ABORTION IN 
THE UNITED STATES
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Abortion in the United States, Dorothy E. McBride
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Capital Punishment, Michael Kronenwetter
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Conflicts over Natural Resources, Jacqueline Vaughn
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Emergency Management, Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Euthanasia, Martha L. Gorman and Jennifer Fecio McDougall
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Genetic Engineering, Harry LeVine, III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and 
James Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

ABORTION IN 
THE UNITED STATES
A Reference Handbook
Dorothy E. McBride
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Copyright 2008 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
McBride, Dorothy E.
Abortion in the United States : a reference handbook / Dorothy E.
McBride.
p. cm. — (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-098-8 (hard copy : alk. paper) — 
ISBN 978-1-59884-099-5 (ebook)
1. Abortion—United States.
2. Abortion—Law and legislation—United States.
3. Pro-life 
movement—United States.
4. Pro-choice movement—United States.
I. Title. 
HQ767.5.U5M3727 2008
363.460973—dc22
2007025876
12
11
10
09
08
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. 
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper 
Manufactured in the United States of America
∞
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Contents
Preface, xiii
1
Background and History, 1
Introduction, 1
Criminalization: The Nineteenth-Century Debate, 3
Reform and Repeal: The Road to Decriminalization, 10
Roe v. Wade and Doe v. Bolton, 16
After Roe: Pro-Life and Pro-Choice Movements Face Off, 19
Pro-Life Movement, 20
Pro-Choice Movement, 24
Frames and Framing: Tools for Understanding Abortion
Debates, 27
References, 29
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 31
Introduction, 31
Constitutional Legality of Abortion, 32
Amending the Constitution, 32
Changing the Court, 35
The Contemporary Debate over Roe v. Wade, 40
State Regulation of Abortion Practice and Access, 42
Administrative Hurdles, 42
Clinic Access, 46
Government Support of Abortion, 47
Hyde Amendment, 48
Domestic and Global Funding Restrictions or “Gag”
Rules, 50
Abortion Procedures, 52
RU-486—Mifepristone, 53
vii
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Ban on Partial-Birth Abortion, 54
Fetus as a Person, 58
Prenatal Drug Laws, 59
Fetal Homicide Laws, 60
Embryonic Stem Cell Research, 62
Other Debates Relating to Fetal Personhood, 63
Birth Control and Sex Education, 65
Emergency Contraception, 67
Sex Education, 69
The Abortion Conflict in Political Parties and Elections, 71
Solutions to the Abortion Conflict, 73
Changing Pro-Life and Pro-Choice Frames, 74
Common Ground, 75
New Collective Frames for Legal Abortion, 77
References, 78
3
Worldwide Perspective, 81
Introduction, 81
Western Postindustrial Democracies, 83
Great Britain, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, 83
France, 86
Nordic Countries, 88
Ireland and Germany, 90
Mediterranean Countries: Italy, Spain, Portugal, 
and Greece, 92
Central and Eastern Europe, 94
Latin America, 97
East and South Asia, 99
Africa and the Middle East, 103
The United Nations, 106
References, 108
4
Chronology, 113
5
Biographical Sketches, 137
Bill Baird, 137
Robert H. Bork, 138
John Bayard Britton, 139
Judie Brown, 140
Mary Steichen Calderone, 140
Gloria Feldt, 141
Sherri Chessen Finkbine, 142
viii
Contents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Wanda Franz, 143
Kim Gandy, 143
Alan Guttmacher, 144
Martin Haskell, 145
Harrison Hickman, 145
Paul T. Hill, 146
Henry Hyde, 147
Frances Kissling, 148
Lawrence Lader, 148
Ellen McCormack, 149
Norma McCorvey, 150
Paul Marx, 150
Kate Michelman, 151
Bernard Nathanson, 152
Margaret Sanger, 153
Joseph M. Scheidler, 153
Patricia Schroeder, 154
Eleanor Smeal, 155
Christopher Smith, 156
Ann E. W. Stone, 156
Horatio Robinson Storer, 157
Randall Terry, 158
Richard Viguerie, 159
Sarah Weddington, 159
6
Data and Documents, 161
Introduction, 161
Historical Documents, 161
Blackstone’s Commentaries, 161
Lord Ellenborough’s Act of 1803, 162
American Medical Association Resolution 1859, 163
Comstock Act of 1873, 163
American Law Institute Model Penal Code: 
Abortion, 164
Humanae Vitae, 165
The Essential Supreme Court Cases: Excerpts, 168
Griswold v. Connecticut 381 U.S. 479 (1965), 168
Einsenstadt v. Baird 405 U.S. 438 (1972), 169
Roe v. Wade 410 U.S. 113 (1973), 171
Doe v. Bolton 410 U.S. 179 (1973), 173
Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey
505 U.S. 833 (1992), 175
Contents
ix
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Excerpts from Important Proposed and 
Enacted Statutes, 181
Human Life Amendment: Three Versions, 181
Freedom of Choice Act of 1993, 182
Freedom of Access to Clinics Entrances Act (FACE) 
of 1994, 184
Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act 2003, 185
The Unborn Victims of Violence Act of 2004, 186
Unborn Child Pain Awareness Act of 2005, 187
Prevention First Act, 189
Current State Laws Regulating Abortion, 192
Regulations of Abortion Practice, 192
Limits on Public Funding, 192
Parental Involvement, 192
Mandatory Counseling and Waiting Periods, 194
Medical Accuracy of Mandated Counseling 
Materials, 196
State Policies if Roe Fell, 200
Abortion Practice: Incidence and Services, 201
Incidence of Abortion in the United States—
CDC Data, 203
Incidence of Abortion in the United States—
AGI Data, 203
Comparative Incidence of Abortion—UNECE Data, 203
Characteristics of Women Having Abortions, 206
Abortion-Related Deaths, 207
Unintended Pregnancies and Their 
Consequences—2001, 207
Abortion Services in the United States, 208
Abortion Clinic Violence, 208
Public Opinion Polls on Abortion Issues, 210
7
Directory of Organizations, 217
Introduction, 217
Government Agencies, 217
United States Organizations, 221
International Organizations, 245
8
Resources, 249
Introduction, 249
Print Sources, 249
General United States: Books, 249
x
Contents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

General United States: Plays, 259
General World and Comparative Studies: Books, 260
General World and Comparative Studies: Articles, 264
Pro-Choice Books, 264
Pro-Choice Article, 270
Pro-Life Books, 271
Nonprint Sources, 276
Video/DVD, 276
Internet Sources, 279
Glossary, 283
Index, 287
About the Author, 303
Contents
xi
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Preface
D
ebate. Controversy. Argument. Conflict. Struggle. Clash. 
Battle. War. All of these terms have been used to describe the
status of the abortion issue in American society and politics,
and it has been this way for nearly a half century. The conflict
affects our legislatures, political parties, courts, churches,
schools, hospitals—and even our foreign policy. And there is no
other country where the battles over abortion are so intense and
pervasive. What is this conflict? What are people fighting about?
Where did it come from? Who are the players and where do they
engage each other? Why is it so hard to settle? What are the
effects on society and politics? This book describes the origins
and changes in the conflict over abortion; the major combatants;
what they are fighting about; the arenas for the conflicts; and the
effects on politics, policy, and social debate. The purpose is to
provide timely information to readers and resources for further
exploration of the topic. 
We start with the basics in Chapter 1. That means looking at
the public history of abortion since the founding of the American
republic, especially the campaign to criminalize the procedure
during the nineteenth century. Then we see how the criminal laws
became out of date in the mid-twentieth century, provoking a new
campaign, this time for reform and repeal of these criminal laws.
Roe v. Wade was the turning point in 1973. This decision legalized
abortion but did not end the debate; in fact, it gave birth to the
clashes we live with today. The pro-choice and pro-life movements
are the big story after 1973. Movements are a combination of ideas
called frames and members called activists. Chapter 1 concludes
with a full presentation of the frames of both great crusades.
After an understanding of the basics, we are ready in Chap-
ter 2 to delve into the war itself, battle by battle, showing winners
xiii
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

and losers over thirty-five years. One of these major conflicts per-
tains to the constitutionality of abortion law and the campaign to
overturn Roe v. Wade. But there are also skirmishes over funding,
administrative regulations, family planning, and emergency con-
traception. Included in the coverage is the all too real firefight
over clinic access in the 1990s.
Chapter 3 takes a look at the rest of the world where, for the
most part, people are born, grow old, and die without knowing
anything about incessant public debates over abortion. In some of
these places—Western Europe, for example—the issue has been
settled for years, and there is a balance between access to contra-
ception, legal abortion, and low abortion rates. In other countries,
the issue has not been on the public agenda at all, despite the fact
that abortion is illegal and there are high rates of maternal mor-
tality as a result. In some places, the American struggles spill over
to other countries where Western feminists face off against pro-
life Roman Catholic activists.
Readers who want a capsule overview of the waxing and
waning (mostly waxing) of abortion politics will find a chronol-
ogy from 1803 to 2007 in Chapter 4. The remaining chapters pro-
vide supplemental materials to fill out the story of this conflict:
biographies, a list of agencies and organizations, and print and
nonprint resources. These do not exhaust the available materials
by any means, but they are a good place to start.
After someone has devoted several decades to a job or proj-
ect, it’s usually time to retire. That certainly pertains to me. If I
add up the years I have spent either involved with or studying
abortion politics, it comes to more than thirty-five years. That’s
why it has been so interesting to me to work on this reference
book: it has been a way to retrace my steps and take the measure
of the journey I and others have made. It also makes me want to
move on to another project, perhaps tracing my family’s geneal-
ogy or gardening. 
Do movements retire like people do? How long is long
enough? Maybe they don’t retire but transform themselves into
some other form. This is a good time for a reference book on the
abortion issue to come out because there is some evidence that we
may be at another turning point in history of this standoff. For one
thing, the biographies of the major players and their organiza-
tions show that most of them have devoted their lives to either the
pro-life or the pro-choice cause. Their consciousness about choice
and life matters was raised as a result of Roe v. Wade and its after-
xiv
Preface
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

math. Now a few have passed on, some have retired, and others
taken the role of “senior advisers” to younger activists. This
means that a new generation is about to pick up the battle flags.
But this new generation may not be “true believers” in the same
sense as the old, not having had their passions forged by the con-
flagration of Roe and its aftermath. 
Second, there are hints of a weakening of the coalition
between evangelical Christians and the Republican Party built in
the 1970s. The right wing of the party grew by using moral
issues—abortion and gay rights—as wedge issues to mobilize the
voters, especially through the evangelical churches. Today the
leaders of these churches are bringing other issues to the fore,
showing that there is an expanding agenda that challenges the
dominance of the Republican right. 
Finally, a compromise may be brewing in the growing sup-
port for the idea of making abortion safe, legal, and rare by pre-
venting unintended pregnancies through better sex education,
counseling, and access to contraception. Hard-core abortion rights
activists worry that such an approach will make abortion seem like
a bad choice. The Roman Catholic Church opposes this approach
as promoting immoral sexual behavior. Nevertheless, proposals
such as the Prevention First Act are the first in a long time to attract
the support of both pro-life and pro-choice members of Congress.
Whether this approach settles the issue remains to be seen.
Preface
xv
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

1
Background and History
Introduction
The practice of abortion is legal in the United States. This seems
simple enough, but just like everything about the abortion con-
flict, there is no easy way to describe abortion law. The law has
many sources—constitutions, legislative statutes, administrative
regulations, court decisions—and to become an expert on abor-
tion law one would have to become familiar with all of them.
This book contains information about many aspects of abortion
policy. But to begin, it is useful to have a clear reference point that
can serve as the framework for looking at all the many forms of
government action that compose U.S. abortion policy.
The foundation of abortion law is the U.S. Constitution as
interpreted by the Supreme Court. Constitutional law does not
directly regulate abortion. Rather, it sets limits on the powers of
the states and the federal government to regulate abortion. The
authority to regulate abortion has long been reserved to the states
by the Constitution because Article I—which covers the legisla-
tive branch—does not give Congress explicit authority to regu-
late medical practice. However, Congress does get involved in
abortion policy through its power to spend money and regulate
interstate commerce.
The Court has established this constitutional law of abortion
through a series of decisions, called case law, especially Roe v.
Wade, Doe v. Bolton, and Planned Parenthood v. Casey (see Chapter
6). States do not have constitutional authority to prohibit the
medical practice of abortion before the fetus is viable; any laws
1
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

that make abortion criminal before viability would be unconsti-
tutional. After viability, that is, when an unborn child is able to
live on its own outside the mother, state governments have the
authority, but not the obligation, to prohibit abortion, except
when medical judgment decides that the abortion is necessary to
save the life or health of the mother. In other words, abortion is
legal in the United States without condition before the fetus is
viable. After viability, abortion is prohibited in some but not all
states except when the health or life of the mother is at risk.
At the same time, governments do have constitutional
authority to enact rules and regulations that may have the goal of
influencing abortion decisions by the woman or the doctor as
long as these are not an undue burden on the woman’s right to
seek an abortion. In other words, state governments are permit-
ted to enact requirements that may place hurdles in the path
toward abortion, such as twenty-four-hour waiting periods and
tests for viability, as long as they do not place a major, substan-
tial, even insurmountable obstacle on the path.
The logic underlying this constitutional foundation is the
assumption that there are important differences in stages of preg-
nancy, specifically, before and after the fetus is viable. The point at
which a fetus is viable varies from pregnancy to pregnancy, but it
is generally thought to be after the twentieth week of gestation.
Experts disagree about the exact point of viability. The legal defi-
nition is that a viable fetus is capable of surviving outside the
mother’s body on its own or with neonatal assistance but does not
include a specific week. Abortion law varies based on a division
of pregnancy into stages of “pre-viability” and “post-viability.”
With this approach, current U.S. law is quite similar to abor-
tion law in the eighteenth century when the Constitution was
drafted and ratified. Then, all the states had adopted English com-
mon law, which made abortion a crime only if it was performed
after quickening—what was also called animation. The definition
of a “quick” fetus was that the mother had felt it move inside her
uterus. The common law reflected an ancient debate (at least back
to the Greeks) about the moral status of a human embryo and
when the developing unborn child became possessed of a soul.
There was widespread belief that quickening, which takes place
in the second trimester of pregnancy, signaled that something
substantial had changed in the pregnancy, and the developing
fetus may be possessed of a selfhood, a soul, or even an indepen-
dent life. At the same time, people believed that if they could see
2
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

the fetus at this stage, it would look more like a baby and less like
a bunch of cells. Thus, it seemed to make sense to punish anyone
who killed a quick fetus because it was similar to killing a baby.
The problem was that in those days there was no indepen-
dent way to determine whether a woman was pregnant; the only
one who knew was the mother and only when she could feel the
quick movement. Therefore, anyone charged with performing an
abortion—a very rudimentary and unpredictable procedure in
the eighteenth century—could use the plausible defense that she
did not know the woman was pregnant. Many women sought
help when their periods stopped; the accused could claim he was
just helping start the blocked “courses.” In this era, therefore,
people, especially women, considered the process of menstrua-
tion and early pregnancy to be very closely linked.
Both the eighteenth-century common law and the twenty-
first-century constitutional law are periodic forms of abortion
law: the law regulates abortion based on stages of pregnancy,
either before and after quickening or before and after viability.
Such periodic laws are found in a number of other countries,
such as France and Austria (see Chapter 3). The other type of
abortion law is conditional. Typically, in conditional laws abor-
tion is criminalized except in certain conditions of pregnancy,
such as to preserve the health of the mother, if the fetus is
deformed, or if the pregnancy is the result of rape or incest. In the
United States, the law allows states to enact conditional laws that
come into force only after viability. Most countries have similar
conditional limits on abortion in later stages of pregnancy. In the
United States, as we see in the next section, a successful cam-
paign in the nineteenth century changed the rather liberal com-
mon law to criminal laws with very limited conditions that
remained in place until the Roe v. Wade decision in 1973.
Criminalization: 
The Nineteenth-Century Debate
When we talk about criminalization, what we mean is that gov-
ernments declare that it is a crime to perform abortions or to help
someone else perform them. In fact, under common law abortions
after quickening were crimes. Yet there was a period of early preg-
nancy when performing an abortion was legal. Until the mid-
Criminalization: The Nineteenth-Century Debate
3
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

1800s, abortions were readily available. Women could perform
them on themselves, and there were many practitioners who
would help them. Most of these practitioners had little training;
they learned through folk medicine or midwives and wise women.
Others peddled herbs and concoctions that had little effect (see
Mohr 1978). In the early days of the republic, these practices were
tolerated primarily as “women’s business.” When the government
tried to prosecute an abortionist, juries regularly acquitted because
there was no way to prove the defendant knew the woman was
pregnant and because there was widespread sympathy for those
who found themselves in the predicament of needing to seek an
abortion. Many believed they were helping poor and unfortunate
girls and women to resolve a difficult situation.
James Mohr’s book Abortion in America is the primary resource
for those who want to learn about the process of criminalization in
the nineteenth century. (However, for an alternative view, see
Olasky 1992.) The process was gradual and followed changes in
the economy, society, and especially, the practice of medicine over
the 100 years. The issue of abortion practice and what to do about
it became a public problem about mid-century. Before that there
was a slow increase in writings about abortion; doctors especially
began to document that abortions were not a sort of rare last resort
for the desperate poor. More and more women were getting them,
and they were women of the “respectable” white, Protestant, mid-
dle class. Abortion had also gradually become a business, and
advertisements marked the commercialization of what was appar-
ently a lucrative practice.
Abortion was not a practice dominated by physicians, as it is
today. Back then, doctoring was not a “profession” in the sense
that there were rules and regulations limiting who could practice.
Some physicians were trained—although training was quite rudi-
mentary by today’s standards. Scientific knowledge was also rudi-
mentary, but these physicians claimed they were the experts. The
1840s were not far removed from the days of barber physicians or
patients being bled, and formally trained physicians had to com-
pete with many other practitioners for patients and for status. For
many of the trained physicians, or “regulars” as they were called,
no issue demonstrated the problem of their profession better than
abortion. Anybody could and did use all manner of means to end
pregnancies; because of the law that reinforced the doctrine that
abortions before quickening were not killing a human being but
solving a female problem, the regulars could do nothing about it.
4
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

The social and economic modernization of the United States
brought increasing attention to standards of education and the
professions. To promote these ideas, professional organizations
appeared, and the regulars formed the American Medical Associ-
ation (AMA) in 1847. From the beginning many of the members
called for change with respect to abortion. They claimed that their
scientific knowledge completely refuted the idea that there were
fundamental differences between quick and not quick pregnan-
cies. The embryo and fetus were essentially the same throughout
the pregnancy. Further, they argued that the reason there were so
many abortions was that women were ignorant; they did not have
this knowledge of fetal development. It was the doctors’ respon-
sibility to remedy this ignorance by declaring that all abortion
killed human beings and prohibiting abortion except to save the
life of a pregnant woman.
In 1859, the AMA enacted a resolution to that effect: 
Resolved, That while physicians have long been united
in condemning the act of producing abortion, at every
period of gestation, except as necessary for preserving
the life of either mother or child, it has become the duty
of this Association, in view of the prevalence and
increasing frequency of the crime, publicly to enter an
earnest and solemn protest against such unwarrantable
destruction of human life.
Resolved, That in pursuance of the grand and noble
calling we profess, the saving of human lives, and of the
sacred responsibilities thereby devolving upon us, the
Association present this subject to the attention of the sev-
eral legislative assemblies of the Union, with the prayer
that the laws by which the crime of procuring abortion is
attempted to be controlled may be revised, and that such
other action may be taken in the premises as they in their
wisdom may deem necessary.
Resolved, That the Association request the zealous
co-operation of the various State Medical Societies in
pressing this subject upon the legislatures of their
respective states (reprinted from Dyer 1999, 14–15).
This resolution reflects the official concern with “saving
human life” and “sacred responsibilities,” but there was another
motive in the campaign against abortion: eliminating competition
Criminalization: The Nineteenth-Century Debate
5
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

from the “irregulars.” Providing help to women seeking abortions
was big business, and it kept those the regulars called “quacks” in
business. Criminalization would deny the competition business.
Thus, prominent physicians contacted their friends in the state
legislatures and urged that they not only prohibit the quacks from
performing abortions but also develop licensing requirements to
deny the irregulars the right to practice any medicine without
proper credentials.
The debate over abortion policy began in the 1840s
(although some states changed their laws as early as the 1820s)
and continued until 1900. In this public debate, physicians led
the way, defining the issue of abortion as first a moral one and
second a question of health, science, and medical standards.
What was exceptional about the debate was that these often com-
peting ideas were intertwined. The doctors defined abortion as a
crime (despite the law at the time) that killed human life—a
moral stance. But at the same time they placed themselves as the
saviors of that life—their sacred duty—through their scientific
knowledge and expertise. They saw their duty to persuade the
public, and especially women, that even tiny embryos were
human lives, not some blockage of menstrual flow.
In the 1870s, doctors got a substantial boost in their campaign
from the antiobscenity movement led by Anthony Comstock of
New York. In those days, many leaders considered sex and child-
birth to be inseparable and guided by religious moral principles.
Thus, growing interest in contraception and the public discussion
of abortion led Comstock and his Committee for the Suppression
of Vice to include them in their crusade against the moral degra-
dation of society. Comstock successfully lobbied Congress in 1873
to pass the Comstock Act, which made importation, trade, and
commerce in “obscene materials” federal crimes. Among the
materials defined as obscene were information and materials that
induce abortion. Comstock also made it his business to arrest
abortionists by masquerading as a poor husband looking for
remedies to his wife’s “problem.” Comstock had the support of
evangelical reformers and allied with some feminists in the social
purity movement. He brought important resources to the physi-
cians’ campaign.
In contrast to today’s abortion politics, in those days two
perspectives were not part of the terms of debate in the state leg-
islatures: that of the women’s movement leaders and that of the
6
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Roman Catholic Church. The feminists said little about abor-
tion, but they tended to condemn it as evidence of the way men
and male lust victimize women. Generally, women’s rights
advocates, such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B.
Anthony, viewed the women who sought abortions as desperate
because their husbands took little heed of the effects of frequent
pregnancies on their health or the well being of the family. The
way to prevent abortion was for men to exercise sexual restraint
and to adopt the moral standard of purity they placed on their
wives. To the nineteenth-century feminists, abortionists were
another class of men who preyed on women. Later in the cen-
tury “voluntary motherhood” became their cry. Recall that in
this period contraception was primitive (abstinence being the
most reliable), married women had few legal rights, marital
rape was permitted under common law, and both abortion and
pregnancy were routinely life threatening. To their advocates,
the status of married women would improve if abortion were
suppressed.
Similarly, quiet were voices from the Roman Catholic
Church. Although today the official view of church history is that
the Roman Catholic Church has always condemned abortion, for-
mal church policy dates only to the late nineteenth century. In the
abortion conflict, different sides select different parts of church
history to support their contemporary points of view. It is more
accurate to say that, like others, Catholic theologians wrote tracts
about abortion, but there was no official church doctrine. Some
turned to St. Augustine, who maintained that the soul enters the
body only after it is formed—at 40 days of gestation for males and
80 days of gestation for females. Before that point, presumably,
abortion did not kill a human being. Not surprisingly, the pro-
nouncements of theologians and church leaders fit the knowledge
of the time. The view that abortion before quickening was accept-
able because there was no child formed until then also fits the
Augustinian pronouncements.
The distinction between the ensouled (animated) and the
nonanimated fetus began to lose support among Catholic theolo-
gians as early as the seventeenth century, yet it was not until 1869
that Pope Pius IX made it official, declaring that the embryo was
a being with a soul from conception and abortion was a sin lead-
ing to excommunication. Another papal decree in 1884 declared
that abortion, even to save the mother’s life, was prohibited
Criminalization: The Nineteenth-Century Debate
7
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

among Catholics. Some of the same social and scientific changes
that influenced physicians likely also had an effect on church
leaders, but until the early twentieth century, the church did not
take a position on the public debate about abortion policy in the
United States.
From 1820 to 1900, abortion prohibition proposals were on
agendas of state legislatures. Before the AMA set out on its quest
for criminalization, states had begun to adopt statutes, putting
the common-law rules into their law codes. By definition, com-
mon law is not in a code but is found in the accumulated case law
of England. William Blackstone prepared a summary in the 1700s
that was often consulted, annotated, and reprinted. To make their
laws clearer, U.S. lawyers urged states to enact legislative statutes
to give the law formal legitimacy. Most of these maintained the
features of the common law: abortion before quickening was not
criminal, and a woman receiving an abortion was immune from
prosecution. The AMA resolution and lobbying activities
occurred at the end of what Mohr (1978) calls a transitional phase
between the 1840s and the 1860s. After the 1860s, states came into
line with the AMA plan and prohibited abortion from conception
on; threats to the mother’s life were the only exception. In 1873,
the federal Comstock Act prohibited information and materials
on abortion to be distributed through interstate commerce and
mail. By 1900, all states had dropped the quickening distinction,
revoked women’s common-law immunities from prosecution
(both the woman and the abortionist could now be sent to jail),
and prohibited advertising of abortion services.
What had changed? Just about everything. The law was
overturned—what had been legal, private, and available in 1800
was criminal, public, and penalized in 1900. The framework of
abortion policy changed from the periodic model to an indica-
tions or conditions model—a severe model that allowed saving
the life of the mother as the only defense for the crime. The terms
of debate also changed. Before, when abortion was rarely dis-
cussed as a public problem, it was viewed as a symptom of
poverty and victimization of the weak. By 1900, abortion was
publicly defined as an immoral taking of a human life, an action
so serious that it could take place only if the pregnancy threat-
ened to take the life of another human being—the mother. Med-
ical doctors were charged with the lofty responsibility of
determining when that decision was warranted.
8
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

When the abortion reform movement rose up in the 1960s
and 1970s, activists looked back at the history of the criminaliza-
tion crusade. One of the issues in the 1960s was the dangers of
illegal abortions. Activists learned that abortions had once been
legal and abortions, like childbirth, constituted a real threat to
women’s lives. Looking at the methods of abortion used histori-
cally made it difficult for many to imagine that women in large
numbers resorted to the procedure. Before the 1860s abortions
were legal but not safe. Medical practice in the late nineteenth
century improved dramatically, however. The invention of the
speculum and the dilation and curettage, or D&C procedure;
knowledge of the risk of bacterial infection; and new methods of
anesthesia allowed for safe abortions for the first time. Yet just as
these medical improvements came along, the legislatures and the
doctors whose practice benefited moved to criminalize abortion.
To many twentieth-century activists it seemed that the abuses
women suffered from so-called back street abortionists were due
to the fact that doctors had worked so hard to make it so.
One way to compare abortion policies across governments
and over time is to classify them in terms of what some call the
abortion triad (McBride Stetson 1996). Any abortion policy distrib-
utes powers and resources among the three main players: the gov-
ernment, the doctors with expertise to perform safe abortions, and
women seeking abortions. The abortion policy from the eighteenth
to the mid-nineteenth century in the United States empowered
women. The state largely stayed out of the process of delivering
abortion. Women were not only free to seek help from a variety of
practitioners but they could also perform an abortion on them-
selves with no punishment. Further, they and only they could
determine when criminal laws kicked in—at quickening. From the
last decades of the nineteenth century, abortion policy shows an
alliance between the government and doctors and the disempow-
erment of women. The new criminal laws had a loophole for
acquiring an abortion—the life of the mother. Question: Who
determined when that condition was met? Answer: medical doc-
tors. Only they could judge when and if an abortion was war-
ranted. Women who sought to end their pregnancies without a
doctor’s permission could go to jail. The next section of this chap-
ter briefly summarizes how women coped with the new triad and
how it broke down under the pressures of social, medical, and eco-
nomic change in the mid-twentieth century.
Criminalization: The Nineteenth-Century Debate
9
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Reform and Repeal: 
The Road to Decriminalization
As in the nineteenth century, the twentieth century saw enor-
mous social and economic changes; medical technology was no
exception. The success of the AMA’s criminalization campaign
had placed the medical profession firmly in control of the prac-
tice of safe abortion. Apparently, the major legal shift had little
impact on women’s desire for abortion. Women sought abortions
and many doctors provided them. This became women’s secret
(Reagan 1998). The motives of those who promoted the criminal
laws may have been to “protest against such unwarrantable
destruction of human life” but in practice medical doctors had
varying opinions about when abortion was warranted. All the
laws had the exception for therapeutic reasons—to save the life
of the mother—but whether any pregnancy posed such a threat
was determined by the doctor alone. He could perform an abor-
tion in his office or the patient’s home and no one would know
about it. Women quietly told their friends about those sympa-
thetic doctors; men left the whole business to women to sort out.
Kristen Luker (1984) calls this period the “century of silence.”
However, antiabortion doctors made some attempts to expose
their more liberal colleagues. None of these moved the issue to
the public agenda for long.
As in the 1830s, the increase in abortion rates in the 1930s
started the process toward new policy debates on the issue. The
Great Depression of the 1930s took an enormous toll on families.
People faced with extreme poverty became desperate to find
ways to avoid bringing more mouths to feed into the world. At
the same time, medical advances had greatly reduced the risk
that pregnancy would lead to death; women began to seek to end
pregnancies for other reasons. By this time, abortion procedures
were conducted in hospitals, rather than doctors’ offices. Some
doctors began to stretch the therapeutic exception to include
social conditions of the pregnancy, but most would not. Women
increasingly sought solutions that were unsafe and ended up in
hospitals, where many died. During the 1930s, as many as 17,000
women are estimated to have died each year (out of 800,000 abor-
tions) from botched abortions (Garrow 1994, 272). In the hospi-
tals where they worked, doctors saw first hand the effects of all
these trends.
10
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

One response to the situation was that the police and prose-
cutors began to crack down on doctors and others who appeared
to be performing abortions outside the law. Another was for hos-
pitals to establish committees to oversee both doctors and
patients; these were intended to bring an impartial judgment to
the doctor/woman decision making that had characterized the
early 1900s. Others reacted by thinking of ways to prevent abor-
tion through family planning. Court decisions in the 1930s had
overturned those aspects of the Comstock Act that prevented doc-
tors from prescribing contraceptive devices such as diaphragms.
In the early 1940s, Margaret Sanger’s American Birth Control
League changed its name to Planned Parenthood Federation of
America (PPFA) and intensified its campaign to expand contra-
ceptive information and use to prevent abortion. At the same
time, Dr. Alan Guttmacher called for liberalization of the law at a
Planned Parenthood meeting in 1942.
The nineteenth-century abortion laws had always caused
some discontent, but most trace the origins of the movement to
reform the law to a 1955 Planned Parenthood conference. It is
understandable that this organization provided an arena for doc-
tors and lawyers to discuss the abortion issue and express con-
cern about the laws. Doctors and lawyers had been discussing
the problems in professional journals for several years. They
soon realized that if anything was going to change it would be
necessary to bring the issue to a public agenda—that is, to
awaken public opinion to the need for reform. When that time
occurred in the 1960s, reformers were already prepared with a
model reform statute that would answer all the concerns doctors
and lawyers expressed.
In 1959, the American Law Institute (ALI) outlined a model
that, in effect, would amend criminal laws to expand conditions
for legal abortion. According to the proposal “A licensed physi-
cian is justified in terminating a pregnancy if he believes that
there is a substantial risk that continuance of the pregnancy
would gravely impair the physical and mental health of the
mother or that the child would be born with grave physical or
mental defects or that pregnancy resulted from rape, incest, or
other felonious intercourse.” (quoted in Davis 1985, 260). In the
United States, then, abortion reform meant a slight increase in the
number of indicators that would permit legal abortion while
keeping most abortions criminalized. Many doctors agreed with
this approach. Guttmacher and others in New York formed the
Reform and Repeal: The Road to Decriminalization
11
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Association for the Study of Abortion in 1960 to try to drum up
support for the reform.
At this time, most people in America had no idea that there
were groups working to change abortion laws, that is, until two
events brought the issue to public attention and the national
agenda (from where it has not receded). In 1962, Sherri Finkbine,
a mother of four, discovered that the sleeping pills her husband
brought her from England contained thalidomide—a tranquil-
izer that causes terrible birth defects. (Thalidomide had not yet
been approved for use in the United States.) She and her doctor
quietly scheduled an abortion in an Arizona hospital on a Mon-
day. On the Sunday before the procedure, Finkbine called an
acquaintance in the news business and suggested she might
warn others about the dangers of thalidomide. The next day
Finkbine’s scheduled abortion was headline news. As a result of
the publicity, the hospital canceled her abortion, and she had to
go to Sweden for the procedure. The national media picked up
the story, focusing on the problems faced by women carrying
deformed fetuses. Support for those women took on steam in the
next year when a rubella epidemic (a form of measles that also
causes birth defects) occurred. The spin in the media was that
perhaps the nineteenth-century laws were too strict and out of
date given all the social and medical changes in the twentieth
century. The change in public opinion necessary for the abortion
reform advocates to form a viable movement was finally under-
way in the early 1960s. Most professional organizations of doc-
tors, lawyers, and health workers endorsed the ALI reform.
With the attention to proposals for limited reform, new
voices joined the debate. Proposals for repeal of state criminal
laws, not simply reform, arose. Some came from the ranks of the
reformers in the law and medical communities. Changes in con-
traceptive laws had an impact on their views. In 1965, the
Supreme Court ruled in Griswold v. Connecticut (38 U.S. 479, 1965)
that states could not criminalize contraceptive use by married
people because such laws interfered with their rights to privacy
in their decisions and behavior with respect to sex and procre-
ation. It seemed logical to many that laws that made it a crime for
a woman to end a pregnancy would also interfere with her pri-
vacy. Many from population, family planning, and health orga-
nizations who had campaigned for reform now began to propose
that states repeal their laws altogether. Some vowed to take the
campaign nationally, holding the First National Conference on
12
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Abortion Laws in 1969 in Chicago. At that conference, a few
prominent leaders formed NARAL—the National Association
for the Repeal of Abortion Laws.
Activists in California played an important role in developing
the argument for repeal. This stemmed from their realization that
the conditional ALI reform merely gave doctors a few more legal
justifications to perform abortions. But those reasons—mental
health, fetal deformity, and pregnancy by rape and incest—were
only a very tiny percentage of the reasons women sought abortions.
Such a reform would not decrease dangerous illegal abortions. And
why should a woman have to prove she is crazy (to two psychia-
trists) just because she does not want to be pregnant and bear a
child for her own reasons? These ideas led women to see that the
state was forcing them to remain pregnant against their will or face
dangerous procedures. This was “compulsory pregnancy.”
One who developed these ideas was Patricia Maginnis, who
early in the 1960s had formed the Citizens’ Committee for
Humane Abortion Laws. Her claim was that abortion was a
woman’s business—and the government should have no control
over this decision. Her demand previewed the mobilization, just a
few years later, of the new feminist movement to the cause of
repeal. At its second national conference in 1967, the newly formed
National Organization for Women (NOW) endorsed repeal. But
the real energy for the repeal campaign came from the more infor-
mal Women’s Liberation Movement groups such as New York
City Redstockings and the Chicago Women’s Liberation Union.
Black feminist groups joined the cause as well. All feminists advo-
cating for repeal based their claims on women’s own experiences
as revealed in speak-outs and small group meetings, forming an
ideology that linked the question of abortion to the lives of all
women. To them, criminal abortion laws were a manifestation of
the male medical establishment’s control of women and their bod-
ies. To repeal these laws would liberate women to control their
own bodies. Slogans such as “My Body Belongs to Me” and “Get
Your Laws Off My Body” went straight to the point. Black femi-
nists told their stories of black women who sought abortions being
forced to undergo sterilization as a condition. The feminist
demands became: “Repeal all anti-abortion laws! No Forced Ster-
ilization! No Restrictive Contraceptive Laws!”
Activists in the movement for repeal used a variety of tactics
in their efforts to change the laws nationwide. They used con-
ventional approaches by lobbying state legislatures and filing
Reform and Repeal: The Road to Decriminalization
13
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

lawsuits to have nineteenth-century state laws declared uncon-
stitutional. The feminists, especially, used nonconventional tac-
tics. Consciousness-raising groups—which were an essential
feature of the larger women’s liberation movement—encouraged
women to learn about their bodies and to develop the self-confi-
dence to confront the doctors who had life-or-death authority
over their reproductive lives. Some of the groups took direct
action, by setting up self-help feminist clinics, referral services
for abortions inside and outside the United States, and even
learning how to perform early-pregnancy abortions—the famous
“Jane” in Chicago is an example (Kaplan 1996). In 1970, tens of
thousands marched in Washington, DC, and San Francisco in
huge demonstrations for their goals. Most scholars agree that the
mobilization by the feminist movement in the late 1960s and
early 1970s turned the reform movement into an abortion rights
movement (e.g., Staggenborg 1991). At the same time, the femi-
nist activism for repeal became the foundation for the women’s
health movement that has accomplished a revolution in women’s
health care (Morgen 2002).
By 1971, a majority of Americans supported legalization; by
early 1973, a stunning 57 percent of Americans, including 54 per-
cent of Roman Catholics, agreed that the abortion decision should
be left to the woman and her doctor (Gallup poll quoted in Gar-
row 1994, 539). At this time there was little organized opposition
to the new abortion rights movement. Most of the opposition in
the states came from Roman Catholic doctors and other profes-
sionals, largely taken off guard by the speed with which the
reform and then repeal bandwagon grew. Black nationalists
opposed both liberal birth control and abortion services for black
women, claiming it was part of a long-standing effort by the white
establishment to reduce the size of the African-American popula-
tion. Still, although the opposition was weak and the repeal
movement growing, many state legislators were opposed even to
modest reforms of their laws, let alone repeal. As the pressure
grew, the antiabortion forces gained strength in some states where
they organized to maintain criminalization.
By far, the most significant accomplishment of the movement
for changing abortion laws was their success in dramatically
changing the terms of the debate on the abortion issue. Since the
late nineteenth century and even through the early years of the
movement for reform, the issue was considered a matter of negoti-
ating the rights of doctors to prescribe abortion for their patients.
14
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Groups concerned about family planning and population control
defined abortion as something that must be available to serve their
larger goals of reducing unsafe illegal abortions, in the case of the
family planners, and to allow parents to reduce the size of their
families, in the case of the zero population activists. Neither of these
perspectives was enough to light any fires for change in the popu-
lation overall. What did get their attention was the unprecedented,
but finally obvious, claim that abortion was a women’s issue and
legal abortion was a women’s rights issue. In this, they shifted the
terms of debate from a contest between doctors and the govern-
ment to a rebellion of women against the medical/government
establishment that controlled their reproductive capacity and their
bodies. To them, criminal abortion meant compulsory pregnancy—
a form of oppression enforced by the state. To the feminists of the
early 1970s, by women controlling their own bodies through abor-
tion on demand they would find liberation from that oppression.
By 1973, the campaign for changes in abortion laws had
achieved legislative victories in fifteen states. Beginning with Cali-
fornia, Colorado, and North Carolina in 1967, twelve states
adopted some version of conditional abortion patterned after the
ALI model statute (Arkansas, Delaware, Georgia, Kansas, Mary-
land, New Mexico, Oregon, South Carolina, and Virginia). Four
states repealed their laws—Washington by referendum and
Alaska, Hawaii, and New York by legislative action. By 1973, how-
ever, the opposition to reform was also gaining strength. In Michi-
gan and North Dakota, referendums for abortion without
condition up to 20 weeks of pregnancy failed by large margins.
Lobbying efforts in state legislatures stalled, especially those pro-
moting repeal. Because of the New York repeal, many women trav-
eled there to obtain abortions through referrals operated by
Planned Parenthood and other organizations. Perhaps this allevi-
ated the pressure presented by illegal abortions. Pope Paul VI’s
1968 encyclical, Humanae Vitae (Human Life), which reiterated the
church’s absolute opposition to abortion as well as all forms of con-
traception and sterilization, may also have stimulated the Roman
Catholic Church to support a more organized antiabortion pres-
ence in the various state and local debates. In any event, although
today some claim that the Supreme Court’s 1973 decision inter-
rupted a wave of abortion reform that would have solved the abor-
tion conflict, there is little evidence to support that notion. Reform
was quick at first, but it was very limited and did not answer
demands from the feminist movement to get the government out
Reform and Repeal: The Road to Decriminalization
15
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

of the business of regulating the practice of abortion altogether. At
the same time, the speed of the early ALI-style reforms mobilized
opposition to further reforms. In New York, the antiabortion forces
were successful in getting the legislature to overturn repeal—
which was only stopped by Governor Nelson Rockefeller’s veto of
the bill to recriminalize.
Reform and repeal activists in the legal profession were well
aware of the difficulties of changing laws nationally by trying to
pass reforms in fifty state legislatures. They opted for a litigation
strategy that would at least undermine the nineteenth-century
criminal laws and force the legislators to consider reform and at
most extend the guarantees of privacy won in Griswold v. Con-
necticut to a woman’s decision to seek an abortion. Thus, in the
late 1960s and early 1970s, many cases were brought challenging
the constitutionality of state laws. As litigation spread, the debate
over the law spread as well and revealed a wide range of dis-
agreement over the respective rights and responsibilities of gov-
ernment, physicians, and women. Opponents of legal abortion
spoke for the rights of the unborn to prevail; many equated all
abortion with murder.
Finally, the Supreme Court agreed to consider the constitu-
tional issues and issued its decisions on the status of both the
nineteenth-century criminal laws and the more recent ALI-style
reform laws in 1973. These cases—Roe v. Wade (410 U.S. 113) and
Doe v. Bolton (410 U.S. 179)—mark the end of the movements for
reform and repeal and the beginning of the contemporary abor-
tion conflict in the United States. The impact of these movements
has been enormous and will be the subject of Chapter 2. Here we
review the cases in terms of how they answered the various
demands of the reform and repeal movements and how the opin-
ions in the cases affected the terms of public debate on the abor-
tion issue.
Roe v. Wade and Doe v. Bolton
Roe v. Wade was a challenge to the constitutionality of the crimi-
nal law that Texas enacted in the 1850s. The law prohibited any-
one to “procure” or “attempt” an abortion except, based on
medical advice, “for the purpose of saving the life of the mother”
(410 US 113, 118). “Jane Roe” was the pseudonym for Norma
McCorvey, who had sought an abortion because she could not
afford to raise a child. Two feminist attorneys, Sarah Weddington
16
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

and Linda Coffee, had been developing a plan to challenge the
Texas law and recruited Norma McCorvey to be their “Roe.”
Doe v. Bolton was a challenge to Georgia’s 1968 reform that
criminalized abortion except when the pregnancy endangered the
life of the mother, there was grave fetal deformity, or the preg-
nancy was the result of rape. The Georgia reform, like many of the
ALI-inspired laws, was very restrictive. In this case the Georgia
legislature had added stringent and cumbersome rules including
a requirement that the abortion decision must be approved by a
committee and the medical judgment must be confirmed by two
doctors in addition to the woman’s own physician. “Jane Doe”
was the pseudonym for Sandra Bensing, a victim of domestic vio-
lence, who, like McCorvey, sought the abortion because she could
not take care of another child. She was represented by Margie
Hames and other feminist attorneys who were keen to challenge
the restrictive law because efforts to convince the Georgia legisla-
ture repeal the law had stalled.
The justices treated the two cases as a single decision, but it is
Roe v. Wade that has become the most famous, the symbol for what
is right and wrong (depending on your point of view) with abor-
tion law in the United States. Justice Harry Blackmun wrote the
decision, which was supported by seven of the nine justices. The
feminists got what they wanted from both cases: both the nine-
teenth-century criminal laws and the 1960s ALI-inspired reform
laws were declared unconstitutional violations of the right to pri-
vacy as outlined in the precedent Griswold v. Connecticut 8 years
earlier. Although the term “privacy” is not mentioned in the Con-
stitution, justices in these and other cases have recognized that the
Constitution does guarantee areas or zones of privacy and that
personal privacy, especially, is a fundamental right. What the jus-
tices did in Roe was to rule that “a woman’s decision whether or
not to terminate her pregnancy” is in one of those zones of pri-
vacy where the government cannot interfere. Included in that
zone was also the physician’s right to practice medicine. Most of
the U.S. state laws at the time prohibited abortions and thus
invaded, unconstitutionally, that zone.
At the same time, the Court acknowledged that the right to
make the abortion decision was not unlimited, because the state
(government) has legitimate interests in regulation and in protect-
ing the fetus. These interests—the woman’s, the physician’s, and
the state’s protection of the fetus—seemed to be irreconcilable. The
difficulty in finding a compromise among these interests had
Reform and Repeal: The Road to Decriminalization
17
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

stymied peaceful reform in many state legislatures since the mid-
1960s. To reconcile these interests, the Court divided pregnancy
into trimesters marking the changes in the growing fetus and the
complexity of abortion techniques. As pregnancies progress
through 40 weeks, the fetus gets closer to viability, and abortion
procedures become increasingly dangerous to the woman. Based
on this framework, the Court issued constitutional guidelines to
the states:
Before the beginning of the third trimester, the state may not
prohibit abortions; the woman’s decision with her doctor is in the
zone of privacy and is paramount. After the beginning of the
third trimester, the “State in promoting its interest in the poten-
tiality of human life may, if it chooses, regulate, and even pro-
scribe, abortion except where it is necessary, in appropriate
medical judgment, for the preservation of the life or health of the
mother.” In addition, the state may enact regulations after the
first trimester in “ways that are reasonably related to maternal
health” (410 U.S. 113, 164). What this means is that state govern-
ments may but are not required to prohibit abortions in the late
stages of pregnancy.
The immediate effect of these rulings was that most states
had to revise their statutes to get them in line with the Supreme
Court’s guidelines. But most realized these were just the first of
many cases that would be necessary to determine the limits of
state power in this area, a process of litigation that continues as
legislatures test the limits of the case law. The content of the deci-
sion had a great impact on the abortion conflict. As we have seen,
before the 1960s the abortion issue was a medical issue in official
debate, placed in the hands of doctors to decide within limits set
by state governments. In the 1960s, many new views came to the
fore and competed for attention. In succession, people argued
that abortion law was a public problem because of illegal abor-
tion; limits on medical professional judgment; the need for ways
to plan families and limit population growth; invasion of per-
sonal privacy; women’s rights to control their bodies; and threats
to the humanity of the fetus, a person due constitutional protec-
tion. Not all of these perspectives could become part of the offi-
cial terms of debate.
The Roe opinion set forth the new terms of debate. The abor-
tion issue was to be a question of the rights to privacy of women
and their doctors against the government’s interest in protecting
potential human life—the fetus. No longer a medical issue, abor-
18
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

tion became a privacy issue related to a fundamental right to
decide whether to bear a child and the reasonable limits on that
right to protect both the woman and the unborn child. The Court
ruled that abortion pertains only to private morality and that the
state could not promote one view over another of, for example,
when human life begins. “We need not resolve the difficult ques-
tion of when life begins. When those trained in the respective dis-
ciplines of medicine, philosophy, and theology are unable to arrive
at any consensus, the judiciary, at this point in the development of
man’s knowledge, is not in a position to speculate as to the
answer” (410 U.S. 113, 159), As to the question of fetal personhood
deserving protection under the Fourteenth Amendment, the Court
ruled “the word ‘person’ used in the Fourteenth Amendment does
not include the unborn” (401 U.S. 113, 157).
The new U.S. abortion law shifted the balance of power sig-
nificantly in the abortion triad—women, physicians, and govern-
ment. Before, the state had empowered doctors to control the
decision making about abortion with restrictions. For the most
part, they were largely unfettered by state interference until the
early years of the reform movement. After 1973, however, the
Constitution, as interpreted by the Supreme Court, empowered
women, along with doctors, to make decisions about abortion.
The government lost authority to make even the most limited
restrictions on the abortion decision for the first six months of
pregnancy.
After Roe: Pro-Life and Pro-Choice
Movements Face Off
According to sociologists, a social movement happens when
“ordinary people join forces in contentious confrontation with
elites, authorities and opponents” (Tarrow 1994, 1). This refers to
collective action—through groups and organizations—bound by
common purposes and solidarity through recognition of com-
mon interests. Movement thinkers construct collective action
frames as a way of defining their common purposes. They use
these frames to mobilize support, organize activists, and com-
municate with the public. After a brief review of the movements’
origins, the following sections describe the collective action
frames of the pro-life and pro-choice movements as presented by
After Roe: Pro-Life and Pro-Choice Movements Face Off
19
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

writers and activists claiming to speak on behalf of the move-
ment. The frames are presented as though they were coming
from pro-life and pro-choice spokespeople. People use a variety
of terms to identify the movements in the abortion conflict,
depending on their perspective (such as proabortion, antiabor-
tion, antichoice). Here we use the terms used by the activists
themselves.
Pro-Life Movement
Origins
In the debates leading up to Roe v. Wade, antiabortion individuals
and groups opposed efforts at reform and repeal. But it wasn’t
until after Roe that a pro-life movement mobilized. Before Roe,
Catholics had taken the lead in testifying against reform and
repeal. The Vatican’s renewed interest in the issues of contracep-
tion and abortion as signified by Humanae Vitae encouraged
clergy to speak out. After Roe, the church hierarchy and organi-
zations on behalf of official doctrine began to take a more active
role in leadership in reaction to legalization of abortion. How-
ever, Catholics were by no means in agreement on how to pro-
ceed or even if it was appropriate for the church to be active in
the political arena.
But a movement needs more than leaders and doctrine from
on high. It needs “ordinary people.” In her study of pro-life
activists in California in the late 1970s, Kristin Luker (1984) found
that many were “stunned” by the Court’s decision to declare an
unborn child a nonperson under the Constitution. Many said
they had never considered that this was possible. In fact, they
had assumed that everybody agreed with them that an embryo
was a human being from conception and equal to all other
human beings. Luker also discovered that most of the post-Roe
activists were married women with children who lived in tradi-
tional marriages and did not work outside the home. By deciding
that women’s choices came first, even if that meant that women
could decide to get an abortion for convenience, the Court under-
mined the value of mothers putting their children ahead of their
own lives.
Some other forces were at work in building the pro-life move-
ment. In the 1970s, some conservatives in the Republican Party
saw an opportunity to recruit supporters for their candidates if
they could link economic conservatism to social conservatism.
20
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

This New Right worked closely with leaders of evangelical
churches, including Pat Robertson and Jerry Falwell. The funda-
mentalist and Pentecostal religions strongly opposed abortion;
Republican strategists promoted an antiabortion platform and
candidates in the Republican Party to attract the support of these
groups that had typically stayed away from politics. Legalization
of abortion without condition was a threat to their fundamental
values, and the effect was to politicize religious faith. From their
perspective, fundamental beliefs were under attack, so evangelical
Christians became fully committed to fighting the evil of abortion.
Pro-Life Collective Action Frames
Abortion is the murder of an innocent human being. This is so
because from the moment the sperm fertilizes the egg—
conception—a human being exists, even though it is just one cell.
We know that conception creates a human being in two ways.
First, from the Bible we know God creates life by bringing the
sperm and egg together. Everyone can see the law of God in
nature’s law. God created everything to have a purpose. In his
plan, men and women marry and have sexual relations. The pur-
pose of those relations is to procreate—to create a new life that is
a gift from God. It is evil to destroy that precious gift through
abortion.
Second, even people who are not religious know that human
life begins with conception. Advances in genetic science prove
that at the moment of conception, a new human being exists with
all the genetic information that he or she will have when reach-
ing maturity. The fertilized egg is very tiny, but it is an indepen-
dent life. No real difference exists between that one cell and an
adult human. Killing a human being is wrong; that is a value
everybody accepts. Because abortion kills an unborn human
being, abortion is wrong by definition (Beckwith 1993).
The current law is nothing more than abortion on demand.
Women have no limits on their “rights” to kill their babies at any
stage. Even after viability, the courts have allowed for an excep-
tion for health. This exception is always interpreted so generally
that just about any reason can be related to a woman’s health. Doe
v. Bolton defined health as including: “physical, emotional, psy-
chological, familial, and the woman’s age—relevant to the well-
being of the patient. All these factors may relate to health.” This
health exception can justify anything. So, the law legalizes killing
human beings—children.
After Roe: Pro-Life and Pro-Choice Movements Face Off
21
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

This “slaughter of innocents” has been like the Holocaust.
Since Roe v. Wade a million babies a year have been killed in the
abortion factories—that’s more than 35 million children! An
unborn baby is a person, just like her mother, and she has to be
treated equally. A woman does not have a “right” to kill her baby;
doctors don’t have a “right” to kill babies. Babies have rights to
life. Abortion takes the life of another, and it is never, never justi-
fied. Even when it may occur to save the life of the mother—if
both would die otherwise—it is an evil.
This plague of abortion is the mark of a society that has lost
its way: it treats children like garbage. It has come about because
of the so-called sexual revolution; abortion is almost a sacrament
of that revolution. Sex has been completely separated from its
purpose, which is to create life. Our sex-saturated society teaches
kids that sex is for fun, for pleasure, for self-expression, or for con-
quest. Abortion is a no-fault sex insurance policy. This has made
a mockery of any attempt at maintaining strong families—the
love and responsibility people have toward each other. Now soci-
ety is full of rampant individualism. If you get pregnant or if your
girlfriend gets pregnant—just get rid of it! The abortion holocaust
is part of the growing culture of death. If it is okay to kill an
unborn child, why not kill sick people, old people, or the handi-
capped? They have no more “right” to live than unborn children.
Our opponents—the proabortion people—claim that
women have the right to control their bodies. They do, but they
do not have the right to kill their babies. The law now allows self-
indulgent women to do anything they want and to go to the
abortion factory just for convenience. These women deny their
bodies and the wonderful capacity to nourish life that God has
given them. They also deny the life path that will give them the
most joy and will make the best contribution—that is to marry
and have children. Most women agree with this at heart; they
don’t want to kill their babies. Once they learn that their little
embryo dances in their womb, has a beating heart, has its own
blood and organs, feels pain, and suffers terribly from abortion,
they want to do the right thing.
Many of our opponents claim they are feminists, but they do
not work for the best interests of women. Our opponents want to
deny that they are women and to live like men. The true feminist
is pro-life and realizes abortion is really a threat to women, not a
choice. Proabortion people focus on autonomy and individual
choice; but this view denies the fact that humans have to live in
22
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

relationships to survive, and the most important relationship is
the one between parent and child. “A woman, involuntarily preg-
nant, has a moral obligation to the now-existing dependent fetus
whether she explicitly consented to its existence or not” (Callahan
2001, 171). Women have the moral obligation to use their life-giv-
ing potential. Today, abortion practices often victimize women
who are pressured by men or even their own families to kill their
babies. They have lifelong guilt that destroys their health and
even their lives; many turn to crime and drug addiction. Abortion
has to be halted to protect both women and the children they bear.
Finally, the Roe v. Wade decision must be overturned. If not,
we must amend the Constitution to protect unborn life. Roe v.
Wade is one of the worst Supreme Court decisions ever. Even
those who are not religious or as passionate as others about pro-
tecting unborn children find this case to be deplorable. The
activist, liberal judges on the Court created a so-called right to pri-
vacy out of thin air! Nothing in the Constitution suggests that
governments have to stay out of matters relating to sex and pro-
creation. This is “legislating from the bench” of the worst kind.
The last time the Court tried something like this in the name of
individual rights was when it said slavery was okay because peo-
ple had a right to own slaves and do what they wanted. The gov-
ernment couldn’t interfere.
Apparently, some of the judges who signed on to Roe v. Wade
thought they were helping settle an issue. Some claimed that the
legislatures were making a mess out of the efforts to change abor-
tion laws. But what they did was to make the whole thing much
worse. They launched the culture wars that have rent our society.
They deprived pro-life people from having any say at all in the
law and took the issue out of the legislatures. This is not a com-
promise: it is dictating one theory of life—that a woman has the
right to make any choice she wants about her baby—on all the
rest of us who think unborn babies are sacred.
Pro-Life Framing Tactics 
Collective frames are “meaning makers.” Their goal is to con-
struct reality in such a way that they will mobilize supporters of
movements and defeat their enemies. Some tactics of the pro-life
collective action frames are worth pointing out.
1. Portray the fetus as a little human. The frames rarely if
ever use the term “fetus” or “embryo.” It is nearly
After Roe: Pro-Life and Pro-Choice Movements Face Off
23
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

always unborn child, human being, human entity—“a
new tiny individual with its own genetic code” (Beck-
with 1993, 42).
2. Refer rarely to woman or mother as a whole body but to
the womb, not uterus. Isolate the fetus from the
mother’s body through ultrasound images and lan-
guage that portrays the unborn child in “space” or a
“cradle.”
Pro-Choice Movement 
Origins
The advocates for liberal abortion laws had already formed a
social movement before the decision in Roe v. Wade. Originally,
the leaders for reform were doctors, lawyers, and professionals
associated with population control and family planning. The rise
of the women’s liberation movement gave these leaders the
“ordinary people” who mobilized to gain repeal of the old crim-
inal laws. By the early 1970s, many organizations from the
women’s rights movement, sometimes referred to as the “older
branch” joined to support the idea that women should have the
right to choose whether or not to have a child.
Immediately after the Roe decision, there was some slump in
the activity of the pro-choice organizations while, one suspects,
they enjoyed the unexpected triumph of their goals and their
frame of the issue in the courts. But they soon began to pick up
the banner when faced with the immediate pro-life efforts to
amend the Constitution to change the Court’s decision. They also
saw the mobilization of many individuals and organizations
throughout the country to overcome the sudden legalization of
abortion nationwide. NARAL led the way; its first action was to
change its name to reflect the new challenge. It became the
National Abortion Rights Action League in 1973 pledging to
“develop and sustain a constituency which effectively uses the
political process at the state and national level to guarantee every
woman in the United States the right to choose and obtain a legal
abortion” (quoted in Wilder 1998, 79).
Pro-Choice Collective Action Frames
The issue of abortion affects every woman because women are
the ones who give birth. Unlike men, they cannot walk away
from a pregnancy; each pregnancy not only affects a woman’s
24
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

body but also her life. Because pregnancy has such a major effect
on women’s lives, it is essential that women be able to make the
decision to become pregnant and to terminate a pregnancy.
When women are unable to get safe and legal abortions, it means
that if they are pregnant against their will, they are forced to
remain pregnant—what some have called “compulsory preg-
nancy.” For many women, finding out they are going to have a
child is a joyous event. But for others, it is a tragedy—the end of
their hopes and desires. Because it is their bodies and their lives
at stake, they must have the choice.
It is not just a question of legal abortion; it is a matter of
reproductive freedom and liberty. Legal abortion does not guar-
antee freedom if there is no information or services for contra-
ception. Freedom includes contraception but also the right to say
no to sex. It includes safety from forced sterilization but also
access to surgical sterilization if desired. It means the right to
have children and raise them with sufficient child care, health
care, education, and income so they won’t be in poverty.
Although much of the pro-choice movement’s political activism
focuses on abortion laws and practices, the overall goal has a
much broader context of bearing wanted children and raising
them to be happy and healthy citizens.
We wish we could spend more time on the larger reproduc-
tive freedom issues, but we are aware that Roe v. Wade and the
legalization of abortion are under assault from the antichoice
forces. Roe is the law of the land. The antichoice people think they
know better and do not have to respect what the Court ruled.
They want to turn back the clock to a time, not so long ago, when
desperate women resorted to the humiliation of illegal abortions.
In those days, many young women were ignorant about birth
control; when they found themselves pregnant they would get
into bad marriages and be subject to frequent pregnancies; their
lives—from their education to their maturity—were cut short.
They were children raising children. Others sought illegal abor-
tions in terrible conditions, and thousands of women died from
the butchering.
The antichoice forces want to make all abortions illegal,
which will make women suffer more. Criminalized abortion laws
don’t eliminate abortions; they never have and they never will.
Women will continue to seek abortions—in other countries, in
back alleys, from friends—or they can try to cause themselves to
miscarry. Many of these procedures will mean women will end up
After Roe: Pro-Life and Pro-Choice Movements Face Off
25
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

in hospitals with damaged uteruses and life-threatening infec-
tions. Those who want to make abortions illegal want to put their
moral views about human life into the law. In fact, theirs is a
minority view. A majority of Americans want to keep abortions
legal. In addition, despite what our opponents say, most religions,
even the Catholics, have pro-choice traditions (Maguire 2001).
Our opponents want to impose an absolute “moral” stan-
dard that the fertilized egg is more important than the woman
who conceives it. They dismiss any complications or tragedies
that result from this rule. In fact, matters of sex, contraception,
pregnancy, and abortion are complex. Real women, and their
families, face such problems every day: through ignorance, failed
contraception, economic deprivation, and victimization. Women
need all the resources possible to be able to make good decisions
about their bodies and their lives. Making them into criminals
will not help them or their children.
Trusting women to make decisions about their pregnancies
is our bottom line. Women are moral agents, and they are capa-
ble of making complex decisions. In addition, women may not
agree with the moral stand taken by our opponents. In fact, many
people believe there is a difference between a fertilized egg in the
body of a woman and a child who has been born. To treat them
as equal is to ignore the woman’s body and her life altogether.
We staunchly oppose this position.
We are convinced that our opponents have an agenda even
larger than reversing Roe v. Wade and criminalizing abortion. They
want to eliminate contraception as well. Through some clever
twists in definition, they claim that all contraceptives, except con-
doms and diaphragms, are actually abortifacient—that is, they stop
a pregnancy. The trick is that they do not discuss pregnancy but talk
about conception: they say the fertilized egg is a human being. But
there is no pregnancy until the fertilized egg attaches itself to the
wall of the uterus and begins to draw nutrients. Doctors can only
tell if a woman is pregnant after implantation. This other definition
is just a way to claim that contraceptives—which are officially
opposed by many in the so-called pro-life movement—can be crim-
inalized along with abortion.
Pro-choice is the real “pro-life” movement (Page 2006). We
believe contraception use can prevent abortions and must be not
only encouraged, but also supported by the government. We also
believe sexuality is a value that should be nurtured to achieve
intimacy and pleasure. Our opponents follow the dictates of the
26
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Roman Catholic Church that all sex outside of marriage is wrong
and that the purpose of sex is procreation. They believe nothing
should be permitted to interfere with this view. The crusade to
criminalize abortion is just the first step in a campaign to attack
contraception and, ultimately, sex itself. By this, they will have
accomplished the primary goal: to force women to be dependent,
to limit their lives to bearing children, and to control women’s
lives and choices.
Pro-Choice Framing Tactics
The collective action frames of the pro-choice movement are
shaped by the fact that they are in the form of responses to the
frames of the opponents in the pro-life movement. Some of these
tactics include the following:
1. Portrayals of the hardships of individual women with
problem pregnancies in the old days before legalization
and in more recent days because of problems of access.
In this they seek to undermine the absolute assumptions
of fetus = human being; abortion = murder.
2. Combat pro-life efforts to eliminate images of woman
from the debate on abortion. Pro-choice frames claim
that equality for zygotes means turning women into
incubators. At the same time, they use medical terms
like zygote, embryo, and fetus, never terms such as
baby or unborn child.
Frames and Framing: Tools for
Understanding Abortion Debates
The next chapter describes the range and depth of the abortion
conflict in the United States by tracing several policy debates from
the early 1970s to the present. A policy debate is a structured dis-
cussion that takes place in public arenas for the benefit of policy-
makers in government. Usually these debates focus on a particular
proposal for a law; at other times the debates may pertain to the
general approaches to public problems. On the agenda of U.S. fed-
eral and state governments are several issues that provoke debates
that don’t go away. Even though from time to time some govern-
ment entity—a legislature or a court—makes a formal decision, the
Frames and Framing: Tools for Understanding Abortion Debates
27
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

debate is not out of the picture and comes back. As long as there
are substantial disagreements among groups with sufficient
resources to make their views known, such debate will continue
over new proposals as well as old proposals that are revisited. The
abortion conflict is just this type of conflict. The question is firmly
on the government’s agenda, powerful activists who are interested
in the issue disagree on what the issue is about and how to solve
it, and the government has thus far not found a solution that will
send the parties home.
Policy debates occur in arenas. Most policy arenas are attached
to government institutions at the federal and state levels, such as
legislatures, bureaucratic agencies, the courts, or the executive lead-
ers. The arenas are large enough to encompass the expression of
views by media, formal organizations, and mass publics. But indi-
viduals and organizations, as well as policymakers, are the major
participants in these arenas when issues they are interested in or
have responsibility for come up. Think of them as “policy actors.”
They could be spokespersons for movement groups like NARAL
and the National Right to Life Committee; they could also be legis-
lators and public intellectuals, for example. Their give and take on
a topic reveals several things of interest in trying to understand
what is going on. We can make sense of what they say by using the
idea of “frames.” We have already discussed collective action
frames of social movements in which they present their compre-
hensive view of the problems and their solutions. Two other kinds
of frames are important: strategic frames and issue frames.
Strategic frames show the way policy actors present their
claims and goals for the policy debate. They usually consist of
two types of statements. One is a definition of the problem show-
ing there is something wrong and why government should act to
fix it. This is sometimes referred to as the “diagnosis” part of the
frame. The other part is the solution offered to the problem: what
should be done, sometimes called the “prognosis.” For social
movements such as pro-choice and pro-life, strategic frames are
excerpts from the more comprehensive collective action frames.
However, the movement leaders adjust their frames to fit a par-
ticular policy debate and specific proposal. At times, for example,
the pro-choice movement may choose not to emphasize a
woman’s right to control her body and instead talk about the
dangers of criminalizing abortion. The latter frame may be more
effective in winning support.
28
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Issue frames show how the policy actors who are regular
participants on the issue see the problem and solution. Often the
issue frame is in the form of a confrontation. For example, we
have seen that Roe established an issue frame that defined abor-
tion as a question of women’s privacy against the state’s legiti-
mate interest in protecting fetal life. So Roe not only settled, for a
time, the policy outcome of the abortion repeal/reform cam-
paign, but it also officially stated what the terms of debate about
abortion would be: a matter between a woman and her doctor
except for the period after viability. After that, the goal of the pro-
life movement was to change that issue frame by presenting its
own strategic frame about abortion. Before too long, the domi-
nant issue frame changed and the issue was defined as a conflict
between women’s right to privacy and the right of the fetus to
life.
As you can see, the goal of many activists is to have their
diagnosis and prognosis of the matter, that is, their strategic
frame, be adopted as the official frame by the policymakers. A lot
is at stake in these frames. Probably most evident is that the deci-
sion that results from a policy debate stems directly from the way
the issue is defined by the policymakers. If a prognosis is
ignored, there is little chance activists will get what they want.
Equally important, however, is that the issue frame has a pro-
found effect on who gets access to the policy arenas. By defining
abortion as a medical matter in the nineteenth century, for exam-
ple, women had no claim to be consulted or have a voice on the
question of legal abortion because it was not “about them.” How-
ever, when the repeal movement successfully claimed that abor-
tion was a woman’s issue and pertained to her rights and
privacy, women were now part of the debate and guaranteed a
place at the table. In the next chapter we will follow the develop-
ing issue frames in various abortion debates stopping to note the
official actions (cases, statutes, orders) along the way.
References
Beckwith, Francis J. Politically Correct Death: Answering the Arguments
for Abortion Rights. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books, 1993.
Blackstone, William. Commentaries on The Laws of England: in four books
by William Gladstone. New York: Harper Bros, 1872.
References
29
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Callahan, Sidney. “Abortion and the Sexual Agenda.” In The Ethics of
Abortion: Pro-Life vs. Pro-Choice, 3rd ed., edited by R. M. Baird and S. E.
Rosenbaum, 167–178. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2001.
Davis, Nanette J. From Crime to Choice: The Transformation of Abortion in
America. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1985.
Dyer, Frederick. “Horatio Robinson Storer M.D. and the Physicians’
Crusade Against Abortion.” Life and Learning IX, 1999. www.uffl.org/
vol%209/dyer9.pdf (accessed 11/10/06).
Garrow, David J. Liberty and Sexuality: The Right to Privacy and the
Making of Roe v. Wade. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994.
Kaplan, Laura. The Story of Jane: The Legendary Underground Feminist
Abortion Service. New York: Pantheon Books, 1996.
Luker, Kristin. Abortion and the Politics of Motherhood. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1984.
Maguire, Daniel C. Sacred Choices: The Right to Contraception and
Abortion in the World’s Religions. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2001.
McBride Stetson, Dorothy. “Abortion Policy Triads and Women’s
Rights in Russia, the United States and France.” In Abortion Politics,
edited by Marianne Githens and Dorothy McBride Stetson, 97–117.
New York: Routledge, 1996.
Mohr, James C. Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution of
National Policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1978.
Morgen, Sandra. Into Our Own Hands: The Women’s Health Movement in
the United States, 1969–1990. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University
Press, 2002.
Olasky, Marvin. Abortion Rites: A Social History. Wheaton, IL: Crossway
Books, 1992.
Page, Christina. How the Pro-Choice Movement Saved America: Freedom,
Politics, and the War on Sex. New York: Basic Books, 2006.
Reagan, Leslie J. When Abortion Was a Crime: Women, Medicine, and Law in
the United States, 1867–73. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998.
Staggenborg, Suzanne. The Pro-Choice Movement. Organization and
Activism in the Abortion Conflict. New York: Oxford University Press,
1991.
Tarrow, Sidney. Power in Movement: Social Movements, Collective Action
and Politics. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
Wilder, Marcy J. “The Rule of Law, the Rise of Violence, and the Role of
Morality: Reframing America’s Abortion Debate.” In Abortion Wars: A
Half Century of Struggle, 1959–2000, edited by Rickie Solinger, 73–94.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998.
30
Background and History
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

2
Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions
Introduction
The abortion conflict in the United States takes many forms. It is
not a simple face-off between pro-life and pro-choice forces over
whether abortion should be legal. That is one of the major clashes,
to be sure, but there are many more manifestations of the abortion
wars. This chapter will cover the range of topics that make up the
abortion conflict and describe the arenas of these many battles.
What are the participants fighting about other than Roe v. Wade?
The list includes parental notification, clinic access, and all forms
of government funding and support, and it extends to the per-
sonhood of the fetus, birth control, sex education, and embryonic
stem cell research. The battles take place in federal and state
courts, congressional committees, federal executive agencies,
political parties, election campaigns, foreign policy and interna-
tional organizations, as well as in clinics and doctor’s offices. This
chapter portrays the course of these disputes with special atten-
tion to the frames of the debates as well as the outcomes—who
won, who lost, and the decisions to date. Given the persistence
and widespread impact of the abortion conflict in American law,
politics, and society, numerous authors have offered solutions to
the problem. This chapter will conclude with summaries of sev-
eral proposals inviting the reader to assess the feasibility and
effectiveness of each.
31
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Constitutional Legality of Abortion
The Supreme Court’s decision that the Constitution includes a
right to seek abortion was a tremendous shock to the opponents
of abortion. Even before the pro-life movement mobilized, lead-
ers sought to do whatever they could to put things back the way
they were before January 23, 1973. When the Supreme Court, the
highest court in the land, rules on the meaning of the Constitu-
tion, those who oppose its ruling have only two options. Neither
is quick or easy. The first is to work to pass an amendment to the
Constitution itself. The founders who drafted the document
made it very difficult to change. It takes two-thirds approval of
both the House of Representatives and the Senate and ratification
by three-fourths of the states—thirty-eight state legislatures.
There is another method—never used successfully—whereby
two-thirds of the states would call for a convention to amend the
Constitution.
The second option is a litigation strategy to convince the
Court to change its ruling. This is difficult because of the impor-
tance of precedent or stare decisis in U.S. law. This means official
interpretations of laws by the Supreme Court are the law of the
land and all courts, including the Supreme Court itself, decide
other cases that come before it following the way the courts did
it before. Of course, the Supreme Court does occasionally over-
turn a precedent, but that is often many years after the initial
decision. The justices accept that conditions and times change
and that their rulings must also change. A major condition for
overturning precedent is that the members of the Court have
changed and the newer justices feel less bound by the decisions
of their predecessors. At least this possibility was important as
the pro-life movement developed a strategy to upend legaliza-
tion of abortion.
Amending the Constitution
Before September 1973, in an immediate response to Roe v. Wade,
members of Congress submitted eighteen proposals to amend
the Constitution to supersede the ruling and a couple of regular
bills to prohibit abortion (Packwood 1992). Some form of the
Human Life Amendment has been introduced in every Congress
to this day. These proposals have taken three forms:
32
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

1. to outlaw abortion directly except to save the life of the
mother;
2. to extend the constitutional definition of person to all
human beings from conception;
3. to give the states the power to criminalize abortion, the
so-called “states’ rights” amendments.
Most of the congressional consideration of these amend-
ments took place in the 1970s and early 1980s. Congress briefly
considered the amendments right after the Roe decision, heard
presentations from pro-life and pro-choice advocates, but was
reluctant to act. Anxious pro-life leaders even started a backup
campaign in states to request a constitutional convention “for the
sole purpose of proposing an amendment to the Constitution of
the United States which would more effectually protect the lives
of unborn human offspring.” (Florida State Senate, 1979)
Pro-life activists kept pressure on Congress all through the
1970s. They staged an annual “March for Life,” where they
would distribute roses to all members as symbols of the babies
they claimed were murdered by legal abortion. When Republi-
cans took the Senate and the presidency in 1981, pro-life sup-
porters held key positions in both the administration and the
Senate committees. Senator Jesse Helms’s bill got the first atten-
tion: “The paramount right to life is vested in each human being
from the moment of fertilization without regard to age, health, or
condition of dependency” (97th Cong., 1st Sess. [1981]). This was
followed by Senator Orrin Hatch’s constitutional amendment
proposal: “A right to abortion is not secured by this Constitution.
The Congress and the several States all have the concurrent
power to restrict and prohibit abortions” (97th Cong., 1st Sess.
[1981]).
The extensive hearings on the Helms bill gave leaders of
both the pro-choice and pro-life movements the opportunity to
present their views on abortion and whether it should remain
legal. But the most important effect was to focus the debate on
the status of the fetus. When is a fetus a human being? Or, as the
question is more commonly reported in the press, When does
human life begin? To address this difficult and some say eternal
question, the pro-life strategy was to claim that it is a scientific
rather than a moral question, and science can provide the answer.
They wanted that answer to be codified into law.
Constitutional Legality of Abortion
33
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

According to the pro-life frame, modern biology had discov-
ered that every human life begins at the moment of its conception.
Through genetic research, scientists can trace to fertilization the
stage at which the cells form an individual with complete genetic
information to become a member of a particular species. The tiny
conceptus formed by sperm and egg of a mouse becomes an indi-
vidual mouse. Similarly, the conceptus of the sperm and egg of
human parents becomes a human being—a member of the human
species. Because of ultrasound technology scientists can observe a
child as he or she develops. 
“The baby plays, so to speak, on a trampoline! He
bends his knees, pushes on the wall, soars up and falls
down again. Because his body has the same buoyancy
as the amniotic fluid, he does not feel gravity and per-
forms his dance in a very slow, graceful, and elegant
way, impossible in any other place on the Earth . . . We
now know what he feels, we have listened to what he
hears, smelled what he tastes and we have really seen
him dancing full of grace and youth. Science has turned
the fairy tale of Tom Thumb into a true story, the one
each of us has lived in the womb of his mother” (“When
does human life begin?” Testimony of Jerome Lejeune at
the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee 1981; available at
www.californiaprolife.org/abortion/whendoes.html).
Thus, it is no longer a matter of opinion, or moral 
ambivalence—we know that actual human life begins at concep-
tion and the unborn baby is equal to all other human beings.
Since the pro-life strategic frame moved to the terrain of sci-
ence, the pro-choice advocates moved to counter their claim by
appealing to scientists such as Leon E. Rosenberg, a professor of
genetics at Yale. He did not quibble with Lejeune’s observations,
but rather pointed out that the phrase “actual human life” used
by the pro-life advocates is not a scientific term. It is true that the
fertilized egg is a potential human life, but when it becomes
“actual” is not determined by science. Some say it is conception,
others say when there is brain function, and still others when the
fetus moves and looks like a baby or when it can live outside the
uterus. The embryo development process is continuous. No def-
inite break exists where one can say it is actual human life after
and not before. Although there are scientists that argue the other
34
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

side, they are not doing it as scientists but are expressing their
religious views: “I maintain that the concepts such as humanness
are beyond the purview of science because no idea about them
can be tested experimentally” (Rosenberg testimony, reprinted in
The Miami Herald, May 3, 1981, p. 1).
Although the Judiciary Committee recommended both
pieces of legislation to the full Senate, neither the Helms bill nor
the Hatch amendment passed. Senator Bob Packwood filibus-
tered until both of them were withdrawn. The Hatch amendment
did get a full floor debate in 1983, but it was defeated 49–50. The
pro-life forces could, nonetheless, claim a victory. They were suc-
cessful in bringing the issue of fetal personhood—recently ruled
by the Supreme Court as a nonlegal matter—to the highest levels
of government. The result was that the frame of the abortion
debate, which the Supreme Court established as a matter of the
privacy of woman in Roe, now became a matter of the person-
hood and thus life of the fetus versus the privacy of women.
Changing the Court
On the problem “What to do about Roe?” the activists from the
pro-life movement have agreed on the diagnosis that abortion on
demand is wrong. They have not always agreed on the solution
or prognosis, however. While some were promoting a constitu-
tional amendment, others took a more political approach. They
mobilized their followers to become active in the Republican
Party, adopt a pro-life plank in the Republican platform, and give
their support to Ronald Reagan for president. When Reagan took
office in 1981, he was indebted to the pro-life movement and
responded to their demands to appoint pro-life justices to the
federal courts, especially the Supreme Court. At the same time,
pro-life activists worked in various states, lobbying legislatures
to enact restrictions that would take away convenient access to
abortion services. When these restrictions were challenged by
pro-choice organizations, each case provided an opportunity for
the courts to whittle away Roe as well. From 1973 until 1989, the
Court struck down most of these restrictions and reiterated its
ruling that states could not interfere in any way with women’s
right to privacy in securing abortions. However, after 1981, the
majorities supporting Roe got smaller and smaller.
In 1981, President Reagan fulfilled his campaign promise
with his first nomination to the Supreme Court—Sandra Day
Constitutional Legality of Abortion
35
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

O’Connor—who became the first woman to serve. Her answers
about abortion cases in the hearings were vague, and most
assumed she would support the pro-life position. And indeed, in
the first abortion case after her appointment, she joined the
minority opposing the Roe position. In City of Akron v. Akron Cen-
ter for Reproductive Health (462 U.S. 416, 1983), the Court struck
down five sections of a city ordinance, including requiring
parental consent and a twenty-four-hour waiting period, because
they restricted a woman’s right to obtain an abortion. In her dis-
sent, O’Connor said that given the changes in technology and
improvements in neonatal care, Roe’s trimester approach was “on
a collision course with itself.” The antiabortion tally on the Court
was now three.
In 1986, Reagan nominated Justice Antonin Scalia to replace
William Rehnquist, who was named Chief Justice after Chief Jus-
tice Warren Burger’s resignation. Although Scalia had a well-
known antiabortion record as an attorney and as an appeals
court judge, his nomination provoked little controversy. But his
influence was soon felt. In Thornburgh v. American College of Obste-
tricians & Gynecologists (476 U.S. 747, 1986), the Reagan adminis-
tration, for the first time, presented a brief asking the Court to
reverse its position in Roe v. Wade. They made the point that they
were not opposed to a constitutional right of privacy as put forth
in Griswold v. Connecticut but that abortion was a special case
because it involved the killing of an unborn child and was not a
matter of privacy. The Thornburgh decision invalidated several
regulations aimed at discouraging women from choosing abor-
tion as interfering with their rights. But this time the majority
was 5–4, showing that the Court was one heartbeat away from
reversing the Roe decision and issue frame.
The next opportunity to staff the Supreme Court came quickly
in 1987. The pro-choice movement had certainly counted the votes,
reviewed the Scalia confirmation process, and raised the stakes for
the next candidate. Reagan nominated Robert Bork, someone who
was not only antiabortion but who had written extensively against
the rulings in Griswold and Roe, and against the entire idea of a con-
stitutional right to privacy. The battle during the confirmation
hearings was intense and widely publicized (for more on the Bork
nomination see Gitenstein 1992; Craig and O’Brien 1993). The
abortion issue was at the center of the debate because Bork would
replace a “swing” justice, Justice Lewis Powell, who had supplied
the crucial fifth vote to protect the right of abortion.
36
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

The Senate refused to confirm Bork by a vote of 52 to 48.
President Reagan then nominated Anthony Kennedy who won
confirmation with little trouble. Kennedy, like Scalia, is a Roman
Catholic; thus, the pro-choice forces feared that the pro-life forces
had finally achieved the majority that would undo Roe. Attention
turned to the next challenge to state abortion restrictions to make
its way to the Court for review: Webster v. Reproductive Health Ser-
vices (492 U.S. 490, 1989). At issue was another set of hurdles
women would have to face to obtain services. In addition, the
state decreed that life begins at conception and that “unborn chil-
dren have protectable interests in life, health, and well-being.”
Once again the Justice Department, this time in the adminis-
tration of President George H. W. Bush, urged the Court to over-
turn Roe v. Wade. Unlike Thornburgh, however, this time there was
also a majority in favor of sustaining the restrictions in the Mis-
souri statute: Rehnquist, Scalia, Kennedy, and O’Connor as well
as Justice Byron White; all but White were Reagan appointees.
Yet they did not speak with one voice about the status of the par-
ent decision Roe v. Wade. Scalia clearly asserted that he wanted to
overturn the previous ruling and invited direct challenges from
the states. O’Connor continued to question the trimester frame-
work but said there would be time to reconsider Roe in the future.
But the dissenting justices, especially Justice Harry Blackmun,
who had written the Roe decision, sent out the warning that “a
plurality of this Court implicitly invites every state legislature to
enact more and more restrictive abortion regulations in order to
provoke more and more test cases, in the hope that sometime
down the line the Court will return the law of procreative free-
dom to the severe limitations that generally prevailed in this
country before January 22, 1973.” He went on: “I fear for the
future. I fear for the liberty and equality of millions of women
who have lived and come of age in the 16 years since Roe was
decided” (492 U.S. 490, 539).
The Webster opinions stimulated both pro-choice and pro-
life groups into action. Pro-choice groups sent out the word that
the Supreme Court now had the dreaded pro-life majority. The
next case could easily rob women of their rights. The pro-life
groups doubled their efforts at the state level, competing to pass
a state law that would directly challenge the Roe decision by out-
lawing abortion in the first trimester of pregnancy. This was not
all that easy, however. The Webster ruling had mobilized many to
the pro-choice organizations because their leaders claimed that
Constitutional Legality of Abortion
37
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

abortion would soon become a crime. For the first time, many
women were aware that they could lose rights they had come to
take for granted.
Pro-life activists, for their part, got busy in the states, push-
ing sympathetic legislators to enact laws that would violate the
Roe ruling to give the Court a chance to do what some justices
promised—overturn Roe v. Wade. This was more successful in
some states than others. Utah, for example, passed a very strict
conditional law—abortion only for health of woman or fetal
deformity. In Florida, Montana, Alaska, and California, on the
other hand, pro-life proposals ran counter to guarantees of pri-
vacy in the state constitutions. Governors in Louisiana and Idaho
vetoed new restrictions as probably unconstitutional. Pennsylva-
nia’s governor, Robert Casey, signed that state’s new law, which
put in place five new hurdles for women seeking abortions:
• Special informed consent of woman seeking abortion
• Parental consent for minors with judicial bypass
• Notification of husband
• Compulsory antiabortion lecture by a doctor 24 hours in
advance of the procedure
• Stringent reporting requirements for facilities providing
abortions
A challenge to this Pennsylvania law by Planned Parent-
hood made its way to the Supreme Court. And it was this case—
Planned Parenthood v. Casey—that many thought would be the
crucial test for Roe. This was especially likely when Clarence
Thomas replaced Justice Thurgood Marshall—one of the Roe
majority in 1991. Thomas was questioned during his confirma-
tion hearings about his views on the abortion case, but he had no
written record and claimed he had never discussed Roe with any-
one. Nevertheless, because he was a conservative attorney
appointed by the pro-life Bush administration, pro-choice
activists counted the votes on the Court to add up to an anti-Roe
majority for the first time.
Facing the inevitable, the attorneys for Planned Parenthood
formally asked the Court to take the opportunity in this Pennsyl-
vania case to either affirm the right to abortion as a fundamental
constitutional right or overturn the Roe decision altogether. They
wanted to confront what they feared might be a gradual chipping
away of abortion rights. The Bush administration lawyers were
38
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

not as keen to make this case the final test of Roe. One reason was
their awareness of pro-choice strategy leading up to the 1992
presidential elections, where President Bush would be chal-
lenged by Governor Bill Clinton—a pro-choice politician. Pro-
choice movement leaders had joined with allies in Congress to
promote the Freedom of Choice Act (FOCA). If passed, this act
would codify the ruling in Roe: “a State may not restrict the right
of a woman to choose to terminate a pregnancy (1) before fetal
viability; or (2) at any time, if such termination is necessary to
protect the life or health of the woman.” If the Court reversed its
ruling about women’s right to seek abortions, then they would
push this act through Congress. They figured that there would be
sufficient support once people realized that otherwise abortion
would become criminalized again. They also planned to make
this a major issue in the presidential campaign, especially if Pres-
ident Bush vetoed the FOCA.
Both sides looked to the Court’s decision in the Pennsylvania
case with anticipation and some dread. When the Court
announced the outcome, neither side could claim a victory. Pro-
choice was disappointed that the Court upheld all but one—the
requirement of husband’s notification—of the administrative hur-
dles and invited the states to enact more. Pro-life was unhappy
that the Court did not overturn the Roe ruling; even more frustrat-
ing was that the plurality upholding it included Justice O’Connor,
one of Reagan’s appointees, and Justice David Souter, one of Pres-
ident Bush’s appointees. Both sides publicly criticized the ruling.
Perhaps that meant the Court had struck a compromise between
the women’s rights and liberty and the fetus’s right to life. The rul-
ing and the opinions were complicated. No opinion was signed by
a majority of the justices, but there was an outcome:
1. A majority of the justices confirmed the Court’s central
ruling in Roe v. Wade: “a recognition of the right of the
woman to choose to have an abortion before viability
and to obtain it without undue interference from the
state” (505 U.S. 833, 846).
2. A plurality of the justices agreed that the trimester
framework was no longer in force. The place to draw
the line with respect to states’ power to prohibit abor-
tion would be viability.
3. Justices agreed that prior to viability the state could put
administrative hurdles in place as long as these did not
Constitutional Legality of Abortion
39
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

constitute an “undue burden” on a woman’s liberty. “A
finding of an undue burden is a shorthand for the con-
clusion that a state regulation has the purpose or effect
of placing a substantial obstacle in the path of a woman
seeking an abortion of a nonviable fetus” (505 U.S. 833,
877).
The Planned Parenthood v. Casey decision cooled the turmoil
over Roe v. Wade for more than a decade. Pro-choice leaders pur-
sued the FOCA, but many members of Congress did not want to
go on record for a woman’s right to choose. At the same time
President Bill Clinton appointed two pro-Roe justices to the
Court: Justices Steven Breyer and Ruth Bader Ginsburg. The
movements went on to other debates until another pro-life pres-
ident, President George W. Bush, took office in 2001. Activists cal-
culated the ages of the justices, thinking about who would be
likely to retire during the second Bush administration.
The Contemporary Debate 
over Roe v. Wade
In 2005 it turned out that one justice from each side of the
divide—Justices O’Connor and Rehnquist—left the Court. The
Senate Judiciary Committee held public hearings that drew wide
attention because the nominees—John Roberts and Samuel
Alito—once again, had the potential to shift the Court to an anti-
Roe majority. Even before the new justices were confirmed, state
governments were preparing to pass laws that would violate the
Roe guidelines. The first to do so was South Dakota. The gover-
nor signed legislation in late 2005 that criminalized all abortions
except to save the life of the mother.
Ever since Roe, the central goal of the pro-life movement has
been to somehow override, with constitutional amendment, or
overturn, through changes in the Court, this constitutional law.
Today, 35 years after this decriminalization of abortion, the pro-
life strategic frame focuses on the number of abortions that have
occurred, saying that babies are dying, and they vow to protect
babies from what they see as a grisly practice. Linking unborn or
“pre-born” children with those who are born, they demand pro-
tection for all human beings. In addition, pro-life attorneys rep-
resented by Americans United for Life charge that the decision
40
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

was an “unconstitutional usurpation of people’s right to self-
government.”
While there remains widespread agreement among activists
on the diagnostic pro-life frame, there is disagreement on the pol-
icy solutions, that is, the prognostic frame. Some pro-life activists
follow the South Dakota approach—direct confrontation and an
early ruling by the new Court. Others fear that this is premature
because there is no guarantee that the Court, even with the new
justices Roberts and Alito, will rule against Roe. And if they
don’t, there could be another reaffirmation like the decision in
Casey. These pro-life organizations want to stay with the plan of
pushing laws that make access to abortion services more and
more difficult through regulations on clinics and administrative
hurdles for patients.
The strategic frame of the pro-choice movement with respect
to the status of Roe is that any ban on abortion is an attack on
women’s health. Activists vow to stand up for women’s freedom
and privacy, but emphasize women’s health as the issue of para-
mount importance. They have long claimed that legal abortion is
in jeopardy, and the pro-life campaign to make direct challenges
to Roe v. Wade underscores the threat. The prognostic pro-choice
frame shows a shift toward activism in the policy arenas in state
legislatures.
The issue frame that dominates the debate over Roe v. Wade
remains the question of whether the Constitution guarantees pri-
vacy to women and doctors in making decisions about abortion
and how these rights can be balanced with the government’s
interest in protecting fetal life (McBride Stetson 2004). In the
Court, the frame focuses on whether specific abortion regulations
constitute an undue burden on women’s liberty, especially with
respect to their lives and health, and deliberations are limited to
this rather narrow question. Thus, the frame favors the pro-
choice position because it keeps the legalization of abortion itself
off the table, but the pro-life attack on Roe is intended to change
this frame to define the issue in terms of the equal personhood of
an unborn child and the Court’s powers, which would work
against pro-choice goals.
The debate over the direct attack on Roe is still unfolding.
The South Dakota governor signed a statute that criminalizes
abortion in all cases except when the pregnancy is a direct threat
to the mother’s life. The statute declares that life begins at con-
ception and that the “guarantee of due process of law under the
Constitutional Legality of Abortion
41
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Constitution of South Dakota applies equally to born and unborn
human beings, and that under the Constitution of South Dakota,
a pregnant mother and her unborn child, each possess a natural
and inalienable right to life” (South Dakota 2006, sec 1). Through-
out the act the fetus is referred to as an “unborn human being.”
Persons who perform abortions may be prosecuted but the
woman seeking the abortion may not.
Most observers expected that pro-choice organizations,
such as Planned Parenthood and the Center for Reproductive
Rights would immediately challenge the constitutionality of the
statute, which is in direct conflict with current constitutional
law. Instead, they first organized a campaign for repeal within
South Dakota, which was successful in November 2006 elec-
tions. Repeal squashed this opportunity for pro-life activists to
get a chance at the new Court. In the meantime, the annual leg-
islative sessions in the states continue to be busy with abortion-
related issues, considering new bans on the procedure, and
national organizations are organizing state campaigns to resist
these proposals.
State Regulation of Abortion 
Practice and Access
Ever since states were prohibited from criminalizing abortion in
1973, a central strategy of the pro-life movement has been to
lobby states to enact laws that would limit the practice of abor-
tion and women’s access to the procedure. As we saw in the
Planned Parenthood v. Casey decision, the Court has ruled such
regulations to be constitutional unless they place an “undue bur-
den” on women’s liberty in seeking abortions. This section
reviews the debates and outcomes relating to several of the
administrative hurdles the states have enacted and concludes
with a section on the major battle over clinic access and pro-life
violence and militancy in the 1980s and 1990s.
Administrative Hurdles
From the beginning, pro-life legislatures tried to test the limits of
Roe v. Wade. In the early cases, when pro-choice enjoyed a strong
Court majority, the Court tended to see most of these require-
42
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

ments as designed to interfere unconstitutionally with women’s
privacy. But as time passed and the membership in the Court
changed to reflect the pro-life perspectives of the administration
and Congress, the hurdles passed judicial scrutiny.
Parental Notification and Consent
One of the first pro-life victories was agreement, even among
many pro-choice legislators, that doctors should not perform
abortions on minors (usually considered to be those younger than
18 years) without their parents at least knowing about it, if not
consenting. While the motive of pro-life activists in promoting
these requirements was to discourage or prevent minors from get-
ting abortions, some framed the issue as a matter of parental rights
and responsibility. Doctors couldn’t prescribe an antibiotic to a
minor without a parent’s permission. They certainly shouldn’t be
performing abortions on children without their parents at least
knowing about it.
Pro-choice activists countered that these laws deprived
young women of their constitutional rights to privacy and equal-
ity. They were also a hardship for many girls from dysfunctional
homes. How can a young girl tell her parents that she is pregnant
and wants an abortion if the father of her child is her older brother
or her own father? Other girls, they claimed, would be so fright-
ened that they would seek illegal abortions or even try to abort
themselves and suffer drastic health consequences. A strategic
pro-choice frame in this debate usually included examples of indi-
vidual girls who had suffered such a fate. One such story that
gained national attention in 1990 was about Becky Bell who fled
to another state when the Indiana law required her to gain con-
sent of one of her parents. She got a botched abortion and died of
infection.
In the end, the Court has been persuaded that both parental
consent and notification laws are constitutionally permitted, as
long as they provide the option to get permission from a judge
for hardship cases, the so-called “judicial bypass.” In 1979, Bel-
lotti v. Baird stated: “We therefore conclude that if a State decides
to require a pregnant minor to obtain one or both parents’ con-
sent to an abortion, it also must provide an alternative procedure
whereby authorization for the abortion can be obtained” (443
U.S. 622, 643). Today a majority of states require some parental
involvement for minors to get an abortion. All follow the Court’s
requirement to have judicial bypass procedures.
State Regulation of Abortion Practice and Access
43
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Some states, including California, Illinois, New York, Ore-
gon, and Washington have no parental notification or consent
requirements. Thus, minors from states with restrictions may
travel, often with the help of friends and relatives, to those states
to obtain abortions. To prevent this, the National Right to Life
Committee has, since 2000, promoted the Child Custody Protec-
tion Act, which would make it a federal crime for anyone who is
not the parent to transport a minor across state lines to obtain an
abortion. The pro-life supporters argue that it is primarily adult
men, probably the ones who impregnated the minors, who take
the girls to get the abortions, thus circumventing the parental
notification laws in place to protect those minors from victimiza-
tion. The pro-choice groups oppose this bill because it hurts
young women who may be victims of family violence or who,
becoming desperate, obtain illegal abortions. The most effective
argument has proved to be the warning that it would be grand-
mothers who are helping their granddaughters who would be
arrested under this law. In fall 2006, Congress rejected this act.
Informed Consent
Another means of slowing down abortion practice promoted by
the pro-life movement is to require women to receive counseling
from doctors or others about the pregnancy, fetal development,
or alternatives to abortion to be sure that their decision is based
on complete information. Often this counseling is required at
least twenty-four hours before the procedure, ostensibly to allow
the woman to think about what she has learned, but also to add
another hurdle that might deter her from proceeding. In some
states the legislatures specify the information that the women
must receive and when they do, in most cases state health depart-
ments provide a script to doctors. The Supreme Court has ruled
that such requirements are not undue burdens and thus consti-
tutional. In any event more than half the states mandate that
women receive counseling before an abortion.
The pro-life people, not unlike the American Medical Asso-
ciation in the 1800s, argue that women who seek abortions are
ignorant about the fetus as an unborn child. They are convinced
that when women know about what kind of operation is
involved, and  its effects on the fetus and on themselves, they will
be reluctant to choose to go ahead. They believe women are also
unaware of the terrible psychological toll abortion has on women
who have them, what some call a “postabortion syndrome.” Pro-
44
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

life promotes the use of “pregnancy crisis centers,” which do not
even mention abortion as a choice.
The pro-choice people respond that these requirements are a
way to harass women who are facing the difficult decision to end
their pregnancies and scare them away. In addition, there is some
evidence, they claim, that in many states women receive incor-
rect information about fetal pain during abortion, the psycholog-
ical effects of abortion on women, or the link to breast cancer.
Further there is no scientific evidence that women who have
abortions suffer psychological trauma any more than women
who give birth or women in general. They criticize the increased
federal funding of the pro-life crisis centers.
Spousal Notification and Consent
In the 1970s, the pro-life activists lobbied for regulations that
required a woman, if married, to receive her husband’s consent
to obtain an abortion. They argued that the father has an interest
in the life of his unborn child. The pro-choice response was that
because pregnancy had a major impact on women’s lives and
health, a woman should not have to inform or gain the consent
of anyone. The Supreme Court has agreed with the pro-choice
position. In the 1970s, the justices ruled that because the only
time the husband’s consent would be significant would be to
deny a woman the right to choose abortion, and because even the
state did not have that authority, it could not give such an author-
ity to a husband.
Another strategy was to promote spousal notification. Along
with this, pro-life groups joined with father’s rights groups that
encouraged men to file restraining orders when they believed a
woman was trying to terminate a pregnancy that they had fathered.
None of these efforts was successful. In Planned Parenthood v. Casey,
the justices rejected only one of the five administrative hurdles in
the Pennsylvania statute: the requirement that a wife notify her
husband before obtaining an abortion. The justices noted: “It is an
inescapable biological fact that state regulation with respect to the
child a woman is carrying will have a far greater impact on the
mother’s liberty than on the father’s . . . The court has held that,
when the wife and the husband disagree on this decision, the view
of only one of the two marriage partners can prevail. In as much as
it is the woman who physically bears the child and who is the more
directly and immediately affected by the pregnancy, as between the
two, the balance weights in her favor” (505 U.S. 833, 896).
State Regulation of Abortion Practice and Access
45
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Clinic Access
After Roe v. Wade most hospitals surrendered to pressures from
the pro-life movement and stopped performing first-trimester
abortions. For a long time, therefore, most abortions have been
performed in clinics established for this purpose and in a few
doctor’s offices. Moving the practice to the private business sec-
tor also moved it into a public space—the marketplace—where
those seeking abortions can be observed. Some leaders in the pro-
life movement have long advocated a direct approach to stop
abortions by harassing the clinics and their patients with the goal
of shutting them down. In 1980, Joseph Scheidler formed his own
organization, the Pro-Life Action League (PLAL), which would
be devoted to direct action against clinics. His work inspired
Randall Terry to form Operation Rescue, which took the tactics to
new levels. While Scheidler was a former Roman Catholic priest,
Terry mobilized his troops among the Christian fundamentalists
forming a new wave of “Christian soldiers.” 
Operation Rescue proclaimed a war against what they called
the “child-killing industry.” Their mission was to rescue America
from moral decline by preventing women from aborting their
children. They compared abortion to the Holocaust. Their goal
was to save lives, and their crusade was more important than any
laws; they were following a “higher law,” what they called “Bible
disobedience.” Their tactics included blocking access to facilities,
conducting sidewalk counseling with clients to persuade them
not to kill their babies, tracing license numbers and phone num-
bers of clinic visitors and confronting these women at home, and
sending threatening letters and making phone calls to doctors
and clinic personnel. To teach these tactics Operation Rescue ran
training programs in Florida. 
Clinic owners and personnel sought to fight back by form-
ing alliances with pro-choice groups to protect their businesses
and their clients. The pro-choice organizations went to court to
seek injunctions against the antiabortion protesters. But the pro-
testers were relentless in defying injunctions and often seemed to
invite arrest despite facing fines and potential jail time. They
challenged these injunctions in federal court claiming that the
injunctions violated their First Amendment rights. In 1994, the
Supreme Court ruled against the antiabortion protesters saying
that an injunction limited their conduct, not their speech. In the
same year, pro-choice activists also won a victory when Congress
46
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

passed the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances (FACE) Act,
which makes it a federal offense to use force or threats of force
against an organization that provides reproductive services and
counseling. Other pro-choice litigation efforts were not success-
ful. The Supreme Court has ruled that neither the federal anti-
racketeering nor the nineteenth-century Ku Klux Klan civil rights
statute could be used to bring federal charges against the pro-life
clinic obstructionists.
Operation Rescue soon faded from the scene, but the mili-
tancy they inspired did not. During the 1990s, a new wave of
antiabortion violence arose, what pro-choice called “pro-life ter-
rorism.” Direct action took a deadly turn with murders and
attempted murders of doctors and other clinic personnel, fire-
bombing of clinics, anthrax and fake anthrax attacks, and all sorts
of harassment (Baird-Windle and Bader 2001). What ideas justified
such violence? Those who advocated and defended violence saw
abortion as the devil’s work that brought down the wrath of God
on America. (Pat Robertson even blamed the terrorist attacks of
September 11, 2001 on feminists and abortionists.) They claimed
they were an Army of God waging war with the devil and fight-
ing as Lambs of Christ (Mason 2002).
The turn toward deadly violence demanded responses from
police and the courts, and eventually most of those who mur-
dered doctors were arrested, tried, and convicted. One, Paul Hill,
was executed by the state of Florida. The Army of God named
him a martyr for Jesus. Although the incidence of bombings and
attacks on personnel has declined, the pro-life campaign at clin-
ics continues. The pro-choice movement is concerned that the
patterns of intimidation have severely reduced the number of
doctors trained to perform abortions and have kept others from
staying in the practice. Some state legislatures continue to enact
new regulations, including special building codes, to make it
more and more expensive for clinics to stay in business. The
result, some fear, will be that abortion will be legal but no one
will be able to get one.
Government Support of Abortion
As part of their strategy to prevent as many abortions as possi-
ble, the pro-life movement has worked with their allies in Con-
gress, Republican administrations, and state governments to
Government Support of Abortion
47
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

eliminate any government support to women seeking abortions.
Usually this means looking carefully at all funding of health care
for the poor and government employees and through public
health plans such as family planning services. The general pro-
life argument is that many people who oppose abortion do not
want their tax dollars to pay for or facilitate abortion. This frame
has limits because the government does many things some tax-
payers don’t like and could hardly justify not funding all of
them. In framing the proposals, pro-life activists seek to define
the problem as the government using tax dollars to kill unborn
human beings. Pro-choice leaders respond by asserting the gov-
ernment’s responsibility to ensure the equal rights of all citizens.
Hyde Amendment
Since 1976, Congress has attached the so-called Hyde Amend-
ment, named after Republican Congress member Henry Hyde of
Illinois, to the annual appropriations bill that provides funds for
the Medicaid program. Medicaid is the publicly funded health
care program for the poor, that is, those on welfare—mostly
women with children—or those who are destitute. It is funded
jointly by the federal government and the states. The Hyde
Amendment prohibits the use of the federal funds to pay for
abortions of women who receive Medicaid, even though the pro-
gram is required to pay for “medically necessary” procedures.
Thirty-two states follow the federal standard and provide Med-
icaid abortions only for life endangerment, rape, or incest (South
Dakota pays only for life endangerment and a few states also pay
for fetal abnormality). That leaves seventeen states that use
Medicaid funds to pay for medically necessary abortions.
The amendment always provides an exception for those few
cases where pregnancy threatens a woman’s life. Sometimes
Congress also allows funding for abortions when pregnancy is
due to rape or incest, although these exceptions are considered
difficult to administer. Those supporting the Hyde Amendment
claim that abortion is never medically necessary unless a
woman’s life is threatened. Pro-life activists have been suspicious
of exceptions for medical necessity or maternal health ever since
the Supreme Court’s ruling in Doe v. Bolton, which gave a very
liberal definition of these exceptions. Further, some believe
women can lie about the rape/incest exception and oppose this
exception as well.
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

The amendment was introduced for the first time in 1974,
right after the decision in Roe v. Wade, and was part of the pro-life
campaign to reverse the effects of legal abortion. Pro-life activists
took their efforts to the state level as well, proposing that states
also ban the use of their Medicaid funds for abortion. The
debates brought the place of the fetus as a human being to the
fore, making it part of the issue frame. This challenged the frame
put forth in Roe v. Wade that abortion is a matter of women’s pri-
vacy to decide. Pro-life proponents asserted that the time for a
woman to control her body is before conception; after conception
she becomes the natural protector of her unborn child. They por-
trayed women who seek abortions as selfish, denying their off-
spring for their own convenience. In this, they did not recognize
that the women who benefited from Medicaid were usually poor
parents who received welfare to support their families.
The pro-choice opponents of the Hyde Amendment did not
forget the poor women; they made them the center of their strate-
gic frame during the debate. They argued that Roe v. Wade gave
women a constitutional right to abortion. However, abortions cost
money and women of means were better able to afford them than
poor women. Denying them those funds, they claimed, was an
unconstitutional discrimination against the poor. Without Medi-
caid, poor women would be forced to bring children into the
world they could not raise and who would sink their family fur-
ther into deep poverty. Or they would have to take desperate
measures seeking cheap abortions from back-alley practitioners
with all the attendant risks of infection and death. And all this,
because they were poor! President Jimmy Carter made pro-choice
advocates furious when he responded to their claim that cutting
Medicaid support was unfair to the poor. “There are many things
in life that are unfair,” he responded (McBride Stetson 2001).
The pro-life campaign to cut Medicaid support was success-
ful. The federal government has not paid for Medicaid abortions
since 1976, except to save women’s lives. Many state governments
enacted similar restrictions. At first pro-choice forces fought back
by challenging these laws in federal courts, claiming that they
unconstitutionally discriminated against the poor and violated
the intent of Medicaid to pay for health care for the poor. The
Court rejected their claims, ruling the Hyde Amendment a consti-
tutional use of government spending power and ruling that there
is no constitutional responsibility to pay for health care. Further,
poor women have no constitutional right to have an abortion—
Government Support of Abortion
49
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

only to seek abortion. Denying them Medicaid funding does not
interfere with this right to seek abortion. Finally, the Constitution
does not prohibit governments from passing laws that affect the
poor differently (Beal v. Doe 432 U.S. 438, 1977; Maher v. Roe 432
U.S. 464, 1977 reviewed federal powers; Harris v. McRae 448 U.S.
297, 1980 addressed states’ powers).
Pro-choice activists have not given up. Sometimes there is a
glimmer of hope, as when President Clinton took the office in
1993. His first budget did not include the Hyde Amendment. In
addition, he included abortion services (“medically necessary
reproductive health services”) in his plan for comprehensive
health reform. Such actions mobilized the pro-life forces, espe-
cially the Christian coalition, to pressure legislators to oppose
these measures. Again, they warned that the government was
facilitating evil by requiring millions of citizens to pay for abor-
tions, “forcing us to finance the deliberate destruction of human
lives” (quoted in Hendershott 2006, 48).
When Henry Hyde retired from Congress at the end of 2006,
the National Network of Abortion Funds launched a new cam-
paign to repeal the restrictions on funding called “Hyde: 30 Years
is Enough!” Women forgo food, security, and their possessions to
pay for abortions or they are forced to continue pregnancies and
stay trapped in poverty, they argue. “We call for full public fund-
ing of abortion as part of comprehensive health care for all, and
support for low-income women to care for their children with
dignity. We stand for reproductive justice, a world in which all
women have the power and resources necessary to make healthy
decisions about their bodies and their families” (www
.hyde30years.nnaf.org/index.html).
Domestic and Global Funding 
Restrictions or “Gag” Rules
The questions at issue in funding restrictions come from policies
first enacted in the Reagan administration in the 1980s. The fed-
eral government has, since the 1970s, funded private and public
agencies that provide family-planning information and services
to the poor. The law forbids these funds to be used to perform
abortions for family-planning purposes. However, the family-
planning programs are supposed to provide information to
clients about their options. President Reagan used his executive
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

authority to issue a rule that agencies receiving federal funds for
family planning could not discuss abortion at all, even to give
neutral information about options. They were only to discuss
adoption or abstinence. Even if they received nonfederal funds,
they could not use them for counseling either. Pro-choice
activists labeled the policy a “gag” rule. They challenged the con-
stitutionality of the rule, but the Supreme Court upheld it as a
constitutional use of executive power to set guidelines on the
expenditure of public funds (Rust v. Sullivan 500 U.S. 173, 1991).
President Reagan also ordered a rule pertaining to foreign aid,
what pro-life activists call the Mexico City policy, after the Popula-
tion Conference where it was announced in 1984. Pro-life advo-
cates welcomed this policy, which banned U.S. aid to American
and foreign family-planning organizations that provided abor-
tions or abortion counseling or that advocated for legal abortion
access anywhere in the world outside the United States. Reagan’s
rationale was that even if an agency involved in both family plan-
ning and abortion were given funding only for its family-planning
functions, it would release funds within the organization for its
abortion activities. The problem with aid to family-planning orga-
nizations, he maintained, is that it is used to promote abortion as a
form of birth control and amounts to taxpayer funding of abortion
in foreign countries. Many countries, especially in Latin America,
have laws criminalizing abortion; funding what pro-life activists
call “population-control” organizations allows them to harass
these governments to legalize abortion against the countries’ cul-
tural norms and traditions. These population-control organiza-
tions attack human life and human dignity by encouraging
women to seek abortions that endanger their health. The progno-
sis in the pro-life frame is for the U.S. government to continue and
expand the Mexico City policy.
The pro-choice movement frames this debate and policy as
the “Global Gag Rule.” The problem is the policy itself, which
pro-choice activists see as a terrible blow to efforts of non-
governmental organizations (NGO) to improve the health and
status of women around the world. Removing support for fam-
ily-planning organizations and the education and services they
provide leads to an increase in unwanted pregnancies and thus
the number of abortions, many of which will be unsafe. For some
pro-choice advocates, the policy is not only an antiabortion mea-
sure but an attack on family planning itself. The results can be
tragic because family planning educates and empowers women
Government Support of Abortion
51
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

to take better care of themselves, their families, and communities.
It will also undermine efforts to stop the spread of HIV/AIDS
because many of the NGOs that promote family planning also
educate about and promote safe sex. Finally, the problem with
the Global Gag Rule is that it impinges on free speech by penal-
izing groups for the counseling and information they provide;
pro-choice activists argue that such a ruling would be unconsti-
tutional if instituted in the United States (although this is proba-
bly not true). They want the government simply to remove the
rule and commit U.S. resources and energies to advancing health
and development through family planning.
The issue frame in the debate over domestic family-planning
funds and foreign aid boils down to whether the United States
should use financial resources to support family planning and
women’s health or prevent resources from being used to support
abortion in this country and others. These rules are at the discre-
tion of the president. In 1989, President George H. W. Bush
retained Reagan’s approach but President Bill Clinton reversed
both policies in 1993. When Republicans took control of Congress
in the 1995, pro-life legislators were unsuccessful in introducing
legislation to reinstate Reagan’s ban. Then, in 2001, immediately
after his inauguration, President George W. Bush put the Mexico
City policy back in effect but not the domestic gag rule. Since
2001, pro-life senators have introduced bills to reinstate the pro-
hibition on funds for family-planning organizations that perform
or counsel abortions but none have passed to date.
Other restrictions on government funds for abortion depend
on the position of the president who is in office. Under the Rea-
gan administration, for example, in addition to the restrictions on
family planning funds and the Mexico City policy, there were
prohibitions on funds for abortions for military personnel and
dependents, in military hospitals, for federal employees, and for
Peace Corps volunteers. When President Clinton took office, he
reinstated abortions for military personnel and their dependents
in military hospitals (although Congress reinstated the ban in
military hospitals in 1995).
Abortion Procedures
Abortion procedures, for the most part, are medical matters out-
side the purview of public policy and thus are rarely up for
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

debate. There have been two exceptions. The first, the so-called
abortion pill, was developed outside the United States and like
all forms of medication was subject to approval by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) before it could be prescribed
and sold. Pro-choice activists sought to bring the pill to the
United States. Because the FDA is a government agency, it is sub-
ject to control by Congress and influenced by the president. The
pro-life movement brought the other procedure, which they
called “partial birth abortion,” to the public agenda because they
claimed it was not a medical procedure but a form of infanticide
that was subject to criminalization by both federal and state gov-
ernments. This section surveys the terms of debate and the fate of
these two very controversial procedures.
RU-486—Mifepristone
The French government was the first to accept RU-486—the drug
mifepristone—as an abortion procedure in the 1980s. Pro-choice
Americans were very interested in the medication, which
induced abortions in the first 7 weeks of pregnancy by pills
rather than the surgical removal of a fetus. Roussel-Uclaf, the
Swiss manufacturer of the drug treatment, was nervous about
antiabortion activism from the beginning. And the pro-life
groups made their opposition known from the start, threatening
to boycott all Roussel-Uclaf products. At one point the company
withdrew RU-486 from the French market until the French gov-
ernment ordered it returned.
Thus, Roussel-Uclaf had no plans to apply to the FDA to offer
the drug in the United States. It took a long campaign led by the
Feminist Majority Foundation and the Population Council to per-
suade the Swiss company to donate its patents to the Population
Council in 1994, which allowed the council to make the applica-
tion and conduct the necessary tests. At one point Lawrence
Lader and his group, Abortion Rights Mobilization, sponsored
their own clinical trials. For the pro-choice movement, it was
important that this work went on under the Clinton administra-
tion because it was highly doubtful that the FDA would have wel-
comed their proposals under the first President Bush.
As expected, the debate over RU-486 was lively. Pro-choice
advocates framed the issue as a major breakthrough in technol-
ogy that would benefit women’s health and their privacy. First of
all, French women who had had abortions using RU-486
Abortion Procedures
53
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

reported that it was much more natural and less traumatic than a
surgical abortion. All a woman had to do was take two pills and
then wait for a miscarriage that was very similar to their men-
strual periods. Pro-choice activists also welcomed this pharma-
ceutical procedure because it could take place between a woman
and her doctor, in the doctor’s office. There was no need to go to
a clinic, often surrounded by pro-life protesters. This, they
hoped, would reduce much of the clinic violence in the 1990s.
The pro-life activists likened RU-486 to chemical warfare on
the unborn, a form of baby poisoning. It’s not just like a woman’s
period, they claim; it’s killing a human baby. Looking at the pro-
cedure as simply a way of starting up menstruation trivializes
the taking of an unborn baby’s life. Another concern is that the
procedure is not safe. It looked as if the FDA was rushing
through the testing because they relied on the fact that the drug
had been used in Europe. Finally, pro-life activists were worried
that the “pill” would make abortion too easy, too convenient. You
could have abortions in every bedroom, they said.
The FDA approved RU-486 for use in the United States in
2000, during the last few months of the Clinton administration. It
has taken some time for doctors to be trained in its use and for
women to learn about the option. Little information about the
pill was in the public arena until 2006, when it was reported that
four women had died of infections after taking RU-486. Although
health officials pointed out that such infections occurred during
miscarriage and childbirth and more had died who had never
taken the abortion pill, pro-life forces moved to take advantage of
the publicity. They sponsored “Holly’s Law,” named after one of
the women who died. This bill would suspend the approval of
RU-486. Pro-life advocates claimed that because the approval
process in the 1990s was slipshod, RU-486 has not been defini-
tively proved to be safe for women and more testing should be
done.
Ban on Partial-Birth Abortion
In 2000, the Supreme Court gave pro-choice forces a policy vic-
tory by ruling that state laws banning the procedure called “par-
tial-birth” abortion without an exception for the woman’s health
were unconstitutional (Stenberg v. Carhart 530 U.S. 914, 2000). This
outcome was a direct result of pro-choice influence in bringing
women’s health into the issue frame of the debate (McBride Stet-
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

son 2001). In the early 1990s, the pro-life movement had devel-
oped a strategy to ban abortion procedure by procedure rather
than launch a frontal attack on all legal abortion. Their success
depended on gaining Republican control of the Congress and
inserting a new frame that excluded women from the discussion.
The pro-life strategic frame separated the fetus from the woman’s
body and presented the procedure as a form of infanticide per-
formed by doctors. They accomplished this with their definition
of the banned procedure as killing a baby outside the womb, a
baby who would otherwise be born alive. Pro-choice activists,
with the help of President Clinton, who vetoed all partial-birth
bans passed by Congress in the 1990s, successfully reinserted
women into the issue frame by focusing on the need for this pro-
cedure to preserve women’s health. None of the bans enacted so
far in the United States have allowed exceptions for a woman’s
health, only for her life. This includes the federal ban enacted in
2003 and signed by sympathetic President George W. Bush.
The Court’s ruling did not end the debate, however, which
has continued since 2000. Pro-choice activists try to challenge the
pro-life frame that has proved immensely effective in attracting
political and public support. Pro-choice activists claim that the
term “partial-birth abortion” itself is misleading—a term manu-
factured by pro-life strategists to gain support but which in fact
is not a medical term. This deception is intended to be a smoke
screen that will hide the true motives of pro-life activists on this
issue: to criminalize abortion procedure by procedure with the
goal of making abortion unattainable in the United States. The
bans are written in such general terms that they extend to more
than one procedure and threaten safe procedures for second-
trimester abortions. Pro-choice activists denounce the pro-life
argument that the law bans just one procedure and that alterna-
tives are available to women in need as a myth promoted to dis-
guise the true goal of criminalizing any abortion practice.
To pro-choice movement actors, a “renegade Congress” in
2003 flaunted the Supreme Court by enacting a national ban
without a health exception—the type of law already ruled uncon-
stitutional (Center for Reproductive Rights 2003). Congress,
based on a deluge of “legislative findings,” claimed that a health
exception is never necessary. The pro-choice frame charges that
Congress has shown a complete disregard for women’s health
and medical judgment, pointing to the opposition of most med-
ical associations to the federal interference in medical judgments
Abortion Procedures
55
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

represented by the law. Most voters oppose “abortion bans,” they
claim.
Pro-life strategic framing has changed little in the partial-
birth abortion debate. Having defined the procedure as killing a
“living baby” outside the womb, activists are content that most
people will see graphic drawings of the procedure as infanticide,
not really abortion. The child no longer resides in the mother and
the horrible procedure kills a child just “three inches” from full
citizenship and personhood. Pro-life activists warn their support-
ers not to be fooled by proabortionists’ use of the term “dilation
and extraction” or D&X, which is, they say, “pseudo-medical jar-
gon”; partial birth is the term used by doctors. They go on to give
“facts” about the situation: this brutal procedure is performed
thousands of times each year in the United States, generally doc-
tors oppose the practice, and the majority of these abortions are
performed on healthy babies of healthy mothers. Most of these
babies would live, they claim, if allowed to be born instead of bru-
tally killed.
So, according to pro-life advocates, the pro-choice claim that
these abortions are performed for health reasons is a myth. Quot-
ing medical doctors and other health professionals they assert
that performing a partial-birth abortion for health reasons is
never necessary. They caution that the health exception is typi-
cally very broad, includes mental health, and thus can allow
abortions at any stage. The frame asserts that convenience is the
primary reason women and their doctors decide to perform par-
tial birth “atrocities.” It’s time for the Supreme Court to treat
human life with dignity by upholding the congressional ban.
The issue frame in the policy debate over partial-birth abor-
tion procedures has remained unchanged since the mid-1990s:
whether the ban limits infanticide or threatens women’s health
and fertility. For a time, the frame favored efforts by pro-choice
advocates to eliminate the bans, but only by moving the debate to
policy arenas in federal courts and away from state and federal
legislatures. As stated earlier, Congress enacted a law in 2003 sim-
ilar to the state laws already declared unconstitutional in 2000.
The Planned Parenthood Federation and the Center for Repro-
ductive Rights immediately challenged the new law. In October
2006, the Supreme Court heard the case on the constitutionality of
the federal ban. In the presentations, the two sides switched roles
in a way. At issue was the contention by the congressional major-
ity that the exception for women’s health is not necessary because
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

partial-birth abortions are never medically necessary and other
procedures are available. During the congressional debate, the
pro-choice side claimed the procedures were rare, and the pro-life
side said they were frequent and gruesome. Yet before the Court,
the defenders of the ban said the procedure was rare and never
necessary for a woman’s health, and the plaintiffs claimed that the
procedure was often used to protect the health and fertility of
women with dangerous pregnancies.
In April 2007, the Court which now included the two new
justices—Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Alito—appointed by
President Bush with the support of the pro-life movement upheld
the congressional ban on what it called the “intact dilation and
evacuation” (Intact D&E) procedure by a 5–4 decision (Gonzales v.
Carhart No. 05-0380 April 18, 2007). The majority opinion, written
by Justice Anthony Kennedy, justified departing from the prece-
dent in Stenberg v. Carhart by arguing that the federal law had
remedied the vagueness found in the state laws the Court
declared unconstitutional in 2000. There were two startling claims
in the majority opinion that resonated in the pro-life/pro-choice
debate. One was that, although the federal law banned a proce-
dure with no exception for a woman’s health, Congress acted
within its constitutional authority because medical opinion was
divided on the question of medical necessity. The other was that
banning the procedure was not an undue burden on women’s
right to decide about abortion but in fact would protect women
from the emotional effects of the procedure. Justice Ruth Bader
Ginsburg’s dissent called the majority opinion “irrational” with
no saving explanation for the ruling. Her dissent focused on the
Court’s shift away from promoting women’s reproductive rights
and liberty.
The pro-life forces hailed the decision as a victory—the
desired effect of appointing the new pro-life justices to the
Supreme Court in 2005–2006. At the same time, some state right-
to-life activists claimed the decision did not save a single life
because it allowed other procedures. The pro-choice leaders were
appalled at what they claimed was a stinging rebuke of women’s
rights and autonomy. At the same time, the immediate effects of
the ruling on medical practice are likely to be minimal, given the
small percentage of second trimester abortions and the loopholes
in the decision. Further, the opinion confirms the precedent in
Planned Parenthood v. Casey that the Constitution prohibits legisla-
tures from placing undue burdens on the path for women seeking
Abortion Procedures
57
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

abortions. However, what is more significant for the abortion con-
troversy is the extent to which Justice Kennedy and the majority
adopted the pro-life strategic frames in their rhetoric. The Court
gives Congress the authority to place moral concerns about a
medical practice above health concerns. It adopts the argument
that abortion is a threat to women’s mental health promoted by
the pro-life Justice Foundation. In addition, it refers to “abortion
doctors” rather than obstetricians, the “unborn child” and “baby”
rather than the fetus, and describes a still legal D&E as “ripping”
the fetus apart. This shift in the issue frame of the abortion debate
in the Court is likely to be the most important victory for the pro-
life campaign.  
Fetus as a Person
The debate relating to partial-birth abortion is part of a more gen-
eral pro-life strategy to establish the independent personhood of
the embryo and fetus. Schroedel (2000) makes the point that tech-
nically an unborn human organism is not a fetus until the fourth
month of development. Before that, it is a fertilized egg, or
embryo. But in general use the fetus can refer to the entire period
of prenatal development. From the moment the Roe v. Wade rul-
ing was known—that the fetus was potential human life but not
a person in the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment—pro-life
activists have fashioned many ways of overcoming this denial of
legal personhood. Pro-life activists have been helped in this goal
by advances in prenatal technology since the 1970s. Today it is no
longer necessary to imagine the fetus in the womb, the pho-
tographs and ultrasound pictures are part of everyday life. With
these images, the pro-life leaders describe the fetus as a tiny per-
son, a new individual human. In this view there is no difference
between a fertilized egg and an adult human man or woman.
They are just at different stages of development. In addition to
such images, a branch of medicine has developed called “fetal
embryology” where doctors treat fetuses as patients in a way that
is separate from their treatment of pregnant women.
Debates over proposals to codify the personhood of the fetus
separately from the personhood of the woman who carries the
fetus began in earnest in the 1980s and have continued to the pres-
ent. Pro-life advocates assert that since there is no difference
between a single-cell embryo and an adult, a woman has no right
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

to disregard the status of the fetus; instead, as a mother, she has
the responsibility to be sure that her child is born in good health.
The law should recognize the equal rights of the fetus.
Pro-choice advocates reply that the interests of a woman and
her fetus cannot be separated because they are a biological unit.
The fetus is not a separate being; it exists in the pregnant body of
a woman and the woman must make decisions for both. The
embryo is just a collection of cells, even though it has the poten-
tial to become a child. Pro-choice leaders call the pro-life cam-
paign for the personhood of the fetus just another means of
opposing abortion with the ultimate goal of having abortion
declared illegal. If the fertilized egg is considered a legal person
equal to the woman, then they think it would be impossible to
sustain support for legal abortion.
Prenatal Drug Laws
In the 1980s, the media brought to light the growing incidence of
babies born addicted to drugs because of their mothers’ drug use.
Widespread evidence indicated that use of “crack” cocaine had
become an epidemic. Reporters told stories about the strength of
these drugs and how addicted women would do anything to get
more crack. They had sex, they had babies, and there was an
alarming increase in drug-exposed infants or “crack babies.” To
many, the women themselves were responsible for this; they
were depicted as heedlessly harming their own children.
Some state legislators filed bills to make such behavior a
crime and put the mothers in jail. These proposals did not get very
far because there was overwhelming evidence that incarceration
would deter the women from seeking help and getting prenatal
care and not help their babies. States began to enact other laws
such as requiring drug tests of pregnant women receiving state
assistance such as welfare, requiring drug treatment to collect
welfare benefits, and declaring drug addiction to be a form of
child abuse. Others opted for more service-oriented approaches
such as expanding public education and drug treatment pro-
grams for addicts. Overall, the pro-life campaign has supported
such laws and has been successful: Thirty-five states have some
form of prenatal drug laws (Schroedel 2000). Only two are purely
punitive against the pregnant woman. The others include public
health approaches either alone or in combination with regulations
on pregnant women receiving public support.
Fetus as a Person
59
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Pro-choice activists and feminists have been very critical of
many of these laws, primarily because they are based on the pro-
life frame that a woman’s main responsibility is to protect her
unborn offspring and in the process lose her own rights. While
they agree that drug addiction needed to be addressed, they have
urged state authorities to take the women’s lives into account.
Studies show, they assert, that crack addicts typically are also vic-
tims of child abuse and woman battery; they take drugs to avoid
the pain these experiences have caused. To put them in jail or
charge them with child abuse without considering the mitigating
circumstances adds even more pain to their lives. Feminists also
point out that the focus on the fetus as a separate “patient”
invites everyone to criticize a woman’s behavior while pregnant.
A pregnant woman is no longer carrying her own child in pri-
vate. Instead, others think they have the right to intervene to crit-
icize a woman for smoking, drinking a glass of wine, or riding on
a motorcycle while pregnant. What’s the next step, they wonder:
confinement of all pregnant women to home? In fact, some
admonitions to pregnant women have been extended through-
out their reproductive years, whether they are pregnant or not.
Health officials today advise “preconception care”—that is,
abstaining from smoking, alcohol, and drugs and taking prenatal
vitamins as long as women have the possibility of pregnancy.
(See Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at www.cdc
.gov/ncbddd/preconception/default.htm.) 
Fetal Homicide Laws
Although the pro-life movement was one of the leaders in pro-
moting prenatal drug laws, at first they were less involved with
bringing the problem of third-party fetal killing to the public
agenda. The media did not make much of the statistics that
showed an increase in fetal injury and death as a result of vio-
lence against pregnant women in the 1980s and 1990s. In 1998,
Ruth Schroedel conducted a study of thirty-two pro-life organi-
zations and found only one, Americans United for Life (AUL),
which considered the issue of fetal death worth promoting. AUL
focuses on legislation and offers model statutes to states and
Congress for bills they advocate.
This lack of interest changed soon after Schroedel’s survey
when the National Right to Life Committee (NRLC) launched a
five-year campaign for fetal homicide laws. In fact, about half the
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

states had already criminalized third-party killing of a fetus.
What was different with the new campaign was that NRLC and
AUL promoted laws that explicitly defined when the fetus was a
person—from fertilization—and explicitly defined the crime as
involving two separate victims—the pregnant woman and the
embryo/fetus. Thus, someone who attacks a woman who does
not know she is pregnant because the fertilized egg has not yet
implanted in the uterus could be charged with murder.
Pro-choice activists opposed these new proposals as part of
what they claimed was the pro-life strategy to dismantle the guar-
antees for women’s choice in abortion in Roe v. Wade by legally
defining the fertilized egg as a human being. By establishing the
“two victims” approach, the pro-lifers actually give the fetus pref-
erence over the woman, thus inflating the status of the fetus. The
pro-choice prognosis for the problem of fetal homicide is for states
to define the crime as injuries inflicted on a pregnant woman—
one victim—and increase the penalties to take into account that
injury to the fetus has occurred.
Pro-life activists have responded to the pro-choice frame of
the issue by pointing out that their proposals will not affect
women’s rights because they exclude abortion explicitly. Others
admit, however, that once the fetus is considered a separate
human being it is harder and harder to justify laws that allow
doctors and pregnant women to kill them. Pro-life frames also
reject the idea of stiffer penalties for crimes against pregnant
women claiming that an assailant will get a longer prison term
for a crime with two victims rather than one.
This campaign got a boost in the early 2000s when the mur-
der of Laci Peterson, who was seven months pregnant, was fol-
lowed closely in the news. When her body was discovered in San
Francisco Bay separate from her fetus, whom she had planned to
name Connor, the issue of fetal homicide was on the national
agenda. California already has a fetal homicide law dating from
the 1970s, so Laci’s husband, Scott Peterson, was tried and con-
victed for two murders—those of Laci and Connor. The pro-life
activists convinced Laci’s family to let them name their bill, the
Unborn Victims of Violence Act (UVVA), “Laci and Connor’s
Law.” All this publicity sealed the fate of the UVVA, and it was
passed and signed by President Bush in 2004. Although as a fed-
eral criminal law it has limited application, the national debate
spurred the passage of identical laws in several states. Today
thirty-seven states have fetal homicide laws, twenty-four of them
Fetus as a Person
61
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

defining the fetus as a person or human being at any stage, many
modeled after the federal law covering embryos and fetuses from
the earliest stages: “As used in this section, the term ‘unborn
child’ means a child in utero, and the term ‘child in utero’ or
‘child, who is in utero’ means a member of the species homo sapi-
ens, at any stage of development, who is carried in the womb” (18
USC 90A Sec 1841, d).
Embryonic Stem Cell Research
Medical research in genetics and embryology has shown that the
cells and tissues in human embryos and fetuses have special
qualities that could be used in treating diseases such as diabetes,
Parkinson’s disease, and spinal injuries. Since the 1970s, fetal tis-
sue research has been conducted on aborted embryos, and
fetuses have been used for transplants to replace diseased or
damaged tissues. Further, the discovery that embryonic stem
cells—those that have not yet differentiated into specific tis-
sues—can be grown to be used in a variety of diseases and
injuries has stimulated interest in more research.
From the beginning, the pro-life movement has opposed the
use of fetuses and embryos for research and treatment. They
have linked this research with abortion and have been concerned
that after legalization people would have abortions just to pro-
vide such tissue for family members. In the 1980s, they con-
vinced the Reagan administration to impose a moratorium on
federal funds for research on the use of human fetal tissue in such
transplants; the moratorium was extended by the first Bush
administration. When Bill Clinton became president, one of his
first acts was to lift the moratorium, and in 1993, Congress
passed the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Revitalization Act,
which permits the use of fetal tissue from abortions, but NIH has
strict guidelines to avoid abuse and misuse of the tissue.
The debate over embryonic stem cell research has grown
with the advances in the technology. Thus far, there have been
few stories of cures, but scientists claim that if they had access to
federal funds, they could move the research toward effective
therapies for diseases that are now incurable. Proposals so far
have focused on using embryos developed but not used for in
vitro fertilization (IVF) and that are currently in frozen storage.
The pro-life movement opposes this research because, in their
view, the research kills human beings—the embryos. The Roman
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Catholic component of the movement opposes any form of arti-
ficial conception such as IVF. Further, they are concerned that
such research devalues human life and encourages people to con-
ceive just to obtain cells for research and treatment. The next step
would be cloning human beings. Pro-choice organizations gener-
ally support such stem cell research, primarily because pro-life
groups are opposed. Feminists disagree over the whole matter of
new reproductive technologies. While some focus on the choices
such technologies open for women who want children, others are
concerned that women, especially low-income and minority
women, will be exploited for their eggs—turned into sources of
biological material.
The issue frame of the debate over stem cell research is not,
however, a fetus versus women’s rights frame like the abortion
issue frame. In fact, it is primarily defined as a medical and health
matter. Researchers hold out the promise of cures for incurable
diseases. Many people have relatives and friends who could ben-
efit if the research promise is fulfilled. Thus, some voters and
members of Congress who otherwise vote with the pro-life posi-
tion have voted to fund stem cell research. In 2006, Congress
passed a bill to fund embryonic stem cell research by substantial
majorities in both houses, but not enough to overcome President
Bush’s veto, his first. He signed the veto at a White House cere-
mony flanked by “snowflakes”—children who were adopted
while they were still frozen embryos. At the same time, he signed
the Fetus Farming Prohibition Act, which prohibits the use of fetal
tissue when that fetus was conceived just for that purpose.
Other Debates Relating 
to Fetal Personhood
The UVVA was not the first time the federal government defined
the fetus as a person from conception. In 2002, Tommy Thomp-
son, secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices, issued a regulation that allows states to define fetuses as
unborn children and extend health care to them under the Chil-
dren’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP). CHIP was established
in 1997 to cover health care for low-income children who were not
eligible for Medicaid and whose families could not afford insur-
ance. Before this ruling, CHIP allowed states to seek permission to
cover pregnant women, but not the fetuses separately. This new
Fetus as a Person
63
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

rule excluded pregnant women from coverage and applied only
to fetuses at any stage of development.
Pro-choice organizations attacked the move as part of the
series of “backdoor” efforts to advance an antiabortion agenda
and establish a federal legal precedent that the fetus is a person.
By denying pregnant women coverage, the Bush administration
acts as though women did not exist or were, at the very most,
containers for fetuses. A fetus cannot be treated apart from the
pregnant woman’s body that carries it; thus, CHIP and other
health care programs should expand prenatal care to all women.
The Bush administration and pro-life activists responded that the
only goal was to protect the health of unborn children and had
nothing to do with abortion.
Another pro-life statute passed in 2002 prompted less con-
troversy: the Born Alive Infants Protection Act. Congressional
committees heard testimony from nurses and other health work-
ers that in some late-term abortions babies survived. The medical
personnel were instructed not to treat these infants but to let
them die. Congress responded by giving all infants at any stage
of development born alive the full protection of the law. That
means doctors and hospitals must do what they can to save their
lives. Pro-choice organizations took no position on this law, and
many congressional abortion rights advocates voted for it
because it did not change the legal status of the fetus. It applied
to infants who had left the womb and were still alive.
The brief calm over the Born Alive Infants Protection Act did
not last long. Pro-life members of Congress began to promote the
Unborn Child Pain Awareness Act. Some physicians testify that a
fetus feels pain at 20 weeks and that an abortion performed at that
time results in an excruciating death. Pro-life activists suppose
that if women knew about the suffering their abortions would
cause, they would be less likely to have them. On the other hand
if they go ahead, they should be able to provide anesthesia. The
proposal before Congress would require doctors to read a state-
ment written by Congress to a woman undergoing an abortion at
20 weeks after fertilization or more, give her a pamphlet that
informs her that her unborn child feels pain, and give her the
option to request anesthesia before going ahead with the proce-
dure. Failure to comply would bring fines of $100,000 to $250,000.
Pro-life advocates define this issue as a simple matter of pro-
viding information to women so they can make an informed
decision about the abortion. It’s not fair to keep women in the
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

dark, they say. It also gives pro-life advocates a chance to talk
about late-term abortion procedures in graphic detail—a tactic
that was successful in banning partial-birth abortions: dismem-
berment, crushing the fetal skull, and poisoning in utero. Pro-
choice advocates respond by accusing the pro-life side of using
the rhetoric of pain when the issue is not about pain but about
trying to harass women and prevent more abortions. In fact, they
assert, the medical profession does not agree about when or even
whether a fetus feels pain—there is an ongoing debate. Pro-life
groups want Congress to take sides and silence opinion that dis-
agrees with the pro-life approach. Many doctors have opposed
the idea of letting Congress determine what doctors must say to
patients. They say the requirement to offer anesthesia to a fetus
overlooks the difficulty in administering such drugs and the dan-
gers to women in doing so. Pro-choice activists go on to point out
if Congress is so concerned about pain for the unborn, why not
examine the pain they suffer in ordinary childbirth and in neona-
tal treatments. The fact that this bill says nothing about these con-
ditions supports the charge that it is, like the other proposals
discussed in this section, part of a campaign to undermine abor-
tion services and limit the number of abortions.
Birth Control and Sex Education
Pro-choice and pro-life movements have fundamental disagree-
ments about sex, birth control, and abortion. A major component
of the pro-choice movement came from family-planning and pop-
ulation-growth organizations. They promoted values that while
individual choice and privacy are constitutionally protected, all
people, especially the young, should have sex responsibly. That
means that they should take action to plan when they want to
have children and only have the children they can afford to bring
up to be healthy, educated, and happy. Knowledge about and ser-
vices for contraception provide the means for them to plan their
families. Legal abortion is necessary to take care of cases where
contraception fails or people lapse in their responsibility.
When feminists joined the pro-choice movement, at first
they tended to place less emphasis on responsibility and focused
on rights and removing the limits of access to abortion. In the
1980s, however, they promoted a collective action frame of repro-
ductive freedom for women. This meant support for liberty and
Birth Control and Sex Education
65
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

resources for women in the full range of their reproductive
lives—from sex education, the right to decide when to have sex
and with whom, contraceptive information and services through
prenatal care, abortion access, health care, child care, and ade-
quate income. Nelson (2003) attributes this expansion of the fem-
inist pro-choice frame to the influence of women of color. In 1994,
to reflect this expansion of what it meant to be pro-choice, the
National Association for the Repeal of Abortion Laws (NARAL)
changed its name to the National Abortion and Reproductive
Rights Action League “to develop and sustain a constituency that
uses the political process to guarantee every woman the right to
make personal decisions regarding the full range of reproductive
choices, including preventing unintended pregnancy, bearing
healthy children, and choosing legal abortion” (quoted in Wilder
1998, 87). When pro-choice activists found themselves put on the
defensive to protect Roe v. Wade, they had fewer resources to
work for this expanded agenda. Nevertheless, in the early 2000s,
they discovered that the pro-life movement had moved to attack
birth control and sex education policies that had been in place
since the 1970s.
One of the original components of the pro-life movement
was the Roman Catholic Church, but the movement attracted
other components brought together by their aversion to legal
abortion and desire to overturn Roe v. Wade. Since the 1980s, how-
ever, the official Catholic values regarding sex, birth control,
childbirth, and abortion have found a more central place in the
agenda of social conservatives in the pro-life movement. It’s not
just a matter of stopping abortion. Some had hoped that if it were,
there would be common ground with pro-choice groups in pre-
venting abortion through greater knowledge and use of contra-
ception. Instead, the pro-life frame also opposes contraception.
This is due to a particular view of sex and morality held by
many in the pro-life movement. In their view, availability of con-
traception is both cause and consequence of a general moral
decline in America. With the invention of the birth control pill,
individuals and even married couples began to separate sex from
reproduction and engaged in sex as an end in itself. Along the
way they devalued the wonder of sexual relations in creating life
and devalued each other. When husbands use contraception,
they turn their wives into whores. No matter who uses it, con-
traception increases sexual promiscuity and, rather than prevent-
ing unwanted pregnancies, leads to more abortions.
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

It’s not just contraception in general that is opposed accord-
ing to these ideas. Some so-called contraceptives actually cause
abortions because they destroy a fertilized egg which is a human
being. Among these are intrauterine devices and birth control
pills that prohibit implantation, not conception. In this section we
review two debates that have arisen from this conflict when
demands for reproductive freedom meet conservative ideas about
sex and morality: emergency contraception and sex education.
Emergency Contraception
Most policymakers believe that although abortion remains very
controversial Americans generally accept financial support for
birth control methods and services as important and legitimate
public policy. In the pro-choice collective action frames, unin-
tended pregnancies represent serious harm to the health of
women and their children. (It is important to note that for many
years, the pro-choice activists used the term “unwanted preg-
nancy,” which pro-life activists challenged by arguing that with
adoption, no baby is unwanted. The change to “unintended”
leaves it open whether the baby is wanted or unwanted.) Because
unprotected sex and even rape continue to occur, women must be
able to obtain emergency contraception (EC) to solve the problem
and prevent abortions. Intense challenges over access to EC,
sometimes called the “morning-after pill,” came as a surprise to
pro-choice activists. In their strategic frames, this effort by oppo-
nents of EC to restrict its use is a serious problem because it
reflects a broader pro-life strategy to promote abstinence and limit
birth control generally (Shorter 2006). Worse, the pro-choice actors
claim that these dangerous efforts are led by political appointees
inside the executive agencies in the Bush administration, espe-
cially at the FDA, which has been reluctant to allow EC to be
available without a doctor’s prescription or over the counter.
In the pro-choice frame, the prognosis or solution to the
problem is to expand access to EC, making it readily available in
hospitals for rape victims and in drug stores to help women
whose contraception has failed. Planned Parenthood recom-
mends that every woman have EC in her medicine cabinet. They
argue that EC prevents pregnancy; it does not end a pregnancy.
Therefore, it is not an abortifacient, as pro-life opponents claim,
and its use presents no moral choice. In addition, EC is most
effective when taken within 24 hours of sexual intercourse so it is
Birth Control and Sex Education
67
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

imperative that women be able to obtain the drug over the
counter. Research shows that having EC available does not lead
to risky sexual behavior or increased sexual promiscuity among
teens, according to pro-choice strategic frames.
Like most pro-choice/pro-life debates, the strategic frames
of the two movements mirror each other with respect to access to
EC. For the pro-life activists the problem with EC is that it is an
abortifacient. Conception occurs when the sperm fertilizes the
egg, and they assert that the result is an embryo and a pregnancy.
Because EC works to prevent an embryo from implanting in the
uterus it destroys the embryo, the same as an abortion. In fact, for
many religious pro-life advocates, all birth control pills have the
same effect by making the uterus unsuitable for implantation.
Some claim that scientists who maintain that pregnancy results
only after implantation are “medically dishonest” (Wilks 1998).
Not only does EC result in an abortion, but access to EC also
promotes unsafe sexual behavior goes the pro-life frame. With
access to drugs that quickly abort any pregnancies, people don’t
have to show restraint. The result is an increase in promiscuity and
sexual disease. In short, the pro-life movement places EC as an
immoral threat to traditional marriage and its relation to procre-
ation. Thus, like abortion, use of EC presents a moral dilemma for
policymakers, doctors, and pharmacists. The solution is to restrict
availability and access to EC and, for some activists, to limit access
to all birth control pills as well. Pharmacists for Life International
are among those who argue that pharmacists must have the right
to decline to fill prescriptions for EC, and policymakers at the FDA
are correct in keeping restrictions on access to the pills.
The issue frame of the debate among policymakers centers
on contradictory claims over the safety and effects of EC,
whether it is a necessary means of reproductive choice or an
immoral means to sexual promiscuity, abortion, and disease. At
first, it was available only by prescription. The drug company
that makes EC, many doctors, and pro-choice activists demanded
that the FDA allow it to be sold over the counter. Science advi-
sory committees to the agency recommended approval but FDA
policymakers deferred action until it became clear that nominees
for FDA director would not be confirmed by the Senate. Critics
charged that the FDA nonaction was based on ideological attach-
ment to pro-life notions about EC and not based on the science.
Senators Hillary Rodham Clinton (D-NY) and Patty Murray 
(D-WA) blocked confirmation until the FDA made a decision
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

about the status of EC. In September 2005, Susan Wood, director
of the Office of Women’s Health at the FDA, resigned accusing
the FDA of using abortion politics in its failure to make a deci-
sion. Finally, in late 2006, FDA approved over-the-counter sales
of EC except for those under the age of 17. In April 2006 and Jan-
uary 2007 Senate Democrats introduced the Prevention First Act
to link birth control to preventing abortion, to expand education
about all contraception, and to require EC to be offered to victims
of assault.
Policy action on this issue is taking place in state arenas as
well as at the federal level (Guttmacher Institute 2006). Nine
states have policies that expand access to EC, including eight that
allow pharmacists to dispense EC without a prescription under
certain conditions. The governor of Illinois, Rod Blagojevich, has
ordered that Illinois pharmacists who stock birth control must
dispense EC despite any moral qualms. Around the same num-
ber of states have policies restricting access, including four that
allow pharmacists to refuse to dispense contraceptives, including
EC, on moral grounds. Bills are pending in other states, some that
would require hospitals to make EC available to rape victims.
The Federal Office of Violence Against Women did not include
any mention of EC in its recent hospital protocol for victims of
sexual assault.
Sex Education
The debate over the place of abstinence in publicly supported sex
education programs brings pro-life and pro-choice movements to
policy arenas in Congress, the executive branch, and the states.
The diagnostic strategic frame of the pro-life advocates is that
American culture is saturated with sex and sexually explicit mes-
sages that encourage adolescents to engage in too much sexual
activity. The problem with this is that teen sex is responsible for
serious social problems: increasing the incidence of sexually
transmitted diseases (STDs), emotional and psychological injury,
promiscuity, and high levels of out-of-wedlock childbearing
(Rector 2002; Maher 2006.) Taken together, these effects render
many young adults incapable of committing to marriage and
family responsibilities.
Most sex education programs promote the use of condoms
and other contraceptives to solve the problems caused by teen sex-
ual activity. First of all, pro-life advocates claim that contraceptives
Birth Control and Sex Education
69
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

are often ineffective in preventing pregnancy and that condoms
provide only limited protection against STDs. Giving contracep-
tives to teens encourages risky sexual activity and leads to higher
rates of disease, pregnancies, and abortions. Many of the so-called
“safe sex” or “comprehensive sex education” programs claim to
include a discussion of abstinence, but in fact they do not. The
solution or prognosis in the pro-life frame is that abstinence-only
programs are desirable and effective. They promote personal
responsibility and commitment to marriage while reducing out-of-
wedlock births among young adults. Pro-life advocates claim that
a growing number of studies show the effectiveness of these pro-
grams, which have become highly popular among teens.
On the other side, pro-choice strategic frames diagnose the
problem to be the expansion of abstinence-only programs in
schools. Such programs are steadily replacing what they call the
real sex education curricula that had become widespread in 
the 1970s (Feldt 2004). The abstinence-only approach teaches the
young that sex is dangerous and contraception is ineffective to pro-
tect them, and it silences teachers who would like to give students
information about how to prevent pregnancy and disease effec-
tively through knowledge and contraceptive use. Instead, young
people are told to sign pledges of virginity and engage in sexual
activity only upon marriage. Yet most young people do have sex in
their teens and wait until they are 25 years or older to marry. The
effect of the decline of real sex education includes increases in unin-
tended pregnancy and STDs in the United States, which has the
highest rates among postindustrial democracies, because people
aren’t getting real information and abstinence-only programs do
not work. The policy solution in the pro-choice frame is to elimi-
nate the abstinence-only approach in favor of comprehensive sex
education in the schools—favored by most parents—which would
provide all available information, including abstinence as an
option. Pro-choice advocates believe such courses should be based
on the belief that sexuality is natural, normal, and healthy, not
something to fear or feel guilty about. Such courses should provide
accurate information about birth control and how to use condoms,
promote the lifelong consistent use of contraception, and cover
topics like abortion, masturbation, and sexual orientation.
The issue frame in the sex education debate places absti-
nence against other forms of sex education; both sides contend
that to follow the other side’s plan leads to disease and abortion.
Abstinence has become more central to the issue frame since the
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

late 1970s, and this has favored the pro-life movement. The fed-
eral government has been funding abstinence education since the
Adolescent Family Life Act was passed in 1981. The winners in
the conflict over the definition of the issue are religious and con-
servative organizations that benefit from grants to the detriment
of those favoring secular sex education and freedom. The 1996
Welfare Reform Act authorized matching grants to states for
abstinence education aimed at groups prone to out-of-wedlock
births (about $50 million per year). The push to replace more gen-
eral sex education with abstinence-only programs in the schools
has strengthened during the Bush administration. Since 2001,
Congress has spent $779 million on abstinence programs through
grants to schools and not-for-profit groups. Some of the latter are
part of the Bush strategy to engage “faith-based” (religious)
groups in administering social policy. State legislatures have
adopted similar programs to limit conventional sex education in
favor of abstinence education. In response, some parents and
health professionals are challenging these trends in the states and
have proposed their own comprehensive sex education bills.
The Abortion Conflict in Political
Parties and Elections
If you polled members of the Democratic and Republican parties
before 1973, you would very likely find no differences between
the parties in their views about abortion. That is, in both parties,
you would find those opposed to legalization of abortion and
those in favor of reform and repeal. That changed in the 1970s
when the Republican Party became the “pro-life party” and the
Democratic Party became the “pro-choice party.” The first change
came with the Republicans. When the economic conservatives
formed an alliance with the evangelical Christian Right to rebuild
the Republican Party in southern and western states, they
brought a substantial number of pro-life voters and party
activists. With a new group of voters, candidates began to appeal
for their support, and the Republican strategists used the abortion
debate as a wedge issue in state and national elections. In the
1970s, passing a Human Life Amendment to overcome the Roe v.
Wade ruling was a top priority for the Christian Right, and they
found their candidate in Ronald Reagan, governor of California.
The Abortion Conflict in Political Parties and Elections
71
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Pro-choice Republicans started to lose elections, even those who
were incumbents of long standing (Packwood 1992). To get the
Republican nomination in 1976, President Gerald Ford had to
switch and declare support for the Human Life Amendment.
George H. W. Bush became a staunch opponent of legal abortion
to be acceptable as vice president to Reagan in the 1980s.
Pro-choice movement activists, many of them feminists,
became increasingly active in the Democratic Party. They were not
happy with President Jimmy Carter, however, who as a born-again
Christian had been able to win the presidency in 1976, but who con-
sistently opposed pro-choice proposals for such policies as Medi-
caid funding. After that the Democratic Party adopted a pro-choice
plank in its platform and nominated only pro-choice candidates for
president. These candidates were not successful in gaining the
White House, however, until 1992 when Bill Clinton defeated the
incumbent George H. W. Bush, partly on the abortion issue. This
election took place in the wake of the debate over the unsuccessful
1987 Supreme Court nomination of Robert Bork and the 1989 Web-
ster decision that mobilized millions of pro-choice voters.
The parties remain officially divided on this issue today. The
platforms in 2004 presidential election reflected the differences:
The Democrats:
“We will defend the dignity of all Americans against
those who would undermine it because we believe in
the privacy and equality of women, we stand proudly
for a woman’s right to choose, consistent with Roe v.
Wade, and regardless of her ability to pay. We stand
firmly against Republican efforts to undermine that
right. At the same time, we strongly support family
planning and adoption incentives. Abortion should be
safe, legal, and rare” (Source:  “Strong at Home,
Respected in the World.” The 2004 Democratic Platform
for America.” p. 38. http://a9.g.akamai.net/7/9/8082/
v002/www.democrats.org/pdfs/2004platform.pdf;
accessed March 27, 2007).
The Republicans:
“We support a human life amendment to the Constitu-
tion and we endorse legislation to make it clear that the
Fourteenth Amendment’s protections apply to unborn
children. Our purpose is to have legislative and judicial
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

protection of that right against those who perform abor-
tions. We oppose using public revenues for abortion and
will not fund organizations which advocate it. We sup-
port the appointment of judges who respect traditional
family values and the sanctity of innocent human life”
(Source: “2004 Republican Party Platform: A Safer World
and a More Hopeful America.”  p. 84. www.gop.com/
media/2004platform.pdf; accessed March 27, 2007).
It is important to keep in mind that the platforms do not
reflect the views of all party activists, nor do they bind legislators
to vote a particular way. For example, there are organizations
such as Republicans for Choice and Pro-Life Democrats. And
while most Republican legislators have high marks from the
National Right to Life Committee for the pro-life voting, there are
Republicans in Congress who are pro-choice. Similarly, Demo-
crats do not all have perfect scores on the NARAL Pro-choice
America Choice index. In fact, in 2007, NARAL can rely on only
38 percent of the House and 35 percent of the Senate to vote con-
sistently pro-choice despite a majority for the Democrats.
Research has shown a close relationship between party iden-
tification, voting, and opinion on the abortion issue (Jelen and
Wilcox 2003). However, it is not clear whether people vote Dem-
ocratic and Republican because of their views on the abortion
issue or whether their views on the abortion issue are shaped by
their identity with the Republican or Democratic Party. Public
opinion on abortion has been fairly stable since the 1970s. A
minority intensely adhere either to the pro-choice idea of abor-
tion based on woman’s choice alone or the pro-life idea of crimi-
nalized abortion and complete fetal rights, but in the middle
most have more moderate views. We see, then, that despite 30
years of supporting a Human Life Amendment, no Republican
president has put his political capital in a campaign to pass it.
And despite 30 years of support for a woman’s right to choose,
Democrats have voted for bans on partial-birth abortion and
against the Freedom of Choice Act.
Solutions to the Abortion Conflict
This chapter has described how the abortion conflict between pro-
life and pro-choice movements has played out in several policy
Solutions to the Abortion Conflict
73
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

issues ranging from the legality of abortion to embryonic stem
cell research. This discussion is not exhaustive because the stand-
off between the two movements can appear in other policy
debates: welfare reform, education funding, and anything to do
with health care. Looking across these various debates, it is easy
to see why some fear that the debate is unending and irresolv-
able. Nevertheless, various scholars, analysts, and journalists
have proposed solutions that would end the divide between the
fetus’s right to life and the woman’s right to liberty, at least in 
the public policy arenas. To conclude this review of the abortion
conflict, this section gives a summary of several of these propos-
als with references for further reading. Based on what you have
read about the conflict, what is the likelihood that any of these
proposals will “get traction” to reach enduring solutions to the
“abortion wars”?
Changing Pro-Life and Pro-Choice Frames
As the collective action frames and the strategic frames derived
from them seem to permit no compromise, some writers suggest
that one side or the other change its position to permit some neu-
tral ground. Hendershott (2006), a sociologist with sympathies
for the pro-life perspective, claims that pro-life movement frames
are on the ascendancy in the debate over the meaning of the abor-
tion issue because most abortion debates favor protecting the
fetus from conception as a human being. Having achieved this
redefinition of the issue, she suggests that pro-life activists could
help end the abortion wars by moving away from the philo-
sophic absolutism of the past debates and move toward some
real dialogue with pro-choice counterparts who also want peace.
They could, for example, give more attention to providing public
services to pregnant women and not spend all their time on
changing abortion laws. To bolster her argument, she quotes
Marvin Olasky, who says pro-life advocates should exert “steady
pressure through all the means that worked a century ago to
reduce abortions and are beginning to work anew: education
about abstinence, refuges for the abandoned, provision of adop-
tion and many other services” (Olasky 1995; quoted in Hender-
shott 2006, 144).
Naomi Wolf, writing as a pro-choice feminist, agrees that
pro-choice has lost out to the pro-life movement in the debate.
The reason is that the pro-choice focus on women’s privacy and
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

rights has abandoned the moral argument, leaving it to the pro-
life side to charge that abortion is an immoral choice. Wolf (2001)
points out that pro-choice rhetoric completely ignores the fetus,
as if it means nothing. Abortion rights need to be placed into a
moral framework that admits that abortion leads to the death of
a fetus and that this is a bad thing and an immoral thing, but
sometimes a necessary thing. It is up to women to make the judg-
ment, but they also have to face that it is a failure to have to
choose abortion. The pro-choice argument should recognize the
responsibilities of women—to use contraception, for example—
as well as the right to make the choice: “We need to contextual-
ize the fight to defend abortion rights within a moral framework
that admits that the death of a fetus is a real death; that there are
degrees of culpability, judgment, and responsibility involved in
the decision to abort a pregnancy; that the best understanding of
feminism involves holding women as well as men to the respon-
sibilities that are inseparable from this country’s high rate of
abortion” (Wolf 2001, 180).
Common Ground
A hope among those who wish to calm abortion battles is that
both sides agree on some common goals that could form the basis
for a compromise. In 1990, in the midst of the furor over Webster
v. Reproductive Services, Laurence Tribe, a Harvard professor of
constitutional law, labeled the abortion conflict as “the clash of
absolutes” between the absolute right of the fetus to life and the
absolute right of a pregnant woman to liberty. He also noted that
each side ignores the worth, if not the very existence, of the other
side in their frames. Pro-life activists show photos of fetuses at
antiabortion rallies with no image of where these fetuses actually
live. Pro-choice activists rarely acknowledge the being that is
aborted; the photos of wire coat hangers focus on injury done by
self-abortion; no attention is paid to the injury to the embryo or
the fetus. “Giving voice to the human reality on each side of the
‘versus,’ keeping both the woman and the fetus in focus at the
same time, may be the only way to avoid the no-win battle that
mercilessly pits women against their unborn children and leaves
us all impoverished” (Tribe 1990, 6).
Tribe attempts to make the case that there is common ground
between the sides, and that is to avoid abortion as much as pos-
sible. Both sides should envision a world where there are only
Solutions to the Abortion Conflict
75
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

wanted pregnancies and women don’t have to make a decision
about abortion. The goal then would be to reduce the number of
abortions, not to make them illegal. Public policies that could
advance this goal include better sex education, such as attention
to abstinence; contraceptive services; and programs to help fam-
ilies raise children that focus on health care, education, and rec-
onciliation of work and family responsibilities.
This compromise has some appeal for pro-choice politicians.
Bill Clinton picked up this idea when he said abortion should be
safe, legal, and rare (a phrase still in the Democratic Party plat-
form). In 2005, Hillary Rodham Clinton got media attention
when she said that abortion was a tragedy:
This decision, which is one of the most fundamental,
difficult and soul searching decisions a woman and a
family can make, is also one in which the government
should have no role. I believe we can all recognize that
abortion in many ways represents a sad, even tragic
choice to many, many women. Often, it’s a failure of our
system of education, health care, and preventive ser-
vices. It’s often a result of family dynamics. This deci-
sion is a profound and complicated one; a difficult one,
often the most difficult that a woman will ever make.
The fact is that the best way to reduce the number of
abortions is to reduce the number of unwanted preg-
nancies in the first place (Clinton 2005).
Some analysts claimed that Senator Clinton was fielding a more
conservative position in the abortion debate to move to middle
ground in advance of a run for the presidency.
William Saletan (2003), on the other hand, has noted that
pro-choice activists have been most successful when they find
common ground with conservatives in a privacy framework. The
pro-choice movement had been hurt by its association with fem-
inism and the sexual revolution. In several elections in the 1990s,
opponents of criminal abortion laws were able to frame the issue
as a problem of government intrusion into the privacy of fami-
lies. This approach bundles a number of issues together: freedom
from government intrusion, family, parental rights, opposition to
funding abortions, and the right to abortion in some circum-
stances such as rape. NARAL picked up the idea with their slo-
gan “Who Decides?” which leaves ambiguous the context of the
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

decision but can be interpreted to mean: Who decides? You and
your family or the government? This type of solution would
search for specific policy proposals that include something for
each side.
New Collective Frames for Legal Abortion
Eileen McDonagh (1996), a professor of political science, has pro-
posed a rethinking of the entire basis for legal abortion. Up to
now, the main argument has been based on privacy and women’s
rights. At the same time, the pro-life strategy of advancing the
humanity of the fetus has been gaining ground. For each step for-
ward for the fetus, there has been a backward step for woman’s
rights and choice. McDonagh sees that the collective action frame
of choice has led to a battle over the moral status of the fetus—
Tribe’s clash of absolutes. McDonagh, in a sort of “if you can’t
beat ‘em, join ’em” approach, advocates accepting the pro-life
view. Yes, the fetus is a human being with equal rights to all other
humans including the woman where it lives.
Based on this assumption, then, the fetus will have the same
rights as other humans—but also the same responsibilities. In
fact the fetus is the result of a fertilized egg that implants itself in
a woman’s body—with or without her consent. With her consent,
it is welcomed, loved, and cared for. Without her consent, then
there is no obligation for the woman to welcome or protect it. Just
like with rape, a woman’s body is violated against her will. The
fetus has the potential to injure the woman, cripple her, or even
kill her. In any case, it will change her life utterly. No human
being has the right to do that to another human without her con-
sent, and the state has the obligation to protect persons from
being hurt by other persons. Even now, pro-life and pro-choice
agree that abortion should be legal when a pregnancy threatens
a woman’s life. Similarly, a pregnant woman has a right to
destroy the fetus to stop the danger and the state has the obliga-
tion to help her do it by providing funding. “It is how we think
about pregnancy, therefore, not merely how we think about the
fetus, that justifies abortion” (McDonagh 1996, 17).
For another approach, look at Alexander Sanger’s 2004 book
Beyond Choice: Reproductive Freedom in the 21st Century. As the title
indicates, Sanger suggests a new collective action frame for those
who favor legal abortion turning from the right to choose toward
a guarantee of reproductive freedom. Using a foundation from
Solutions to the Abortion Conflict
77
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

the science of evolutionary biology, Sanger argues that reproduc-
tive freedom is essential to humanity: it allows each generation to
reproduce in the best possible way. That is, freedom advances the
creation of life and its survival to the next generation. Women
who can control their childbearing have a better chance of sur-
viving, and so do their children. With that freedom, people are
able to find partners or not, give birth or not according to their
circumstances, and ensure that if they have children they are
raised to be healthy and well equipped to start the reproductive
cycle over again. Reproductive freedom is not granted by gov-
ernment; humans have it naturally. What can happen, however,
is that government can try to take that freedom away. “If a moral
rule helps community survival, the rule will last. If it does not, it
will wither away. Such is the case with moral rules against birth
control and abortion. These practices help humanity survive and
reproduce successfully and many humans use them. Moral rules
forbidding them will not stand” (Sanger 2004, 85).
Sanger writes that the pro-choice movement should start
using these scientific arguments to advance their goals of legal
birth control and abortion. Pro-life made substantial gains with
their biological arguments to support the humanity of the fetus.
Pro-choice actors could do the same to justify reproductive free-
dom. For example, the argument that every fertilized egg should
be protected goes against the scientific laws of natural selection.
Human beings must have some control over the reproductive
process to advance the overall well-being of humanity. Efforts to
deny this control will either not work and be ignored or they will
work to the detriment of the health of the human community,
says Sanger.
References
Baird-Windle, Patricia, and Eleanor J. Bader. Targets of Hatred: Anti-
Abortion Terrorism. New York: Palgrave, 2001.
Center for Reproductive Rights. “Unconstitutional Assault on the Right
to Choose: Federal Abortion Ban Is an Affront to Women and the
Supreme Court.” 2003. www.reproductiverights.org (accessed April 11,
2006).
Clinton, Hillary Rodham. “Remarks by Senator Hillary Rodham
Clinton to the NYS Family Planning Providers.” January 24, 2005.
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

http://clinton.senate.gov/~clinton/speeches/2005125A05.html
(accessed November 27, 2006).
Craig, Barbara Hinkson, and David M. O’Brien. Abortion and American
Politics. Chatham, NJ: Chatham House, 1993.
Feldt, Gloria. The War on Choice: The Right-Wing Attack on Women’s
Rights and How to Fight Back. New York: Bantam Books, 2004.
Gitenstein, Mark. Matters of Principle—An Insider’s Account of America’s
Rejection of Robert Bork’s Nomination to the Supreme Court. New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1992.
Guttmacher Institute. “State Policies in Brief: Emergency
Contraception.” 2006. www.guttmacher.org (accessed April 6, 2006). 
Hendershott, Anne. 2006. The Politics of Abortion. New York: Encounter
Books
Jelen, Ted G., and Clyde Wilcox. 2003. “Causes and Consequences of
Public Attitudes toward Abortion: A Review and Research Agenda.”
Political Research Quarterly 56 (2003): 489–500.
Maher, Bridget. “Why Wait: The Benefits of Abstinence Until
Marriage.” Family Research Council. 2006. www.frc.org (accessed April
4, 2006).
Mason, Carol. Killing for Life: The Apocalyptic Narrative of Pro-Life
Politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2002.
McBride Stetson, Dorothy. “US Abortion Debates 1959–1998: The
Women’s Movement Holds On.” In Abortion Politics, Women’s Movements
and the Democratic State: A Comparative Study of State Feminism, edited by
D. McBride Stetson, 247–266. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
McBride Stetson, Dorothy. Women’s Rights in the USA: Policy Debates and
Gender Roles. 3rd ed. New York: Routledge, 2004.
McDonagh, Eileen L. Breaking the Abortion Deadlock: From Choice to
Consent. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
Nelson, Jennifer. Women of Color and the Reproductive Rights Movement.
New York: New York University Press, 2003.
Olasky, Marvin. Abortion Rites. Washington, DC: Regenery, 1995.
Packwood, Senator Bob. “The Rise and Fall of the Right-to-Life
Movement in Congress: Response to the Roe Decision, 1973–83.” In
Abortion, Medicine, and the Law, 4th ed., edited by J. Douglas Butler and
David F. Walbert, 629–647. New York: Facts on File, 1992.
Rector, Robert E. “The Effectiveness of Abstinence Education Programs
in Reducing Sexual Activity Among Youth.” The Heritage Foundation.
2002. www.heritage.org/Research/Family (accessed March 23, 2006).
References
79
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Saletan, William. Bearing Right: How Conservatives Won the Abortion War.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003.
Sanger, Alexander. Beyond Choice: Reproductive Freedom in the 21st
Century. New York: Public Affairs, 2004.
Schroedel, Jean Reith. Is the Fetus a Person? A Comparison of Policies
across the Fifty States. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2000.
Shorter, Russell. “Contra-Contraception.” New York Times Magazine.
May 7, 2006: 48.
Tribe, Laurence H. Abortion: The Clash of Absolutes. New York: W.W.
Norton & Company, 1990.
Wilder, Marcy J. “The Rule of Law, the Rise of Violence, and the Role of
Morality: Reframing America’s Abortion Debate.” In Abortion Wars: A
Half Century of Struggle, 1959–2000, edited by Rickie Solinger, 73–94.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998.
Wilks, John. 1998. “The Pill—How It Works and Fails.” Pharmacists for
Life. www.pfli.org. (accessed April 5, 2006). 
Wolf, Naomi. “Our Bodies, Our Souls.” In The Ethics of Abortion: Pro-
Life vs. Pro-Choice, 3rd ed., edited by Robert M. Baird and Stuart E.
Rosenbaum, 179–192. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 2001. 
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

3
Worldwide Perspective
Introduction
Debates about abortion and abortion law are global phenomena.
Since the 1960s, liberalization has almost been like a wind blow-
ing from one country to another, especially in the postindustrial
democracies. Beginning with Great Britain in 1967, long-standing
criminal laws prohibiting abortion have fallen in the context of
demands for reform. The forces that brought the issue to the top
of the policy agenda in the United States—population growth,
worries about illegal abortions, demands for women’s rights and
liberation—pushed legislators in Western democracies to take up
the issue, however reluctantly in many cases. The effects of exist-
ing laws on population growth and women’s health have also
come to attention in developing countries. The Roman Catholic
Church’s opposition to the practice of abortion forms a global
countermovement to the demands for change. At the same time,
pro-life and pro-choice movements in the United States have con-
nected with transnational organizations to promote their collec-
tive action frames in other countries and in international forums.
There are nearly 200 independent nation states, and it is very
difficult to generalize about their responses to the abortion issue.
While there have been many changes in the law, the process and
direction of change have not been uniform. The issue frames of
debates often put women’s self determination against the protec-
tion of unborn life, but the balance between these arguments
varies as well as the significance of other issue frames, such as
health, family traditions, population growth, or modernization.
81
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Several important characteristics of countries are likely to
affect their abortion politics and policy. First of all, the type of
legal system is important. The United Nations (UN) classifies
legal systems as common law, civil law (also called code law),
and Islamic law. Common law, or judge-made law, is found in the
former colonies of Great Britain, including the United States.
Civil-law systems are fashioned after the Roman law code and
later the Napoleonic Code. Countries in Europe and Latin Amer-
ica, as well as some in Africa and Asia, have the civil system.
Finally, the third form is Islamic law or sharia, which is prevalent
in countries in North Africa, the Middle East, and West Asia.
Each system has different origins, sources, and methods of law-
making that may affect abortion law. Another important factor
affecting abortion policy is the status of women in society and
culture. Social scientists sometimes refer to this as the “gender
regime,” that is, the norms, rules, and positions of women com-
pared with men. These can range from egalitarian to patriarchal,
that is, from a pattern where women and men have equal legal
status and similar roles to one where men dominate in every
sphere of life.
A third important component of the environment for abor-
tion policy involves religion, not only the particular denomina-
tion and its beliefs about conception, pregnancy, and abortion, but
also the degrees of religiosity and the political influence of reli-
gious leaders. For example, most of the people in a country like
France may identify as Catholics, but religion may not be very
important in their lives—they have a low level of religiosity.
Therefore, the strict prohibitions against abortion that are part of
Roman Catholic Church doctrine would have little effect on poli-
cymaking about abortion. The particular pattern of religious affil-
iation may also be important. In some countries the population is
affiliated with two or more religions, and the pattern of settlement
will be significant. In the case of Germany, for example, access to
abortion is quite restricted in the Catholic southern regions
whereas it is much more open in the Protestant north and east.
Finally, the status of the abortion issue in a country may
depend on the form of government and the level of political con-
flict. Stable democracies offer an environment for advocates to
bring their demands out in public and have an influence on pol-
icymakers. Authoritarian governments are unlikely to offer such
an environment and may respond only to international pressure.
In the developing world, many people are still trying to establish
82
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

stable and legitimate regimes; high levels of conflict push issues
like abortion policy into the background.
This chapter takes a regional approach to sorting out the
worldwide perspectives on the abortion issue, pointing out the
general trends in politics and policy for each, and looking in
some detail at a few countries in each region where there are par-
ticularly interesting debates and practices. A goal will be to place
the U.S. conflict in the context of these regions, pointing out sim-
ilarities and differences. The chapter begins with a survey of
abortion policy in countries that are most similar to the United
States—the Western democracies. Then we turn to Central and
Eastern Europe, Latin America, East and South Asia, and Africa
and the Middle East. The chapter concludes with a description of
the impact of current abortion policies on world health and a
look at debates at the UN.
Western Postindustrial Democracies
Western postindustrial democracies are the countries whose
economies and political systems are most like the those of the
United States. Western democracies (comprising Western Euro-
pean countries, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand) had crim-
inal abortion laws until abortion reform movements developed
in the mid-twentieth century. Since then their laws have taken a
variety of forms; today, for the most part, the debates are settled
but there are some exceptions.
Great Britain, Canada, 
Australia, and New Zealand
As a result of the expansion of the British Empire, the legal sys-
tems and institutions of Britain, Canada, Australia, and New
Zealand remained closely associated throughout the twentieth
century, and British policy on abortion applied in the other coun-
tries as well. Thus, British common-law rules that permitted abor-
tion before quickening, which had also prevailed in the early days
of the American republic, governed abortion policy in the
colonies. This was superseded by Lord Ellenborough’s Act, which
made abortion before quickening a felony, and again in 1861
when the British parliament passed the Offenses Against the Per-
son Act, which established complete criminalization of abortion.
Western Postindustrial Democracies
83
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

The latter act was also in force in Canada, Australia, and New
Zealand. The conditions under which abortion could be legally
performed expanded a bit as the result of the English court ruling
in the 1939 Bourne case, which allowed abortions for threats to the
physical and mental health of the mother. This case was precedent
in the other countries as well.
Thus, it is not surprising that the British campaign for
reforming the abortion law, led since the 1930s by the Abortion
Law Reform Association (ALRA), stimulated reform activism in
the other countries. At first, the ALRA worked for repeal of the
old laws, a goal supported by feminists. But when the Abortion
Act finally passed in 1967, it was a compromise designed offi-
cially to “fix” the problem of illegal abortions, not to provide
abortion on demand (for the fascinating story of this reform see
Hindell and Simms 1970; Potts, Diggory, and Peel 1977; Cohan
1986). The formal wording of the act considers abortion a crimi-
nal procedure but allows for exceptions: when two medical prac-
titioners agree that continuing a pregnancy would endanger the
life, physical, or mental health of the woman or her children, or
if there is risk of fetal deformity or handicap. In determining the
risk of pregnancy to a woman, a doctor can consider the so-called
“statistical argument,” that is, whether pregnancy would be
more risky than abortion. Statistics show that it is almost always
more risky to proceed to childbirth. In addition, doctors can take
a woman’s environment into account. The effect of these two pro-
visions is to give the medical profession wide discretion in
responding to women’s requests to end their pregnancies. There
was some debate about late-term abortions until 1990 when the
cutoff date for the statistical argument and the environmental
conditions was firmly established at 24 weeks.
Because it was the first reform of criminal abortion laws in
Western European countries, the 1967 act, strict in language but
liberal in implementation, made Britain a destination for women
from other countries. Antiabortion activists in Britain, those most
closely connected to the Roman Catholic Church and American
pro-life groups, found allies in Parliament to try to rescind or at
least restrict access to legal abortion. Many bills have been filed
in the decades since 1967, but none has been successful (McBride
Stetson 2001). At the same time, the women’s movement, which
came along after the 1967 reform, has consistently demanded free
abortion on demand with little success. Their goal is to remove
the control of doctors over the practice of abortion, but they have
84
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

spent the most energy, like their counterparts in the United
States, in defending the status quo. Today in Britain, the abortion
triad privileges doctors in controlling which women get abor-
tions and under what circumstances with little interference from
the government (Sheldon 1997).
The movement for reform came to Australia in the 1970s. As
in the United States, in Australia abortion laws are the responsi-
bility of the state governments or provinces. There has been no
counterpart to U.S. Supreme Court decisions that set national
standards, however. Australia has been influenced by events in
Britain. Abortion provisions in the provinces vary from abortion
on request up to 20 weeks in Western Australia, to restrictions in
the provinces of Victoria and others where courts have inter-
preted the old criminal statutes modeled after the Offenses
Against the Person Act very narrowly. South Australia and the
Northern Territory passed reform statutes modeled after the 1967
British act. In 1979, the national parliament agreed to include
abortion under the national health insurance.
Australian abortion policy also resembles the British policy
because the rules are fairly stringent on paper but quite liberal in
practice. In general, doctors are in control of access to abortion.
Women may travel from restrictive locations to more liberal ones
as well. After the 1970s, the abortion debate was off the public
agenda, apparently settled to advocates’ satisfaction. However,
in 2003 some leaders in the Conservative government warned of
the practice of late-term abortions, apparently hoping to stimu-
late a debate about the rate of terminations and the status of abor-
tion practice. Both pro-choice and pro-life organizations began to
publicize their positions on the Internet as the parliament con-
sidered RU-486, stem cell research, and cloning.
Canada was governed directly by British criminal law until
1969 when the national parliament adopted a new criminal code.
Included was the criminalization of abortion except to save the
life and health of the mother. Although the debate over this pro-
vision coincided with abortion reform in Britain, the medical pro-
fession largely controlled the debate and came away with total
control over the procedure. The law placed abortion practice
exclusively in hospitals where therapeutic abortion committees
determined who got abortions and for what reasons. Advocates
for women’s rights had not been influential before the new law;
instead, the effect of the new law on women’s choices stimulated
them to action. Unable to gain much traction in the parliament,
Western Postindustrial Democracies
85
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

they found new access as a result of the 1982 Canadian constitu-
tion, which separated Canadian law from British law. Women’s
rights advocates joined with activist doctors in bringing a case to
the newly empowered constitutional court, the Supreme Court of
Canada. In 1988, the court ruled that the Canadian law was
unconstitutional because it denied women’s rights to liberty and
security established in the 1982 constitution.
According to the Canadian constitution, the national federal
government has the power to set criminal law, and because abor-
tion regulation is considered part of criminal law, the provincial
governments may not enact their own statutes. A Conservative
government attempted to enact a restrictive national law, sup-
ported by pro-life groups, but failed in 1990 by one vote in the
upper house. Thus, Canada presently has no criminal law regu-
lating abortion; it is, essentially, abortion on request. Still, access
to abortion depends to a great degree on the operation of the
health care system and health insurance (Haussman 2005). The
court has empowered women to exercise their liberty and doc-
tors to provide abortions; the triad that results is that women and
doctors negotiate abortion with little interference from the state.
New Zealand’s abortion statute dates from 1977; before that
time, policy conformed to the model Offenses Against the Person
Act. The conditional statute allows abortions up to 20 weeks of
pregnancy to safeguard the life and health of the mother, for fetal
deformity, if the pregnancy is the result of incest or through a
supervisor’s intercourse with a minor, or if the woman is men-
tally subnormal. Two doctors are required to approve the proce-
dure (United Nations 2001). Doctors remain in charge in New
Zealand as in Australia resulting in regional variation in access to
the procedure.
The Abortion Law Reform Association of New Zealand has
sought decriminalization of abortion since its founding in 1971,
but it has had little success in reaching the public agenda with the
proposal. The most recent debate, which the group lost, was to
require notification to parents and guardians before abortions
can be performed on minors. Among these Western common-law
countries, New Zealand has the most restrictive abortion policy.
France
The French case provides an interesting contrast to the British-
influenced common-law countries. Most nations in Europe have
86
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

some form of civil-law codes, many influenced by the Napoleonic
code, which was first adopted in 1810. The Napoleonic code
criminalized all abortion without exception, making it a felony,
the most serious type of crime. Both the abortionist and the
woman having the abortion could be condemned to long prison
terms. Perhaps the punishment was the reason the law was
rarely enforced for many of the same reasons U.S. laws were inef-
fective: courts and police believed women who had abortions
were unfortunate victims, often desperate. During the nineteenth
century, French women continued to have abortions, and the
rates increased among the middle and upper classes. Another
contrast with the British and American cases is that the French
government has a long tradition of pronatalism, that is, promot-
ing policies that will increase the birth rate. After World War I,
with its great loss of life, and in the face of even more abortions,
the government adopted a statute designed to make it difficult
for women to limit their pregnancies. The laws of 1920 and 1923
criminalized both abortion and contraception; at the same time
the laws reduced the penalties on the assumption that the courts
would be more likely to convict if less draconian prison terms
were involved. In 1939 a new law allowed for abortion to save
the life of the mother, but it also required that doctors report all
pregnancies to the police.
Women continued to have abortions despite these strict reg-
ulations. The rate increased in the 1960s. Thus, the issue of
reform came to the policy agenda because of alarm about the ris-
ing incidence of illegal abortions. Family planning groups were
working on a conditional reform proposal (abortions would be
legal for health, fetal deformity, rape, and incest) when the
women’s movement organized and took up the issue. They
demanded free abortion on demand and brought their demands
to public attention by some innovative forms of direct action.
They pioneered the “Abortion Manifesto,” where hundreds of
prominent women publicly declare that they have had illegal
abortions and challenge the police to arrest them. The feminist
organization Choisir (To Choose) formed to publicize a trial pros-
ecuting a teenage woman and her mother charged under the
criminal law (Halimi 1973). Feminist groups set up clinics (like
Jane in the United States) to counsel and help women obtain
abortions.
The modernizing government of President Valery Giscard
d’Estaing and his Health Minister Simone Veil agreed that the
Western Postindustrial Democracies
87
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

only way to reduce illegal abortions (and reduce the pressure
from the campaign) was to develop a periodic law allowing
choice for women in the first 10 weeks of pregnancy. The Veil law
passed in 1975 and was made permanent in 1979. In 1983, the
government agreed to fund abortions through the national health
insurance plan (McBride Stetson 1987, 53–79; Robinson 2001).
Then, in 1988, women in France became the first to have access to
RU-486, the so-called abortion pill.
Opposition to these reforms came primarily from conserva-
tive legislators and the Roman Catholic Church. A small pro-life
organization called Laissez les vivre (“Let them live”) was involved
in the public debate; their pro-life constitutional amendments and
bills got nowhere. It was not until the early 1990s that antiabortion
groups took direct action to promote their agenda. From 1991 to
1993, they took aim at doctors, clinics, and hospitals who per-
formed abortions by blocking entrances and harassing clients and
employees. They received advice and support from the U.S. orga-
nization, Operation Rescue. The minister for women’s issues,
Véronique Neiertz, convinced the government to make such
activity illegal, and her 1993 law now protects access to abortion
clinics. This action reinforced the French abortion triad: women
have control over the abortion decision in the first weeks of preg-
nancy; doctors can decline on the basis of conscience, but abortion
is largely a regular medical practice, either via surgery or pills,
and the state acts to protect the system against pro-life opponents.
Nordic Countries
In general, the Nordic countries—Norway, Denmark, Sweden,
Finland, and Iceland—began to loosen the restrictions on doc-
tors’ powers to perform abortions as early as the 1930s. The rise
of women’s movements in the 1960s pushed governments to fur-
ther liberalize, either by greatly expanding the number of condi-
tions justifying abortion (Iceland) or by establishing abortion on
demand (other countries). The majority of citizens support the
current laws, which give the power in the abortion triad to
women, but some antiabortion groups and the Christian Demo-
cratic parties remain opposed. In all of these countries, however,
the official view, which received majority support, is that legal
abortion is a necessary last resort; sex education and family plan-
ning are emphasized to prevent the need for abortions. In this
88
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

section, we’ll look at three of the countries in more detail (Rolston
and Eggert 1994 is the source of most of this information).
In 1962, when Sherri Finkbine could not convince U.S. doc-
tors to terminate her pregnancy on the grounds of severe fetal
deformity, she found what she needed in Sweden. In the 1940s,
the government had expanded the conditions for abortion to
include medical risk, fetal deformity, and pregnancy by rape.
Nevertheless, this reform did not answer many women’s
demands for abortion; illegal abortions continued to increase,
and Swedish women started traveling to Eastern Europe, where
abortion was legal under the communist governments. The
women’s rights movement provoked intense debate over what
the law should be. In 1975, women’s rights advocates were suc-
cessful when the Social Democratic government enacted a law
making abortion a woman’s decision—to the twelfth week of
pregnancy with no questions asked and to the eighteenth week
with counseling. Later abortions are conditional. The Social
Democratic party, which has governed Sweden for most of the
past 75 years, remains a strong supporter of the law. The Chris-
tian Democrats oppose, but they have not attempted to change
the law when they have been in power.
Sweden’s neighbor, Norway, took more time to change its
criminal abortion laws, and expanded the grounds to include
socio-medical, eugenic, and ethical conditions in 1966. Adminis-
tration of the law was fairly liberal, but the number of illegal
abortions continued to increase. As in Sweden, the women’s
rights movement promoted a law based on women’s right to self-
determination. Despite opposition from Christian leaders and
groups who defended the restrictive law, the Norwegian parlia-
ment passed a new law in 1978 that gives women the choice to
terminate their pregnancies up to 12 weeks on request and free of
charge. After 12 weeks, abortions must meet strict conditions.
Denmark follows the Nordic pattern rather closely. Abortion
was criminalized until the 1930s when medical, ethical, and
eugenic conditions were expanded. However, the law was
restrictive because special medical committees had to approve
requests from doctors and their patients. Women’s rights groups
led the campaign for women’s self-determination and started
making referrals to Eastern European countries. The Socialist
party agreed with the demands and helped pass the 1973 law
that allows abortion to the twelfth week of pregnancy on a
Western Postindustrial Democracies
89
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

woman’s request. Denmark is a bit different from the other coun-
tries because there is an active pro-life movement. They have
tried, unsuccessfully, to get the government to reverse the law.
Debates over the ethics of stem cell research and new reproduc-
tive technologies have moved toward official declarations that
human life begins at fertilization. So far, such statements include
exceptions for abortion laws, but Danish abortion rights activists,
like their American counterparts, express concern that the legal
personhood for the fetus would, eventually, undermine women’s
choice in abortion.
Ireland and Germany
Ireland and Germany are exceptions to the abortion politics in
the common-law and civil-law countries just described. As a for-
mer colony of Great Britain, Ireland has a common-law tradition
and inherited the law that abortion was prohibited except to save
the life of the mother. Yet instead of following the path of greater
liberalization found in the other common-law countries, Ire-
land’s abortion law is even more restrictive than it was under
British law. In the case of Germany, a civil-law country like
France and the Nordic countries, the government responded to
demands from the women’s movements in the 1970s to allow for
women’s self-determination. But this policy was thwarted by the
Federal Constitutional Court, which has ruled such liberal laws
as unconstitutional. In both countries the abortion triad favors
the power of the state to prohibit and control both women and
doctors.
Ireland has a “silent export”: thousands of women who
travel to England each year to get abortions under the British
1967 law (Hadley 1996). Although theoretically Irish law permits
abortions to save the life of a pregnant woman, in practice the
ban on performance of abortion is absolute. The major debates
surround the rights of family-planning organizations to give
information and refer women to British clinics. Antiabortion
activists are powerful and well connected, because they reflect
the teaching of the Roman Catholic Church, which is especially
strong in Ireland. They meet little opposition to their demand
that unborn life be protected completely. To ensure that these
views would be the foundation of Irish government, they suc-
cessfully promoted a 1983 amendment to the Constitution to pro-
tect unborn life: “The State acknowledges the right to life of the
90
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

unborn and, with due regard to the equal right to life of the
mother, guarantees in its laws to respect, as far as practicable, by
its laws defend and vindicate that right.” The Irish government
issued regulations prohibiting groups from providing counseling
on abortion or assistance in referrals abroad. In 1993, during
negotiations over the treaty forming the European Union (EU),
the antiabortion forces obtained a secret agreement exempting
their abortion law from oversight by the EU and its laws.
The abortion policy debates in Ireland have been about rights
to information and to travel abroad for abortions, not debates
over liberalization of the national prohibitions. The people
approved these rights by referendum in 1993, but they did not
accept another proposal that would have allowed abortions for
the mother’s life and physical health. Rulings of the Supreme
Court, however, seem to mean that abortions to save a life, includ-
ing the threat of suicide, might not be prosecuted. Still, few doc-
tors are willing to take the risk, and there are few advocates for
any kind of reform, let alone guaranteeing women’s choice on the
matter. The women’s movement is divided and, pragmatically,
has tended to focus on issues they have a chance of winning, not
abortion (Mahon 2001).
The abortion conflict in Germany involves arguments equiv-
alent to those in other Western European countries, that is,
women’s movement claims to self-determination against the
Christian values demanding protection of the fetus’s right to life.
What makes it different from other European countries, however,
is the infusion of special historical circumstances into that debate.
After World War II, Germany was divided into two parts. When
the two parts reunited in 1990, they had two different abortion
laws. The Federal Republic, also called West Germany, had
adopted a constitution promoting democracy and human rights.
When the parliament responded to the demands for women’s
self-determination by passing a liberal law in 1975, the Federal
Constitutional Court declared that it violated constitutional guar-
antees of rights to life, including the life of the unborn. Only a
restrictive conditional law—medical, fetal handicap, rape/incest
conditions—would pass constitutional muster. The Democratic
Republic of Germany, also called East Germany, with a govern-
ment dominated by the Communist party, placed a high priority
on women’s rights and equality and enacted a law in 1972 that
provides abortion on request up to 12 weeks. In the East, German
women became used to abortion as a means of birth control while
Western Postindustrial Democracies
91
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

in the West, German woman often traveled to the Netherlands to
receive abortions because of the strict law at home.
During the negotiations that preceded unification, the two
Germanys sought to reconcile their laws through compromise
(Kamenitsa 2001). The division over the abortion policy was so
great that it defied agreement and the issue was delayed until after
unification. The process involved the former states of the East join-
ing the West under the Federal Republic’s constitution. The two
sides put together a complex compromise that became law, only
to, once again, be declared in violation of the constitution by the
Federal Constitutional Court. This time the court issued guidelines
that the parliament put into a new law in 1995. Abortion in all cir-
cumstances is a criminal offense, but women and their doctors will
not be prosecuted if the following conditions are met: the woman
is in a state of distress and conflict or pregnant by rape or incest
and she receives counseling against proceeding with the abortion
at least 3 days before the abortion is to be performed. Health insur-
ance only covers abortions for poor women.
Mediterranean Countries: 
Italy, Spain, Portugal, and Greece
Western European countries bordering on the Mediterranean Sea
share some aspects of abortion politics. In all these countries the
decision whether to liberalize abortion law or not is a Left/Right
issue, that is the parties of the Left, such as Socialists, Commu-
nists, and Social Democrats, have typically favored more liberal
laws. Parties of the Right, such as Conservatives and Christian
Democrats, have opposed liberal laws. Another similarity is that
the Catholic Church—Roman or Orthodox—which opposes
abortion, is an important player in politics and has historic ties as
a state religion. These countries have important differences as
well. The place of the Catholic Church in political debate and the
popularity of its positions vary from dominant in Portugal, influ-
ential in Italy, to in decline in Spain and Greece.
Italy was the first of these countries to liberalize its criminal
abortion law. The debate over reform was dramatic, and an active
women’s movement was joined by left-wing activists staging
demonstrations and dominating the headlines for weeks in the
mid-1970s (Calloni 2001). The result was conditional reform per-
mitting women to apply for abortions within the first 90 days of
92
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

pregnancy on conditions typical of those found in other countries
with indications laws: mental and physical health, fetal deformity,
rape, or incest. Added to these were social, family, and other cir-
cumstances to which a woman can attest to obtain the termination.
Thus, on paper, the law became one of the most liberal in Europe
because it was based on the woman’s request. Efforts to overturn
the law with a referendum failed in 1983 ,and a majority of the Ital-
ian voters confirmed the reform. In practice, however, abortions
are often difficult to get, and most doctors invoke the conscience
clause and refuse to perform the procedures. The Vatican from
time to time warns Catholics they will face excommunication if
they assist. At the same time, abortion—whether legal or illegal—
has long been a way Italian women have practiced birth control.
Today they have access to contraception, and when that fails, most
have little trouble ending their pregnancies.
Women in Greece also seem to pay little attention to what
the government or the church says about abortion. The criminal
law was liberalized in the 1970s and then further changed in 1986
allowing abortion on request for the first 12 weeks of pregnancy.
These changes had little effect because the old criminal law had
never been enforced for doctors or women. A main argument for
the law was to avoid embarrassment to the legal system from the
flagrant violation of the old law. Today there is a high incidence
of abortion, and only a small minority is opposed to the legaliza-
tion of the procedure, despite the official opposition of the Ortho-
dox Catholic Church.
In Spain, too, the Catholic Church was unable to prevent the
new democracy from legalizing abortion in 1985 in the face of a
high rate of illegal abortions. Two arguments favored reform:
first, the criminal law was ineffective in preventing abortion and,
second, the Socialist government placed modernization of the
legal system as a high priority (Valiente 2001). The government
wanted to bring Spain in line with its West European counter-
parts as quickly as possible; enacting liberal abortion laws was
part of that process. Spain’s law is actually quite restrictive by
European standards; it permits abortion for medical, eugenic,
and criminal conditions only. At the same time, the procedure is
based in private clinics with little supervision from the state, per-
mitting more liberal implementation.
The EU has issued standards for states to follow in protecting
women’s reproductive health. Portugal’s high rate of illegal abor-
tion, including maternal deaths, has placed its abortion policy in
Western Postindustrial Democracies
93
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

the spotlight. The law has been quite restrictive on paper and in
practice. The government has regularly prosecuted not only doc-
tors but also women themselves and has issued prison sentences.
The Socialist party has for some time wanted to bring the law
more in line with that in other member states of the EU. They
have been reluctant to proceed in the face of a 1998 referendum
that failed because opponents stayed away from the polls and
prevented a valid decision. A similar result occurred in a 2007 ref-
erendum; however, there was a strong majority in favor of a more
liberal law among those who did vote.
In March 2007, the parliament voted to make abortion legal
in the first 10 weeks of pregnancy. With a change in the law in
Portugal, abortion is now legal, at least in the first weeks of preg-
nancy, in all the countries in Western Europe, with the exception
of Ireland. For most countries the abortion triad places women in
charge with more or less reliance on their doctors. All of these
countries are successful democracies and members of the EU. It
is not surprising that there is a convergence in the policies and
practices with respect to abortion. In the next section we turn to
the other half of Europe, which has followed a different trajectory
to arrive at nearly the same place.
Central and Eastern Europe
The nations of Central and Eastern Europe (CEE) include the
Russian Federation and all the European countries that were
under the influence of the Soviet Union during the socialist era
from 1946 until around 1990 (including Albania, Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia (now Czech Republic and Slovakia), the German
Democratic Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Yugoslavia
and its successor states, along with Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, and
Ukraine). Their abortion politics and policies have been greatly
influenced by their experience under Soviet domination. Most of
them had restrictive laws until the 1950s when, after Stalin’s
death, the Soviet government quietly legalized abortion. The CEE
countries followed suit, some following the Soviet 1955 law that
permitted abortion on women’s request in the first trimester
while others passed conditional laws. Most of these laws were
very liberal in practice. At the same time, there was little informa-
tion about or access to contraception. Thus, there was a very high
incidence of induced abortion in CEE during the socialist period.
94
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

The relation between abortion and contraception in the
political cultures of the CEE countries was quite different from
the views that developed in Western Europe and among family
planning groups in the United States. Stenvol (2006) calls these
differences the “problematization” of birth control. In the West,
contraception is the preferred method of birth control, while
abortion is a last resort—a necessary evil. In the East, the domi-
nant issue frame considered modern contraception—intrauterine
devices (IUDs), pills—to be dangerous, even unnatural. Abor-
tion, on the other hand, was seen as more natural—even as a
form of cleansing. This view coincided with the absence of con-
traceptive services in the health clinics of the socialist states.
Although these socialist laws may resemble laws in Western
Europe and the United States, legal abortion in socialist countries
was imbedded in a political and cultural context that was radi-
cally different from that of the West. Thus, it is not accurate to
describe these laws as providing choice for women or advancing
women’s rights. In practice, Russian and CEE women had no
choice in family planning; they had to resort to abortion to plan
their childbearing, and they did—in large numbers. Women
could expect to have many abortions over the course of their
reproductive years, but it was the doctors who were in control.
The abortion policy triad favored physicians who had the means
to provide safe abortions; there were no private clinics and no
rights to travel to other countries (McBride Stetson 1996).
There was one exception to the liberal use of abortion in the
CEE countries—Romania. It followed the Soviet model until the
1960s when the regime of Nikolai Ceaus¸escu put an extremely
restrictive birth control policy in place with the goal of achieving
a dramatic boost in population growth rates. Contraception and
abortion were prohibited, except for women over age 45 or to
save their lives,. Declaring the fetus to be socialist property, the
government monitored pregnant women until they gave birth.
Abortion rates remained high, according to estimates, but all of
them were illegal (Baban 1999, 200).
Around 1990, all of these countries underwent a transition
from socialism to market-based economies and democratizing
governments. For the most part, however, the new regimes kept
their abortion laws from the socialist era; although in the case of
Hungary and Romania, the laws became more liberal and
allowed abortion on women’s request in the first trimester. Other
laws and practices changed, however. Contraceptives have
Central and Eastern Europe
95
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

become available, and there has been an increase in private med-
ical practice, which has given women more choices. In some
countries, antiabortion groups formed; many of these were con-
nected to the Roman Catholic or Orthodox Catholic Churches.
New family planning groups came together as well, influenced
by international campaigns for reproductive health. Neverthe-
less, to date, some aspects of abortion politics have not changed.
The frames of debates about abortion laws rarely include argu-
ments for women’s rights or choice; there is little discussion of
the personhood of the fetus either. The dominant issue frame of
abortion keeps it in the realm of necessary medical practice, and
in most countries, abortion remains the preferred means of birth
control. Thus, despite the dramatic changes in the transition from
socialism to democracy, the ideas of preventing unwanted preg-
nancies or advancing women’s rights, fetal rights, and individual
privacy are not popular.
The exception to this general pattern in the CEE countries is
Poland. Before 1990, Poland had a fairly restrictive conditional
law, which came into effect in 1956 in the wake of the legalization
in the Soviet Union. Officially, women could obtain abortions
only on certain conditions, but they were freely available in prac-
tice. Yet the Roman Catholic groups opposed the law from the
beginning, and many parliamentary deputies spoke out even
before the transition. One of the first acts of the new conservative
government was to restrict access to abortion, and in 1993, the
parliament adopted a new law that allowed abortions only when
three physicians certified the pregnancy was a serious threat to
the life or health of the woman, if the pregnancy was the result of
a crime reported to the police, or if the fetus would be severely
deformed. In 1996, a more left-leaning government tried to liber-
alize the law, but the constitutional court overturned the changes.
The 1993 law was reinstated and remains in place. Poland’s poli-
cies tend to reflect the doctrine of the Roman Catholic Church.
Although not illegal, contraceptives are difficult to get and
described as “early abortifacients,” a view similar to that of some
of the pro-life Catholic groups in the United States (Githens
1996). When parliamentarians approved the 1996 reform, Pope
John Paul II, the “Polish pope” declared, “A nation that kills its
own children is a nation without a future” (quoted in Kulczycki
1999, 110). Even though Poland has the most restrictive law in
Europe, next to Ireland, conservative and Roman Catholic
groups continue to campaign to prohibit all abortion.
96
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Latin America
Countries in Latin America, which include Brazil and the Span-
ish-speaking nations of the Caribbean, Central America, and
South America, criminalized abortions when they put their mod-
ern penal codes in place in the late nineteenth and early twenti-
eth centuries. For the most part, those restrictive laws are still on
the books; indeed, some have become even more punitive. Some
laws have a specific exception for the life and health of the
mother; others do not prosecute for these conditions. A few over-
look abortions if the pregnancy is the result of a criminal act such
as rape or incest. Chile, El Salvador, and Nicaragua have laws
that allow for no exceptions, even if the mother’s life is seriously
threatened by the pregnancy. Cuba—a socialist country—is the
one exception to this general pattern. In 1965, 6 years after the
Cuban revolution, the government issued a new law permitting
abortion on request up to the tenth week of pregnancy. Cuban
clinics allow menstrual regulation treatments, a procedure that
extracts the contents of the uterus before the results of a preg-
nancy test are performed or available.
Along with widespread criminalization, the other notable
feature of abortion politics and policy in Latin American coun-
tries is the high abortion rate. Millions of illegal abortions are
performed, many by untrained clandestine abortionists in unsafe
conditions or even by women themselves. Evidently, the restric-
tive laws are rarely enforced as there are relatively few prosecu-
tions associated with these abortions. At the same time, there is a
cost in the comparatively high rates of maternal deaths due to
botched abortions. Two countries with very restrictive laws that
do pay attention to prosecution are Chile and El Salvador (Htun
2003; Hitt 2006). In the latter case, New York Times journalist Jack
Hitt reported that women are often arrested in their hospital
beds, while recovering from infections and hemorrhages.
In some countries, leaders have recognized that the increases
in abortions are in part due to the lack of contraception, espe-
cially for the poor. This has provoked politicians to take a more
active stance on providing contraception to reduce the abortion
toll. The Chilean government, for example, has responded to the
relentless increases in illegal abortions by promoting extensive
family planning services in public clinics, including access to
emergency contraception. Mexico, despite the claims of its revo-
lutionary ideology that its plans for social equality would make
Latin America
97
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

birth control unnecessary, has also accepted the need for family
planning.
In Brazil, despite a restrictive law, abortion—both safe and
unsafe—is widely practiced. Brazil also has a more hospitable cli-
mate for reform politics. Proposals for liberalizing the law that
allows abortion only for rape or to save a woman’s life have
reached the level of presidential politics. This is an exception to the
norm in Latin America. Despite the evidence of the effects of 
the prohibitions on maternal health, political leaders rarely bring
the question of abortion to the policy agenda, except to propose a
more restrictive law as occurred in Nicaragua in 2006.
Why has there been no liberalization of abortion laws in
Latin America? One reason is the rocky political history in the
1960s and 1970s, decades when reform movements were devel-
oping in the Western democracies. Military regimes ruled many
countries, repressing groups, especially women’s rights activists,
likely to demand change. The transition to democracy in the
1980s and 1990s has opened up new opportunities for participa-
tion. In recent years, women especially have become involved in
politics, and governments have responded by modernizing laws
toward more gender equality (Htun 2003). At the same time, they
have not changed many laws relating to reproductive issues.
Latin American countries still lack the components that have
led to law reforms in the United States and Europe. Domestic
pro-choice movements do not exist; the groups that are most
interested in promoting reform are external to the countries, such
as Human Rights Watch, the Center for Reproductive Rights, and
Women’s Link Worldwide. They work with a small number of
local feminists, family planning groups, and physicians, but they
cannot mobilize enough public opinion and activism to gain
attention of political parties and politicians. In addition, they face
a very strong adversary: the Roman Catholic Church.
Just when the opportunities for participation improved,
Pope John Paul II turned his attention to the Latin American
countries in an effort to strengthen the Catholic Church’s posi-
tion there. Along with an emphasis on unity, hierarchy, and dis-
cipline in the national churches, he made opposition to divorce,
birth control, and abortion a top priority. The church’s stance
empowered Catholic parties and politicians in many Latin Amer-
ican countries; it also increased the presence of antiabortion offi-
cials at any international discussion of population, reproductive
health, and women’s rights.
98
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

At the same time, the pro-life groups in the United States are
very interested in maintaining the restrictive laws in Latin Amer-
ica. Human Life International uses Catholic doctrine to organize
pro-life groups in many countries. The pro-life support of the Mex-
ico City policy has had the effect of denying U.S. family planning
funds to organizations that might otherwise promote reform. One
of the main arguments in favor of this policy is that it would place
the United States in a position of unduly interfering with the abor-
tion laws—in this case restrictive ones—in sovereign countries.
Finally, reform efforts have little chance in the Latin Ameri-
can legislatures. Antiabortion politicians are strongly committed
to their pro-life positions; many are closely associated with the
Catholic hierarchy in their country. Those legislators who are not
pro-life either have little interest in the abortion issue or actively
avoid getting involved with what they may see as a dangerous
conflict. The top politicians, even a feminist like Chile’s President
Michelle Bachelet, do not challenge the current laws. Public opin-
ion is either ambivalent or disinterested providing few resources
to any elected politician who takes up the issue. An exception is
the April 2007 decriminalization of abortion in Mexico City by
the city council, an action which received widespread support
despite opposition from the Catholic hierarchy.
If there is to be a change in the abortion policy in most Latin
American countries it is likely to follow the lead of the high court
in Colombia. As part of a regional litigation strategy, Women’s
Link Worldwide attorneys challenged Colombia’s restrictive
abortion law as a violation of its international treaty obligations to
ensure human rights, in this case, women’s rights to life and
health. The court ruled that abortion must be permitted for threats
to a woman’s health or life and in cases of rape, incest, and fetal
deformity. Although the resulting policy remains restrictive com-
pared with laws in Europe, the Colombian court’s response sug-
gests a promising avenue to change. At the same time, pro-life
organizations outside the region consider such litigation in Latin
American courts to be an attack on the rights of the pre-born and
warn of a Roe v. Wade effect spreading in the region.
East and South Asia
The laws on the books in Asian countries vary from restrictive, as
in Indonesia, to abortion on request, as in China. Regardless of
East and South Asia
99
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

the formal rules, however, abortion is generally a widespread
means of birth control in Asian countries. The use of modern con-
traceptives, such as the hormone pill or the IUD, arrived much
later than in Western countries. Many women remain ignorant of
these methods or afraid of their effects, despite efforts of interna-
tional and domestic family planning organizations. The abortion
issue is not high on the public agendas in any country, and there
is little public debate about changing the laws or the practices.
Since the 1950s, most governments have taken a direct inter-
est in the size and composition of their populations. This is often
a more straightforward and direct approach in authoritarian sys-
tems than in the more democratic ones. It is important to con-
sider the practice of abortion in the context of such population
policies. Rather than responding to demands for greater liberal-
ization or restrictions from political groups or social movements,
political leaders assess the abortion rates according to the way
they contribute to demographic goals. In this brief review of
abortion policy and politics in Japan, China, Korea, and India, we
will see that strategies to shape fertility behavior may have unin-
tended consequences.
Japan is an island with a large population. After its defeat in
World War II, the government wanted to keep population growth
under control and to be sure that families would not reproduce
genetically inferior offspring. The legalization of abortion in 1948
included several eugenic conditions that allowed abortions,
along with social and economic conditions and threats to a
woman’s health. In fact, it didn’t much matter what the law said
because doctors would perform abortions on a woman’s request
and did not require any proof of a legally required condition.
Over the years, there have been a few debates over the abortion
law. These have occupied a relatively small group of elites either
from the right, where they are trying to reduce the high abortion
rate, or from the left, where coalitions of feminists, family plan-
ning organizations, and socialists have overcome efforts to
tighten up the law (Gelb 2003). In 1996, parliament revised the
abortion law to remove the language about eugenics (abolishing
forced sterilization of the handicapped, for example). This was
more a response to groups with disabilities than any attempt at
abortion reform, and it left the general policy intact.
The participation of Japanese politicians, especially women,
in international conferences in the 1990s brought home the real-
ization that Japan was behind the rest of the industrialized
100
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

democracies because of the high rate of abortion and the low use
of contraceptives (Norgren 2001). In fact, modern contraceptives
weren’t even legal. As a result of their efforts, these leaders were
able to persuade the government to legalize the hormone pill in
1999. Since these reforms, the abortion rate has begun to decline,
and the use of contraception has increased, although fewer than
10 percent of couples use pills or IUDs, relying instead on con-
doms and withdrawal (Sato and Iwasawa 2006). Public discus-
sion of reproductive issues is infrequent, and there is scarce
attention to sex education; many women remain ignorant of con-
traception and family planning until they find themselves seek-
ing their first abortion.
One other feature of abortion politics in Japan caught public
attention in the 1990s. Some Buddhist temples set aside space for
parents to remember their aborted fetuses in a ritual called mizuko
kuyo. The Western press described these as apologies to the fetus,
a way of assuaging guilt of parents who have ended its life. How-
ever, others have reported that such practices are a blatant
attempt by the temples to cash in on the lucrative abortion prac-
tice (Hardacre 1997). In fact, it is likely that the main political force
for maintaining the status quo is the medical profession, which
reaps big profits (at $1,000 per procedure) from legal abortion.
China has the largest population in the world—1.2 billion
people. The country’s politics have been turbulent in the past 60
years—ranging from a Communist social revolution to the rise of
a market economy. Regardless of the frequent political and eco-
nomic upheavals, the population has grown steadily. As a result,
all Chinese leaders have adhered to a strict antigrowth policy since
the 1970s In 1979, the government adopted the “one-child”
approach, which sought to limit each couple to one child. To
accomplish this goal, the government also instituted nationwide
family planning programs that included information, education,
and services for contraception and an abortion policy that allowed
abortion on request up to 6 months of pregnancy when contracep-
tion failed. Economic incentives and disincentives completed the
policy. Organized social pressures on women to abort their second
or third pregnancies and even forced sterilization were reported.
According to the UN, the one-child policy has been limited to the
majority Han population in the urban areas.
Demographic studies show that the policy has slowed the
fertility rates in China, and the government has extended it to at
least 2010. But the policy has had an unintended consequence: it
East and South Asia
101
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

has upset the sex balance. A normal ratio of male to female births
is 105/100. In China, since the 1970s, the ratio has been as high as
114/100. The phenomenon of the missing millions of girls has
been attributed to female-selective abortion (FSA) and neglect,
abandonment, or infanticide of female babies (Miller 2001). It
works something like this: There is a cultural preference for male
children. When a couple is pressured to limit their childbearing
to one child, they prefer to give birth to a boy. If they can learn
the sex of the fetus before birth, through amniocentesis or ultra-
sound, they will choose abortion if it is female. In communities
where such technologies are not available, then parents resort to
other strategies. In the current climate in China, few questions
are asked of women seeking abortions, and they are free, safe,
and easily accessible.
Other Asian countries also have the FSA phenomenon and
the resulting imbalanced sex ratios. Korea has a restrictive abor-
tion law, allowing abortion only for a few conditions: life and
health of the mother, hereditary diseases of the parents, or preg-
nancy as a result of rape and incest. Despite the restrictive law,
Korea adopted a successful population policy to reduce the birth
rate from 6.3 births per woman in 1955 to 1.08 births per woman
in 2005, below the 2.1 replacement level (the U.S. level is 2.1).
Despite attention to family planning services, however, abortion
has been the primary means for birth control among Korean
women. The cultural and political pressure to have small fami-
lies, coupled with widespread abortion, led to a sex imbalance
that reached 115/100 in 1994 and is now around 108/100 (Byun
2006).
India has a comparatively flexible abortion statute, which it
adopted in 1971. Abortion is permitted up to 20 weeks of gesta-
tion to preserve the life and health of the mother and for a risk of
fetal deformity or handicap. The statute also accepts reasons of
rape and contraceptive failure when the abortion is used to limit
the number of children. India too has been troubled with the
growth rate of its huge population and has established a policy
to encourage family planning by bringing contraceptive services
to the diverse country and even providing incentives for steril-
ization. The goal of the abortion law was to reduce the high inci-
dence of illegal abortions and maternal death. The rate of illegal
abortion remains high, however, especially among the poor.
To adapt to the new standard of smaller families, Indian
women, like their counterparts in China, Korea, and Pakistan,
102
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

looked for ways to ensure that they would give birth to as many
boys as possible. The widespread availability of ultrasound tech-
nology gave rise to a lucrative business for doctors who
promised to ensure that the next child would be a boy. If the
ultrasound showed a woman was carrying a female fetus, the
doctor could easily provide an abortion so the couple could try
again for a boy. This practice of FSA brought the sex ratio as high
as 112/100 in the early 1990s (Miller 2001).
After widespread international publicity about the millions
of “missing girls” (aborted females) in these Asian countries, the
governments moved to prohibit abortion for sex selection—in
Korea in 1987, India in 1994, and China in 2003. These bans are
difficult to enforce, although China and India have tried to regu-
late the use of ultrasound equipment for determining the sex of a
fetus. The question of skewed sex ratios has been the topic of
international debate. Feminists decry the cultural position of
girls and women in these countries that is represented by the fig-
ures. They argue that it is part of a strict patriarchy that has
stayed in place despite economic modernization. Human rights
activists see the deliberate aborting of only females as a violation
of human rights. Some sociologists warn that generations of boys
and men will be unable to marry and be part of a viable family;
and, at loose ends, they can cause violence, increased crime, and
social unrest (Hudson and den Boer 2004). On the other side,
there are claims that the demographic pattern is temporary; with
fewer girls, the value of women will increase and in the long term
births will reestablish the normal balance. Others say the imbal-
ance is effective in reducing population growth (fewer women to
give birth). Finally, some warn not to get too worked up over the
reports because the data on abortions and births in these coun-
tries is notoriously unreliable (Miller 2001).
Africa and the Middle East
Abortion laws among the countries in the Middle East and Africa
have little variation. They are almost universally restrictive, pro-
hibiting abortion in all circumstances, but allowing the proce-
dure to save a woman’s life; such laws empower the state’s role
in the abortion triad rather than doctors or women. Only a few
countries, mostly in Africa, allow exceptions for physical and
mental health and only one or two for cases of fetal deformity or
Africa and the Middle East
103
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

for social and economic reasons. At the same time, the incidence
of unsafe abortions and maternal deaths ranges from moderate
to very high (World Health Organization 2004). Prosecutions for
illegal abortions are rare, and there is little public debate about
abortion policy as the issue is rarely on the agenda of political
leaders.
The situation in Egypt is representative of the politics of
abortion in North Africa and the Middle East. Egypt has long
prohibited abortion by law in all circumstances but does not
prosecute when abortions are to save a woman’s life. At the same
time, there are few prosecutions for any abortions because the
law has stringent evidence requirements. “The intent to commit
the act is not sufficient to be convicted of the offence of abortion.
The prosecution also has to prove the pregnancy of the woman,
the interruption of pregnancy and the illegal means to interrupt
the pregnancy. Given these requirements, it is difficult for the
prosecution to procure the evidence necessary for a conviction of
the crime of abortion” (United Nations 2001, Vol. I, 135).
There are exceptions to the generalizations about the region.
Israel, Tunisia, and Algeria, have established broader grounds for
abortion—physical and mental health and fetal impairment. The
abortion issue has recently been on the public agenda in Iran
where the legislature agreed to extend legal abortion to include
cases of fetal deformity along with threats to the pregnant
woman’s life. However, the conservative Council of Guardians,
dominated by Muslim clerics, rejected the reform in 2005.
Kenya is representative of the politics of abortion in sub-
Saharan Africa. Kenya retains a law, dating back to the period of
British rule, that prohibits abortion except to preserve the life and
health of the mother. Legal abortions are difficult to obtain
because complex procedures must be met. The rate of illegal
abortions is high, but there are few prosecutions. The govern-
ment’s family planning policy dates from the 1960s and is one of
the earliest on the continent. Nevertheless, the rate of contracep-
tive use is low. The rate of unsafe abortions contributes to
Kenya’s high rate of maternal death; the rate of abortions among
adolescents in on the rise. All of these facts point to a problem
with abortion policy in Kenya.
Despite the concerns of many family planning groups and
other health professionals, the abortion issue is not on the
national agenda (Kulczycki 1999). Antiabortion forces in the
country are strong, especially the Roman Catholic bishops and
104
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

conservatives. When public officials have mentioned the need for
a policy change, there is an immediate negative reaction from the
antiabortion groups. Cultural factors make it difficult to confront
the problem of illegal abortion. Custom dictates, for example,
that people marry early and that women have children through-
out their reproductive years. Traditionalists consider abortion,
like feminism, to be a foreign import; they claim that before the
colonial period there were no abortions among the people of
Kenya.
Other barriers to finding a solution to illegal abortion as well
as other threats to women’s health include a lack of contraception
and prenatal care and health systems that cannot answer
demands on them, especially among the poor. The government
has become increasingly authoritarian since independence in the
1960s, which makes it difficult for advocates to get a hearing
from the top leaders. Few doctors and family planning workers
have taken up the abortion issue. The HIV/AIDS health chal-
lenge has dominated social services since the 1990s; at the same
time the Mexico City policy of the United States has limited the
funds coming from foreign aid for reproductive health needs.
The exception to the general pattern in sub-Saharan Africa is
South Africa. The end of the white-dominated rule of apartheid
in the early 1990s opened the door for a reexamination of law and
policy in South Africa. The newly empowered black citizens con-
tributed to writing a new constitution and electing a democratic
government. In the first election, the African National Congress
campaigned on the pledge to liberalize the abortion law. They
did so in 1996, changing the restrictive and racist conditional law
to allow abortion on request in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy
and up to 20 weeks on a set of broad grounds. Before the reform,
there were high rates of unsafe abortions among poor black
South Africans. Since the reform, more abortion services are
available, but there are still problems in answering the demands.
Still, the overall rate of unsafe abortions has declined.
The law is based on the idea of individual rights, especially
women’s rights. This reflects the significant attention in the 1996
constitution to women’s equality and the establishment of influ-
ential women’s policy agencies that pushed a pro-choice agenda: 
Recognising that the Constitution protects the right of
persons to make decisions concerning reproduction and
to security in and control over their bodies;
Africa and the Middle East
105
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Recognising that both women and men have the right
to be informed of and to have access to safe, effective,
affordable and acceptable methods of fertility regula-
tion of their choice, and that women have the right of
access to appropriate health care services to ensure safe
pregnancy and childbirth; 
Recognising that the decision to have children is fun-
damental to women’s physical, psychological and social
health and that universal access to reproductive health
care services includes family planning and contracep-
tion, termination of pregnancy, as well as sexuality edu-
cation and counseling programmes and services
(Source: Preamble, Choice on Termination of Pregnancy
Act 1996, www.info.gov.za/acts/1996).
The antiabortion forces have not given up the battle, and
there was strong opposition to the initial liberalization of abor-
tion policy in 1996. Many blacks oppose free abortion because
they see it as a legacy of apartheid when white rulers tried to
boost white birth rates and limit fertility of blacks. The pro-life
opposition claims that this law violates the right to life guaran-
teed to the unborn in the constitution. The constitutional court
has ruled, however, that this right does not extend to the fetus
(United Nations 2001; Guttmacher et al 1998).
The United Nations
The World Health Organization has documented that the rate of
unsafe abortions in developing countries is one of the most
neglected world health problems. Estimates suggest that two of
every five pregnancies worldwide are unplanned due to lack of
information on contraception, lack of access to services, or failure
of the method used (World Health Organization 2004). Many
women in poor countries seek help from clandestine practitioners
who are untrained and are likely to operate in unsafe conditions.
The consequences can be frightening: “Severe complications, such
as sepsis, hemorrhage, genital and abdominal trauma, perforated
uterus and poisoning due to ingestion of harmful substances, may
be fatal if left untreated . . . Unsafe abortion may lead to repro-
ductive tract infections, chronic pelvic pain, pelvic inflammatory
disease, and at times to infertility; genital trauma and infection
106
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

may also warrant an immediate hysterectomy” (World Health
Organization 2004, 4).
Transnational networks of women’s nongovernmental orga-
nizations (NGOs) have taken the issues of unsafe abortion under
the umbrella of demands for better reproductive health to the
UN and other international organizations. Their goal is to frame
debates and establish policies at the international level that will
influence the abortion politics of member states (Petchesky 2003).
Since the 1980s, coalitions of activists have attempted to link the
right to abortion not only to women’s rights and equality but also
more generally to human rights. In international conferences
these women’s NGOs have encountered strong opposition from
traditional and conservative groups, pro-life organizations, and,
especially, the Roman Catholic Church.
The following are excerpts from three UN documents that
take positions related to abortion:
1. Convention for Elimination of Discrimination Against
Women 1979 requires that “States Parties shall take all
appropriate measures to eliminate discrimination
against women in the field of health care in order to
ensure, on a basis of equality of men and women, access
to health care services, including those related to family
planning” (Article 12).
2. The UN International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD) met in Cairo, Egypt in 1994 and
agreed that “In no case should abortion be promoted as a
method of family planning. All governments and relevant
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
are urged to strengthen their commitment to women’s
health, to deal with the health aspect of unsafe abortion as
a major public health concern and to reduce the recourse
to abortion through expanded and improved family plan-
ning services . . . In circumstances where abortion is not
against the law, such abortion should be safe. In all cases
women should have access to quality services for man-
agement and complications arising from abortion.” 
3. The Plan of Action for UN Fourth Conference on Women
in Beijing, China, in 1995 declared that: “the human
rights of women include their right to have control over
and decide freely and responsibly on matters related to
their sexuality, including sexual and reproductive health,
The United Nations
107
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

free of coercion, discrimination and violence.” The report
went on to assert: “The ability of women to control their
own fertility forms an important basis for the enjoyment
of other rights. Shared responsibility between women
and men in matters related to sexual and reproductive
behavior is also essential to improving women’s health.”
On the question of unsafe abortion the plan declared,
“Since unsafe abortion is a major threat to the health and
life of women, research to understand and better address
the determinants and consequences of induced abortion,
including its effects on subsequent fertility, reproductive
and mental health and contraceptive practice, should be
promoted, as well as research on treatment of complica-
tions of abortions and post-abortion care” (Source:
www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/beijing/index.html).
The transnational pro-life movement has met the women’s
rights coalition head-on at every UN venue where the issues of
abortion may come up. Those opposed to abortion challenge terms
such as “reproductive health,” “reproductive rights,” “family
planning,” and “women’s rights as human rights.” They warn that
these terms are a way to make the right to abortion enforceable
through treaty obligations and in international forums. Nowhere
in the agreements has the UN adopted the position that abortion is
a woman’s right or choice and the 1994 ICPD document even
explicitly proclaimed that abortion is not an acceptable form of
family planning. Nevertheless, representatives of the George W.
Bush administration to the UN conferences have repeatedly asked
that the international bodies reject abortion in their documents.
While the UN has not taken a pro-choice position, it has not taken
the pro-life position either. The result is that the interpretation of
the meaning of these documents and their significance depends on
the views of leaders in the nearly 200 states that belong to the UN.
References
Baban, Adriana. “Romania.” In From Abortion to Contraception: A
Resource to Public Policies and Reproductive Behavior in Central and Eastern
Europe from 1917 to the Present, edited by Henry P. David with assistance
of Joanna Skilogianis, 191–222. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1999.
108
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Byun, Wha-soon. “The Imbalance of Sex Ratio and Reproductive
Rights in Korea.” International Political Science Association, Fukuoka,
Japan. 2006. www.ipsa.org (accessed December, 31, 2006).
Calloni, Marina. “Debates and Controversies on Abortion in Italy.” In
Abortion Politics, Women’s Movements and the Democratic State: A
Comparative Study in State Feminism, edited by D. McBride Stetson,
181–204. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Cohan, Alvin. “Abortion as a Marginal Issue: The Use of Peripheral
Mechanisms in Britain and the United States.” In The New Politics of
Abortion, edited by J. Lovenduski and J. Outshoorn, 27–49. London:
Sage, 1986.
Gelb, Joyce. Gender Policies in Japan and the United States: Comparing
Women’s Movements, Rights, and Politics. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2003.
Githens, Marianne. “Reproductive Rights and the Struggle with
Change in Eastern Europe.” In Abortion Politics: Public Policy in a Cross
Cultural Perspective, edited by M. Githens and D. McBride Stetson,
55–70. New York: Routledge, 1996.
Guttmacher, Sally, Farzana Kapadia, Jim Te Water Nanda, and Helen
De Pinho. “Abortion Reform in South Africa: A Case Study of the 1996
Choice on Termination of Pregnancy Act.” International Family Planning
Perspectives 1998 (24): 191–194.
Hadley, Janet. Abortion: Between Freedom and Necessity. Philadelphia, PA:
Temple University Press, 1996.
Halimi, Gisèle. The Right to Choose. Brisbane, Australia: University of
Queensland Press, 1973.
Hardacre, Helen. Marketing the Menacing Fetus in Japan. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1997.
Haussman, Melissa. Abortion Politics in North America. Boulder, CO:
Lynne Rienner, 2005.
Hindell, Keith, and Madeleine Simms. Abortion Law Reformed. London:
Peter Owen, 1970.
Hitt, Jack. “Pro-Life Nation.” The New York Times Magazine. April 9,
2006. 41–47, 62, 72, 74.
Htun, Mala. Sex and the State: Abortion, Divorce, and the Family under
Latin American Dictatorships and Democracies. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2003.
Hudson, Valerie, and Andrea M. den Boer. 2004. Bare Branches: The
Security Implications of Asia’s Surplus Male Population. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
References
109
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Kamenitsa, Lynn. “Abortion Debates in Germany.” In Abortion Politics,
Women’s Movements and the Democratic State: A Comparative Study in
State Feminism, edited by D. McBride Stetson, 111–134. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2001.
Kulczycki, Andrzej. The Abortion Debate in the World Arena. New York:
Routledge, 1999.
Mahon, Evelyn. “Abortion Debates in Ireland: An Ongoing Issue.” In
Abortion Politics, Women’s Movements and the Democratic State: A
Comparative Study in State Feminism, edited by D. McBride Stetson,
157–180. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
McBride Stetson, Dorothy. Women’s Rights in France. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 1987.
McBride Stetson, Dorothy. “Abortion Policy Triads and Women’s
Rights in Russia, the United States and France.” In Abortion Politics:
Public Policy in Cross Cultural Perspective, edited by M. Githens and D.
McBride Stetson, 97–118. New York: Routledge, 1996.
McBride Stetson, Dorothy. “Women’s Movements’ Defence of Legal
Abortion in Great Britain.” In Abortion Politics, Women’s Movements and
the Democratic State: A Comparative Study in State Feminism, edited by D.
McBride Stetson, 135–156.  Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Miller, Barbara. “Female-Selective Abortion in Asia: Patterns, Policies
and Debates.” American Anthropologist 103 (2001): 1083–1095.
Norgren, Tiana. Abortion Before Birth Control: The Politics of Reproduction
in Postwar Japan. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.
Petchesky, Rosalind Pollack. Global Prescriptions: Gendering Health and
Human Rights. London: Zed Books, 2003.
Potts, Malcolm, Peter Diggory, and John Peel. Abortion. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press, 1977.
Robinson, Jean. “Gendering the Abortion Debate: The French Case.” In
Abortion Politics, Women’s Movements and the Democratic State: A
Comparative Study in State Feminism, edited by D. McBride Stetson,
87–110. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
Rolston, Bill, and Anna Eggert, eds. Abortion in the New Europe: A
Comparative Handbook. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1994.
Sato, Ryuzaburo, and Miko Iwasawa. “Contraceptive Use and Induced
Abortion in Japan: How Is It so Unique among Developed Countries?
The Japanese Journal of Population March 2006: 33–55.
Sheldon, Sally. Beyond Control: Medical Power and Abortion Law. London:
Pluto Press, 1997.
110
Worldwide Perspective
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Stenvol, Dag. “Contraception, Abortion, and State Socialism.”
International Political Science Association, Fukuoka, Japan, 2006.
www.ipsa.org (accessed December 29, 2006).
United Nations. Abortion Policies: A Global Review Volumes I, II, III.
New York: United Nations, 2001.
Valiente, Celia. 2001. “Gendering Abortion Debates: State Feminism in
Spain.” In Abortion Politics, Women’s Movements and the Democratic State:
A Comparative Study in State Feminism, edited by D. McBride Stetson,
229–246. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001.
World Health Organization. Unsafe Abortion: Global and Regional
Estimates of the Incidence of Unsafe Abortion and Associated Mortality in
2000. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 2004.
References
111
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

4
Chronology
T
he events in this chronology impart an impression of the ori-
gins, development, and outcomes of policy debates in three
eras: the nineteenth century, which led to criminalization of
abortion in the United States and other countries; the movement
for reform of those criminal abortion policies in the first 70 years
of the twentieth century; and the contemporary pro-choice ver-
sus pro-life standoff since 1973.
1803
The British parliament passes Lord Ellenborough’s
Act, an omnibus crime statute that makes abortion
before quickening a criminal act and thus overturns
the long-standing common-law practice of not prose-
cuting abortions performed before quickening.
1810
The Napoleonic law code criminalizes abortion mak-
ing it a felony with no exceptions. This becomes a
standard for civil-law countries in Europe.
1821
The Connecticut legislature passes the first abortion
statute in the United States, which makes performing
abortion by poison after quickening a crime. Missouri
(1825) and Illinois (1827) pass similar statutes, begin-
ning the process of criminalization.
1828
The New York state legislature passes a law that
makes performing abortion by any means after quick-
ening a crime.
113
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

1830
The decade that follows shows a noticeable increase
in the number and rate of abortions, especially among
middle-class married women.
1840
New abortion statutes spread among the states until
by this date ten of the twenty-six states have some
restrictions.
1845
J. Marion Sims, a gynecologist in New York, develops
the modern speculum for vaginal medical examina-
tions.
1847
The American Medical Association (AMA) forms and
becomes the first professional association of doctors.
1857
Dr. Horatio Storer, an obstetrician and gynecologist,
urges medical doctors to use their connections with
politicians to make abortion illegal.
1859
The AMA declares that abortion at any stage of preg-
nancy kills a human being and resolves to campaign
to criminalize abortion in all states.
1861
The British parliament enacts the Offenses Against
the Person Act, which prohibits abortion—with no
exceptions—and prosecutes both the abortionist and
the woman undergoing the procedure. This act
becomes law in the countries of the British Common-
wealth, including Australia, Canada, India, Ireland,
and New Zealand.
1869
Pope Pius IX officially puts the Roman Catholic
Church in opposition to contraception and abortion
in the papal bull (constitutional proclamation) Apos-
tolicae Sedis Moderationi.
1870s
Dilation and curettage, or D&C, is developed as a
method of early abortions, first in Germany and later
in the United States.
1873
Congress enacts the Comstock Act, which makes it a
federal crime to import or sell obscene materials,
114
Chronology
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

including information about and devices for contra-
ception and abortion, through interstate commerce.
1884
Pope Pius IX declares that an embryo has a soul from
conception and that abortion for any reason, even to
save the mother’s life, is against Roman Catholic
Church doctrine.
1900
At this time all states have criminalized abortion
throughout pregnancy; some statutes permit excep-
tions only to save the life of the mother and some
hold the woman as well as the abortionist liable for
prosecution.
1915
The surgical procedures Joseph Lister developed in
the 1860s finally come into common practice in both
the operating room and the delivery room. As a
result, abortion mortality and childbirth mortality
begin to decline. At some point later, the two down-
ward curves intersect, and abortion became less dan-
gerous to the woman than childbirth.
1916
Margaret Sanger opens the first birth control clinic in
the United States. Within a few years she is jailed for
violating the Comstock Act.
1920
After the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, Russia
becomes the first country to legalize abortion on
woman’s request as a health measure to stem the
health costs of illegal abortions. In 1936, Stalin recrim-
inalizes abortion to promote population growth.
1921
The American Birth Control League forms after the
reorganization of its parent organization, the National
Birth Control League, which was founded in 1916.
1936
A study by Frederick J. Taussig shows that the illegal
abortion rate in the United States has skyrocketed to
500,000 per year.
A federal circuit court’s decision in U.S. v. One Package
(86 F.2d 737 [2nd Cir. 1936]) rules that the Comstock
Chronology
115
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Act does not prevent the import and distribution of
contraceptives and abortion devices for physicians to
use in their medical practice. Unless state laws prevent
it, contraceptives such as diaphragms are now avail-
able from doctors.
1937
The AMA recognizes birth control as integral to med-
ical practice.
Margaret Sanger resigns from the American Birth
Control League.
1939
Dr. Aleck Bourne is acquitted of criminal abortion in
English courts when he explains that he has helped
preserve the mental and physical health of a pregnant
fourteen-year-old who had been raped. This estab-
lishes the Bourne defense, which liberalizes abortion
practice in Great Britain, Canada, and other countries
in the Commonwealth to allow the procedure to save
the life and health of the mother.
1942
Dr. Alan Guttmacher calls for extensive liberalization
of criminal abortion laws at the New York meeting of
the American Birth Control League. At the same
meeting, the members vote to change the organiza-
tion’s name to Planned Parenthood Federation of
America.
1950s
To better regulate the practice of legal abortions in
response to policy crackdowns and publicity, many
hospitals create committees that must approve the
procedures before doctors can perform them.
1953
Alfred Kinsey’s controversial report, Sexual Behavior
in the Human Female, appears. He reports that 22 per-
cent of married women have had an abortion and that
90 percent of pregnancies outside marriage end in
abortion.
1955
The Soviet Union quietly legalizes abortion, declaring
it a woman’s right.
116
Chronology
1936
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Planned Parenthood sponsors a conference, “Abor-
tion in America,” led by Mary Calderone. The confer-
ence report is published in 1958.
1957
British physician Dr. Ian Donald develops technolog-
ical applications for using ultrasound to view a devel-
oping fetus during pregnancy. It becomes widely
available during the 1970s.
1958
The use of the vacuum aspiration technique for early
abortions is pioneered in China.
1959
The American Law Institute (ALI) drafts a model
abortion reform statute that would allow doctors to
perform abortions for the health of the mother, if the
fetus is deformed, or if the pregnancy was the result
of rape or incest. These reforms are examples of “indi-
cations” abortion laws.
In his book Babies by Choice or Chance, Dr. Alan
Guttmacher calls for more liberal abortion laws across
the country.
1960
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approves the use of the hormone pill to prevent con-
ception.
Dr. Alan Guttmacher and other physicians in New
York form the Association for the Study of Abortion,
one of the first organizations promoting reform of
criminal abortion laws.
1962
Pat Maginnis of California forms the feminist Citi-
zens’ Committee for Humane Abortion Laws, which
seeks to repeal criminal abortion laws.
Sherry Finkbine travels to Sweden to obtain a legal
abortion after being denied by her hospital in Arizona.
She fears she will give birth to a severely deformed
child because she took thalidomide during her preg-
nancy without knowing it might cause birth defects.
Chronology
117
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Her previously arranged abortion was denied after
publicity about her situation. This marks the begin-
ning of major public debate on abortion law reform.
1963
The U.S. government establishes the National Insti-
tute of Child Health and Human Development. Part
of its mandate is to support and oversee research in
reproductive science and contraceptive development.
1964
A rubella epidemic breaks out in the United States.
The damage rubella can do to a fetus in early preg-
nancy is widely understood, and many women, pri-
marily those with money and/or influence, demand
and get legal abortions. But tens of thousands are pre-
vented by restrictive laws.
Bill Baird opens a birth control clinic on Long Island
and begins to give women referrals for abortion,
becoming one of the first referral services in the 
country.
1965
The Supreme Court issues its ruling in Griswold v.
Connecticut that the Constitution creates a zone of pri-
vacy where government may not intrude and that
decisions by married couples about whether and
when to have a child are inside that zone. States may
not prohibit married couples from access to contra-
ceptive information and services.
CBS Reports, the respected television news series,
broadcasts “Turning Points in the Debate on Abortion
and Birth Control,” which includes interviews with
clergy, doctors, lawyers, and population control
advocates.
The New York Times endorses abortion law reform in
an editorial.
1966
Roman Catholic priest (later bishop) James McHugh
forms the National Right to Life Committee (NRLC);
the NRLC becomes a national coordinating organiza-
tion in 1971.
118
Chronology
1962
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

The National Organization for Women (NOW) forms
as the first civil rights organization for women.
Laurence Lader’s book Abortion is published; it
details the extent of both legal and illegal abortion in
the United States and the effects on women.
1967
The vacuum aspiration technique for performing abor-
tions in the first weeks of pregnancy, first used in China,
is presented to U.S. physicians in the journal Obstetrics
and Gynecology. It quickly becomes the preferred
method for first-trimester abortions, replacing the D&C.
At its second annual convention, NOW calls for the
repeal of criminal abortion laws.
The AMA endorses the ALI model reform statute.
Colorado becomes the first state to pass the ALI
model reform statute, followed by North Carolina
and California.
The Virginia Society for Human Life forms, becoming
the first state pro-life organization; state pro-life orga-
nizations are subsequently formed in Minnesota, Col-
orado, and Illinois.
After a 30-year campaign, the British Abortion Law
Reform Association finds success when the British
parliament enacts the Abortion Act, the first liberal-
ization among European democracies. The act decrim-
inalizes abortions performed when two doctors agree
that pregnancy would risk the life and physical or
mental health of the pregnant woman or any of her
children, or if there is risk of fetal deformity.
1968
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecol-
ogists endorses the ALI model reform statute.
The American Public Health Association becomes the
first professional organization to support repeal of
criminal abortion laws.
Chronology
119
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Pope Paul VI issues Humanae Vitae (Human Life), a
papal encyclical that reaffirms the opposition of the
Roman Catholic Church to contraception and abortion.
The American Civil Liberties Union calls for repeal of
all criminal abortion laws saying they obstruct
women’s reproductive rights and freedoms.
1969
The First National Conference on Abortion Laws con-
venes in Chicago. Lawrence Lader and Lonny Myers
take this opportunity to form the National Associa-
tion for the Repeal of Abortion Laws (NARAL).
Jane, the abortion counseling service of women’s lib-
eration, provides abortions outside the law for
women in Chicago.
Attorneys Sarah Weddington and Linda Coffee ask
Norma McCorvey to be the plaintiff Jane Roe in a case
challenging the constitutionality of the nineteenth-
century criminal abortion statute in Texas.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
begins their annual report of the number of legal
abortions and the characteristics of the women who
obtain them.
1970
The Hawaiian legislature repeals its criminal abor-
tion statute, becoming the first state to legalize all
abortions in the first 20 weeks of pregnancy. New
York repeals its abortion law and permits abortion
up to 24 weeks of pregnancy, followed by Alaska.
The state of Washington repeals its law through a 
referendum.
Congress enacts the Family Planning Services and
Population Research Act, which authorizes grants to
organizations and public clinics for family planning.
The AMA extends support to doctors who perform
abortions for social and economic conditions of
women with problem pregnancies.
120
Chronology
1968
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

1971
A national poll shows that a majority of Americans
support liberalization of abortion laws.
Congress repeals most of the provisions of the 1873
Comstock Act.
1972
By this year, fourteen states have passed abortion
reform statutes modeled after the ALI conditional
reform.
The American Bar Association goes on record in favor
of legal abortion through the twentieth week of 
pregnancy.
Governor Nelson Rockefeller of New York vetoes the
state legislature’s effort to rescind the 1970 abortion
law that repealed criminal abortion.
The Report of the Commission on Population Growth
and the American Future calls for liberalizing abor-
tion laws and providing federal support for family
planning.
In Eisenstadt v. Baird (405 U.S. 438), the Supreme Court
declares that individuals have a right to privacy in
contraception regardless of marital status. The effect
is to legalize contraception completely in the United
States. Justice William Brennan says: “If the right of
privacy means anything, it is the right of the individ-
ual, married or single, to be free from unwarranted
governmental intrusion into matters so fundamen-
tally affecting a person as the decision whether to
bear or beget a child.” (453). The inclusion of “bear”
along with “beget” portends the decision in Roe the
next year.
1973
January 22. The Supreme Court rules that states may
not prohibit abortion before the third trimester in Roe
v. Wade and may not set up cumbersome procedures
in Doe v. Bolton. The ruling declares the decision
between a woman and her doctor regarding abortion
to be in the zone of privacy.
Chronology
121
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Senator James Buckley (R-NY) and six senators intro-
duce the first constitutional amendment to supersede
Roe v. Wade.
Referendums to permit abortion without condition
up to 20 weeks of pregnancy fail by large margins in
Michigan and South Dakota, a setback for the repeal
advocates.
The NRLC is formally incorporated with the express
purpose of overturning the Roe v. Wade decision. The
NRLC holds the first national right-to-life convention.
The Religious Coalition for Abortion Rights and
Catholics for a Free Choice are founded to support
the right to family planning and abortion.
1974
Pro-life activists organize the March for Life in Wash-
ington, DC, on the anniversary of Roe v. Wade. This
march becomes an annual event.
NARAL reorganizes with a new name: the National
Abortion Rights Action League.
The West German national government enacts a lib-
eral abortion law: the periodic model, which allows
women to seek abortion in the first 3 months of preg-
nancy with mandatory counseling.
1975
The Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments of
the Senate Judiciary Committee holds extensive hear-
ings on human life amendments that would reverse
Roe v. Wade. The committee votes not to report any of
the amendments to the full committee.
The National Women’s Health Network forms to pro-
mote empowerment of women in relation to repro-
ductive health.
The West German Constitutional Court rules that the
German constitution protects the unborn child at all
122
Chronology
1973
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

stages of pregnancy, which makes the 1974 liberal
reform unconstitutional. The government subse-
quently passes an indications law saying abortions
could be legal if for medical, genetic, ethical (after
rape), or social hardship.
1976
The Republican Party platform recognizes that there
is an ongoing debate on abortion but supports the
Human Life Amendment.
The Supreme Court rules that administrative regula-
tions, including a requirement for spousal consent,
unconstitutionally limit women’s privacy in making
decisions about abortion in Planned Parenthood v. Dan-
forth (428 U.S. 552).
Congress attaches the Hyde Amendment to the
health appropriations bill; the amendment limits use
of Medicaid funds to abortions that save the life of the
mother.
Laurence Lader leaves NARAL and forms Abortion
Rights Mobilization. This move allows him to set his
own agenda and not be limited by an organization he
believes is not radical enough. His campaigns include
attacks on the Catholic Church and action supporting
the legalization of RU-486.
1977
The Supreme Court rules that the state governments’
denial of Medicaid funds for abortions is legal and
constitutional in Beal v. Doe (432 U.S 438) and Maher v.
Roe (432 U.S. 464).
In Carey v. Population Services International (432 U.S.
438), the Supreme Court holds that prohibitions on
contraceptive advertisements and sales for minors are
unconstitutional.
1979
In Bellotti v. Baird (428 U.S. 132) the Supreme Court
rules 9 to 0 that states may require minors to obtain
parental consent to get an abortion as long as there is
Chronology
123
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

an alternative judicial procedure if consent is denied
or the minor does not want to seek parental consent.
Abortion performed during first 10 weeks of preg-
nancy for a woman in a state of distress, passed in
1975 as a temporary measure, becomes formal law in
France. The law requires the woman to undergo
counseling and wait a week.
The Supreme Court rules that states must set precise
standards for determining the viability of fetuses for
statutes prohibiting third trimester abortions in
Colautti v. Franklin (439 U.S. 379).
The United Nations adopts the Convention for the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women, which requires signatories to promote a
broad range of equal rights for women and men,
including access to family planning. To date, the U.S.
Senate has not ratified this treaty.
1980
The Republican Party platform endorses the Human
Life Amendment and advocates that antiabortion jus-
tices be appointed at all levels of the federal courts.
The Supreme Court rules that the federal government
may deny Medicaid funds for abortions in Harris v.
McRae (448 U.S. 297).
Joe Scheidler forms the Pro-Life Action League, an
organization devoted to direct action against abortion
clinics and other providers. In 1985 he writes a man-
ual for activists: Closed: 99 Ways to Stop Abortion.
1981
Ronald Reagan, the first president to adopt the pro-
life position on abortion, takes office. His right-to-life
essay “Abortion and the Conscience of the Nation”
appears in 1983.
The Adolescent Family Life Act requires active
involvement of religious groups in family planning
124
Chronology
1979
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

and mandates adoption over abortion and abstinence
over contraceptive education.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
issues regulations prohibiting family planning clinics
supported by federal Title X funds from providing
any information about abortion.
Justice Sandra Day O’Connor, nominated by Presi-
dent Reagan, is confirmed as the first woman justice
on the Supreme Court.
The Senate Judiciary Committee holds hearings on
the Helms Bill to prohibit abortion and on the Human
Life Amendment. Although the committee recom-
mends both be enacted, Senator Robert Packwood (R-
OR) successfully filibusters on the Senate floor until
they are withdrawn.
1983
The Human Life Amendment is debated in the full
Senate and rejected 49–50.
In City of Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health
(462 U.S. 416), the Supreme Court invalidates a city
ordinance requiring that abortions be performed in
hospitals, with parental and/or informed consent,
and after a 24-hour waiting period. The Court rules
that these administrative hurdles unduly interfere
with women’s rights to obtain abortions. Justice
O’Connor joins anti-Roe minority on the Court and
writes that Roe’s trimester framework is on a “colli-
sion course with itself.”
The National Black Women’s Health Project, dedi-
cated to informing African-American women about
all health matters including reproductive health, is
founded.
Irish voters add an antiabortion amendment to the
Irish Constitution by a two to one margin. “The state
acknowledges the right to life of the unborn, and,
Chronology
125
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

with due regard to the equal right to life of the
mother, guarantees in its laws to respect, and as far as
practicable by its laws to defend and vindicate that
right” (Article 40.3.3).
1984
Dr. Bernard Nathanson narrates a 30-minute film
entitled “The Silent Scream” purporting to show an
ultrasound of a fetus during an abortion. He directs
the viewer to see the fetus appear to cry out. The film
is shown around the country by pro-life activists.
At the United Nations (UN) Conference on Popula-
tion held in Mexico City, the Reagan administration
announces that no foreign aid funds will be given to
organizations or individuals that provide abortions,
counsel abortions, or promote legalization of abortion
anywhere in the world. This becomes known as the
Mexico City policy or the Global Gag Rule.
1985
The Reagan administration presents a brief in Thorn-
burgh v. American College of Obstetricians & Gynecolo-
gists asking the Supreme Court to overturn Roe v.
Wade.
NARAL launches “Abortion Rights, Silent No More”
in response to “The Silent Scream.”
1986
President Reagan nominates Antonin Scalia to the
Supreme Court, and he is confirmed overwhelmingly
by the Senate. Justice Scalia becomes a reliable ally for
the pro-life litigation strategy.
The Supreme Court, in a 5 to 4 decision, invalidates a
Pennsylvania law with administrative regulations in
Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians & Gyne-
cologists ( 476 U.S. 747); it rejects the request by the
Reagan administration to overturn Roe v. Wade.
NOW and other feminist organizations organize the
first national March for Women’s Lives bringing more
than 100,000 advocates of the right to choose to Wash-
ington, DC.
126
Chronology
1983
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

1987
President Reagan proposes restrictions for clinics
funded under Title X’s family planning programs,
similar to the Mexico City policy, which forbids clin-
ics from counseling clients about abortion.
The Senate holds hearings on President Reagan’s
nomination of Robert Bork to the Supreme Court.
Bork is an outspoken critic of the constitutional right
to privacy for contraception and abortion. The Senate
votes not to confirm the nomination. President Rea-
gan then nominates Anthony Kennedy, who wins
confirmation easily.
1988
Operation Rescue, organized by Randall Terry, comes
to prominence at the Democratic Convention in
Atlanta. In 1991, the group stages weeks-long protests
at an abortion clinic in Wichita, Kansas, an event that
becomes a template for pro-life direct action against
abortion practice.
The government of France approves use of RU-486,
now known as mifepristone, as a nonsurgical alterna-
tive to early abortion. U.S. activists seek to bring the
drug to the United States.
Becky Bell, age 17, dies after obtaining an illegal abor-
tion. She left her home rather than comply with the
parental notification law. Her case becomes a rallying
point for pro-choice activists seeking to limit parental
involvement laws.
The Supreme Court of Canada rules that the criminal
abortion law is unconstitutional. This ruling leaves
Canada with no national abortion regulations.
1989
In Webster v. Reproductive Health Services (492 U.S. 490)
the Supreme Court upholds (5–4) several administra-
tive hurdles, and a group of justices invite cases that
directly challenge Roe v. Wade and legal abortion.
1990
The Supreme Court rules in Ohio v. Akron Center for
Reproductive Health (497 U.S. 502) and in Hodgson v.
Chronology
127
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

State of Minnesota (497 U.S. 417) that states may
require notification of one or both parents before a
teenager may have an abortion, as long as she has the
option of a judicial bypass.
1991
After stormy hearings in the Senate Judiciary Com-
mittee regarding Anita Hill’s allegations of sexual
harassment, the Senate confirms Clarence Thomas to
replace Thurgood Marshall as the only African-Amer-
ican justice on the Supreme Court. Thomas quickly
joins the anti-Roe group on the Court.
In Rust v. Sullivan (500 U.S. 173), a 5–4 decision
upholds President George H. W. Bush’s policy called
the “gag” rule. The result is that the government can
prohibit federal funds going to family planning pro-
grams from being used to discuss, counsel, give infor-
mation about, or perform abortions.
1992
In Planned Parenthood of South Eastern Pennsylvania v.
Casey (505 U.S. 833), the Supreme Court upholds the
central holding in Roe v. Wade that a woman has lib-
erty to choose abortion before the fetus is viable, and
the state can regulate from conception. The case
establishes the undue burden standard that state reg-
ulations are acceptable unless they constitute an
obstacle to woman’s exercise of her liberty. The deci-
sion goes on to declare that requiring spousal notifi-
cation is an undue burden on women’s liberty.
After the unification of West and East Germany, the
new parliament endures a long debate to find a com-
promise between the strict West German abortion law
and the liberal East German one. The compromise
keeps abortion in the penal code but abortions will
not be prosecuted if performed in the first 12 weeks of
pregnancy after mandatory counseling and a waiting
period. In 1993, the German Federal Constitutional
Court declares this law unconstitutional asserting
that the fetus has an absolute right to life against the
actions of the pregnant woman. Abortion for medical
128
Chronology
1990
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

and eugenic reasons will not be prosecuted if rigorous
conditions are met.
1993
Immediately after taking office, President Bill Clinton
rescinds the Mexico City policy, the domestic gag rule
regarding family planning funds, and reinstates abor-
tions for military personnel in military hospitals.
Congress permits the use of fetal tissue from abor-
tions in National Institutes of Heatlh–funded research
under strict regulations.
Dr. David Gunn, a physician who practices abortion in
Georgia, Alabama, and Florida, is shot three times when
entering a clinic in Pensacola, Florida. The shooter,
Michael Griffin, serves a life sentence for the murder.
Poland’s postcommunist government enacts a restric-
tive abortion law allowing legal abortion only for
dangers to a woman’s life and health, if pregnancy is
the result of rape or incest, and for proven fetal abnor-
mality. This law wins praise from Pope John Paul II.
1994
NARAL changes its name to National Abortion and
Reproductive Rights Action League and pledges to
work to guarantee all women full reproductive choices,
not limited to abortion.
NOW’s case against Joseph Scheidler charges that he
is running a national conspiracy to blockade abortion
clinics and demands damages under the federal anti-
racketeering statute called the RICO (Racketeer Influ-
enced and Corrupt Organization) Act. The Supreme
Court rules in NOW v. Scheidler (510 U.S. 249) that vio-
lations do not have to have an economic component
to be covered under the federal statute. This ruling
sends the case back to the circuit court for rehearing
and is not finally settled until 2006.
Congress enacts the Freedom of Access to Clinic
Entrances (FACE) Act, which makes it a federal crime
Chronology
129
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

to use physical force to disrupt the business of abor-
tion clinics.
India outlaws the practice of prenatal screening for
the purpose of sex selection, but the prohibition is
rarely enforced.
The UN Conference on Population and Development
meets in Cairo, Egypt, and agrees that abortion
should not be promoted as a method of family plan-
ning. Governments are urged to increase their com-
mitment to reduce the number of unsafe abortions
and improve women’s health.
In Madsen v. Women’s Health Center (512 U.S. 753) an
appeal by antiabortion protesters in Florida, the U.S.
Supreme Court upholds as constitutional a buffer
zone around health care clinics that is intended to
protect access to the clinic.
Dr. John Britton and Lt. Col. Jim Barrett are killed in
front of a Pensacola Clinic. Two abortion clinic work-
ers, Shannon Lowney and Leanne Nichols are mur-
dered in Brookline, Massachusetts.
1995
The UN’s Fourth Conference on Women meets in Bei-
jing, China, and adopts an extensive plan of action
that defines women’s human rights to include repro-
ductive rights and choice in family planning. Pro-life
groups criticize the document as promoting abortion
as a right.
Congress reinstates the ban on abortions in military
hospitals.
1996
The South African legislature enacts the Choice in
Termination of Pregnancy Act, which permits abor-
tion without condition to the twelfth week of preg-
nancy. South Africa is the only nation in Africa that
permits abortion on a woman’s request.
130
Chronology
1994
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

President Clinton vetoes the Partial Birth Abortion
Ban Act passed by Congress because it fails to include
an exception for the mother’s health.
The FDA’s Reproductive Health Advisory Committee
recommends approval of mifepristone for use in non-
surgical abortions in the United States. However, final
approval does not happen for 4 years.
1997
Congress again passes the Partial Birth Abortion Ban
Act, and President Clinton again vetoes it because it
does not contain an exception for women’s health.
1998
In upstate New York, an antiabortion extremist assas-
sinates abortion doctor Bernard Slepian, who is
standing at a window in his house with his family
around him.
The FDA approves the first dedicated product for
emergency contraception for use in the United States.
1999
Democrats for Life forms; the mainstream Democratic
Party refuses affiliation.
2000
The FDA approves the use of mifepristone, also
known as RU-486 or the abortion pill.
The Supreme Court invalidates state bans on partial-
birth abortions in Stenberg v. Carhart (530 U.S. 914)
because the statutes are unconstitutionally vague and
do not include an exception for a woman’s health.
2001
Immediately after taking the oath of office, President
George W. Bush reinstates the Mexico City policy.
2002
Secretary of Health and Human Services Tommy
Thompson issues a regulation making fetuses eligible
for health care under the Children’s Health Insurance
Program. Pro-choice activists claim the action is a
way to establish legal personhood for the fetus.
Chronology
131
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Congress passes the Born Alive Victims Protection
Act, which requires doctors to take all possible steps
to save the lives of fetuses that survive abortions.
2003
NARAL changes its name to NARAL Pro-choice
America, pledging to educate citizens and politicians
about reproductive rights and to work to elect pro-
choice candidates to office.
NOW is denied the right to sue abortion clinic pro-
testers under federal racketeering statues in Scheidler
v. NOW (537 U.S. 393).
The state of Florida executes Paul Hill for the 1994
murders of Dr. John Britton and his escort James Bar-
rett outside an abortion clinic in Pensacola, Florida.
Connected to the Army of God, Hill claims before his
death that he has no remorse for his actions and will
meet his reward in heaven.
President Bush signs the federal Partial Birth Abor-
tion Ban Act, which places an absolute prohibition on
the procedure with no exceptions. Congress reports
its “finding” that the procedure is never necessary to
protect a woman’s health. Similar bills were passed in
1996 and 1998 and vetoed by President Clinton.
2004
Pro-choice activists organize the March for Women’s
Lives in Washington, DC, one of the largest demon-
strations in U.S. history.
President Bush signs the Unborn Victims of Violence
Act, also called “Laci and Connor’s Law,” which
makes injury to a fetus by an attack on a pregnant
woman a separate crime in federal jurisdictions.
2005
The Republican Mike Rounds, governor of South
Dakota, signs the Women’s Health and Human Life
Protection Act, which prohibits abortions except to
save the life of the mother. Some pro-life activists
hope this will be the challenge that overturns Roe v.
132
Chronology
2002
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Wade. Pro-choice activists begin campaigning to
rescind the law.
The Senate confirms John Roberts to replace William
Rehnquist as chief justice of the Supreme Court. In
early 2006, Samuel Alito takes the seat formerly held
by retiring Justice O’Connor. There is widespread
agreement that Justice Kennedy is likely to become
the “swing” vote between the pro-Roe and anti-Roe
justices.
Susan Wood, director of the Office of Women’s Health
in the FDA, resigns over the FDA’s failure to approve
over-the-counter sales of emergency contraception.
She claims the agency head is motivated by ideology
and ignores advice by science committees.
Representative Louise Slaughter (D-NY) and Senator
Harry Reid (D-NE) introduce the Prevention First Act
in Congress. The act, which is on the agenda again in
2006 and 2007, will provide funds and regulations to
promote the use of contraception and reduce the inci-
dence of unintended pregnancies.
2006
Voters approve a referendum to rescind the restrictive
criminal abortion law in South Dakota.
Congress rejects the Child Custody Protection Act,
which would make it a federal crime to accompany a
minor across state lines to avoid parental notification
requirements.
After news of fatal infections among women taking
the abortion pill, pro-life activists promote “Holly’s
Law,” which would suspend the approval of RU-486.
They claim that the FDA approval process was too
hasty, and the drug is dangerous to women.
The FDA approves the sale of emergency contracep-
tion over the counter (without prescription) to
women over 17.
Chronology
133
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

The Supreme Court rules again in Scheidler v. NOW
(04-1244) that the RICO Act does not apply to
antiabortion groups’ obstruction of clinic access,
because it would establish the precedent that civic
action by organizations could be prosecuted. This rul-
ing overturns an early ruling in 1994 that the NOW
could sue for damages under the RICO Act.
In Ayotte v. Planned Parenthood of Northern New
England, et al (546 U.S. 320), the U.S. Supreme Court
unanimously sustains its precedent that abortion
laws must protect a woman’s health and safety. The
Supreme Court asks the lower court to consider
whether the New Hampshire legislature would have
wanted this law to have a medical emergency excep-
tion. If not, the Court says the law should be struck
down in its entirety.
Representative Henry Hyde (R-IL), architect of the
Hyde Amendment, retires from Congress at the end
of the year.
President Bush vetoes an act to fund embryonic stem
cell research, based on his view that such research
kills human beings. On the same day he signs the
Fetal Farming Protection Act, which prohibits use of
tissue from embryos conceived for the purpose of
their tissues.
President Bush appoints Dr. Eric Keroack as head of
the Office of Population Affairs. Before the appoint-
ment he was director of a network of faith-based “cri-
sis pregnancy centers” that promote abstinence and
oppose birth control as demeaning to women. This
appointment produces widespread opposition
among pro-choice advocates.
2007
The parliament of Portugal votes 161–69 to legalize
abortion in the first 10 weeks of pregnancy.  The Pres-
ident signed the act; all Western European countries
except Ireland have legal abortion.
134
Chronology
2006
(cont.)
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

The Democratic Party regains the majority in the
House of Representatives and the Senate. Some pro-
choice activists launch a new campaign to repeal the
ban on funding abortions: “Hyde: 30 Years is Enough!”
Dr. Eric Keroack resigns as head of the Office of Pop-
ulation Affairs in the midst of charges of Medicaid
fraud in Massachusetts where he had operated preg-
nancy crisis centers.
The Mexico City city council legalizes abortion on
request in the first trimester of pregnancy. This law is
the first legalization in Latin America since Cuba. The
Roman Catholic Church and feminists wage compet-
ing demonstrations over the issue.
The Supreme Court rules that the Federal Partial
Birth Abortion Ban Act is constitutional in Gonzales v.
Carhart. This is the first time that the Court has
approved abortion restrictions that do not include
exceptions for women’s health.
Chronology
135
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

5
Biographical Sketches
T
he major players in the abortion debates since the 1960s are
here, along with ones from the nineteenth century (Stoner)
and early twentieth century (Sanger). Most of the individuals
portrayed through these brief biographies are still active in the
abortion conflict. But the dates after each name show that some
of the pioneers in the pro-choice and pro-life movements have
retired or are aging, and some have passed away recently. Does
this mean the movements will change? A new generation will
have to carry on the crusades. For most, the Roe v. Wade decision
will not be a personal memory but a historical fact. It remains to
be seen how abortion politics will change as a result. 
Bill Baird (1932–)
Born in Brooklyn to a family of limited means, Bill Baird is a per-
manent part of the history of reproductive law in the United
States. As a young man he went to work for a company that man-
ufactured contraceptive foam. It was the 1950s, and there were
many restrictions on the information, sale, and distribution per-
taining to birth control methods. He took his “plan van” to poor
neighborhoods in New York and gave talks and demonstrations
challenging these laws. He developed tactics to push law
enforcement to arrest him and then take his case to court and the
press. 
In the mid-1960s, Baird established a birth control clinic and
gave referrals to doctors who would perform abortions. In 1967,
after the Supreme Court decision legalizing contraceptives for
137
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

married couples, students at Boston University invited Baird to
give a talk on birth control. There he directly challenged the
Massachusetts law and was arrested. It took 5 years for his case—
Eisenstadt v. Baird—to reach the Supreme Court. The justices
ruled that states could not deny equal protection to unmarried
people in getting contraceptives and went on to declare the right
to “bear and beget” a child a fundamental right. Baird continued
his feisty stance toward restrictions on reproductive rights,
including challenging parental consent laws in Belotti v. Baird in
1979. 
Baird’s relationships with the rest of the pro-choice move-
ment have been mixed. Some admire his “shock tactics” as nec-
essary to get public attention. Others think he is too radical and
an embarrassment. He defends his role and contribution through
his business, the Pro-Choice League, and through articles and
speeches at the group’s website (www.prochoiceleague.com). 
Robert H. Bork (1927–)
Robert H. Bork has been an important figure in the abortion
debates of the last 30 years in two ways. As a legal scholar, his writ-
ings about judicial philosophy have influenced pro-life activists
and conservative judges alike. As a nominee to the Supreme Court
in 1987, he became the center of a televised debate about his views
and their relationship to the right to privacy established by Gris-
wold v. Connecticut and Roe v. Wade.
Bork earned his undergraduate and law degrees at the Uni-
versity of Chicago and served as a professor of law at Yale Uni-
versity. In the 1970s, he was solicitor general of the United States
and was appointed to the U.S. Circuit Court in Washington, DC,
in 1982. To Bork, the U.S. Constitution should be read as the
framers intended, in other words strictly and with its original
meaning. He is sharply critical of the Supreme Court’s rulings
that the Constitution ensures a right to privacy when there is no
mention of that right in the text. In Bork’s view, such rulings by
unelected officials undermine democracy; judges should adjudi-
cate and “not legislate from the bench,” a phrase that has become
a code word for judges who support abortion rights. 
During the 1987 confirmation hearings, Bork took the oppor-
tunity to describe his philosophy fully, which opened him to stren-
138
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

uous opposition, even attacks from some senators. In the end, his
nomination was rejected by 58 to 42 votes. The experience led to
the coining of the term “to bork,” which means to defeat judicial
appointees through an attack on character, philosophy, and history
rather than their qualifications and experience. As a result, nomi-
nees have avoided being “borked” by remaining silent on any con-
tentious issue, especially the status of Roe v. Wade.
Bork has continued to write about his views, including
Slouching Toward Gomorrah: Modern Liberalism and American
Decline in 1996. This book reflects the pro-life belief that the social
movements of the 1960s and 1970s, especially feminism and sex-
ual liberation, have undermined American culture and even
Western Civilization.
John Bayard Britton (1925–1994)
Dr. John Britton was 69 when Paul Hill made him what the New
York Times called “an uncertain martyr.” After graduating from the
University of Virginia Medical School in 1949, he became a family
care physician in Fernandina Beach, Florida. By all accounts his
medical career was a bit rocky as he got in trouble with the med-
ical establishment from time to time. His patients saw him as com-
passionate as well as a bit eccentric. 
He was not a model pro-choice physician, therefore, when
he volunteered at a Pensacola abortion clinic to replace Dr. David
Gunn, who had been killed by an antiabortion protester. Britton
seemed to be ambivalent about abortion and would turn away
women so they could think about their decisions. Nevertheless,
he stated that women should be able to have legal abortions and
defied the abortion protesters and the danger they posed. Some
reported that perhaps Britton took on the risky abortion job
because he needed the money. In any event he put on his ill-fit-
ting bullet-proof vest and flew to the job once a week. 
On July 29, 1994, Paul Hill, with a newly purchased shotgun,
waited for Britton’s arrival with his escort, James Barrett, and
June Barrett, the escort’s wife. He shot Dr. Britton in the head and
killed him, killed Barrett, and wounded Barrett’s wife. Extremist
pro-life groups praised the killing, but most organizations dis-
tanced themselves from the growing violence in the 1990s against
doctors working in abortion clinics. 
Biographical Sketches
139
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Judie Brown (1944–)
Judie Brown has devoted nearly 40 years to the pro-life move-
ment. In 1969, with her husband, Paul Brown, she passed out lit-
erature opposing a liberal abortion law up for referendum in the
state of Washington. In 1976, as a member of Ohio’s Right to Life
Committee, she moved her activism to the national stage, first
participating in the 1976 March for Life and later on the staff of
the National Right to Life Committee (NRLC). While there she
used direct mail to increase the membership of the organization
but parted with the leadership when she discovered that devel-
oping grassroots membership was not a high priority for the
NRLC.
In 1979 she formed a new organization—the American Life
League—which claims to have hundreds of thousands of mem-
bers nationwide. Brown wanted an organization that would
work to overcome what she saw as an anti-life ethic. She adheres
closely to the position of the Roman Catholic Church and
opposes abortion, modern contraception, stem cell research, and
euthanasia. Brown uses the American Life League website as a
forum for commentary on issues of interest, including promotion
of a Right to Life Act that would give legal personhood to
embryos and fetuses. She proposes a complete ban on all abor-
tions with no exceptions declaring that medical opinion shows
that abortion is never needed to save a woman’s life. 
Mary Steichen Calderone
(1904–1998)
Dr. Mary Calderone was to the study of human sexuality what
Margaret Sanger was to birth control—the one who nearly single-
handedly changed the nation’s approach to the topic. Her early
life didn’t suggest that she would have such an influence one day.
The daughter of the noted photographer Edward Steichen, Mary
frittered away her days at Vassar and eventually left in the early
1920s to become an actress. Fifteen years later, much changed by
life, she graduated from medical school, a divorced mother chal-
lenging a male-dominated field. She married again in 1941 and
spent her career in school and public health positions. 
140
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

In 1953 Calderone was offered the position of medical direc-
tor at Planned Parenthood; one of her first activities was to spon-
sor a 1955 conference that publicly discussed the question of
reform of criminal abortion laws for the first time. Although she
had a role in forming the reform movement, Calderone left
Planned Parenthood at the age of 60 to form a new organization
to focus on sexuality and sex education: the Sex Information and
Education Council of the United States (SIECUS). There she pro-
moted sex education that was frank, nonjudgmental, and com-
prehensive. She believed women had the right to express love,
especially in marriage, without the fear of unwanted pregnancy.
Calderone supported legal abortion but preferred to focus on
preventing pregnancy. SIECUS has had a role in developing the
idea that sexuality is a positive force and that sex education
should not enforce any particular standard. With these views,
both Calderone and SIECUS provoked strenuous opposition
from pro-life activists. 
Gloria Feldt (1942–)
Gloria Feldt served as president of the Planned Parenthood Fed-
eration of America (PPFA) for nine years. Feldt brought a strong
feminist perspective to her leadership as well as a commitment to
engaging pro-life adversaries in political and policy arenas. A
native of Texas, Feldt had gotten pregnant and married at the age
of 15 and moved to Odessa where her husband found work. By
the age of twenty she had three children; she connects her situa-
tion in those days directly to the lack of education and access to
effective contraception. Availability of the birth control pill in
1962 made it possible for her to start college. It took her 12 years
to graduate.
Feldt started with Planned Parenthood in 1974 as a regional
executive director, then moved to Arizona, eventually becoming
national president in 1996. Her ambitious agenda included revi-
talizing the local affiliates and their services and developing a
25-year plan for PPFA. She is best known for her leadership in
promoting family planning as a human right and contraception
as a necessity for women not an option. She also became head of
the Planned Parenthood Political Action Committee and
worked to support pro-choice candidates. Feldt helped promote
Biographical Sketches
141
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

contraceptive equity policies in state legislatures. She was an
organizing leader of the 2004 March for Women’s Lives and
helped draft the Prevention First Act—not yet passed—to estab-
lish a federal policy for preventing unwanted pregnancies.
Active in international networks, Feldt was part of the U.S. dele-
gation to the Cairo Plus Five meeting in 1999, a follow-up to the
United Nations 1994 Population and Development Conference.
She resigned as PPFA president in January 2006. She is author of
two books: Behind Every Choice is a Story (2003) and The War on
Choice: The Right-wing Attack on Women’s Rights and How to Fight
Back (2004). 
Sherri Chessen Finkbine (1930–)
In 1962, Sherri Finkbine was 29 years old, married, the mother of
four children, hostess of the local children’s TV show Romper
Room, and pregnant with her fifth child. She was devastated to
learn that during her pregnancy she had taken pills containing
thalidomide, a tranquilizer, which her husband Bob brought from
Europe. The Finkbines had read the news stories that linked the
drug to serious fetal deformity, and they were afraid their child
would be a victim. Their doctor arranged with the local hospital
for a therapeutic abortion based on the threat of the pregnancy to
Sherri’s mental health. However, hospital officials worried that
publicity surrounding the case would invite prosecution and
denied the procedure. The Finkbines eventually traveled to Swe-
den and requested an abortion under its conditional law. Sherri
had to see a psychiatrist and receive permission from the Royal
Medical Board. Finally approved, the abortion went forward. 
The press followed the story from Arizona all the way to
Sweden. The Vatican denounced the whole thing as a crime, and
Sherri lost her job at the TV station, but the Finkbines’ ordeal had
a major effect on the public’s view of abortion in the United States.
People began to see the kind of personal problems that can give
rise to the termination of a pregnancy. This view replaced the tra-
ditional image of abortion as a matter of criminal prosecution of
doctors. With this story, the tide began to turn in the effort to gain
a hearing on criminal abortion laws and provided the public sup-
port needed to mobilize the pro-choice movement. 
The Finkbines had two more children but divorced in 1974.
In 1991, Sherri married a physician who had practiced at the
142
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Phoenix hospital that had denied her abortion. In 1992, HBO pro-
duced a film about the case called A Private Matter.
Wanda Franz (1944?–)
Wanda Franz became president of the nation’s largest pro-life
organization, the National Right to Life Committee (NRLC) in
1991. In her position she presents the pro-life perspective on top-
ics of the day through the NRLC website, in speeches, and on
radio and television. Franz holds a PhD in developmental psy-
chology and spent her career on the faculty of West Virginia Uni-
versity, teaching and writing articles and books on child
development. She became active in the early days of the pro-life
movement and was president of the West Virginia Right to Life
committee for fifteen years.
Franz served in the Reagan and George H. W. Bush admin-
istrations as consultant to the Office of Population Affairs from
1983 to 1991 and as an expert adviser on adolescent sex educa-
tion. She wrote the introduction to Ronald Reagan’s book Abor-
tion & the Conscience of the Nation. After becoming president of
NRLC she played a prominent role at the United Nations Cairo
Conference on Population and Development in 1994. She is now
an emeritus professor at West Virginia University, having retired
in 2003.
Kim Gandy (1954–)
Kim Gandy has been president of the National Organization for
Women (NOW) since 2001, having been reelected to a second
term in 2005. But she has been at the center of the abortion
debates on Capitol Hill for nearly twenty years. Born and edu-
cated in Louisiana, she received her bachelor’s degree in mathe-
matics from Louisiana Tech and joined NOW in 1973. Her first
successful campaign was to overturn Louisiana’s marital prop-
erty law, which gave complete control over a couple’s property to
the husband. Law school followed, and she soon was working
her way up the NOW hierarchy.
As executive vice president in charge of legislation and liti-
gation, Gandy was a key figure in all the pro-choice campaigns of
the 1990s, including the battle against the partial-birth abortion
Biographical Sketches
143
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

ban. She took the lead in NOW’s suit against abortion protesters
(NOW v. Scheidler) and served on the committee that drafted the
Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act. As NOW’s president,
she chairs the NOW Foundation and the NOW political action
committee, which publishes a list of pro-choice candidates in each
election. She is also the chief spokesperson for NOW and typically
takes a spirited and firm feminist position on the issues of the day,
such as access to emergency contraception, appointments to the
Supreme Court, the South Dakota abortion ban, and partial-birth
abortion litigation.
Alan Guttmacher (1898–1974)
During his residency, after graduating from Johns Hopkins Med-
ical School, Alan Guttmacher had a life-changing experience
when he came face to face with dying women who had had ille-
gal abortions. He embarked on a distinguished career as an
obstetrician, including serving as chief of obstetrics at Sinai Hos-
pital in Baltimore, Maryland, but he never stopped working to
increase women’s information and options for family planning.
He became active in the American Birth Control League, the fore-
runner of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America (PPFA).
At a PPFA meeting in 1942, he made one of the first calls for the
liberalization of abortion laws. 
At first, Guttmacher’s proposals involved a limited exten-
sion of the criminal laws to allow therapeutic abortions when
women’s health was at risk. Then, as the debate developed and
more groups got involved, he favored increasing the number of
grounds for legal abortions. In his 1959 book, Babies by Choice or
Chance, Guttmacher called for more liberal and uniform abortion
laws across the country, but he also noted that reform would take
place only when there was citizen support. He was present at the
1959 American Law Institute meeting that proposed reform to
include health, fetal deformity, and rape and incest conditions
and became national president of Planned Parenthood in 1962. In
1964, he founded the Association for the Study of Abortion,
which began to publicize the issue, and he made it clear that he
opposed abortion on demand. 
Guttmacher lived to see the legalization of both contracep-
tion and abortion. In the end, he called the decision in Roe v. Wade
“wise and courageous.” While he was president, PPFA began to
144
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

develop an institute to do research on family planning and edu-
cate the public. As a memorial, the institute was named after
Guttmacher; it remains a major source of information about sex-
ual and reproduction health issues.
Martin Haskell (1946–)
Dr. Martin Haskell, a physician from Cincinnati, Ohio, operates
three abortion clinics. He is well aware of the difficulties of termi-
nating pregnancies that have advanced to the second trimester.
Until the late 1980s, the only procedures available for such abor-
tions required up to three days in the hospital. He was willing to
perform them but was frustrated as more and more hospitals
turned patients and their doctors away. In his effort to respond to
the needs of his patients, he developed a procedure he called
intact dilation and extraction (or evacuation), also called intact
D&E or D&X, which did not require a hospital stay.
In 1992, he presented a paper describing the procedure at a
risk-management seminar sponsored by the National Abortion
Federation, the association of abortion providers. He was likely
unaware of the storm of pro-life activism the paper would pro-
voke. When printed and in circulation, the paper soon came to the
attention of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops and the
National Right to Life Committee (NRLC). Its graphic description
of the procedure in which the fetus is killed while in the birth
canal seemed to these pro-life groups to be something different
from an abortion. The committee commissioned a set of drawings,
which are still available on its website, to show that this proce-
dure killed a child outside the womb, in the process of being born.
The NRLC labeled the procedure “partial-birth abortion” and
Representative Charles Canady (R-FL) introduced a bill banning
the procedure in Congress in 1995. 
Harrison Hickman (1953–)
Harrison Hickman, a pollster and consultant to Democratic can-
didates and NARAL, was born, raised, and educated in North
Carolina, received an M.A. from the University of Nebraska, and
studied statistics at the University of Michigan. In the 1980s,
Hickman developed a successful strategy for defeating pro-life
Biographical Sketches
145
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

proposals in conservative southern states. In his own politics he
combined support for Democratic issues such as civil rights and
equality with a strong attachment to personal autonomy and a
respect for the deeply held anti-government beliefs of the con-
servative South. 
In 1984, he was called upon to work with pro-choice groups
facing an antiabortion constitutional amendment campaign in
Arkansas. Personally he opposed abortion but at the same time
believed it should be legal because of his belief in individual
rights. At the start, the polls showed strong support for the
antiabortion amendment as well as negligible acceptance for
legal abortion for reasons of women’s rights, sexual freedom, or
freedom of religion. For the Arkansas campaign he devised a
strategy that would link the opposition to the proposed amend-
ment with the widespread antigovernment beliefs of the voters.
Government rules limiting access to abortion were linked to gov-
ernment intrusion in the family, as well as to gun control and
busing. The committee leading the pro-choice campaign was
renamed the “Stop Big Government” committee. The strategy
turned the outcome around when the amendment lost by a tiny
margin. In Bearing Right, William Saletan offers this strategy as a
way for abortion rights activists to counter the strength of pro-
life action frames in abortion debates.
Paul T. Hill (1954–2003)
In 2003, the state of Florida executed Paul Hill by lethal injection
for the killing of Dr. John Britton and James Barrett outside a Pen-
sacola abortion clinic in 1994. Hill went to his death without
remorse for his action. He had long believed and professed that
killing those who perform abortions is a just way to defend the
unborn, just like defending one’s own children. He expected to
receive God’s reward in heaven, he said in his posthumous man-
ifesto “Mix My Blood with the Blood of the Unborn.”
Hill was born in Miami and found religion after a somewhat
misspent youth. He became a Presbyterian minister and had a
congregation in South Carolina. Becoming increasingly active in
antiabortion activism, he left his ministry; some report he was
excommunicated for his radical views while others say he left vol-
untarily because of what he considered the meek position of his
church on the abortion issue. He was in touch with the militant
146
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Army of God; eventually he moved to Pensacola where he
founded his own small militant group, Defensive Action, and
became a fixture outside the Ladies Center. When Michael Griffin
shot clinic physician Dr. David Gunn, Hill defended the killing as
justified and appeared on any TV show that would have him to
state his case. 
When Dr. Britton replaced Dr. Gunn at the clinic, Hill pur-
chased a shotgun and waited for him to arrive, shooting the doc-
tor and his escort, James Barrett, and wounding Barrett’s wife.
He put down the gun and walked away and was arrested within
minutes. Although there were some court challenges to Hill’s
death sentence, he seemed to welcome it and looked forward to
being a martyr. Before he died he established a website to present
his story and to make the case for his place in heaven, but main-
stream pro-life organizations and activists have distanced them-
selves from Hill and have rejected his methods.
Henry Hyde (1924–)
Among the pro-life advocates in Congress, Henry J. Hyde,
Republican Representative from Illinois, will no doubt be the
most remembered. Shortly after he was elected to the House in
1974, Hyde sponsored an amendment to an appropriations bill to
deny the use of federal Medicaid funds to finance abortions for
poor women except when necessary to save their lives. The
amendment passed with little debate that first year and has been
reauthorized in Congress ever since. Called the Hyde Amend-
ment, it has withstood lobbying, appeals to public opinion, and
litigation from pro-choice organizations challenging the constitu-
tionality of the ban on federal funds for abortion. 
Hyde was born into an Irish-Catholic family and attended
Catholic schools, including Georgetown and Loyola, where he
earned his law degree. He left the Democratic Party in the 1950s
because it was too liberal and joined the Republicans. After the
success of the Hyde Amendment, he became a major spokesper-
son for the pro-life position as the party made opposition to abor-
tion an integral part of its platform and voted to support the
Human Life Amendment. In 1981, Hyde sponsored the Human
Life Bill authored by Senator Jesse Helms (R-SC) in the House of
Representatives, which would have codified his belief that human
life begins at conception. This proposal, in line with Roman
Biographical Sketches
147
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Catholic doctrine, demonstrated his views that religious values
should be an integral part of policy debates, especially with respect
to abortion. Hyde retired from the House of Representatives in
2006 and remains a sought-after speaker among pro-life groups. 
Frances Kissling (1943–)
Frances Kissling was raised a Catholic, attended Catholic
schools, and even spent six months in a convent. Nevertheless,
she grew up to be not only one of the most provocative critics of
the Roman Catholic Church but also one committed to provok-
ing a rebellion from the inside. From her position as president of
Catholics for a Free Choice (CFFC), she campaigns to overturn
the church’s staunch pro-life doctrine. To Kissling, the church’s
opposition to abortion is an effort to maintain control over
women. If they really cared about the unborn, she argues, they
would do more to prevent abortions by supporting contraception
to prevent unwanted pregnancies. Let women be free moral
agents, she asks.
Kissling participated in social activism in the 1960s, which led
to working in abortion clinics in the 1970s. She was a cofounder of
the National Abortion Federation, and served as its director until
1980. In 1982 she became president of CFFC. She has close ties with
several pro-choice groups, such as the Alan Guttmacher Institute,
the Sex Information and Education Council of the United States,
and the International Women’s Health Coalition. Her activism has
won her many allies, but she remains extremely controversial.
Syndicated columnist Ellen Goodman has called her the thought-
ful and eloquent “philosopher of the pro-choice movement,”
whereas George Neumayr of the American Spectator called her a
“repulsive heretic.” Kissling retired as President of CFFC on March
1, 2007, and then became a fellow at the Radcliffe Institute for
Advanced Studies at Harvard University. 
Lawrence Lader (1919–2006)
Lawrence Lader was born in New York City and graduated from
Harvard University. After service in the army in World War II, he
began a career as a writer, first as a foreign correspondent and
148
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

later as a freelancer for popular magazines. When he decided to
write his first book, he chose to write a biography of Margaret
Sanger, the pioneer for birth control. From interviews with her,
he became convinced that it was important for women to have
control over their childbearing; without it they could not lead
independent lives. Sanger told him about the effects of illegal
abortions on women’s health, and he realized there was little
information on the subject. His 1966 book Abortion began: “Abor-
tion is the dread secret of our society.”
The book came out one year after the Griswold v. Connecticut
case that established legal contraception for married couples as a
protected right to privacy. Lader advocated for laws that would
make the decision to have an abortion another right of privacy.
He joined with Betty Friedan and Bernard Nathanson to start
NARAL to campaign for law repeal and succeeded when New
York eliminated abortion restrictions in 1970. Friedan named him
the “father of the abortion rights movement,” and Justice Harry
Blackmun cited Lader’s book nine times in Roe v. Wade.
In 1976, Lader left NARAL to form Abortion Rights Mobi-
lization and concentrated his attacks on the Roman Catholic
Church, at one point suing unsuccessfully to remove its tax-
exempt status because of its pro-life political activities. He also
sponsored the development of RU-486 in the United States and
was named “feminist of the year” by the Feminist Majority for
his leadership in getting the abortion pill into the U.S. 
Ellen McCormack (1926–)
Ellen McCormack ran for the Democratic Party’s presidential
nomination in 1976 on a single issue: support for a Human Life
Amendment. A Roman Catholic mother of four, she was a leader
of New York right-to-life activists when she entered primaries in
twenty states. As a result of support from her organization, she
became the first woman to qualify for federal matching cam-
paign funds under newly passed reform guidelines. In 1980, she
opposed Ronald Reagan in the general election as the candidate
of the New York–based Right to Life Party, receiving 32,327 votes
in three states. Her entry into the primaries in 1976 brought pub-
licity to the pro-life movement and warned the other candidates
that opposition to legal abortion was becoming an electoral issue. 
Biographical Sketches
149
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Norma McCorvey (1947–)
In 1969, Norma McCorvey was living in Texas and pregnant with
her third child. She was poor, unemployed, and had only a tenth-
grade education; both her children had been adopted by others.
She wanted an abortion but could not afford to travel to Califor-
nia where it was legal. So she told the doctor that she had been
raped because someone suggested this might persuade the doc-
tor. When rejected for the procedure, she eventually came in con-
tact with attorneys Sarah Weddington and Linda Coffee, who
were looking for a plaintiff in their challenge to the constitution-
ality of Texas’s restrictive law. Thus, McCorvey became Jane Roe
against Henry Wade, District Attorney of Dallas County. The
lawyers protected her anonymity, but did not help her get the
abortion she had wanted. After she gave birth, she put her third
child up for adoption.
In 1980, McCorvey identified herself as the Roe of Roe v.
Wade. She became involved in the pro-choice movement and
eventually worked for an abortion clinic. Her 1994 book I Am Roe
detailed her version of the case. In 1995 she was attracted to the
work of Operation Rescue and became part of the pro-life move-
ment, converting to Catholicism in 1998. Her second book, Won
by Love, tells the story of her conversion. She petitioned the
Supreme Court to overturn the 1973 ruling, claiming that it was
harmful to women; her petition was denied. McCorvey’s sup-
porters charge that she was a pawn for the feminist lawyers and
the pro-choice movement lawyers in their campaign to legalize
abortion.
Paul Marx (1920?–)
Father Paul Marx was one of seventeen children born to a strict
Catholic family in Minnesota. He found his calling to the priest-
hood and became a Benedictine monk in 1947. With the rise of
debate about population, birth control, and abortion, he began to
speak out on the topic guided by Roman Catholic doctrine. To
promote his work he organized pro-life institutes in several states
even before the pro-life movement got underway in the 1970s.
Seeing his message as important to the world, he formed Human
Life International (HLI), located near Washington, DC, in 1980.
From this base he embarked on a worldwide mission to promote
150
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

natural family planning and other aspects of Catholic perspective
through traveling, speaking, and working with national pro-life
organizations. HLI was especially active in opposing efforts to
establish family planning and legal abortion in Latin America.
With the blessing of Pope John Paul II, Marx’s message was
that modern artificial contraception led to the destruction of
nations. To Marx, contraception is not only an abortifacient, but it
also leads to massive increases in abortion and decreases in
birthrates. There is a decline in marriage as well as increases 
in single-parent families, abusive sex, venereal disease, and
euthanasia. Fertility declines and populations begin to decline,
which spells collapse. Marx challenged anyone to show him a
nation where widespread use of contraception and legal abortion
had not resulted in a decline in family morality. He instructed his
audiences in means of natural family planning, which he claimed
brought families together and did not lead to infidelity and
promiscuous sex. Marx wrote of his work in Faithful for Life and
The Death Peddlers, which are available from Human Life Interna-
tional. He retired in 1999 and returned to his abbey in Minnesota. 
Kate Michelman (1942–)
Kate Michelman served as president of NARAL for 20 years
(1985–2004), and her tenure left a major imprint on the abortion
debates. At one point Washingtonian Magazine named her as one
of the 100 most powerful women in Washington. She has been a
tireless spokesperson for the pro-choice ideal that women retain
a constitutional right to choose abortion and that the pro-life plat-
form must be defeated. Michelman has been an adviser to many
high-level politicians including, notably, Bill Clinton and Hilary
Rodham Clinton.
From her post at NARAL, she led the pro-choice movement
organizations through many ups and downs. When she took the
position, the movement had been pushed to a defensive position,
struggling to protect legal abortion itself because of erosion of
support in the Supreme Court. She stepped into the fray leading
the successful campaign to reject Robert Bork’s Supreme Court
nomination and testifying against Clarence Thomas as well. She
campaigned vigorously for Bill Clinton and brought resources of
NARAL to support his removal of the Mexico City policy and the
veto of bans on partial-birth abortion. 
Biographical Sketches
151
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

She has long given credit for her vigorous stamina in the
pro-choice cause to her own life. Her husband abandoned her
and her three young daughters in the late 1960s. Left with little
support, she found out shortly after her husband left that she was
pregnant. The pregnancy nearly drove her to suicide, and she
qualified for a therapeutic abortion under pre-Roe policies. The
memory of the humiliation and powerlessness she felt when she
had to get approval from an all-male hospital committee and the
husband who deserted her never left and sustained her activism.
She remains a prominent spokesperson for abortion rights. 
Bernard Nathanson (1926–)
Dr. Bernard Nathanson has become famous in the abortion
debates because he completely changed his views from proabor-
tion to antiabortion. As an obstetrics/gynecology physician, he
joined Lawrence Lader and feminist Betty Friedan, among oth-
ers, to found NARAL in the late 1960s and served as chair of its
medical committee. In 1971, soon after New York legalized abor-
tion, he opened a large abortion clinic, which performed thou-
sands of abortions for New York women as well as women from
out of state.
In the mid-1970s the use of ultrasound technology allowed
Nathanson to study what he called “fetology,” and he came to
believe abortion was a form of infanticide. He told the story of his
change of heart in Aborting America, which was published in
1979. Nathanson claimed that, as an insider, he knew the pro-
choice movement was built on lies, fabricated statistics, and cyn-
ical slogans. He confessed his past as a thoughtless abortionist,
including aborting his own child.
Nathanson came to national prominence with the produc-
tion and distribution of his film, The Silent Scream, in 1984. It
showed the ultrasound of an abortion and its effects on the fetus;
Nathanson’s narration was designed to show that abortion was a
form of infanticide. His next film, The Edge of Reason, contained a
similar graphic portrayal of late-term abortion. The films became
controversial; Planned Parenthood charged that Nathanson’s
films were based on ideology, not on medical science. Neverthe-
less, Nathanson continues to be a prominent pro-life speaker,
describing his confession and conversion to the cause of the
152
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

unborn. In 1996, he completed his conversion and became a
Roman Catholic; he wrote about this change in Hand of God.
Margaret Sanger (1879–1966)
Margaret Sanger is famous today as the founder of the birth con-
trol movement in America. Her 1938 autobiography tells the
story of her awakening to the plight of desperate poor women
who were enslaved by repeated pregnancies. Trained as a nurse,
Sanger worked among the immigrant families in New York City
slums in the early twentieth century, attending more than one
woman who was dying from an attempt at self-abortion. She
vowed to arm women with knowledge about contraception but
soon ran afoul of the federal prohibitions in the Comstock Act of
1873. She had to flee the country at one point and was eventually
jailed.
Sanger founded the American Birth Control League, which
became the Planned Parenthood Federation of America. She also
led the campaign to legalize contraception; her most significant
victory in that regard was the 1936 federal court decision in the
U.S. v. One Package case, which allowed doctors to receive con-
traception for medical uses. She lived just long enough to see the
complete legalization of contraception in the states in 1965. 
Although Sanger made conflicting statements on the subject
of abortion, it is clear that she focused on birth control as a way
to prevent the serious risks of illegal abortion. Yet she also under-
stood the women’s desire for the procedure when contraception
failed. Sanger remains a symbolic and controversial figure in the
abortion debate. Pro-life advocates accuse her of being an atheist
who advocated racial purity through her association with the
eugenics movement and an advocate of abortion as a means of
birth control. Pro-choice feminists consider her a pioneer for
women’s rights to self-determination and a feminist who liber-
ated women’s sexuality. 
Joseph M. Scheidler (1927–)
Joseph Scheidler is the national director of the Pro-Life Action
League (PLAL) and the defendant in the National Organization
Biographical Sketches
153
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

for Women’s (NOW) case against obstruction of abortion clinics.
Scheidler is a strong Catholic; he studied for the priesthood for a
time, then married and had seven children. As a strong conserv-
ative Catholic he has always opposed abortion. Like other
Catholics, the decision that the fetus was not a person in Roe v.
Wade stunned him and pushed him to work full time to prevent
abortions. He organized PLAL and developed a strategy for
direct action against clinics. His goal was to try to reduce the
number of abortions and, as he has stated, save lives. He outlined
his methods in Closed: 99 Ways to Stop Abortion. Patrick Buchanan
has called him the “green beret of the pro-life movement.” 
In the 1980s and 1990s, Scheidler traveled extensively, taking
his message of saving lives directly to abortion clinics or “abor-
tion mills” as he calls them. To him, abortion is always immoral,
never permitted—it’s simple. Every woman who can be per-
suaded not to go ahead with a termination is another life saved,
and Scheidler is proficient in sidewalk counseling. NOW claims
that his tactics include violence and intimidation and are illegal.
The feminists have engaged Scheidler in a 12-year court battle
over his activism. They claimed that the nationwide campaign
against abortion clinics and their clients constituted a violation of
the federal anti-racketeering statute. Both sides had temporary
victories, but Scheidler won the war when the Supreme Court
ruled that this racketeering statute only applied to economic
racketeering and not to civil action and protest.
Patricia Schroeder (1940–)
For more nearly 25 years, from 1973 to 1997, Representative
Patricia Schroeder (D-CO) was a reliable ally in Congress for
feminists and the pro-choice movement. She graduated with
honors from the University of Minnesota and Harvard Law
School when quotas limiting the number of women students
were still in place. She moved with her husband to Denver, Col-
orado, and worked for the National Labor Relations Board and
Planned Parenthood. She ran for Congress and became one of
only sixteen women (out of 435 members) in 1973. She joined
Congress at a time when the women’s rights movement was in
ascendance, bringing a full equality agenda to Congress. The
women’s rights movement found a courageous advocate in
Schroeder who, as she built her seniority and status, brought
154
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

their message to the committees and the debating floor. She led
the Congressional Caucus for Women’s Issues from 1979 to 1995.
Schroeder ran for president in 1988, but withdrew from the
race after facing strong opposition to her candidacy. She retained
her passionate commitment to women’s rights, especially the
right to self-determination with respect to pregnancy and child-
bearing. She advocated a comprehensive policy approach to
women’s reproductive health. Her legislative successes include
sponsorship of the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act and
the Violence Against Women Act. When the partial-birth abortion
issue swept through the Congress, she battled against the tide by
charging that the ban was just a smoke screen for the real pro-life
goal—the criminalization of all abortion procedures. Schroeder
retired from Congress at the end of 1996 and became president of
the American Publishers Association. 
Eleanor Smeal (1939–)
A graduate of Duke University and the University of Florida,
Eleanor Smeal has become one of the most important feminist
activists in the United States. She served as president of the
National Organization for Women (NOW) from 1977 to 1982 and
1985 to 1987. During these years she led the finally unsuccessful
campaign for ratification of the equal rights amendment and
then turned to the goal of defending Roe v. Wade and access to
legal abortion for American women. She organized and led the
first National March for Women’s Lives in 1986 and developed
the legal strategy to counter Operation Rescue and clinic violence
of the late 1980s and early 1990s. After leaving the presidency of
NOW, Smeal founded the Feminist Majority Foundation (FMF).
Her goal in organizing FMF was to empower women to act
politically in their own interests. The issue of reproductive rights
is a major focus. In 1989 she produced two videos—Abortion for
Survival and Abortion Denied: Shattering Women’s Lives—to raise
awareness of the effects of punitive and restrictive abortion laws
in the United States. as well as other countries. Smeal used the
organization’s resources to lead the successful campaign for the
Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act, which makes it a fed-
eral crime to use physical force to obstruct access to abortion clin-
ics. She also waged the 12-year campaign for approval of
mifepristone (RU-486), the “abortion pill.”
Biographical Sketches
155
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Christopher Smith (1953–)
Representative Christopher Smith (R-NJ) heads the bipartisan
Pro-life Caucus in the House of Representatives where he has
represented New Jersey since 1981. His view on the issue is
absolute: to him all abortion is murder; there are no exceptions
for health, rape, incest, or fetal deformity. Smith also considers
abortion a threat to women whose lives are destroyed by their
experiences in what he calls “torture and killing centers.” He has
led the pro-life legislative agenda against abortions in military
hospitals, in favor of the Mexico City gag rules, and to ban par-
tial-birth abortions. He even successfully derailed a bipartisan
bankruptcy reform bill over language that prohibited clinic pro-
testers from using bankruptcy to avoid paying damages awarded
in court judgments (as Randall Terry had done in 1998). He is the
architect of the Unborn Child Pain Awareness Act.
The abortion issue shaped his early political career. In 1976,
he ran as a Democrat while serving as executive director of the
New Jersey Right to Life Committee. But he soon switched to the
Republican Party when the Democrats supported Roe v. Wade. He
takes a moral stand on most policy issues and is prominent in
promoting human rights issues. Although he has a perfect pro-
life voting record, he does not always toe the line on other issues
associated with the right wing of the Republican Party. In this
way he has formed alliances with feminists to curb sex traffick-
ing and pornography. When Republicans nationwide were being
defeated in the 2006 elections, Smith won his with 66 percent of
the vote.
Ann E. W. Stone (1952–)
Ann Stone got involved in Republican Party politics in the 1970s
through her association with Richard Viguerie and others who
were trying to build Republicans into a majority party. The abor-
tion issue became divisive after the pro-life Republicans achieved
dominance in party organization and elections, beginning with
the election of Ronald Reagan in 1980. The party faced the loss of
many moderates and other Republicans that supported legal
abortion. To counter that, the leadership encouraged the forma-
tion of groups within the party that would give an organizational
presence for both pro-life and pro-choice views.
156
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

In 1990, Stone organized Republicans for Choice, which has
consistently opposed strong pro-life planks in the party’s plat-
forms. She uses the organization and its website as a forum for
criticizing the party leaders’ unwillingness to allow a place for
pro-choice politicians and policies. Stone links the right to privacy
in abortion to other issues of limited government that appeal to
Republican voters. At the same time, she urges pro-choice voters
not to assume that a candidate’s party is a way to determine his
or her position on women’s right to privacy. Some Democrats are
anti-choice, she argues, and some moderate Republicans favor
Roe v. Wade. To Stone, the party would be better off if it were not
identified with the pro-life movement because most voters are
interested in other issues. 
Ann Stone continues to work in the direct-mail business and
serves as a founding board member and vice president of the
National Women’s History Museum organization. 
Horatio Robinson Storer (1830–1922)
Dr. Horatio Storer, a native of Boston, Massachusetts, attended
Harvard College and earned his medical degree at Harvard Med-
ical School. He opened a practice in 1855 in the relatively new
field of gynecology and only 2 years later launched a campaign
among physicians to criminalize abortion. He worked on two
fronts: he built a network of physicians in other states, and he
worked to gain support of the Massachusetts medical associa-
tions. Both tactics were successful; he convinced the American
Medical Association (AMA) to endorse his campaign. 
The AMA appointed a committee to make a recommenda-
tion on the issue, and Storer drafted the report. He noted the
rapidly increasing incidence of abortion and linked it to a dan-
gerous demoralization of American society. He blamed the prob-
lem on unscrupulous people seeking to benefit from the demand
for abortion and to the ignorance, mainly of women, that abor-
tions end human lives. In 1859, the AMA adopted Storer’s report
and resolved to work to make abortion a crime in every state
except to save the life of the mother. Storer saw his goal achieved
fully by 1900. 
Although he is not famous anymore, Storer is a controversial
figure in abortion and women’s health circles. The pro-life advo-
cates see him as the grandfather of their movement and the man
Biographical Sketches
157
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

who saved women from exploitation by quack abortionists. The
National Right to Life Committee named its foundation after
him. Pro-choice feminists have uncovered his contributions to
establishing male-dominated medical treatment of women and
have exposed his theory that women’s emotional problems were
related to their reproductive systems. To cure them, he removed
their ovaries, an operation he performed many times in his
career. 
Randall Terry (1959–)
It was the 1980s when Randall Terry began his crusade against
abortion. He had grown up in New York, graduated from the
Elim Bible Institute, married, and become a leader in his evan-
gelical church. Concerned about the moral decay of American
society, he participated in the 1984 March for Life in Washington,
DC. Shortly after that he and his wife started Project Life, which
involved the two taking turns standing outside abortion clinics in
Binghamton, New York, and trying to persuade women not to go
in. This led to rescue missions to occupy and block entrances to
abortion clinics. In 1987, Terry organized Operation Rescue and
recruited activists to join direct action campaigns, first in Cherry
Hill, New Jersey, and later in cities in the South and Midwest. 
Terry claims to have been arrested more than forty times and
became a co-defendant in the National Organization for
Women’s (NOW) lawsuit against clinic protesters, NOW v. Schei-
dler, which sought to use the federal antiracketeering law to sue
groups obstructing clinics for damages. Terry left Operation Res-
cue in the mid-1990s and eventually settled the case with NOW
out of court. Soon after, however, he declared bankruptcy and
avoided paying any fines or damages. Some pro-choice activists
blame Terry and his crusade for clinic violence. His message
tapped into the fervent religious feelings of his followers and
urged extreme action to stop what he called the killing of babies.
Allegations continue that those who murdered abortion doctors
in the 1990s were carrying out what they thought Terry wanted.
After the Operation Rescue days, Terry fell from grace with
his religious followers when he left his wife and married another
woman. He moved to Florida and has campaigned for the state
legislature, so far unsuccessfully. 
158
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Richard Viguerie (1933–)
Richard Viguerie takes credit for building the conservative move-
ment in America in the 1960s and 1970s. A key component of that
movement was the pro-life activism that rose in the 1970s.
Viguerie calls himself a pioneer in the use of direct mail. He lent
his business, American Target Advertising, and his expertise to
the new antiabortion groups to send millions of letters, especially
in states with a large number of Christian evangelicals, to spread
information about the abortion issue and to raise funds. As a
strategist and consultant he was present at the formation of such
pro-life groups as the Moral Majority. By the mid 1970s, the con-
servative movement could claim so much voter support that it
can be credited for the shift in the Republican Party from a mod-
erate to a pro-life party.
Thus, Viguerie deserves credit for turning a small number of
Roman Catholic politicians who were dismayed at the Supreme
Court decision in Roe v. Wade into a strong and successful politi-
cal movement against legal abortion. The coalition he built
brought about the Reagan years, anti-Roe appointments to the
federal courts, and passage of the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act.
He recounts the tale of these and other successes in his 2004 book:
America’s Right Turn: How Conservatives Used New and Alternative
Media to Take Power. He is a native of Texas and a Catholic, and he
has devoted his life to his cause. He remains a harsh judge of
those who don’t toe the pro-life line. In 2004, Viguerie criticized
President George W. Bush for not speaking out strongly enough
against abortion or using it as a major campaign issue. 
Sarah Weddington (1945–)
Sarah Weddington had been out of University of Texas law school
only 6 years when she became the youngest person to win a case
before the Supreme Court. The opportunity came when a small
group of feminist activists involved in the early days of the move-
ment for abortion rights in Austin, Texas, asked her opinion about
the legal status of their plan to begin a referral service for women
seeking abortions in Mexico. Her research into this question
revealed a strategy for challenging the constitutionality of Texas’s
nineteenth-century law, which prohibited all abortions except to
Biographical Sketches
159
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

save the life of the mother. Along with her colleague, Linda Cof-
fee, Weddington located Norma McCorvey, who would become
their plaintiff “Roe.” The winning case was Roe v. Wade, which
abolished criminal abortion laws in the United States in January
1973.
Weddington has been a pioneer for women’s rights in many
ways. She served in the Texas legislature 1973–1975, the first
woman to be elected from Austin. She then joined the federal
government as the first woman to be general counsel at the U.S.
Department of Agriculture. When Midge Constanza resigned
from her position as special assistant to President Jimmy Carter
for women’s issues, Weddington took the post until 1981. Since
then she has traveled widely debating women’s rights and work-
ing to promote women’s leadership. Her book describing her
experiences in the great Roe v. Wade case, A Question of Choice, was
published in 1992.
160
Biographical Sketches
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

6
Data and Documents
Introduction
Facts pertaining to the abortion conflict found here include some
historical documents, such as early laws and proposals, excerpts
from the major Supreme Court rulings that establish constitu-
tional law, and proposed and enacted federal statutes, such as the
Freedom of Access to Clinics Entrances, Partial-Birth Abortion
Ban, Laci and Connor’s law, and Prevention First. Data selected
for this chapter show the current laws in the states pertaining to
regulations and funding and the trends in abortion rates and
ratios showing who gets abortions. Finally, some representative
samples of public opinion polls document the ambivalence
among American voters over this difficult issue.
Historical Documents
Blackstone’s Commentaries
By definition, English common law is “unwritten” law in that it is con-
tained in all the precedents of the English courts. However, William
Blackstone wrote four volumes describing the common law as it was prac-
ticed in the eighteenth century, and these have been updated and
reprinted from time to time. Here is what he had to say about abortion
and, indirectly, partial-birth abortion long before the twenty-first-century
debate.
161
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Under murder: the person being killed must be “a reasonable crea-
ture in being, and under the king’s peace,” at the time of the killing. . . . To
kill a child in the mother’s womb is now no murder, but great mispri-
sion; but if the child be born alive, and dieth by reason of a potion or
bruises it received in the womb, it seems by the better opinion, to be
murder in such as administered or gave them. [sic]
So if a mortal wound be given to a child while in the act of being
born, for instance, upon the head as soon as the head appears, and
before the child has breathed, it may be murder, if the child is after-
ward born alive and dies hereof. It must be proved, however, that the
entire child has been born into the world of the living state; and the
fact of its breathing is not a conclusive proof thereof. But the fact of its
being still connected with the mother by the umbilical cord will not
prevent the killing from being murder.
(Source: Commentaries on The Laws of England: in four books by William
Gladstone. Vol IV. New York: Harper Bros., 1872 p. 198.)
Lord Ellenborough’s Act of 1803. 32 Geo
III c. 58, sec 2.
The British parliament placed criminal abortions in statute form in
1803 setting a standard for the U.S. states to follow.
II. ‘And whereas it may sometimes happen that Poison or some
other noxious and destructive Substance or Thing may be given, or
other Means used, with Intent to procure Miscarriage or Abortion
where the Woman may not be quick with Child at the Time, or it may
not be proved that she was Quick with Child;’ be it therefore further
enacted, That if any Person or Persons, from and after the said first
Day of July in the said Year of our Lord One thousand eight hundred
and three, shall wilfully [sic] and maliciously administer to, or cause to
be administered to, or taken by any Woman, any Medicines, Drug, or
other Substance or Thing whatsoever, or shall use or employ, or cause
or procure to be used or employed, any Instrument or other Means
whatsoever, with Intent thereby to cause or procure the Miscarriage of
any Woman not being, or not being proved to be, quick with Child at
the Time of administering such Things or using such Means, that then
and in every such Case the Person or Persons so offending, their Coun-
sellors, Aiders, and Abettors, knowing of and privy to such Offence,
shall be and are hereby declared to be guilty of Felony, and shall be
liable to be fined, imprisoned, set in and upon the Pillory, publickly or
privately whipped, or to suffer one or more of the said Punishments,
or to be transported beyond the Seas for any Term not exceeding four-
162
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

teen Years, at the Discretion of the Court before which such Offender
shall be tried and convicted.
(Source: AOL. The Abortion Law Homepage. http://members.aol
.com/abtrbng/lea.htm.)
American Medical Association 
Resolution 1859
Adoption of the following resolution marked the formal campaign to
criminalize abortion in the United States.
Resolved, That while physicians have long been united in con-
demning the act of producing abortion, at every period of gestation,
except as necessary for preserving the life of either mother or child, it
has become the duty of this Association, in view of the prevalence and
increasing frequency of the crime, publicly to enter an earnest and
solemn protest against such unwarrantable destruction of human life.
Resolved, That in pursuance of the grand and noble calling we pro-
fess, the saving of human lives, and of the sacred responsibilities thereby
devolving upon us, the Association present this subject to the attention
of the several legislative assemblies of the Union, with the prayer that
the laws by which the crime of procuring abortion is attempted to be
controlled may be revised, and that such other action may be taken in
the premises as they in their wisdom may deem necessary.
Resolved, That the Association request the zealous co-operation of
the various State Medical Societies in pressing this subject upon the
legislatures of their respective states.
(Source: Dyer, Frederick. “Horatio Robinson Storer M.D. and the Physi-
cians Crusade Against Abortion.” Life and Learning IX, 1998. www
.uffl.org/vol%209/dyer9.pdf.)
Comstock Act of 1873 
Congress outlawed information and materials related to contraception
and abortion through the Comstock Act. It banned these in interstate
commerce and from importation and transport through the mails.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled, That whoever, within
the District of Columbia, or any of the Territories of the United Sates,
or any other place within the exclusive jurisdiction of the United Sates,
shall sell or lend, or give away, or in any manner exhibit, or shall offer
to sell, or to lend, or to give away, in any manner to exhibit, or shall
otherwise publish or offer to publish in any manner, or shall have in
Historical Documents
163
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

his possession, for any such purpose or purposes, any obscene book,
pamphlet, paper, writing, advertisement, circular, print, picture, draw-
ing or other representation, figure, or image on or of paper or other
material, or any cast, instrument, or other article of any immoral
nature, or any drug or medicine, or any article whatever, for the pre-
vention of conception, or for causing unlawful abortion, or shall adver-
tise the same for sale, or shall write or print, or cause to be written or
printed, any card, circular, book, pamphlet, advertisement, or notice of
any kind, setting when, where, how, or of whom, or by what means,
any of the articles in this section hereinbefore mentioned, can be pur-
chased or obtained, or shall manufacture, draw, or print, or in any wise
make any of such articles, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and on conviction thereof in any court of the United States . . . shall be
imprisoned at hard labor in the penitentiary for not less than six
months nor more than five years for each offense, or fined not less than
one hundred dollars nor more than two thousand dollars, with costs of
the court.
(Source: U.S. Statutes. Chapt. CCLVII. March 3, 1873.)
American Law Institute Model 
Penal Code: Abortion. Adopted 1959. 
This American Law Institute model for conditional legal abortion
became the first proposal for reform of criminal abortion laws in the
1960s. Many doctors and abortion activists promoted this proposal
before Roe v. Wade was decided. Several states adopted similar laws
including Georgia. The Georgia law was declared unconstitutional in
Doe. v. Bolton, the companion case to Roe v. Wade.
Section 230.3. Abortion.
(1) Unjustified Abortion. A person who purposely and unjustifi-
ably terminates the pregnancy of another otherwise than by a live birth
commits a felony of the third degree or, where the pregnancy has con-
tinued beyond the twenty-sixth week, a felony of the second degree.
(2) Justifiable Abortion. A licensed physician is justified in termi-
nating a pregnancy if he believes there is substantial risk that continu-
ance of the pregnancy would gravely impair the physical or mental
health of the mother or that the child would be born with grave physi-
cal or mental defect, or that the pregnancy resulted from rape, incest,
or other felonious intercourse. All illicit intercourse with a girl below
the age of 16 shall be deemed felonious for purposes of this subsection.
Justifiable abortions shall be performed only in a licensed hospital
except in case of emergency when hospital facilities are unavailable.
[Additional exceptions from the requirement of hospitalization may be
164
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

incorporated here to take account of situations in sparsely settled areas
where hospitals are not generally accessible.] 
(3) Physicians’ Certificates; Presumption from Non-Compliance.
No abortion shall be performed unless two physicians, one of whom
may be the person performing the abortion, shall have certified in writ-
ing the circumstances which they believe to justify the abortion. Such
certificate shall be submitted before the abortion to the hospital where
it is to be performed and, in the case of abortion following felonious
intercourse, to the prosecuting attorney or the police. Failure to comply
with any of the requirements of this Subsection gives rise to a pre-
sumption that the abortion was unjustified.
(Source: Reprinted from Doe v. Bolton Appendix B to the opinion. [410
U.S. 179, 205 1973].)
Humanae Vitae
ENCYCLICAL OF POPE PAUL VI ON THE REGULATION OF BIRTH
JULY 25, 1968. Excerpts relating to birth control.
With this 1968 encyclical, Pope Paul VI clarified the church’s opposi-
tion to contraception and abortion at a key point in the abortion reform
debate.
Responsible Parenthood
10. Married love, therefore, requires of husband and wife the full
awareness of their obligations in the matter of responsible parenthood,
which today, rightly enough, is much insisted upon, but which at the
same time should be rightly understood. Thus, we do well to consider
responsible parenthood in the light of its varied legitimate and interre-
lated aspects.
With regard to the biological processes, responsible parenthood
means an awareness of, and respect for, their proper functions. In the
procreative faculty the human mind discerns biological laws that apply
to the human person.
With regard to man’s innate drives and emotions, responsible par-
enthood means that man’s reason and will must exert control over them.
With regard to physical, economic, psychological and social condi-
tions, responsible parenthood is exercised by those who prudently and
generously decide to have more children, and by those who, for serious
reasons and with due respect to moral precepts, decide not to have
additional children for either a certain or an indefinite period of time.
Responsible parenthood, as we use the term here, has one further
essential aspect of paramount importance. It concerns the objective
moral order which was established by God, and of which a right con-
science is the true interpreter. In a word, the exercise of responsible
Historical Documents
165
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

parenthood requires that husband and wife, keeping a right order of
priorities, recognize their own duties toward God, themselves, their
families and human society.
From this it follows that they are not free to act as they choose in
the service of transmitting life, as if it were wholly up to them to
decide what is the right course to follow. On the contrary, they are
bound to ensure that what they do corresponds to the will of God the
Creator. The very nature of marriage and its use makes His will clear,
while the constant teaching of the Church spells it out.
Observing the Natural Law
11. The sexual activity, in which husband and wife are intimately and
chastely united with one another, through which human life is transmit-
ted, is, as the recent Council recalled, “noble and worthy.”’ It does not,
moreover, cease to be legitimate even when, for reasons independent of
their will, it is foreseen to be infertile. For its natural adaptation to the
expression and strengthening of the union of husband and wife is not
thereby suppressed. The fact is, as experience shows, that new life is not
the result of each and every act of sexual intercourse. God has wisely
ordered laws of nature and the incidence of fertility in such a way that
successive births are already naturally spaced through the inherent
operation of these laws. The Church, nevertheless, in urging men to the
observance of the precepts of the natural law, which it interprets by its
constant doctrine, teaches that each and every marital act must of neces-
sity retain its intrinsic relationship to the procreation of human life.
Union and Procreation
12. This particular doctrine, often expounded by the magisterium of
the Church, is based on the inseparable connection, established by
God, which man on his own initiative may not break, between the uni-
tive significance and the procreative significance which are both inher-
ent to the marriage act.
The reason is that the fundamental nature of the marriage act,
while uniting husband and wife in the closest intimacy, also renders
them capable of generating new life—and this as a result of laws writ-
ten into the actual nature of man and of woman. And if each of these
essential qualities, the unitive and the procreative, is preserved, the use
of marriage fully retains its sense of true mutual love and its ordina-
tion to the supreme responsibility of parenthood to which man is
called. We believe that our contemporaries are particularly capable of
seeing that this teaching is in harmony with human reason.
Faithfulness to God’s Design
13. Men rightly observe that a conjugal act imposed on one’s partner
without regard to his or her condition or personal and reasonable
166
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

wishes in the matter, is no true act of love, and therefore offends the
moral order in its particular application to the intimate relationship of
husband and wife. If they further reflect, they must also recognize that
an act of mutual love which impairs the capacity to transmit life which
God the Creator, through specific laws, has built into it, frustrates His
design which constitutes the norm of marriage, and contradicts the
will of the Author of life. Hence to use this divine gift while depriving
it, even if only partially, of its meaning and purpose, is equally repug-
nant to the nature of man and of woman, and is consequently in oppo-
sition to the plan of God and His holy will. But to experience the gift of
married love while respecting the laws of conception is to acknowl-
edge that one is not the master of the sources of life but rather the min-
ister of the design established by the Creator. Just as man does not
have unlimited dominion over his body in general, so also, and with
more particular reason, he has no such dominion over his specifically
sexual faculties, for these are concerned by their very nature with the
generation of life, of which God is the source. “Human life is sacred—
all men must recognize that fact,” Our predecessor Pope John XXIII
recalled. “From its very inception it reveals the creating hand of God.” 
Unlawful Birth Control Methods
14. Therefore We base Our words on the first principles of a human and
Christian doctrine of marriage when We are obliged once more to
declare that the direct interruption of the generative process already
begun and, above all, all direct abortion, even for therapeutic reasons,
are to be absolutely excluded as lawful means of regulating the number
of children. Equally to be condemned, as the magisterium of the Church
has affirmed on many occasions, is direct sterilization, whether of the
man or of the woman, whether permanent or temporary.
Similarly excluded is any action which either before, at the
moment of, or after sexual intercourse, is specifically intended to pre-
vent procreation—whether as an end or as a means.
Neither is it valid to argue, as a justification for sexual intercourse
which is deliberately contraceptive, that a lesser evil is to be preferred
to a greater one, or that such intercourse would merge with procreative
acts of past and future to form a single entity, and so be qualified by
exactly the same moral goodness as these. Though it is true that some-
times it is lawful to tolerate a lesser moral evil in order to avoid a
greater evil or in order to promote a greater good, it is never lawful,
even for the gravest reasons, to do evil that good may come of it—in
other words, to intend directly something which of its very nature con-
tradicts the moral order, and which must therefore be judged unworthy
of man, even though the intention is to protect or promote the welfare
of an individual, of a family or of society in general. Consequently, it is
a serious error to think that a whole married life of otherwise normal
Historical Documents
167
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

relations can justify sexual intercourse which is deliberately contracep-
tive and so intrinsically wrong.
(Source: Vatican/Holy See. www.vatican.va/holy_father/paul_vi/
encyclicals/documents/hf_p-vi_enc_25071968_humanae-vitae_en.html.)
The Essential Supreme Court Cases:
Excerpts
Griswold v. Connecticut 381 U.S. 479 (1965) 
The Supreme Court votes to overturn Connecticut’s contraception pro-
hibition statute on the grounds that marital sex is in a protected zone of
privacy.
MR. JUSTICE DOUGLAS delivered the opinion of the Court.
Appellant Griswold is Executive Director of the Planned Parent-
hood League of Connecticut. Appellant Buxton is a licensed physician
and a professor at the Yale Medical School who served as Medical
Director for the League at its Center in New Haven—a center open and
operating from November 1 to November 10, 1961, when appellants
were arrested.
They gave information, instruction, and medical advice to married
persons as to the means of preventing conception. They examined the
wife and prescribed the best contraceptive device or material for her use.
Fees were usually charged, although some couples were serviced free.
The statutes whose constitutionality is involved in this appeal are
53-32 and 54-196 of the General Statutes of Connecticut (1958 rev.). The
former provides: 
“Any person who uses any drug, medicinal article or instrument
for the purpose of preventing conception shall be fined not less than
fifty dollars or imprisoned not less than sixty days nor more than one
year or be both fined and imprisoned.” 
Section 54-196 provides: 
“Any person who assists, abets, counsels, causes, hires or com-
mands another to commit any offense may be prosecuted and pun-
ished as if he were the principal offender.” 
. . .
The foregoing cases suggest that specific guarantees in the Bill of Rights
have penumbras, formed by emanations from those guarantees that help
give them life and substance. See Poe v. Ullman, 367 U.S. 497, 516 -522
(dissenting opinion). Various guarantees create zones of privacy. The
right of association contained in the penumbra of the First Amendment
is one, as we have seen. The Third Amendment in its prohibition against
168
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

the quartering of soldiers “in any house” in time of peace without the
consent of the owner is another facet of that privacy. The Fourth Amend-
ment explicitly affirms the “right of the people to be secure in their per-
sons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and
seizures.” The Fifth Amendment in its Self-Incrimination Clause enables
the citizen to create a zone of privacy which government may not force
him to surrender to his detriment. The Ninth Amendment provides:
“The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be con-
strued to deny or disparage others retained by the people.” 
The Fourth and Fifth Amendments were described in Boyd v.
United States, 116 U.S. 616, 630 , as protection against all governmental
invasions “of the sanctity of a man’s home and the privacies of life.”
We recently referred in Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643, 656 , to the Fourth
Amendment as creating a “right to privacy, no less important than any
other right carefully and particularly reserved to the people.” See
Beaney, The Constitutional Right to Privacy, 1962 Sup. Ct. Rev. 212;
Griswold, The Right to be Let Alone, 55 Nw. U. L. Rev. 216 (1960).
. . .
The present case, then, concerns a relationship lying within the zone of
privacy created by several fundamental constitutional guarantees. And it
concerns a law which, in forbidding the use of contraceptives rather than
regulating their manufacture or sale, seeks to achieve its goals by means
having a maximum destructive impact upon that relationship. Such a
law cannot stand in light of the familiar principle, so often applied by
this Court, that a “governmental purpose to control or prevent activities
constitutionally subject to state regulation may not be achieved by means
which sweep unnecessarily broadly and thereby invade the area of pro-
tected freedoms.” NAACP v. Alabama, 377 U.S. 288, 307. Would we
allow the police to search the sacred precincts of marital bedrooms for
telltale signs of the use of contraceptives? The very idea is repulsive to
the notions of privacy surrounding the marriage relationship.
We deal with a right of privacy older than the Bill of Rights—
older than our political parties, older than our school system. Marriage
is a coming together for better or for worse, hopefully enduring, and
intimate to the degree of being sacred. It is an association that pro-
motes a way of life, not causes; a harmony in living, not political faiths;
a bilateral loyalty, not commercial or social projects. Yet it is an associa-
tion for as noble a purpose as any involved in our prior decisions.
Eisenstadt v. Baird 405 U.S. 438 (1972) 
The Supreme Court strikes down the Massachusetts criminal contra-
ceptive law and extends the Griswold right to marital privacy to all
individuals married or single, declaring the right to bear and beget a
child a fundamental right of individuals. 
The Essential Supreme Court Cases: Excerpts
169
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

MR. JUSTICE BRENNAN delivered the opinion of the Court.
Appellee William Baird was convicted at a bench trial in the
Massachusetts Superior Court under Massachusetts General Laws
Ann., c. 272, 21, first, for exhibiting contraceptive articles in the course
of delivering a lecture on contraception to a group of students at
Boston University and, second, for giving a young woman a package
of Emko vaginal foam at the close of his address.
. . .
Massachusetts General Laws Ann., c. 272, 21, under which Baird was
convicted, provides a maximum five-year term of imprisonment for
“whoever . . . gives away . . . any drug, medicine, instrument or article
whatever [405 U.S. 438, 441] for the prevention of conception,” except
as authorized in 21A. Under 21A, “[a] registered physician may admin-
ister to or prescribe for any married person drugs or articles intended
for the prevention of pregnancy or conception. [And a] registered phar-
macist actually engaged in the business of pharmacy may furnish such
drugs or articles to any married person presenting a prescription from
a registered physician.” As interpreted by the State Supreme Judicial
Court, these provisions make it a felony for anyone, other than a regis-
tered physician or pharmacist acting in accordance with the terms of
21A, to dispense any article with the intention that it be used for the
prevention of conception. The statutory scheme distinguishes among
three distinct classes of distributees—first, married persons may obtain
contraceptives to prevent pregnancy, but only from doctors or drug-
gists on prescription; second, single persons may not obtain contracep-
tives from anyone to prevent pregnancy; and, third, married or single
persons may obtain contraceptives from anyone to prevent, not preg-
nancy, but the spread of disease. This construction of state law is, of
course, binding on us. E. g., Groppi v. Wisconsin, 400 U.S. 505, 507
(1971).
. . .
If under Griswold the distribution of contraceptives to married persons
cannot be prohibited, a ban on distribution to unmarried persons
would be equally impermissible. It is true that in Griswold the right of
privacy in question inhered in the marital relationship. Yet the marital
couple is not an independent entity with a mind and heart of its own,
but an association of two individuals each with a separate intellectual
and emotional makeup. If the right of privacy means anything, it is the
right of the individual, married or single, to be free from unwarranted
governmental intrusion into matters so fundamentally affecting a per-
son as the decision whether to bear or beget a child. See Stanley v.
Georgia, 394 U.S. 557 (1969). See also Skinner v. Oklahoma, 316 U.S.
535 (1942); Jacobson v. Massachusetts, 197 U.S. 11, 29 (1905).
On the other hand, if Griswold is no bar to a prohibition on the
distribution of contraceptives, the State could not, consistently with the
170
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Equal Protection Clause, outlaw distribution to unmarried but not to
married persons. In each case the evil, as perceived by the State, would
be identical, and the underinclusion would be invidious. Mr. Justice
Jackson, concurring in Railway Express Agency v. New York, 336 U.S.
106, 112 -113 (1949), made the point: 
“The framers of the Constitution knew, and we should not forget
today, that there is no more effective practical guaranty against arbi-
trary and unreasonable government than to require that the principles
of law which officials would impose upon a minority must be imposed
generally. Conversely, nothing opens the door to arbitrary action so
effectively as to allow those officials to pick and choose only a few to
whom they will apply legislation and thus to escape the political retri-
bution that might be visited upon them if larger numbers were
affected. Courts can take no better measure to assure that laws will be
just than to require that laws be equal in operation.” 
Although Mr. Justice Jackson’s comments had reference to admin-
istrative regulations, the principle he affirmed has equal application to
the legislation here. We hold that by providing dissimilar treatment for
married and unmarried persons who are similarly situated, Massachu-
setts General Laws Ann., c. 272, 21 and 21A, violate the Equal Protec-
tion Clause.
Roe v. Wade 410 U.S. 113 (1973)
The Supreme Court extends the right to privacy to women seeking abor-
tion and refuses to declare the fetus a person under the Constitution.
The case decriminalizes abortion in the United States.
MR. JUSTICE BLACKMUN delivered the opinion of the Court
The Texas statutes that concern us here are Arts. 1191–1194 and
1196 of the State’s Penal Code. These make it a crime to “procure an
abortion,” as therein defined, or to attempt one, except with respect to
“an abortion procured or attempted by medical advice for the purpose
of saving the life of the mother.” Similar statutes are in existence in a
majority of the States.
The Constitution does not explicitly mention any right of privacy.
In a line of decisions, however, going back perhaps as far as Union
Pacific R. Co. v. Botsford, 141 U.S. 250, 251 (1891), the Court has recog-
nized that a right of personal privacy, or a guarantee of certain areas or
zones of privacy, does exist under the Constitution. In varying contexts,
the Court or individual Justices have, indeed, found at least the roots of
that right in the First Amendment, Stanley v. Georgia, 394 U.S. 557, 564
(1969); in the Fourth and Fifth Amendments, Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 8
-9 (1968), Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347, 350 (1967), Boyd v. United
States, 116 U.S. 616 (1886), see Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438,
478 (1928) (Brandeis, J., dissenting); in the penumbras of the Bill of
The Essential Supreme Court Cases: Excerpts
171
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Rights, Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S., at 484-485; in the Ninth
Amendment, id., at 486 (Goldberg, J., concurring); or in the concept of
liberty guaranteed by the first section of the Fourteenth Amendment,
see Meyer v. Nebraska, 262 U.S. 390, 399 (1923). These decisions make it
clear that only personal rights that can be deemed “fundamental” or
“implicit in the concept of ordered liberty,” Palko v. Connecticut, 302
U.S. 319, 325 (1937), are included in this guarantee of personal privacy.
They also make it clear that the right has some extension to activities
relating to marriage, Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1, 12 (1967); procre-
ation, Skinner v. Oklahoma, 316 U.S. 535, 541-542 (1942); contraception,
Eisenstadt v. Baird, 405 U.S., at 453-454; id., at 460, 463-465 (WHITE, J.,
concurring in result); family relationships, Prince v. Massachusetts, 321
U.S. 158, 166 (1944); and child rearing and education, Pierce v. Society of
Sisters, 268 U.S. 510, 535 (1925), Meyer v. Nebraska, supra.
This right of privacy, whether it be founded in the Fourteenth
Amendment’s concept of personal liberty and restrictions upon state
action, as we feel it is, or, as the District Court determined, in the Ninth
Amendment’s reservation of rights to the people, is broad enough to
encompass a woman’s decision whether or not to terminate her preg-
nancy. The detriment that the State would impose upon the pregnant
woman by denying this choice altogether is apparent. Specific and
direct harm medically diagnosable even in early pregnancy may be
involved. Maternity, or additional offspring, may force upon the
woman a distressful life and future. Psychological harm may be immi-
nent. Mental and physical health may be taxed by child care. There is
also the distress, for all concerned associated with the unwanted child,
and there is the problem of bringing a child into a family already
unable, psychologically and otherwise, to care for it. In other cases, as
in this one, the additional difficulties and continuing stigma of unwed
motherhood may be involved. All these are factors the woman and her
responsible physician necessarily will consider in consultation.
On the basis of elements such as these, appellant and some amici
argue that the woman’s right is absolute and that she is entitled to termi-
nate her pregnancy at whatever time, in whatever way, and for whatever
reason she alone chooses. With this we do not agree. Appellant’s argu-
ments that Texas either has no valid interest at all in regulating the abor-
tion decision, or no interest strong enough to support any limitation upon
the woman’s sole determination, are unpersuasive. The Court’s decisions
recognizing a right of privacy also acknowledge that some state regula-
tion in areas protected by that right is appropriate. As noted above, a
State may properly assert important interests in safeguarding health, in
maintaining medical standards, and in protecting potential life. At some
point in pregnancy, these respective interests become sufficiently com-
pelling to sustain regulation of the factors that govern the abortion deci-
sion. The privacy right involved, therefore, cannot be said to be absolute.
172
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

In fact, it is not clear to us that the claim asserted by some amici that one
has an unlimited right to do with one’s body as one pleases bears a close
relationship to the right of privacy previously articulated in the Court’s
decisions. The Court has refused to recognize an unlimited right of this
kind in the past. Jacobson v. Massachusetts, 197 U.S. 11 (1905) (vaccina-
tion); Buck v. Bell, 274 U.S. 200 (1927) (sterilization).
We, therefore, conclude that the right of personal privacy includes
the abortion decision, but that this right is not unqualified and must be
considered against important state interests in regulation.
. . .
The appellee and certain amici argue that the fetus is a “person” within
the language and meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment. In support of
this, they outline at length and in detail the well-known facts of fetal
development. If this suggestion of personhood is established, the appel-
lant’s case, of course, collapses, for the fetus’ right to life would then be
guaranteed specifically by the Amendment. The appellant conceded as
much on reargument. On the other hand, the appellee conceded on
reargument that no case could be cited that holds that a fetus is a per-
son within the meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The Constitution does not define “person” in so many words. Sec-
tion 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment contains three references to “per-
son.” The first, in defining “citizens,” speaks of “persons born or
naturalized in the United States.” The word also appears both in the
Due Process Clause and in the Equal Protection Clause. “Person” is
used in other places in the Constitution: in the listing of qualifications
for Representatives and Senators, Art. I, 2, cl. 2, and 3, cl. 3; in the
Apportionment Clause, Art. I, 2, cl. 3; 53 in the Migration and Importa-
tion provision, Art. I, 9, cl. 1; in the Emolument Clause, Art. I, 9, cl. 8; in
the Electors provisions, Art. II, 1, cl. 2, and the superseded cl. 3; in the
provision outlining qualifications for the office of President, Art. II, 1,
cl. 5; in the Extradition provisions, Art. IV, 2, cl. 2, and the superseded
Fugitive Slave Clause 3; and in the Fifth, Twelfth, and Twenty-second
Amendments, as well as in 2 and 3 of the Fourteenth Amendment. But
in nearly all these instances, the use of the word is such that it has
application only postnatally. None indicates, with any assurance, that it
has any possible pre-natal application.
All this, together with our observation, supra, that throughout the
major portion of the 19th century prevailing legal abortion practices
were far freer than they are today, persuades us that the word “person,”
as used in the Fourteenth Amendment, does not include the unborn. 
Doe v. Bolton 410 U.S. 179 (1973)
In the companion case to Roe v. Wade, the court defined the extent of
the medical judgment or health exception for abortion restrictions.
The Essential Supreme Court Cases: Excerpts
173
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

MR. JUSTICE BLACKMUN delivered the opinion of the Court.
In this appeal, the criminal abortion statutes recently enacted in
Georgia are challenged on constitutional grounds.
. . .
As the appellants acknowledge, the 1968 statutes are patterned upon
the American Law Institute’s Model Penal Code, 230.3 (Proposed Offi-
cial Draft, 1962), reproduced as Appendix B, post, p. 205. The ALI pro-
posal has served as the model for recent legislation in approximately
one-fourth of our States. The new Georgia provisions replaced statu-
tory law that had been in effect for more than 90 years. Georgia Laws
1876, No. 130, 2, at 113. The predecessor statute paralleled the Texas
legislation considered in Roe v. Wade, supra, and made all abortions
criminal except those necessary “to preserve the life” of the pregnant
woman. The new statutes have not been tested on constitutional
grounds in the Georgia state courts.
Section 26-1201, with a referenced exception, makes abortion a
crime, and 26-1203 provides that a person convicted of that crime shall
be punished by imprisonment for not less than one nor more than 10
years. Section 26-1202 (a) states the exception and removes from 1201’s
definition of criminal abortion, and thus makes noncriminal, an abor-
tion “performed by a physician duly licensed” in Georgia when, “based
upon his best clinical judgment . . . an abortion is necessary because: 
“(1) A continuation of the pregnancy would endanger the life of
the pregnant woman or would seriously and permanently injure her
health; or 
“(2) The fetus would very likely be born with a grave, permanent,
and irremediable mental or physical defect; or 
“(3) The pregnancy resulted from forcible or statutory rape.” 
. . .
Appellants argue that 26-1202 (a) of the Georgia statutes, as it has been
left by the District Court’s decision, is unconstitutionally vague. This
argument centers on the proposition that, with the District Court’s hav-
ing struck down the statutorily specified reasons, it still remains a crime
for a physician to perform an abortion except when, as 26-1202 (a) reads,
it is “based upon his best clinical judgment that an abortion is necessary.”
The appellants contend that the word “necessary” does not warn the
physician of what conduct is proscribed; that the statute is wholly with-
out objective standards and is subject to diverse interpretation; and that
doctors will choose to err on the side of caution and will be arbitrary.
The net result of the District Court’s decision is that the abortion
determination, so far as the physician is concerned, is made in the
exercise of his professional, that is, his “best clinical,” judgment in the
light of all the attendant circumstances. He is not now restricted to the
three situations originally specified. Instead, he may range farther
afield wherever his medical judgment, properly and professionally
exercised, so dictates and directs him.
174
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

The vagueness argument is set at rest by the decision in United
States v. Vuitch, 402 U.S. 62, 71-72 (1971), where the issue was raised
with respect to a District of Columbia statute making abortions crimi-
nal “unless the same were done as necessary for the preservation of the
mother’s life or health and under the direction of a competent licensed
practitioner of medicine.” That statute has been construed to bear upon
psychological as [410 U.S. 179, 192] well as physical well-being. This
being so, the Court concluded that the term “health” presented no
problem of vagueness. “Indeed, whether a particular operation is nec-
essary for a patient’s physical or mental health is a judgment that
physicians are obviously called upon to make routinely whenever
surgery is considered.” Id., at 72. This conclusion is equally applicable
here. Whether, in the words of the Georgia statute, “an abortion is nec-
essary” is a professional judgment that the Georgia physician will be
called upon to make routinely.
We agree with the District Court, 319 F. Supp., at 1058, that the
medical judgment may be exercised in the light of all factors—physical,
emotional, psychological, familial, and the woman’s age—relevant to
the wellbeing of the patient. All these factors may relate to health. This
allows the attending physician the room he needs to make his best
medical judgment. And it is room that operates for the benefit, not the
disadvantage, of the pregnant woman.
Planned Parenthood of Southeastern 
Pa. v. Casey, 505 U.S. 833 (1992) 
In this compromise decision, the Supreme Court affirms the central
holding in Roe v. Wade, protects women’s liberty from undue burdens
and affirms the states’ power to protect fetal life. These principles stand
as controlling precedent for subsequent cases regarding regulations of
abortion coming before the federal courts.
JUSTICE O’CONNOR, JUSTICE KENNEDY, and JUSTICE
SOUTER announced the judgment of the Court and delivered the opin-
ion of the Court 
. . .
Men and women of good conscience can disagree, and we suppose
some always shall disagree, about the profound moral and spiritual
implications of terminating a pregnancy, even in its earliest stage. Some
of us as individuals find abortion offensive to our most basic principles
of morality, but that cannot control our decision. Our obligation is to
define the liberty of all, not to mandate our own moral code. The
underlying constitutional issue is whether the State can resolve these
philosophic questions in such a definitive way that a woman lacks all
choice in the matter, except perhaps in those rare circumstances in
The Essential Supreme Court Cases: Excerpts
175
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

which the pregnancy is itself a danger to her own life or health, or is the
result of rape or incest.
It is conventional constitutional doctrine that, where reasonable
people disagree, the government can adopt one position or the
other . . . . That theorem, however, assumes a state of affairs in which
the choice does not intrude upon a protected liberty. Thus, while some
people might disagree about whether or not the flag should be saluted,
or disagree about the proposition that it may not be defiled, we have
ruled that a State may not compel or enforce one view or the other. See
West Virginia Bd. of Ed. v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624 (1943); Texas v. John-
son, 491 U.S. 397 (1989).
Our law affords constitutional protection to personal decisions
relating to marriage, procreation, contraception, family relationships,
child rearing, and education. Carey v. Population Services Interna-
tional, 431 U.S., at 685. Our cases recognize the right of the individual,
married or single, to be free from unwarranted governmental intrusion
into matters so fundamentally affecting a person as the decision
whether to bear or beget a child. Eisenstadt v. Baird, supra, 405 U.S., at
453 (emphasis in original). Our precedents “have respected the private
realm of family life which the state cannot enter.” Prince v. Massachu-
setts, 321 U.S. 158, 166 (1944). These matters, involving the most inti-
mate and personal choices a person may make in a lifetime, choices
central to personal dignity and autonomy, are central to the liberty pro-
tected by the Fourteenth Amendment. At the heart of liberty is the
right to define one’s own concept of existence, of meaning, of the uni-
verse, and of the mystery of human life. Beliefs about these matters
could not define the attributes of personhood were they formed under
compulsion of the State.
These considerations begin our analysis of the woman’s interest in
terminating her pregnancy, but cannot end it, for this reason: though
the abortion decision may originate within the zone of conscience and
belief, it is more than a philosophic exercise. Abortion is a unique act.
It is an act fraught with consequences for others: for the woman who
must live with the implications of her decision; for the persons who
perform and assist in the procedure; for the spouse, family, and society
which must confront the knowledge that these procedures exist, proce-
dures some deem nothing short of an act of violence against innocent
human life; and, depending on one’s beliefs, for the life or potential life
that is aborted. Though abortion is conduct, it does not follow that the
State is entitled to proscribe it in all instances. That is because the lib-
erty of the woman is at stake in a sense unique to the human condi-
tion, and so, unique to the law. The mother who carries a child to full
term is subject to anxieties, to physical constraints, to pain that only
she must bear. That these sacrifices have from the beginning of the
human race been endured by woman with a pride that ennobles her in
176
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

the eyes of others and gives to the infant a bond of love cannot alone
be grounds for the State to insist she make the sacrifice. Her suffering
is too intimate and personal for the State to insist, without more, upon
its own vision of the woman’s role, however dominant that vision has
been in the course of our history and our culture. The destiny of the
woman must be shaped to a large extent on her own conception of her
spiritual imperatives and her place in society.
It should be recognized, moreover, that in some critical respects, the
abortion decision is of the same character as the decision to use contra-
ception, to which Griswold v. Connecticut, Eisenstadt v. Baird, and Carey
v. Population Services International afford constitutional protection. We
have no doubt as to the correctness of those decisions. They support the
reasoning in Roe relating to the woman’s liberty, because they involve
personal decisions concerning not only the meaning of procreation but
also human responsibility and respect for it. As with abortion, reasonable
people will have differences of opinion about these matters. One view is
based on such reverence for the wonder of creation that any pregnancy
ought to be welcomed and carried to full term, no matter how difficult it
will be to provide for the child and ensure its wellbeing. Another is that
the inability to provide for the nurture and care of the infant is a cruelty
to the child and an anguish to the parent. These are intimate views with
infinite variations, and their deep, personal character underlay our deci-
sions in Griswold, Eisenstadt, and Carey. The same concerns are present
when the woman confronts the reality that, perhaps despite her attempts
to avoid it, she has become pregnant.
It was this dimension of personal liberty that Roe sought to protect,
and its holding invoked the reasoning and the tradition of the prece-
dents we have discussed, granting protection to substantive liberties of
the person. Roe was, of course, an extension of those cases and, as the
decision itself indicated, the separate States could act in some degree to
further their own legitimate interests in protecting prenatal life. The
extent to which the legislatures of the States might act to outweigh the
interests of the woman in choosing to terminate her pregnancy was a
subject of debate both in Roe itself and in decisions following it.
. . .
From what we have said so far, it follows that it is a constitutional lib-
erty of the woman to have some freedom to terminate her pregnancy.
We conclude that the basic decision in Roe was based on a constitu-
tional analysis which we cannot now repudiate. The woman’s liberty is
not so unlimited, however, that, from the outset, the State cannot show
its concern for the life of the unborn and, at a later point in fetal devel-
opment, the State’s interest in life has sufficient force so that the right of
the woman to terminate the pregnancy can be restricted.
That brings us, of course, to the point where much criticism has
been directed at Roe, a criticism that always inheres when the Court
The Essential Supreme Court Cases: Excerpts
177
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

draws a specific rule from what in the Constitution is but a general
standard. We conclude, however, that the urgent claims of the woman
to retain the ultimate control over her destiny and her body, claims
implicit in the meaning of liberty, require us to perform that function.
Liberty must not be extinguished for want of a line that is clear. And it
falls to us to give some real substance to the woman’s liberty to deter-
mine whether to carry her pregnancy to full term.
We conclude the line should be drawn at viability, so that, before
that time, the woman has a right to choose to terminate her pregnancy.
We adhere to this principle for two reasons. First, as we have said, is
the doctrine of stare decisis. Any judicial act of line-drawing may seem
somewhat arbitrary, but Roe was a reasoned statement, elaborated
with great care. We have twice reaffirmed it in the face of great opposi-
tion. See Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians and Gyne-
cologists, 476 U.S., at 759; Akron I, 462 U.S., at 419-420. Although we
must overrule those parts of Thornburgh and Akron I which, in our
view, are inconsistent with Roe’s statement that the State has a legiti-
mate interest in promoting the life or potential life of the unborn, see
infra, at 40-41, the central premise of those cases represents an unbro-
ken commitment by this Court to the essential holding of Roe. It is that
premise which we reaffirm today.
The second reason is that the concept of viability, as we noted in
Roe, is the time at which there is a realistic possibility of maintaining
and nourishing a life outside the womb, so that the independent exis-
tence of the second life can, in reason and all fairness, be the object of
state protection that now overrides the rights of the woman. See Roe v.
Wade, 410 U.S., at 163. Consistent with other constitutional norms, leg-
islatures may draw lines which appear arbitrary without the necessity
of offering a justification. But courts may not. We must justify the lines
we draw. And there is no line other than viability which is more work-
able. To be sure, as we have said, there may be some medical develop-
ments that affect the precise point of viability, see supra, at 17-18, but
this is an imprecision within tolerable limits, given that the medical
community and all those who must apply its discoveries will continue
to explore the matter. The viability line also has, as a practical matter,
an element of fairness. In some broad sense, it might be said that a
woman who fails to act before viability has consented to the State’s
intervention on behalf of the developing child.
The woman’s right to terminate her pregnancy before viability is
the most central principle of Roe v. Wade. It is a rule of law and a com-
ponent of liberty we cannot renounce.
On the other side of the equation is the interest of the State in the
protection of potential life. The Roe Court recognized the State’s
“important and legitimate interest in protecting the potentiality of
human life.” Roe, supra, at 162. The weight to be given this state inter-
178
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

est, not the strength of the woman’s interest, was the difficult question
faced in Roe. We do not need to say whether each of us, had we been
Members of the Court when the valuation of the state interest came
before it as an original matter, would have concluded, as the Roe Court
did, that its weight is insufficient to justify a ban on abortions prior to
viability even when it is subject to certain exceptions. The matter is not
before us in the first instance, and, coming as it does after nearly 20
years of litigation in Roe’s wake we are satisfied that the immediate
question is not the soundness of Roe’s resolution of the issue, but the
precedential force that must be accorded to its holding. And we have
concluded that the essential holding of Roe should be reaffirmed.
Yet it must be remembered that Roe v. Wade speaks with clarity in
establishing not only the woman’s liberty but also the State’s “impor-
tant and legitimate interest in potential life.” Roe, supra, at 163. That
portion of the decision in Roe has been given too little acknowledg-
ment and implementation by the Court in its subsequent cases. Those
cases decided that any regulation touching upon the abortion decision
must survive strict scrutiny, to be sustained only if drawn in narrow
terms to further a compelling state interest. See, e.g., Akron I, supra, at
427. Not all of the cases decided under that formulation can be recon-
ciled with the holding in Roe itself that the State has legitimate inter-
ests in the health of the woman and in protecting the potential life
within her. In resolving this tension, we choose to rely upon Roe, as
against the later cases.
Roe established a trimester framework to govern abortion regula-
tions. Under this elaborate but rigid construct, almost no regulation at
all is permitted during the first trimester of pregnancy; regulations
designed to protect the woman’s health, but not to further the State’s
interest in potential life, are permitted during the second trimester;
and, during the third trimester, when the fetus is viable, prohibitions
are permitted provided the life or health of the mother is not at stake.
Roe, supra, at 163-166. Most of our cases since Roe have involved the
application of rules derived from the trimester framework. See, e.g.,
Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
supra; Akron I, supra.
The trimester framework no doubt was erected to ensure that the
woman’s right to choose not become so subordinate to the State’s inter-
est in promoting fetal life that her choice exists in theory, but not in
fact. We do not agree, however, that the trimester approach is neces-
sary to accomplish this objective. A framework of this rigidity was
unnecessary, and, in its later interpretation, sometimes contradicted the
State’s permissible exercise of its powers.
Though the woman has a right to choose to terminate or continue
her pregnancy before viability, it does not at all follow that the State is
prohibited from taking steps to ensure that this choice is thoughtful
The Essential Supreme Court Cases: Excerpts
179
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

and informed. Even in the earliest stages of pregnancy, the State may
enact rules and regulations designed to encourage her to know that
there are philosophic and social arguments of great weight that can be
brought to bear in favor of continuing the pregnancy to full term, and
that there are procedures and institutions to allow adoption of
unwanted children as well as a certain degree of state assistance if the
mother chooses to raise the child herself. “[T]he Constitution does not
forbid a State or city, pursuant to democratic processes, from express-
ing a preference for normal childbirth.” Webster v. Reproductive
Health Services, 492 U.S., at 511 (opinion of [505 U.S. 833, 873] the
Court) (quoting Poelker v. Doe, 432 U.S. 519, 521 (1977)). It follows that
States are free to enact laws to provide a reasonable framework for a
woman to make a decision that has such profound and lasting mean-
ing. This, too, we find consistent with Roe’s central premises, and
indeed the inevitable consequence of our holding that the State has an
interest in protecting the life of the unborn.
We reject the trimester framework, which we do not consider to
be part of the essential holding of Roe. See Webster v. Reproductive
Health Services, supra, at 518 (opinion of REHNQUIST, C.J.); id., at 529
(O’CONNOR, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment)
(describing the trimester framework as “problematic”). Measures
aimed at ensuring that a woman’s choice contemplates the conse-
quences for the fetus do not necessarily interfere with the right recog-
nized in Roe, although those measures have been found to be
inconsistent with the rigid trimester framework announced in that
case. A logical reading of the central holding in Roe itself, and a neces-
sary reconciliation of the liberty of the woman and the interest of the
State in promoting prenatal life, require, in our view, that we abandon
the trimester framework as a rigid prohibition on all pre-viability regu-
lation aimed at the protection of fetal life. The trimester framework
suffers from these basic flaws: in its formulation, it misconceives the
nature of the pregnant woman’s interest; and in practice, it underval-
ues the State’s interest in potential life, as recognized in Roe.
As our jurisprudence relating to all liberties save perhaps abortion
has recognized, not every law which makes a right more difficult to
exercise is, ipso facto, an infringement of that right. An example clari-
fies the point. We have held that not every ballot access limitation
amounts to an infringement of the right to vote. Rather, the States are
granted substantial flexibility in establishing the framework within
which voters choose the candidates for whom they wish to vote.
Anderson v. Celebrezze, 460 U.S. 780, 788 (1983); Norman v. Reed, 502
U.S. 279 (1992).
The abortion right is similar. Numerous forms of state regulation
might have the incidental effect of increasing the cost or decreasing the
180
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

availability of medical care, whether for abortion or any other medical
procedure. The fact that a law which serves a valid purpose, one not
designed to strike at the right itself, has the incidental effect of making
it more difficult or more expensive to procure an abortion cannot be
enough to invalidate it. Only where state regulation imposes an undue
burden on a woman’s ability to make this decision does the power of
the State reach into the heart of the liberty protected by the Due
Process Clause.
Excerpts from Important Proposed 
and Enacted Statutes
Human Life Amendment: Three Versions
In the 1970s, in response to the Supreme Court ruling that the Consti-
tution prohibited states from outlawing abortion, pro-life advocates pro-
posed amendments to the Constitution to override the decision. None of
them passed the Congress.
1. Rep. Angelo D. Roncallo (R-NY) 5/30/74 93 H. J. Res. 1041 
“SECTION 1. Abortion is hereby prohibited within the United
States and all territory subject to the jurisdiction thereof. As used in
this article, abortion means the intentional destruction of unborn
human life, which life begins at the moment of fertilization.
“SECTION 2. Congress and the several States shall have concur-
rent power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.”
2. Sen. William L. Scott (R-VA) 6/6/75 94 S. J. Res. 91 
“The power to regulate the circumstances under which pregnancy
may be terminated is reserved to the States.”
3. Sen. Jesse Helms (R-NC) 12/16/81 97 S. J. Res. 137 
“SECTION 1. The right to life is the paramount and most funda-
mental right of a person.
SECTION 2. With respect to the right to life guaranteed to persons
by the fifth and fourteenth articles of amendment to the Constitution,
the word ‘person’ applies to all human beings, irrespective of age,
health, function, or condition of dependency, including their unborn
offspring at every stage of their biological development including fer-
tilization.
SECTION 3. No unborn person shall be deprived of life by any
person: Provided, however, That nothing in this article shall prohibit a
law allowing justification to be shown for only those medical proce-
dures required to prevent the death of either the pregnant woman or
Excerpts from Important Proposed and Enacted Statutes
181
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

her unborn offspring, as long as such law requires every reasonable
effort be made to preserve the life of each.
SECTION 4. Congress and the several States shall have the power
to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.”
(Source: National Committee for the Human Life Amendment. www
.nchla.org/docdisplay.asp?ID=74.)
Freedom of Choice Act of 1993 
In anticipation of an anti-Roe majority on the Supreme Court in the early
1990s, the pro-choice movement organized a campaign to put the guaran-
tees of Roe into law through Congressional action. The act did not pass.
Following is the text of the proposed legislation as reported in the Senate.
A BILL To protect the reproductive rights of women, and for other
purposes.
(a) FINDINGS—Congress finds the following:
(1) The 1973 Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade established
constitutionally based limits on the power of States to restrict the right
of a woman to choose to terminate a pregnancy. Under the strict
scrutiny standard enunciated in Roe v. Wade, States were required to
demonstrate that laws restricting the right of a woman to choose to ter-
minate a pregnancy were the least restrictive means available to
achieve a compelling State interest. Since 1989, the Supreme Court has
no longer applied the strict scrutiny standard in reviewing challenges
to the constitutionality of State laws restricting such rights.
(2) As a result of the Supreme Court’s recent modification of the
strict scrutiny standard enunciated in Roe v. Wade, certain States have
restricted the right of women to choose to terminate a pregnancy or to
utilize some forms of contraception, and these restrictions operate
cumulatively to—
(A)(i) increase the number of illegal or medically less safe abor-
tions, often resulting in physical impairment, loss of reproductive
capacity or death to the women involved;
(ii) burden interstate commerce by forcing women to travel from
States in which legal barriers render contraception or abortion unavail-
able or unsafe to other States or foreign nations;
(iii) interfere with freedom of travel between and among the vari-
ous States;
(iv) burden the medical and economic resources of States that con-
tinue to provide women with access to safe and legal abortion ; and
(v) interfere with the ability of medical professionals to provide
health services;
182
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

(B) obstruct access to and use of contraceptive and other medical
techniques that are part of interstate and international commerce;
(C) discriminate between women who are able to afford interstate
and international travel and women who are not, a disproportionate
number of whom belong to racial or ethnic minorities; and
(D) infringe upon women’s ability to exercise full enjoyment of
rights secured to them by Federal and State law, both statutory and
constitutional.
(3) Although Congress may not by legislation create constitutional
rights, it may, where authorized by its enumerated powers and not
prohibited by a constitutional provision, enact legislation to create and
secure statutory rights in areas of legitimate national concern.
(4) Congress has the affirmative power both under section 8 of
article I of the Constitution of the United States and under section 5 of
the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution to enact legislation to
prohibit State interference with interstate commerce, liberty or equal
protection of the laws.
(b) PURPOSE—It is the purpose of this Act to establish, as a statu-
tory matter, limitations upon the power of States to restrict the freedom
of a woman to terminate a pregnancy in order to achieve the same lim-
itations as provided, as a constitutional matter, under the strict scrutiny
standard of review enunciated in Roe v. Wade and applied in subse-
quent cases from 1973 to 1988.
SEC. 3. FREEDOM TO CHOOSE.
(a) IN GENERAL—A State—
(1) may not restrict the freedom of a woman to choose whether or
not to terminate a pregnancy before fetal viability;
(2) may restrict the freedom of a woman to choose whether or not
to terminate a pregnancy after fetal viability unless such a termination
is necessary to preserve the life or health of the woman; and
(3) may impose requirements on the performance of abortion pro-
cedures if such requirements are medically necessary to protect the
health of women undergoing such procedures.
(b) RULES OF CONSTRUCTION—Nothing in this Act shall be
construed to—
(1) prevent a State from protecting unwilling individuals or pri-
vate health care institutions from having to participate in the perfor-
mance of abortions to which they are conscientiously opposed;
(2) prevent a State from declining to pay for the performance of
abortions; or
(3) prevent a State from requiring a minor to involve a parent,
guardian, or other responsible adult before terminating a pregnancy.
(Source: 103d Congress; 1st Session; S. 25; [Report No. 103-42].)
Excerpts from Important Proposed and Enacted Statutes
183
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Freedom of Access to Clinics 
Entrances Act (FACE) of 1994 
After a dramatic increase in violence at abortion clinics, Congress
enacted the following bill making forceful obstruction a federal offense.
(a) Prohibited activities. —Whoever— 
(1) by force or threat of force or by physical obstruction, intention-
ally injures, intimidates or interferes with or attempts to injure, intimi-
date or interfere with any person because that person is or has been, or
in order to intimidate such person or any other person or any class of
persons from, obtaining or providing reproductive health services; 
(2) by force or threat of force or by physical obstruction, intention-
ally injures, intimidates or interferes with or attempts to injure, intimi-
date or interfere with any person lawfully exercising or seeking to
exercise the First Amendment right of religious freedom at a place of
religious worship; or 
(3) intentionally damages or destroys the property of a facility, or
attempts to do so, because such facility provides reproductive health
services, or intentionally damages or destroys the property of a place
of religious worship, shall be subject to the penalties provided in sub-
section (b) and the civil remedies provided in subsection (c), except
that a parent or legal guardian of a minor shall not be subject to any
penalties or civil remedies under this section for such activities insofar
as they are directed exclusively at that minor.
(b) Penalties. —Whoever violates this section shall— 
(1) in the case of a first offense, be fined in accordance with this
title, or imprisoned not more than one year, or both; and 
(2) in the case of a second or subsequent offense after a prior con-
viction under this section, be fined in accordance with this title, or
imprisoned not more than 3 years, or both; except that for an offense
involving exclusively a nonviolent physical obstruction, the fine shall
be not more than $10,000 and the length of imprisonment shall be not
more than six months, or both, for the first offense; and the fine shall,
notwithstanding section 3571, be not more than $25,000 and the length
of imprisonment shall be not more than 18 months, or both, for a sub-
sequent offense; and except that if bodily injury results, the length of
imprisonment shall be not more than 10 years, and if death results, it
shall be for any term of years or for life.
(c) Civil remedies. — 
(1) Right of action. — 
(A) In general. —Any person aggrieved by reason of the conduct
prohibited by subsection (a) may commence a civil action for the relief
set forth in subparagraph (B), except that such an action may be
brought under subsection (a)(1) only by a person involved in provid-
ing or seeking to provide, or obtaining or seeking to obtain, services in
184
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

a facility that provides reproductive health services, and such an action
may be brought under subsection (a)(2) only by a person lawfully exer-
cising or seeking to exercise the First Amendment right of religious
freedom at a place of religious worship or by the entity that owns or
operates such place of religious worship.
(B) Relief. —In any action under subparagraph (A), the court may
award appropriate relief, including temporary, preliminary or perma-
nent injunctive relief and compensatory and punitive damages, as well
as the costs of suit and reasonable fees for attorneys and expert wit-
nesses. With respect to compensatory damages, the plaintiff may elect,
at any time prior to the rendering of final judgment, to recover, in lieu
of actual damages, an award of statutory damages in the amount of
$5,000 per violation.
(Source: 18 U.S.C. § 248.)
Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act 2003 
After two attempts during President Bill Clinton’s administration, pro-
life activists were successful in 2003 when President George W. Bush
signed the federal ban on partial-birth abortions. In 2007, the Supreme
Court upheld the constitutionality of this law.
The Congress finds and declares the following:
(1) A moral, medical, and ethical consensus exists that the practice
of performing a partial-birth abortion—an abortion in which a physi-
cian deliberately and intentionally vaginally delivers a living, unborn
child’s body until either the entire baby’s head is outside the body of
the mother, or any part of the baby’s trunk past the navel is outside the
body of the mother and only the head remains inside the womb, for the
purpose of performing an overt act (usually the puncturing of the back
of the child’s skull and removing the baby’s brains) that the person
knows will kill the partially delivered infant, performs this act, and then
completes delivery of the dead infant—is a gruesome and inhumane
procedure that is never medically necessary and should be prohibited.
(2) Rather than being an abortion procedure that is embraced by the
medical community, particularly among physicians who routinely per-
form other abortion procedures, partial-birth abortion remains a disfa-
vored procedure that is not only unnecessary to preserve the health of the
mother, but in fact poses serious risks to the long-term health of women
and in some circumstances, their lives. As a result, at least 27 States
banned the procedure as did the United States Congress which voted to
ban the procedure during the 104th, 105th, and 106th Congresses.
(3) In Stenberg v. Carhart, 530 U.S. 914, 932 (2000), the United
States Supreme Court opined “that significant medical authority sup-
ports the proposition that in some circumstances, [partial birth abortion]
Excerpts from Important Proposed and Enacted Statutes
185
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

would be the safest procedure” for pregnant women who wish to
undergo an abortion. Thus, the Court struck down the State of
Nebraska’s ban on partial-birth abortion procedures, concluding that it
placed an “undue burden” on women seeking abortions because it
failed to include an exception for partial-birth abortions deemed neces-
sary to preserve the “health” of the mother.
. . .
13) There exists substantial record evidence upon which Congress
has reached its conclusion that a ban on partial-birth abortion is not
required to contain a “health” exception, because the facts indicate that
a partial-birth abortion is never necessary to preserve the health of a
woman, poses serious risks to a woman’s health, and lies outside the
standard of medical care. Congress was informed by extensive hear-
ings held during the 104th, 105th, 107th, and 108th Congresses and
passed a ban on partial-birth abortion in the 104th, 105th, and 106th
Congresses. These findings reflect the very informed judgment of the
Congress that a partial-birth abortion is never necessary to preserve the
health of a woman, poses serious risks to a woman’s health, and lies
outside the standard of medical care, and should, therefore, be banned.
. . .
SEC. 3. PROHIBITION ON PARTIAL-BIRTH ABORTIONS.
a) In General. —Title 18, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting after chapter 73 the following:
“CHAPTER 74—PARTIAL-BIRTH ABORTIONS
“Sec. 1531. Partial-birth abortions prohibited.” (a) Any physician
who, in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce, knowingly per-
forms a partial-birth abortion and thereby kills a human fetus shall be
fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 2 years, or both.
This subsection does not apply to a partial-birth abortion that is neces-
sary to save the life of a mother whose life is endangered by a physical
disorder, physical illness, or physical injury, including a life-endanger-
ing physical condition caused by or arising from the pregnancy itself.
(Source: 18 USC 1531; Public Law 108-105 108th Congress.)
The Unborn Victims of Violence Act of 2004 
In 2004, Congress enacted a law making the attack on a pregnant
woman that injures the fetus she is carrying a separate crime; this law
is also called “Laci and Connor’s law.”
(a) In General.—Title 18, United States Code, is amended by
inserting after chapter 90 the following:
(a)(1) Whoever engages in conduct that violates any of the provi-
sions of law listed in subsection (b) and thereby causes the death of, or
bodily injury (as defined in section 1365) to, a child, who is in utero at
186
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

the time the conduct takes place, is guilty of a separate offense under
this section.
(2)(A) Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the pun-
ishment for that separate offense is the same as the punishment pro-
vided under Federal law for that conduct had that injury or death
occurred to the unborn child’s mother.
(B) An offense under this section does not require proof that—(i)
the person engaging in the conduct had knowledge or should have
had knowledge that the victim of the underlying offense was pregnant;
or (ii) the defendant intended to cause the death of, or bodily injury to,
the unborn child.
(C) If the person engaging in the conduct thereby intentionally
kills or attempts to kill the unborn child, that person shall instead of
being punished under subparagraph (A), be punished as provided
under sections 1111, 1112, and 1113 of this title for intentionally killing
or attempting to kill a human being.
(D) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the death
penalty shall not be imposed for an offense under this section.
. . .
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the prosecu-
tion—(1) of any person for conduct relating to an abortion for which the
consent of the pregnant woman, or a person authorized by law to act on
her behalf, has been obtained or for which such consent is implied by law;
(2) of any person for any medical treatment of the pregnant woman or her
unborn child; or (3) of any woman with respect to her unborn child.
(d) As used in this section, the term ‘unborn child’ means a child
in utero, and the term ‘child in utero’ or ‘child, who is in utero’ means
a member of the species homo sapiens, at any stage of development,
who is carried in the womb.
(Source: Public Law 108-212 118 STAT. 568. 18 USC 1841 108th Congress.)
Unborn Child Pain Awareness Act of 2005 
The following is a bill introduced in the 109th Congress by pro-life leg-
islators but that did not pass. It was introduced in the Senate as S 51.
Congress makes the following findings:
(1) At least 20 weeks after fertilization, an unborn child has the
physical structures necessary to experience pain.
(2) There is substantial evidence that by 20 weeks after fertilization,
unborn children draw away from certain stimuli in a manner which in
an infant or an adult would be interpreted as a response to pain.
(3) Anesthesia is routinely administered to unborn children who
have developed 20 weeks or more past fertilization who undergo pre-
natal surgery.
Excerpts from Important Proposed and Enacted Statutes
187
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

(4) There is substantial evidence that the abortion methods most
commonly used 20 weeks after fertilization cause substantial pain to an
unborn child, whether by dismemberment, poisoning, penetrating or
crushing the skull, or other methods. Examples of abortion methods
used 20 weeks after fertilization include, but are not limited to the 
following:
(A) The Dilation and Evacuation (D&E) method of abortion is com-
monly performed in the second trimester of pregnancy. In a dilation and
evacuation abortion, the unborn child’s body parts are grasped at ran-
dom with a long-toothed clamp. The fetal body parts are then torn off of
the body and pulled out of the vaginal canal. The remaining body parts
are grasped and pulled out until only the head remains. The head is then
grasped and crushed in order to remove it from the vaginal canal.
(B) Partial-Birth Abortion is an abortion in which the abortion
practitioner delivers an unborn child’s body until only the head
remains inside the womb, punctures the back of the child’s skull with a
sharp instrument, and sucks the child’s brains out before completing
the delivery of the dead infant.
(5) Expert testimony confirms that by 20 weeks after fertilization
an unborn child may experience substantial pain even if the woman
herself has received local analgesic or general anesthesia.
(6) Medical science is capable of reducing such pain through the
administration of anesthesia or other pain-reducing drugs directly to
the unborn child.
The Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 201 et seq.) is amended
by adding at the end the following:
`SEC. 2902. REQUIREMENT OF INFORMED CONSENT.
(1) IN GENERAL —Before any part of an abortion involving a
pain-capable unborn child begins, the abortion provider or his or her
agent shall provide the pregnant woman involved, by telephone or in
person, with the information described in paragraph (2).
(2) REQUIRED INFORMATION-
(A) ORAL STATEMENT-
(i) IN GENERAL —An abortion provider or the provider’s agent
to whom paragraph (1) applies shall make the following oral statement
to the pregnant woman (or in the case of a deaf or non-English speak-
ing woman, provide the statement in a manner that she can easily
understand):
You are considering having an abortion of an unborn child who
will have developed, at the time of the abortion, approximately XX
weeks after fertilization. The Congress of the United States has deter-
mined that at this stage of development, an unborn child has the physi-
cal structures necessary to experience pain. There is substantial evidence
that by this point, unborn children draw away from surgical instruments
in a manner which in an infant or an adult would be interpreted as a
response to pain. Congress finds that there is substantial evidence that
188
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

the process of being killed in an abortion will cause the unborn child
pain, even though you receive a pain-reducing drug or drugs. Under the
Federal Unborn Child Pain Awareness Act of 2005, you have the option
of choosing to have anesthesia or other pain-reducing drug or drugs
administered directly to the pain-capable unborn child if you so desire.
The purpose of administering such drug or drugs would be to reduce or
eliminate the capacity of the unborn child to experience pain during the
abortion procedure. In some cases, there may be some additional risk to
you associated with administering such a drug.
(ii) DESCRIPTION OF RISKS —After making the statement
required under clause (i), the abortion provider may provide the
woman involved with his or her best medical judgment on the risks of
administering such anesthesia or analgesic, if any, and the costs associ-
ated therewith.
(iii) ADMINISTRATION OF ANESTHESIA —If the abortion
provider is not qualified or willing to administer the anesthesia or
other pain-reducing drug in response to the request of a pregnant
woman after making the statement required under clause (i), the
provider shall—(I) arrange for a qualified specialist to administer such
anesthesia or drug; or (II) advise the pregnant woman—(aa) where she
may obtain such anesthesia or other pain-reducing drugs for the
unborn child in the course of an abortion; or (bb) that the abortion
provider is unable to perform the abortion if the woman elects to
receive anesthesia or other pain-reducing drugs for her unborn child.
(Source: H.R. 356; 109th Congress; S.R. 21 109th Congress.)
Prevention First Act 
The supporters of the Prevention First bill want the government to
increase and maintain funding for contraceptive information and ser-
vices; it is framed as a way to prevent unwanted pregnancy. Following
is the text of the bill as introduced in the House as H.R.819 in 2007
(110th Congress).
The Congress finds as follows:
(1) Healthy People 2010 sets forth a reduction of unintended preg-
nancies as an important health objective for the Nation to achieve over
the first decade of the new century, a goal first articulated in the 1979 Sur-
geon General’s Report, Healthy People, and reiterated in Healthy People
2000: National Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Objectives.
(2) Although the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(referred to in this section as the ‘CDC’) included family planning in its
published list of the Ten Great Public Health Achievements in the 20th
Century, the United States still has one of the highest rates of unin-
tended pregnancies among industrialized nations.
Excerpts from Important Proposed and Enacted Statutes
189
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

(3) Each year, 3,000,000 pregnancies, nearly half of all pregnancies,
in the United States are unintended, and nearly half of unintended
pregnancies end in abortion.
(4) In 2004, 34,400,000 women, half of all women of reproductive
age, were in need of contraceptive services and supplies to help pre-
vent unintended pregnancy, and nearly half of those were in need of
public support for such care.
(5) The United States has the highest rate of infection with sexu-
ally transmitted diseases of any industrialized country. In 2005, there
were approximately 19,000,000 new cases of sexually transmitted dis-
eases, almost half of them occurring in young people ages 15 to 24.
According to the CDC, these sexually transmitted diseases impose a
tremendous economic burden with direct medical costs as high as
$14,100,000,000 per year.
(6) Increasing access to family planning services will improve
women’s health and reduce the rates of unintended pregnancy, abor-
tion, and infection with sexually transmitted diseases. Contraceptive
use saves public health dollars. For every dollar spent to increase fund-
ing for family planning programs under title X of the Public Health
Service Act, $3.80 is saved.
(7) Contraception is basic health care that improves the health of
women and children by enabling women to plan and space births.
(8) Women experiencing unintended pregnancy are at greater risk
for physical abuse and women having closely spaced births are at
greater risk of maternal death.
(9) A child born from an unintended pregnancy is at greater risk
than a child born from an intended pregnancy of low birth weight,
dying in the first year of life, being abused, and not receiving sufficient
resources for healthy development.
(10) The ability to control fertility allows couples to achieve eco-
nomic stability by facilitating greater educational achievement and par-
ticipation in the workforce.
(11) Without contraception, a sexually active woman has an 85
percent chance of becoming pregnant within a year.
(12) The percentage of sexually active women ages 15 through 44
who were not using contraception increased from 5.4 percent to 7.4
percent in 2002, an increase of 37 percent, according to the CDC. This
represents an apparent increase of 1,430,000 women and could raise
the rate of unintended pregnancy.
(13) Many poor and low-income women cannot afford to pur-
chase contraceptive services and supplies on their own. In 2003, 20.5
percent of all women ages 15 through 44 were uninsured.
. . .
(27) Teens who receive comprehensive sexuality education that
includes discussion of contraception as well as abstinence are more
190
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

likely than those who receive abstinence-only messages to delay sex, to
have fewer partners, and to use contraceptives when they do become
sexually active.
(28) Government-funded abstinence-only-until-marriage programs
are precluded from discussing contraception except to talk about failure
rates. An October 2006 report by the Government Accountability Office
found that the Department of Health and Human Services does not review
the materials of recipients of grants administered by such department for
scientific accuracy and requires grantees to review their own materials for
scientific accuracy. The GAO also reported on the Department’s total lack
of appropriate and customary measurements to determine if funded pro-
grams are effective. In addition, a separate letter from the Government
Accountability Office found that the Department of Health and Human
Services is in violation of Federal law by failing to enforce a requirement
under the Public Health Service Act that federally-funded grantees work-
ing to address the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases, including
abstinence-only-until-marriage programs, must provide medically accurate
information about the effectiveness of condoms.
(29) Recent scientific reports by the Institute of Medicine, the
American Medical Association, and the Office on National AIDS Policy
stress the need for sexuality education that includes messages about
abstinence and provides young people with information about contra-
ception for the prevention of teen pregnancy, HIV/AIDS, and other
sexually transmitted diseases.
(30) A 2006 statement from the American Public Health Associa-
tion (‘APHA’) ‘recognizes the importance of abstinence education, but
only as part of a comprehensive sexuality education program . . .
APHA calls for repealing current federal funding for abstinence-only
programs and replacing it with funding for a new Federal program to
promote comprehensive sexuality education, combining information
about abstinence with age-appropriate sexuality education.’
. . .
TITLE II—EQUITY IN PRESCRIPTION INSURANCE AND 
CONTRACEPTIVE COVERAGE
TITLE III—EMERGENCY CONTRACEPTION EDUCATION
AND INFORMATION
TITLE IV—COMPASSIONATE ASSISTANCE FOR RAPE 
EMERGENCIES
TITLE V—AT-RISK COMMUNITIES TEENAGE PREGNANCY
PREVENTION ACT
TITLE VI—ACCURACY OF CONTRACEPTIVE INFORMATION
TITLE VII—UNINTENDED PREGNANCY REDUCTION ACT
TITLE VIII—RESPONSIBLE EDUCATION ABOUT LIFE ACT
(Source: Library of Congress Thomas http://thomas.loc.gov/.)
Excerpts from Important Proposed and Enacted Statutes
191
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Current State Laws 
Regulating Abortion
Regulations of Abortion Practice
Constitutional Framework: States have no authority to prohibit
abortion practice prior to viability, with the possible exception of
partial birth procedures, but they can regulate the medical con-
ditions of the procedure to promote women’s health. After via-
bility, states may proscribe abortion except to protect a woman’s
life or health.
Overview: Thirty-nine states require abortion to be per-
formed by a licensed physician and thirty-six prohibit abortions
after viability, at 24 weeks, or in the third trimester. After a spec-
ified point in the pregnancy, nineteen states require that the pro-
cedure be performed in a hospital, and eighteen mandate the
involvement of a second physician as seen in Table 6.1, page 193.
Limits on Public Funding
Constitutional Framework: It is constitutional for states to prohibit
the use of public funds and facilities for abortion. The federal
Hyde Amendment prohibits the states from using federal Medic-
aid funds for abortions for poor women. The states have author-
ity to use their own funds.
Overview: Table 6.2, page 195, shows that most states follow
the federal policy and fund only those abortions necessary
because of threats to life or because of rape or incest. Seventeen
states fund all or nearly all medically necessary abortions.
Parental Involvement
Constitutional Framework: States have the authority to require
parental consent or notification for minors’ abortions as long as a
judicial bypass is available. Some states have their own constitu-
tional requirements that limit the power of government to allow
parents to impede abortions for their minor daughters.
Overview: Table 6.3, page 197, tallies the state regulations.
Thirty-four states require either notification, consent, or both, but
all of these states have provisions for judicial bypass. Other
192
Data and Documents
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Current State Laws Regulating Abortion
193
TABLE 6.1
State Regulations of Abortion Practice
When the
Procedure
When the
Is Prohibited
Must Be
Procedure
When a
Except When
Performed
Must Be
Second
the Woman’s
by Licensed
Performed
Physician
Health/Life
State
Physician
in Hospital
Is Required
Are in Danger*
Alabama
X
Viability
Viability
Viability
Alaska
X
Arizona
X
Viability
Viability
Arkansas
X
Viability
Viability
California
X
Viability
Colorado
X
Connecticut
X
Viability
Viability
Delaware
**
District of Columbia
Florida
X
24 weeks
24 weeks
Georgia
X
3rd trimester
3rd trimester
Hawaii
X
Idaho
X
Viability
3rd trimester
Viability
Illinois
X
Viability
Viability
Indiana
X
2d trimester
Viability
Viability
Iowa
X
3rd trimester
Kansas
Viability
Viability
Kentucky
2d trimester
Viability
Louisiana
X
Viability
Viability
Maine
X
Viability
Maryland
X
Viability
Massachusetts
X
12 weeks
24 weeks
Michigan
X
Viability
Minnesota
X
2nd trimester
**
**
Mississippi
X
Missouri
X
Viability
Viability
Viability
Montana
Viability
Viability
Nebraska
X
Viability
Nevada
X
12 weeks
24 weeks
New Hampshire
New Jersey
X
14 weeks
New Mexico
New York
24 weeks
24 weeks
North Carolina
X
20 weeks
20 weeks
North Dakota
X
12 weeks
12 weeks
Viability
Ohio
X
**
**
Oklahoma
X
2nd trimester
Viability
Viability
Oregon
continues
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

exceptions are often permitted, such as medical emergency or in
cases of abuse, assault, incest, or neglect.
Mandatory Counseling 
and Waiting Periods
Constitutional Framework: States have the authority to require
counseling and waiting periods for women seeking abortions as
long as the regulations are not deemed to be undue burdens on
women and do not prevent women from obtaining abortions
within the law. The Supreme Court has ruled that it is constitu-
tional for states to adopt policies that favor birth over abortion.
Overview: A majority of states require counseling. Table 6.4,
page 199, shows that in twenty-three states, the department of
health develops materials that must be used. Some legislatures
194
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.1
Continued
When the
Procedure
When the
Is Prohibited
Must Be
Procedure
When a
Except When
Performed
Must Be
Second
the Woman’s
by Licensed
Performed
Physician
Health/Life
State
Physician
in Hospital
Is Required
Are in Danger*
Pennsylvania
X
Viability
Viability
24 weeks
Rhode Island
X
24 weeks
South Carolina
X
3rd trimester
3rd trimester
3rd trimester
South Dakota
X
24 weeks
24 weeks
Tennessee
X
Viability
Texas
X
3rd trimester
Utah
X
90 days
**
Vermont
Virginia
X
2nd trimester
Viability
3d trimester
Washington
Viability
West Virginia
Wisconsin
X
12 weeks
Viability
Wyoming
X
Viability
Total
39
19
18
36
*There may be other exceptions for rape, incest, or restrictions to life endangerment only;  check specific state laws
at www.guttmacher.org. 
**Permanently enjoined law by court order.
Source:  The Alan Guttmacher Institute, www.guttmacher.org.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Current State Laws Regulating Abortion
195
TABLE 6.2
Limits on State Funding for Abortions
Follows Federal
Standard of Life
Endangerment,
State
Rape, and Incest
Other Exceptions
Funds Most Abortions
Alabama
X
Alaska
By court order
Arizona
By court order
Arkansas
X
California
By court order
Colorado
X
Connecticut
By court order
Delaware
X
District of Columbia
X
Florida
X
Georgia
X
Hawaii
Voluntarily
Idaho
X
Illinois
By court order
Indiana
X
Physical health
Iowa
X
Fetal abnormality
Kansas
X
Kentucky
X
Louisiana
X
Maine
X
Maryland
Voluntarily
Massachusetts
By court order
Michigan
X
Minnesota
By court order
Mississippi
X
Fetal abnormality
Missouri
X
Montana
By court order
Nebraska
X
Nevada
X
New Hampshire
X
New Jersey
By court order
New Mexico
By court order
New York
Voluntarily
North Carolina
X
North Dakota
X
Ohio
X
Oklahoma
X
Oregon
By court order
Pennsylvania
X
Rhode Island
X
South Carolina
X
continues
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

mandate specific information to be included such as assistance
available so women can give birth rather than choose abortion or
a list of pregnancy support centers. These centers are controver-
sial because pro-choice abortion providers claim they are fronts
for intimidating women against choosing abortion. A few states
mandate information that is of questionable scientific merit,
including a reputed link between abortion and breast cancer and
allegations that a fetus feels pain, offering anesthesia to the fetus
(see the next section for more information). Twenty-four states
require a waiting period between the time of the counseling and
the procedure.
Medical Accuracy of Mandated 
Counseling Materials
Constitutional framework: The Supreme Court has upheld laws
that require specific information about abortion as part of overall
“informed consent” policies. They have said these are acceptable
under the law if the information provided is accurate and not
misleading. In addition, medical ethics standards prohibit doc-
tors or anyone else from using personal opinion in lieu of scien-
tifically accepted information. States have the constitutional
196
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.2
Continued
Follows Federal
Standard of Life
Endangerment,
State
Rape, and Incest
Other Exceptions
Funds Most Abortions
South Dakota
*
Tennessee
X
Texas
X
Utah
X
Physical health/Fetal abnormality
Vermont
By court order
Virginia
X
Fetal abnormality
Washington
Voluntarily
West Virginia
By court order
Wisconsin
X
Physical health
Wyoming
X
Total
33
17
*State only pays when abortion is to save woman’s life.
Source: The Alan Guttmacher Institute, www.guttmacher.org.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Current State Laws Regulating Abortion
197
TABLE 6.3
Parental Involvement Requirements
Requires
Medical
Abuse, Assault,
Parental
Judicial
Emergency
and Incest
State
Involvement*
Bypass
Exceptions
Exceptions
Alabama
Consent
X
X
X
Alaska
**
Arizona
Consent
X
X
X
Arkansas
Consent
X
X
X
California
**
Colorado
Notification
X
X
Connecticut
Delaware
Notification
X
X
District of Columbia
Florida
Notification
X
X
Georgia
Notification
X
X
Hawaii
Idaho
**
Illinois
**
Indiana
Consent
X
X
Iowa
Notification
X
X
X
Kansas
Notification
X
X
X
Kentucky
Consent
X
X
Louisiana
Consent
X
Maine
Maryland
Notification
X
Massachusetts
Consent
X
Michigan
Consent
X
X
Minnesota
Notification of both parents
X
X
X
Mississippi
Consent of both parents
X
X
Missouri
Consent
X
Montana
**
Nebraska
Notification
X
X
X
Nevada
**
New Hampshire
**
New Jersey
**
New Mexico
**
New York
North Carolina
Consent
X
X
North Dakota
Consent of both parents
X
X
Ohio
Consent
X
Oklahoma
Consent and notification
X
X
X
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Consent
X
X
Rhode Island
Consent
X
X
South Carolina
Consent
X
X
X
South Dakota
Notification
X
X
continues
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

authority to develop their own materials and require abortion
providers to use them. Twenty-three states do this. How accurate
are these counseling materials?
Overview: Table 6.5, page 201, is based on work by Richard-
son and Nash who compared the state requirements with med-
ical literature and found that most of the materials produced by
state health departments are accurate. In a few egregious cases,
however, states require women to be informed of certain risks of
abortion that are not confirmed by scientific research. Following
are some of those unconfirmed risks:
1. Link between abortion and breast cancer. Some states
require patients to be told that abortion greatly increases
the risk of breast cancer. In 2003, however, the National
Cancer Institute issued an official denial of such a link.
Other states require women be given accurate informa-
tion that there is no link.
2. Postabortion psychological trauma. Pro-life activists claim
that women who have abortions are plagued by long-
lasting psychological consequences, and some states
include this warning in their materials. Experts on psy-
chology and psychiatry deny this claim, and their
research shows that there is no causal relationship.
198
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.3
Continued
Requires
Medical
Abuse, Assault,
Parental
Judicial
Emergency
and Incest
State
Involvement*
Bypass
Exceptions
Exceptions
Tennessee
Consent
X
X
X
Texas
Consent
X
X
Utah
Consent and notification
X
X
X
Vermont
Virginia
Consent
X
X
X
Washington
West Virginia
Notification
X
X
Wisconsin
Consent
X
X
X
Wyoming
Consent
X
X
Total
34
34
28
13
*Except where indicated requires involvement of one parent only.
**Permanently enjoined law by court order.
Source:  The Alan Guttmacher Institute, www.guttmacher.org.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Current State Laws Regulating Abortion
199
TABLE 6.4
Mandatory Counseling and Waiting Periods
Information
Length of
Counseling
Information on
on Abortion
Waiting
State
Required
Pro-birth Care
Alternatives
Period
Alabama
X
X
24 hours
Alaska
X
X
Arizona
Arkansas
X
X
X
Prior day
California
X
Colorado
Connecticut
X
Delaware
X
X
District of Columbia
Florida
**
Georgia
X
X
24 hours
Hawaii
Idaho
X
X
24 hours
Illinois
X
Indiana
X
X
18 hours
Iowa
Kansas
X
X
X
24 hours
Kentucky
X
X
X
24 hours
Louisiana
X
X
X
24 hours
Maine
X
Maryland
Massachusetts
**
Michigan
X
X
24 hours
Minnesota
X
X
24 hours
Mississippi
X
X
24 hours
Missouri
X
X
24 hours
Montana
**
**
Nebraska
X
X
24 hours
Nevada
X
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
X
X
24 hours
Ohio
X
X
24 hours
Oklahoma
X
X
X
24 hours
Oregon
Pennsylvania
X
X
X
24 hours
Rhode Island
X
X
South Carolina
X
X
X
1 hour
South Dakota
X
X
24 hours
continues
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Some states assert the existence of a “postabortion trau-
matic stress syndrome.” This syndrome is also not rec-
ognized by the experts.
3. Fetuses feel pain: Antiabortion experts also insist that
women be told that their fetuses will feel pain and that
they can choose anesthesia for them. In fact, at best
there is disagreement among scientists about this claim;
most argue that there is no evidence for the assertion
that fetuses “feel” pain. Five states include incorrect
materials about this.
State Policies if Roe Fell
Constitutional framework: If the Supreme Court completely
reversed the Roe decision, the authority to regulate abortion—
allow it, prohibit it, regulate it—would return to the states.
Overview: Even in 2006 and 2007, some state legislatures have
passed or considered bills that directly oppose the Roe guarantees
of women’s liberty in seeking abortions before the fetus is viable.
Others have left the pre-Roe bills on the books. See in Table 6.6,
page 202, that sixteen states have laws that could be used to limit
access to abortion if Roe is no longer binding on them and five oth-
ers have expressed their intent to enact such laws. Seven states
have laws that protect choice in abortion. Ten states have consti-
200
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.4
Continued
Information
Length of
Counseling
Information on
on Abortion
Waiting
State
Required
Pro-birth Care
Alternatives
Period
Tennessee
X
**
Texas
X
X
X
24 hours
Utah
X
X
X
24 hours
Vermont
Virginia
X
X
X
24 hours
Washington
West Virginia
X
X
24 hours
Wisconsin
X
X
24 hours
Wyoming
Total
32
21
17
24
**Permanently enjoined law by court order.
Source: The Alan Guttmacher Institute, www.guttmacher.org.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

tutions that have explicit privacy provisions in their constitutions
that could limit a complete crackdown on legal abortion.
Abortion Practice: Incidence and Services
The incidence of abortion is typically measured three ways:
• Absolute number of abortions
• Abortion ratio: number of abortions per 1,000 live births
• Abortion rate: number of abortions for 1,000 women of
childbearing age (15–44 years)
Abortion Practice: Incidence and Services
201
TABLE 6.5
Accuracy of State-Developed Abortion Counseling Materials
Breast Cancer
Psychological
Information
State
and Abortion
Effects of Abortion
on Fetal Pain
Alabama
Correct
Alaska
False
Correct
Arkansas
Correct
X
Georgia
Correct
X
Idaho
Correct
Kansas 
False
Correct
Kentucky
Louisiana
Michigan
False
Minnesota
Correct
Correct
X
Mississippi
False
Nebraska
False
North Dakota
Ohio
Pennsylvania
Correct
South Carolina
False
South Dakota
False
X
Texas
False
False
X
Utah
False
Virginia
Correct
West Virginia
False
False
Wisconsin
Correct
Total
5 False
7 False
5 
1 Correct
11 Correct
Source: Richardson, Chinué Turner, and Elizabeth Nash. 2006. “Misinformed Consent: The Medical Accuracy of State-
Developed Abortion Counseling Materials.”  Guttmacher Policy Review 9 (Fall): 6–11.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

202
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.6
State Policies after Roe
Abortion Policy
States
States with criminal abortion laws intended to ban abortion if Roe is overturned
Louisiana
South Dakota
Utah
States where pre-Roe ban is still on the books; some have exceptions for life, health, 
Alabama
pregnancy due to rape or incest, or chance of fetal defect
Arizona
Arkansas
Colorado
Delaware
Massachusetts
Michigan
Mississippi
New Mexico
Oklahoma
Vermont
West Virginia
Wisconsin
States where legislatures have expressed intent to limit abortion to the maximum 
Arkansas
extent after Roe
Illinois
Kentucky
Missouri
North Dakota
States with laws protecting the right to abortion
California
Connecticut
Hawaii
Maine
Maryland
Nevada
Washington
States with explicit privacy provisions in the constitution that could serve to protect the 
Alaska
right to abortion 
Arizona
California
Florida
Hawaii
Illinois
Louisiana
Montana
South Carolina
Washington
Source:  The Alan Guttmacher Institute, www.guttmacher.org.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Incidence of Abortion in the 
United States—CDC Data
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), an
agency in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
has conducted its “abortion surveillance” studies since 1969. Sur-
veillance data are compiled from reports about the number of
legal induced abortions from central health agencies in the states,
the District of Columbia, and New York City. Although there are
questions about the extent to which these health agencies receive
the reports of all abortions, the data covered all fifty states until
1997. Between 1998 and 2003, California and New Hampshire
did not report. Oklahoma did not report during 1998–1999, and
Alaska did not report until 2003. Thus, the latest figures under-
report the number of abortions. Nevertheless, they do show
trends over time, as seen in Table 6.7, page 204.
Incidence of Abortion in the 
United State—AGI Data
Recognizing the limits of the CDC surveillance data, the Alan
Guttmacher Institute (AGI) does a periodic survey of all known
abortion providers. The most recent reports cover 1999–2000 as
shown in Table 6.8, page 205. Based on this survey, the figures
show a higher incidence of abortion than the CDC studies but the
general pattern is the same. Abortions were highest in 1990 and
have been declining in number, rate, and ratio ever since.
Comparative Incidence of 
Abortion—UNECE Data 
Comparative data from the United Nations Economic Commis-
sion for Europe (UNECE) in Table 6.9, page 205, show the abortion
ratio of the United States compared with the rates in other coun-
tries where abortion is legal. These U.S. figures also differ from
CDC and AGI figures. However, the comparison shows that the
U.S. abortion ratio is high in relation to Western Europe, but the
highest rates are in Central and Eastern Europe where Soviet-style
abortion laws are still mostly in place.
Abortion Practice: Incidence and Services
203
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

204
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.7
CDC Reports of Number, Ratio, and Rate of Abortions 1970–2003—Selected Years
1970
1972
1980
1983
1990
1993
1998*
2003**
No. of
Abortions
193,491
615,831
1,297,606
1,268,987
1,429,247
1,330,414
883,273
838,163
Ratio per
1,000 births
52
196
359
349
344
333
264
243
Rate per 
1,000 women
aged 15–44 years
5
14
25
23
24
23
17
15
*Figures do not include abortions in Alaska, California, New Hampshire, and Oklahoma.
**Figures do not include abortions in California and New Hampshire.
Source:  Abortion Surveillance—United States, 2003.  Lilo T. Strauss, Sonya B. Gamble, Wilda Y. Parker, Douglas A. Cook, Suzanne B. Zane, Saeed Hamdan. Surveillance Summaries; CDC, November 24,
2006, 55(SS11), 1–32.  www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss5511a1.htm.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Abortion Practice: Incidence and Services
205
TABLE 6.8 
AGI Estimates of Abortions in the United States, 1973–2003—Selected Years
1973
1980
1983
1990
1993
1998
2003
No. of
abortions
744,600
1,553,900
1,575,000
1,609,000
1,495,000
1,319,000
1,287,000
Ratio per 
1,000 births
193
303
304
280
274
251
238
Rate per
1,000 
Women aged 
15–45 years
16.3
29.3
28.5
27.4
25.0
21.5
20.8
Source:  Finer, Lawrence B., and Stanley K. Henshaw. 2006. “Estimates of U.S. Abortion Incidence, 2001–2003.” Alan
Guttmacher Institute. www.guttmacher.org/pubs/2006/08/03/ab_incidence.pdf.
TABLE 6.9
Comparative Data on European Countries for 
Ratio of Legal Abortions per 1,000 Live Births
Country
1980
1990
1995
2000
United States
430
387
350
327
Denmark
407
325
254
234
Finland
238
187
157
193
France
—
254
255
—
Germany
290
200
128
176
Italy
325
278
256
258
The Netherlands
117
93
110
132
Sweden
359
302
304
343
United Kingdom
231
247
239
291
Canada
430
387
350
327
Czech Republic
448
852
515
381
Hungary
544
719
687
607
Russia
2046
2063
2028
1688
Iceland
116
150
189
219
— Data not available.
Source:  United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. “Families and Households.” 2003.  www.unece.org/stats/
trends/ch2.htm.  
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Characteristics of Women 
Having Abortions
The trends suggested by data from 1973, 1990, and 2003, as
shown in Table 6.10, below, are that women over 25 years old
have the largest percentage of abortions; the lowest percentage is
among women under the age of 19 years. The rate of abortions
among blacks has been growing, but the percent of abortions
among women of Hispanic origin remains low. Less than 1.5 per-
cent of abortions are performed after the twentieth week of ges-
tation; however, if the total number of abortions is 1.3 million
that is still a large number—18,200.
206
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.10
Characteristics of Women Having Abortions in 1973, 1990, and 2003 in Percents
Characteristic
1973
1990
2003
Age 
<19 years
32.7
22.4
17.4
20–25 years
32.0
33.2
33.5
>25 years
35.3
44.4
49.1
100.0%
100%
100%
Race 
White
72.5
64.8
55.0
Black
27.5
31.9
35.1
Other
NA
3.3
7.9
100%
100%
100%
Ethnicity  
Hispanic
NA
11.4
18.1
Non-Hispanic
NA
88.6
81.9
100%
100%
Marital status
Married
27.4
21.7
17.9
Unmarried
72.6
78.3
82.1
100%
100%
100%
Weeks of gestation
<10
65.5
76.9
78.5
11–20
32.8
22.1
20.1
>29
1.7
1.0
1.4
100%
100%
100%
Note: NA = not available.
Source: Abortion Surveillance—United States, 2003. Lilo T. Strauss, Sonya B. Gamble, Wilda Y. Parker, Douglas A.
Cook, Suzanne B. Zane, Saeed Hamdan. Surveillance Summaries; CDC, November 24, 2006, / 55(SS11), 1–32.
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss5511a1.htm.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Abortion-Related Deaths
The CDC has collected information from state agencies on the
number of deaths from legal and illegal abortions since the early
1970s. The pattern shows declines in the number of deaths and
the ratio of deaths to all abortions. Table 6.11, below, shows the
figures for selected years.
Unintended Pregnancies and 
Their Consequences—2001
The primary source of information on the number and rates of
unintended pregnancies in the United States is the National Sur-
vey of Family Growth, which is conducted by the National Cen-
ter for Health Statistics. As seen in Table 6.12, page 208, Finer and
Henshaw (2006) combine that information with government
sources of information on births, abortions, and fetal losses. They
found that nearly half (48 percent) of 6.4 million pregnancies in
2001 were unintended—that is, the mother did not aim to have a
baby of that time. How many babies were “unwanted”? This is
Abortion Practice: Incidence and Services
207
TABLE 6.11
Number of Deaths from Abortions and Case Fatality Ratio, 
Selected Years, 1972–2002
Legal
Illegal
Case Fatality
Year
Abortion
Abortion
Unknown*
Total  
Ratio
1972
24
39
2
65
4.1
1974
26
6
1
33
3.4
1980
9
1
2
12
.7
1985
11
1
1
13
.8
1990
9
0
0
9
.6
1993
4
0
0
4
.3
2002
9
0
0
9
NA
Total
377
94
15
486
1.1**
Note: NA = not applicable.
*Not known whether this refers to induced or spontaneous abortions.
**This figure is only available for 1972–1997.
Source:  Abortion Surveillance—United States, 2003. Lilo T. Strauss, Sonya B. Gamble, Wilda Y. Parker, Douglas A.
Cook, Suzanne B. Zane, Saeed Hamdan. Surveillance Summaries; CDC, November 24, 2006, / 55(SS11), 1–32.
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ss5511a1.htm.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

difficult to know because parents’ attitudes change during the
course of pregnancy and childbirth. Unintended pregnancies
resulted in births and abortions on a roughly equal percentage.
The rate of unintended pregnancies varies among population
subgroups.
Abortion Services in the United States
The decline in the number of abortion providers has been steady
since the early 1990s. The drop is nationwide, although it is
greater in the South and West than in the Northeast, as shown in
Table 6.13, page 209. At the end of the twentieth century, 87 per-
cent of U.S. counties had no abortion provider. Even a majority of
metropolitan counties (61 percent) had no provider, and 70 per-
cent had no large provider, defined as one that performs more
than 400 abortions per year. Ninety-one percent of rural women
live in counties with no services compared with 21 percent of
women in metropolitan counties.
Abortion Clinic Violence
The Feminist Majority Foundation has conducted a survey of
abortion clinics since the early 1990s and publishes a tally of how
208
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.12
Intended and Unintended Pregnancies and Outcomes, 2001
Pregnancies and 
Intended Pregnancies
Unintended Pregnancies
Outcomes
and Outcomes
and Outcomes
6.4 million pregnancies
3.3 million intended pregnancies
3.1 million unintended pregnancies
4.0 million (62.5%) resulted 
2.64 million (80%) resulted 
1.36 million (44%) resulted in births
in births
in births
1.3 million (20%) resulted 
0 resulted in abortions
1.30 million (42%) resulted in abortions
in abortions
1.1 million (17%) resulted in 
.66 million (20%) resulted
fetal losses (e.g., miscarriages)
in fetal losses
.43 million (14%) resulted in fetal losses
Source:  Finer, Lawrence B., and Stanley K. Henshaw. 2006. “Disparities in Rates of Unintended Pregnancy in the
United States, 1994–2001.”  Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health 38 (2):  90–96.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

many and what percent experience various forms of violence.
Since the high point in 1994, the incidence of clinic violence has
steadily declined, as shown in Table 6.14, below. One reason is
the enactment of the federal Freedom of Access to Clinic
Entrances Act in 1994 as well as the adverse publicity of the
assassination of doctors who worked in the clinics. Most pro-life
organizations have denounced extreme violence as a way of
stopping abortions. Nevertheless, among the 337 clinics, bomb
Abortion Practice: Incidence and Services
209
TABLE 6.13
Number of Abortion Providers by Region, 1992–2000
Region
1992
1996
2000
% Change 1996–2000
Northeast
620
562
536
–5%
Midwest
260
212
188
–11%
South
620
505
442
–12%
West
880
763
653
–14%
Total 
2380
2042
1819
–11%
Source:  Finer, Lawrence B., and Stanley K. Henshaw. 2003. “Abortion Incidence and Services in the United States in
2000.” Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health 35 (1): 6–15.  
TABLE 6.14
Reported Clinic Violence, 1993–2005 
Percent Experiencing
Number Reporting Staff
Year
Extreme Violence (N=337)
Resignations Due to Violence
1993
50
23
1994
52
9
1995
39
9
1996
28
4
1997
25
7
1998
22
5
1999
20
10
2000
20
5
2002
23
7
2005
18.4
4
Source: Feminist Majority Foundation. 2006. 2005 National Clinic Violence Survey. www.feminist.org/research/
cvsurveys/clinic_survey2005.pdf.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

threats, death threats, and obstruction remain a part of providing
services, as shown in Table 6.15, below.
Public Opinion Polls 
on Abortion Issues
Following is a sample of polls taken in 2006–2007 on various aspects of
abortion. (Source: PollingReport. www.pollingreport.com/abortion.htm.) 
For the past 10 years, public opinion on the legality of abortion
has remained nearly unchanged. Fifty-four to fifty-seven percent of
registered voters think abortion should be legal in all or most cases
while 40 to 48 percent think abortion should be illegal in most or all
cases. A tiny percentage of the registered voters are unsure.
The Pew Research Center survey attempts to get at some of the
nuances in public opinion about the abortion issue and distinguishes
between legality, availability, and personal views. Responses to the sur-
vey questions show that a minority of respondents—about 30 to 35
percent—have the view that abortion should be generally available. At
the same time a minority believes abortion is always a moral issue
while about half see it as a moral question only sometimes. Overall, a
majority of respondents are looking for a national solution that finds a
middle ground. See Tables 6.17, 6.18, and 6.19, pages 212–213.
210
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.15
Percent of Clinics Reporting Types of Attacks in 2005
Type of Attack
Percent of Clinics
Stalking
3.6
Death threats
2.4
Blockades
8.3
Bomb threats
4.2
Invasions
2.1
Physical violence
1.5
Gunfire
.6
Chemical attack
.3
Arson 
2.1
Bombing
.6
Arson threat
1.6
Source: Feminist Majority Foundation. 2006. 2005 National Clinic Violence Survey. www.feminist.org/research/
cvsurveys/clinic_survey2005.pdf.  
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Another poll looks at attitudes about Roe v. Wade. Table 6.20, page
213, shows that in January 2007 a strong majority (62 percent) did not
want to see the Supreme Court overturn this decision.
Yet when people are asked about the provisions that were guaran-
teed by Roe v. Wade there is less support. This Harris poll (Table 6.21,
page 214) shows that nearly half (47 percent) oppose the central hold-
ing in the case that leaves the abortion decision in the first 3 months in
the zone of privacy.
The pro-choice movement gets sympathy of a majority of respon-
dents in the polls, but there are distinct party differences as Table 6.22,
page 215, indicates. Republicans continue to be the pro-life party while
Democrats and Independents are more welcoming to pro-choice views.
The last two tables are compiled from the General Social Survey,
which, since 1972, has asked questions of a random sample of Ameri-
can citizens about their attitudes toward abortion under certain condi-
tions. Table 6.23, page 215, shows the pattern of support for legal
Public Opinion Polls on Abortion Issues
211
TABLE 6.16
Survey Respondents’ (N=1,082 Adults) Answers (in percent) to 
Question about When Abortion Should Be Legal* 
Survey Question
Do you think abortion should be legal in all cases, legal in most cases, or illegal in all cases? 
Legal in
Legal in
Illegal in
Illegal in
Date
All Cases
Most Cases
Most Cases
All Cases 
Unsure
2/22–25/07
16
39
31
12
2
12/15–18/05
17
40
27
13
3
4/21–24/05
20
36
27
14
3
12/04
21
34
25
17
3
5/04
23
31
23
20
2
1/03
23
34
25
17
2
8/01
22
27
28
20
3
6/01
22
31
23
20
4
1/01
21
38
25
14
1
9/00**
20
35
25
16
3
7/00
20
33
26
17
4
9/99
20
37
26
15
2
3/99
21
34
27
15
3
8/96
22
34
27
14
3
6/96
24
34
25
14
2
*Margin of error ± 3.
**Survey of registered voters.
Source: Washington Post Poll, published February 22–25, 2007. Fieldwork by TNS Intersearch. 
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

212
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.17
Survey Respondents’ (N=996 Adults) Answers (in percent) to a 
Question about the Availability of Abortion*
Survey Question
Which comes closer to your view? Abortion should be generally available to those who want it.
Abortion should be available but under stricter limits than it is now. Abortion should be against
the law except in cases of rape, incest, and to save the woman’s life. Abortion should not be
permitted at all.
Generally
Rape, Incest,
Not Permitted
Date
Available
Stricter Limits
Woman’s Life Only
at All
Unsure
7/6–19/06
31
20
35
11
3
12/7–11/05
35
20
31
11
3
11/9–27/05
30
19
31
16
4
7/13–17/05
35
23
31
9
2
*Margin of error ± 3.5.
Source: Pew Research Center for the People and the Press and Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life Survey con-
ducted by Schulman, Ronca, and Bucuvalas. July 6–19, 2006. (Data from December 2005 and earlier conducted by
Princeton Survey Research Associates International.)
TABLE 6.18
Survey Respondents’ (N=996 Adults) Answers (in percent) to a 
Question about Whether Abortion Is Morally Wrong*
Survey Question
Regardless of whether or not you think abortion should be legal, do you personally believe that
having an abortion is morally wrong in nearly all circumstances, morally wrong in some
circumstances, or is it not a moral issue?
Nearly Always
Sometimes
Morally Wrong
Morally Wrong
Not a Moral Issue
Unsure
7/6–19/06
24
49
24
3
7/13–17/05
29
41
26
4
*Margin of error ± 3.5.
Source: Pew Research Center for the People and the Press and Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life Survey con-
ducted by Schulman, Ronca, and Bucuvalas. July 6–19, 2006. (Data from December 2005 and earlier conducted by
Princeton Survey Research Associates International.)
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Public Opinion Polls on Abortion Issues
213
TABLE 6.19
Survey Respondents’ (N=996 Adults) Answers (in percent) to 
Questions about the Abortion Issue*
Survey Question 1
Which comes closer to your view about the abortion issue? The country needs to find a middle
ground on abortion laws or there’s no room for compromise when it comes to abortion laws.
(Options are rotated.)
Finding a Middle Ground on Abortion Laws*
No Room for
Middle Ground
Compromise
Unsure
7/6–19/06
66
29
5
Survey Question 2
Do you think the question of whether abortion should be legally permitted is something that
should be decided at the national level, or is it something that each state should decide for itself?
National Level
Each State
Unsure
7/6–19/06
55
39
6
*Margin of error ± 3.5. 
Source: Pew Research Center for the People and the Press and Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life Survey con-
ducted by Schulman, Ronca, and Bucuvalas. July 6–19, 2006. N=996 adults nationwide. (Data from December and
earlier conducted by Princeton Survey Research Associates International.)
TABLE 6.20
Survey Respondents’ (N=1,008 adults) Answers (in percent) to a 
Question about Overturning Roe v. Wade*
Survey Question
Would you like to see the Supreme Court overturn its 1973 Roe v. Wade decision concerning
abortion or not? 
Would
Would Not
Unsure
1/19–21/07
29
62
9
*Margin of error ± 3.
Source:  CNN/Opinion Research Corporation Poll, January 19–21, 2007. 
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

abortion by conditions. Throughout the years the vast majority of peo-
ple support abortion on the basis of women’s health, fetal defect, or
rape. There is less than majority support for abortion on women’s
choice or economic circumstances. The pattern of support varies only
slightly by race and gender, as shown in Table 6.24, page 216.
214
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.21
Survey Respondents’ (N=1,016 adults) Answers (in percent) to a 
Questions about the Abortion Issue*
Survey Question 1
In 1973, the U.S. Supreme Court decided that states laws that made it illegal for a woman to
have an abortion up to three months of pregnancy were unconstitutional, and that the decision on
whether a woman should have an abortion up to three months of pregnancy should be left to the
woman and her doctor to decide. In general, do you favor or oppose this part of the U.S. Supreme
Court decision making abortions up to three months of pregnancy legal?
Favor
Oppose
Unsure
4/4–10/06
49
47
4
Survey Question 2
In general, do you favor permitting a woman who wants one to have an abortion in all
circumstances, some circumstances, or no circumstances?
All
Some
No
Unsure
4/4–10/06
24
53
20
4
Survey Question 3
Do you favor laws that would make it more difficult for a woman to get an abortion, favor laws
that would make it easier to get an abortion, or should no change be made to existing abortion
laws?
More Difficult
Easier
No Change
Unsure
4/4–10/06
40
15
40
6
*Margin of error ± 3.
Source:  The Harris Poll, April 4–10, 2006. N=1,016 adults nationwide.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Public Opinion Polls on Abortion Issues
215
TABLE 6.22
Survey Respondents’ (N=1,002 adults) Answers (in percent) to a 
Questions about the Abortion Issue*
Survey Question
Which side of the political debate on the abortion issue do you sympathize with more: the right-
to-life movement that believes abortion is the taking of human life and should be outlawed, or,
the pro-choice movement that believes a woman has the right to choose what happens to her
body, including deciding to have an abortion?*
Right-to-Life
Pro-Choice
Neither 
Unsure
All adults
39
53
3
5
Republicans
62
31
4
3
Democrats
25
69
2
4
Independents
35
57
4
4
Trend:
11/10–11/05
34
57
5
4
10/29–30/98
39
51
5
5
*Options rotated; margin of error ± 3 (for all adults).
Source: Newsweek Poll conducted by Princeton Survey Research Associates International, October 26–27, 2006. 
TABLE 6.23
Support for Abortion under Conditions—Percent Answering Yes
Abortion Is Okay if:  
1972
1989
2004
There is a strong chance of defect in the baby
78.6
81
72.9
A woman is married and doesn’t want any more children
39.7
44.5
41.8
A woman’s health is seriously endangered
86.9
90.1
86.0
A woman is low income and can’t afford any more children
48
47
41
A woman is pregnant as the result of rape
79.1
83.2
76.2
A woman is unmarried
43.5
45.4
40.9
A woman wants the abortion for any reason
NA
40.3
40.6
Note: NA = not available.
Source. General Social Survey, NORC, http://gss.norc.org. 
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

216
Data and Documents
TABLE 6.24
Support for Abortion under Conditions—
Percent Answering Yes by Gender and Race for 2004
Abortion Is Okay if:  
All Women
All Men
All Blacks
A woman’s health is seriously endangered
85.2
86.9
85.5
There is a strong chance of defect in the baby
73.0
72.7
69.2
A woman wants the abortion for any reason
38.6
42.9
40.6
Source: General Social Survey, NORC, http://gss.norc.org. 
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

7
Directory of Organizations
Introduction
Because the pro-choice and pro-life movements are such an
important part of the abortion debate story, this section provides
descriptions of an equal number of organizations from the two
sides. Although a few of these are no longer in existence or have
reorganized in later years, they are included because they are an
essential part of understanding the trajectory of the policy
debates on abortion since the early 1970s. Information on gov-
ernment agencies that have programs related to reproductive
health precedes the section on U.S. organizations; a list of groups
on the international scene follows. Relatively fewer pro-life orga-
nizations are working internationally than pro-choice ones. 
Government Agencies
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
www.cdc.gov/
The mission of the CDC, a division of the Department of Health
and Human Services, is to prevent and control infectious and
chronic diseases, injuries, workplace hazards, disabilities, and
environmental health threats. The CDC also keeps records on
mortality and morbidity; as part of that function it conducts an
annual surveillance of abortion practice. The report is based on
surveys of health departments in the states, but it remains incom-
plete because of limits on the data in some locales.
217
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Congressional Pro-Choice Caucus
Rep. Louise M. Slaughter 202-225-3615 
This quasi-governmental body is composed of members of Con-
gress who support the pro-choice position. The caucus is chaired
by Representative Louise Slaughter (D-NY) . 
Congressional Pro-Life Caucus
Rep. Chris Smith  202-225-3715
This quasi-governmental body is composed of members of Con-
gress who support the pro-life position. Congressional caucuses
receive no funding, and the pro-life group is no exception.
Chaired by Chris Smith (R-NJ), the caucus allows members of
Congress to take a public stand on the issue. 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
www.fda.gov
The FDA is an agency in the Department of Health and Human
Services that has been charged with protecting consumers since
1906. Today its mission includes ensuring the safety of drugs,
medical devices, food, and cosmetics. Through its Center for
Drug Evaluation and Research, FDA receives applications for
approval of drugs for sale in the United States. The FDA has had
a significant role in affecting reproductive health through its
reviews of birth control pills, intrauterine devices, and mifepris-
tone, the abortion pill.
Office of Family Planning (OFP)
http://opa.osophs.dhhs.gov/titlex/ofp.html
Part of the massive Department of Health and Human Services,
the OFP administers Title X, the only federal program to support
family planning services. The agency makes annual grants to
nearly 5,000 clinics that serve about 5 million people a year (out
of a population of 300 million). The services are primarily con-
traceptives and counseling, but there are also preventive health
services such as breast and pelvic exams, sexually transmitted
disease and HIV/AIDS tests, and cervical cancer tests. Under
Presidents George H. W. Bush, Ronald Reagan, and George W.
Bush, these programs have been forbidden to give any informa-
tion or advice about abortion options and services. 
218
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Office of Women’s Health (OWH)
www.4woman.gov/owh/about/
Since 1991, the OWH has been working to advance the women’s
health agenda inside the vast Department of Health and Human
Services. To that end it coordinates OWH offices in the major
agencies such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the
National Institutes of Health, and the CDC. When the FDA direc-
tor stalled a decision allowing emergency contraception to be
sold over the counter, the director of the FDA’s OWH Susan
Wood resigned in protest. The OWH also maintains an informa-
tion website—www.womenshealth.gov—to address a wide vari-
ety of questions about the women’s health , including a detailed
description of all sorts of methods of birth control. Currently,
under the Bush administration, www.womenshealth.gov does
not mention abortion at all. In the early years of the Bush admin-
istration, pro-choice activists complained that the site had an arti-
cle claiming that abortion causes breast cancer. Such a posting is
no longer there.
United Nations Division for the Advancement of Women
(UNDAW)
www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/
This agency oversees United Nations (UN) policy relating to gen-
der equality. It supports the UN Commission on the Status of
Women (CSW) and CEDAW (Convention for the Elimination of
All Forms of Discrimination Against Women). Compliance with
the 1995 Beijing Platform for Action is also under the UNDAW’s
supervision. Thus, the agency provides an international forum
for the world’s women to sustain efforts for gender equality and
to advance the status of women worldwide. Questions dealing
with abortion and other matters of reproductive health are deli-
cate, however, because of the opposition of the Roman Catholic
Church to contraception and abortion. At the same time, the
agency sees these as important health matters for women.
United Nations Population Division
www.un.org/esa/population/unpop.htm
Like UNDAW, the Population Division is part of the UN’s Depart-
ment of Economic and Social Affairs. In the past decades it has
been involved in two ways in the abortion question. First, the
Government Agencies
219
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

division keeps track of the abortion policies in all the member states
of the UN and provides an important resource for students and pol-
icy practitioners. Second, the division sponsors conferences; the
most significant one—the International Conference on Population
and Development—was held in Cairo in 1994. That conference saw
major debate over the legalization of abortion and the problems of
illegal abortion. Pro-choice and pro-life activists assembled from
around the world, including a high-level delegation from the Vati-
can. The final statement reflected the compromises:
In no case should abortion be promoted as a method of
family planning. All Governments and relevant inter-
governmental and non-governmental organizations are
urged to strengthen their commitment to women’s
health, to deal with the health impact of unsafe abortion
as a major public health concern and to reduce the
recourse to abortion through expanded and improved
family planning services. Prevention of unwanted preg-
nancies must always be given the highest priority and
all attempts should be made to eliminate the need for
abortion. Women who have unwanted pregnancies
should have ready access to reliable information and
compassionate counselling. Any measures or changes
related to abortion within the health system can only be
determined at the national or local level according to
the national legislative process. In circumstances in
which abortion is not against the law, such abortion
should be safe. In all cases women should have access to
quality services for the management of complications
arising from abortion. Post-abortion counselling, educa-
tion and family planning services should be offered
promptly which will also help to avoid repeat abortions
(Source: www.iisd.ca/Cairo.html).
U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID)
www.usaid.gov
USAID is the agency charged with distributing U.S. foreign aid.
Since 1965 that aid has included funds for family planning. In
1984, President Ronald Reagan’s Mexico City policy prohibited
the use of these funds for providing services or information
about abortion. During President Bill Clinton’s administration,
220
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

USAID was again able to fund many more family planning orga-
nizations because he rescinded that policy. President George W.
Bush put the policy back in effect, and it has been difficult to find
family planning groups that don’t have to deal with the abortion
question. Instead, USAID focuses on integrating aid for prevent-
ing HIV/AIDS with family planning. 
United States Organizations
Abortion Rights Mobilization (ARM)
Lawrence Lader, a leading member of the abortion reform/repeal
movement of the 1960s, founded ARM in 1975. A tiny group with
no staff or members, ARM was a resource for Lader to promote
his various goals for abortion policy. It was especially active in the
1980s and 1990s in the campaign to legalize mifepristone, also
known as RU-486 or the abortion pill. With support from the John
Merck Foundation, among others, ARM produced a version of the
drug and with Food and Drug Administration permission con-
ducted trials to meet requirements for more general usage. ARM
also followed a litigation strategy. With others, it brought lawsuits
to challenge the tax-exempt status of the Roman Catholic Church
claiming that the church’s abortion activism violated the federal
law. With Lader’s death in 2006, ARM is no longer in existence. 
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) Reproductive
Freedom Project
www.aclu.org/reproductiverights/index.html
The ACLU established its Reproductive Freedom Project in 1974,
a year after Roe v. Wade decriminalized abortion. A pro-choice
organization, ACLU strives to protect the individual’s right to
make informed decisions about whether to become a parent by
advancing the broad spectrum of reproductive policies. The proj-
ect is especially concerned that rights not be limited by income,
age, race, or where people live. The project has its own staff of
attorneys, paralegals, and support personnel, and its main activ-
ities are lobbying at federal and state legislatures, litigation in
state and federal courts, and public education through press
releases, conferences, meetings, and publications. Many state
ACLU chapters have counterparts to the national Reproductive
Freedom Project. 
United States Organizations
221
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

American Coalition of Life Activists (ACLA)
This pro-life group was associated with the spike in pro-life vio-
lence in the early 1990s. It authored a series of wanted-style
posters that portrayed doctors and others who worked in abor-
tion practice as criminals. ACLA offered a $5,000 reward for suc-
cess in driving such doctors out of the business. The
“Nuremburg” files posted on the Internet got the group in real
trouble. Dossiers about scores of doctors and clinic personnel
were offered to show their “crimes against humanity.” Subse-
quently, some of these practitioners were the victims of assassi-
nations. When anyone was attacked ACLA drew a line through
the photos on the website. Planned Parenthood sued the group
and won a $100 million judgment but this was overturned on
appeal, based on First Amendment grounds.  The group has dis-
banded apparently and no longer has its website. 
American Law Institute (ALI)
www.ali.org
The ALI was founded in 1923 to bring those with the best legal
minds together to work on improving the law. The ALI is com-
posed of 3,000 judges, practicing attorneys, and legal scholars
asked to join on the basis of their experience and interest in law
reform. Through committees, the ALI focuses on special prob-
lems to produce model codes and reinstatements of law through
“thoughtful and impartial analysis,” according to their website.
ALI made a major contribution to the abortion reform movement
by including a conditional abortion law in its model penal code,
which was drafted in 1959 and adopted in 1962. This served as a
model for reform in many state legislatures and remains a part of
the debate over abortion law.
American Life League (ALL)
www.all.org
ALL was founded in 1979 by Paul and Judie Brown and is led
today by Judie Brown. The organization professes strong pro-life
views, declaring that the life of every human being is sacred from
conception to natural death, and that all such life must have
equal rights. ALL is one of the most absolutist of the pro-life
groups, as they say, “without compromise, without exception,
without apology.” For ALL the pro-life movement is a moral cru-
222
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

sade. Its projects include Celebrate Life magazine; Rock for Life
youth activism; STOPP International, which directly attacks
Planned Parenthood; and the Crusade for Defense of Our
Catholic Church. In the Crusade, Judie and her group proclaim
their fundamentalist Catholic ideals, urging bishops to unite in
actively opposing abortion and denying communion to all
elected Catholic officials who do not support extreme pro-life
positions. 
American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM)
www.asrm.org/whatsnew.html
Founded in Chicago in 1944, ASRM has a membership of physi-
cians, nurses, researchers, and other medical and health profes-
sionals in fifty states and 100 countries. The mission is to develop
all aspects of reproductive medicine and serve as an advocate for
patient care, research, and education. ASRM has programs to
support continuing education for physicians in every area of
reproductive health. The Benjamin Young Office of Public Affairs
is the lobbying arm of ASRM and promotes, among other goals,
reproductive rights. Abortion is not central to the activities today,
but the ASRM has been part of pro-choice coalitions during times
of policy debates in Congress. 
Americans United for Life (AUL)
www.unitedforlife.org/
AUL calls itself a “non-profit public-interest bioethics law firm.”
The group was founded in 1971 to focus on lawmaking and liti-
gation to achieve pro-life goals. AUL attorneys call the 1973 rul-
ing in Roe v. Wade abortion on demand—a judge-created social
experiment. Their goal is to reverse this decision and its effects
through joining in litigation and, especially, offering their legal
expertise to propose model legislation to Congress and the states.
The organization claims that abortion destroys two lives—the
child who is killed and the woman who suffers “devastating
physical and psychological harm.” In fact, making the case that
abortion is a particular threat to women’s health has been part of
AUL’s agenda since its formation. AUL also claims that legal
abortion has led to increases in illegitimacy and child abuse.
Instead of privacy and choice, women have suffered through loss
of moral integrity and failure to find committed relationships.
United States Organizations
223
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Roe v. Wade created a “culture of death,” which AUL wants to
replace with a “culture of life” through law reform. 
Army of God
www.armyofgod.com/
The Army of God takes up where the American Coalition of Life
Activists left off in carrying the militant pro-life banner. At its
website one can find disturbing photographs of alleged abortions
and links to the “Nuremburg” files, websites for assassins Paul
Hill and Eric Rudolph, and the Baby Liberation Army. It remains
an underground organization committed to the use of violence to
stop abortion.
Black Women’s Health Imperative (formerly National Black
Women’s Health Project)
www.blackwomenshealth.org/
This organization was founded in 1983 by Byllye Y. Avery to pro-
mote “empowerment of African American women as educated
health care consumers and a strong voice for the improved health
status of African American women.” It is an education, research,
and advocacy organization, focusing primarily on reaching and
informing black women about their health options and encour-
aging self-help and responsibility. Reproductive issues are a
small part of their overall program; they advocate access to a
broad range of reproductive health options, recognizing that
black women have high levels of unintended pregnancy. These
options include prenatal care, complete and accurate family
planning information and services, safe childbirth, fertility ser-
vices, adoption, safe abortion, and disease prevention. 
Catholics for a Free Choice (CFFC)
www.catholicsforchoice.org/
Frances Kissling founded CFFC in 1973 to challenge the assump-
tion that the Vatican and the bishops speak for all Catholics on
the issue of reproductive rights. Since then, CFFC has offered a
way for Catholics who support a woman’s right to “follow her
conscience in the matters of sexuality and reproductive health”
to come together to support pro-choice policies. CFFC advocates
full access to contraception, safe and legal abortion, prenatal and
postnatal care, and adoption. With these goals, the organization
224
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

seeks to establish links with the Catholic traditions of social jus-
tice, instead of the more patriarchal natural-law tradition. CFFC
focuses on networking and educational activities, forming coali-
tions with other pro-choice organizations within the United
States as well as Latin America, Europe, and Africa and at the
United Nations. 
Center for Bio-Ethical Reform (CBR)
www.cbrinfo.org/
The CBR is based in California and was founded in 1990 to seek
“prenatal justice, and the right to life of the unborn, disabled and
aged.” To accomplish its pro-life agenda, CBR’s strategy is to por-
tray images of abortions and bloody aborted fetuses to the pub-
lic through many media, based on the assumption that the reason
abortion remains legal is because people have not confronted
what CBR says is the true nature of the procedure. Following are
three of CBR’s recent campaigns: the Reproductive Choice Cam-
paign, where CBR sends many large tractor-trailers painted with
aborted fetuses along highways and through cities; the Genocide
Awareness Campaign, which places displays of aborted fetuses
next to recognized images of genocide to make the case that abor-
tion is similar to the Holocaust; and the Abortionno campaign,
which offers free copies of a video showing an abortion. The CBR
has been heavily criticized for its genocide campaign because it
implies that women who have abortions are like Nazis. 
Center for Reproductive Rights (CRR)
www.reproductiverights.org/
CRR was founded in 1992 as the Center for Reproductive Law
and Policy. The group’s mission is to use the law to achieve its
goals of reproductive rights in the United States and around the
world. To CRR, the idea of reproductive rights includes safe and
affordable contraception; safe, accessible, and legal abortion; and
safe, healthy pregnancies. The group pays special attention to
reproductive health and support of adolescents and low-income
women and to countering violence against women’s freedom to
exercise their rights. CRR took the lead in the successful chal-
lenge to the constitutionality of state bans on partial-birth abor-
tions in Stenberg v. Carhart (2000). CRR has extensive activities
abroad, especially helping lawyers in Latin American countries
who want to change their restrictive abortion and contraceptive
United States Organizations
225
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

226
Directory of Organizations
laws. This organization is a prominent and reliable participant in
the pro-choice movement. 
Christian Coalition of America
www.cc.org/
Christian TV preacher Pat Robertson founded the Christian
Coalition in 1989, the year after he ran for president. For Robert-
son and his colleague, Ralph Reed, the Coalition was a means by
which Christian fundamentalists could “take over” the Republi-
can party through grassroots organizing. Strong pro-life views
linked the coalition to other Christian conservative groups, such
as Focus on the Family. The Coalition was a national player dur-
ing the 1990s, but its political activism got it in trouble with the
Internal Revenue Service, which revoked its tax-exempt status.
Robertson left the organization in 2000, and it reorganized as the
Christian Coalition of America under the presidency of Roberta
Coombs. The Christian Coalition calls itself the “largest and most
active conservative grassroots political organization in America,”
claiming more than 2 million members. Although the group
maintains its pro-family, pro-life agenda, without the media star
Robertson, many think the Christian Coalition has lost much of
its influence.
Committee for Abortion Rights and Against Sterilization
Abuse (CARASA)
CARASA was founded in 1977 in the wake of the passage of the
Hyde Amendment, which denied the use of federal Medicaid
funds to poor women for abortions. The group brought together a
broad coalition of activists from mainstream to socialist feminist
groups focusing on the poor, the young, and women of color. The
activists formed committees to promote their goals, which placed
abortion rights in a wider context of overall social justice for poor
women. Important to CARASA is the material context for repro-
ductive rights—welfare rights, child care, workplace safety, and
especially, an end to sterilization abuse. The issue of sterilization
brought in membership from the Committee to End Sterilization
Abuse (CESA). CESA had been active in black and Puerto Rican
communities, where they charged doctors with sterilizing women
without their knowledge. The aim of CARASA was to create a
popular movement to counter the grassroots Right to Life move-
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

United States Organizations
227
ment that was gaining momentum in the late 1970s and early
1980s. What distinguished CARASA from other pro-choice groups
such as the National Organization for Women and NARAL was its
focus on class and color, and its stand against racism. To this end
CARASA helped found the Reproductive Rights National Net-
work in 1979. Both groups declined in the 1980s. 
Common Ground Network for Life and Choice
www.sfcg.org/
Between 1993 and 2000—during a time of extreme polarization in
the abortion conflict and pro-life violence—the Search for Com-
mon Ground, an organization that promotes conflict resolution,
formed the Common Ground Network for Life and Choice. The
goal was to shift the ground in the divisive debate over legal abor-
tion. The steering committee, which comprised pro-choice and
pro-life activists, set out the steps that would bring a solution to
the divisive conflict: first bring each side into dialogue where the
goal is to understand the other’s points of view; second, find com-
mon values and beliefs; and third, look for ways to move together
toward common goals. The common goals that arose through the
dialogue were preventing teenage pregnancy, making adoption
more accessible, avoiding violence, increasing options for women,
and reducing conditions that increase abortion rates. The intense
discussion took place in Buffalo, NY, and Pensacola, FL, and pro-
duced manuals for use in other conflict situations. 
Concerned Women for America (CWFA)
www.cwfa.org/main.asp
CWFA was founded in 1979 by fundamentalist Christian activist
Beverly LaHaye, who remains the chairman of the board. CWFA
claims to be the largest public policy women’s organization in the
United States. The central theme of the organization’s mission is
to bring “Biblical principles” to government through activism of
“women and like-minded men.” CWFA derives its agenda from
its fundamentalist view of the Bible and Christianity and its goal
to return the nation to the traditional values of the founders.
Sanctity of life is a top-priority issue for CWFA, placing it firmly
in the pro-life camp—against abortion, fetal tissue experimenta-
tion, embryonic research, euthanasia, population control, and
human genetic engineering. CWFA also advocates for sexual
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

abstinence and the natural distinctions between men and women
in marriage. CWFA is a reliable partner in the pro-life movement,
and its president, Wendy Wright, is a frequent guest on talk
shows and other news programs about abortion and other “life”
issues.
Democrats for Life of America (DLA)
www.democratsforlife.org/
DLA was formed in 1999 after several prominent pro-life Demo-
crats were denied the chance to speak at the Democratic Party’s
presidential conventions. The organization seeks to attract those
in the Democratic Party who do not support the party’s pro-choice
stand. Like other pro-life organizations, DLA opposes abortion
and euthanasia, but it also opposes capital punishment, a position
not usually on the pro-life agenda. These pro-life Democrats agree
that abortion should be illegal, but overturning Roe v. Wade is not
their top priority; instead, they focus on programs that would
reduce abortion through preventing unplanned pregnancy and
helping pregnant women to find options other than abortion. The
group’s signature proposal in the 2000s has been pregnant women
support acts, both federal and state, which combine a number of
programs to provide support for childbirth while dissuading
women from choosing abortion. Members of the DLA argue that
the Democratic Party has been hurt in elections because of its rigid
pro-choice position and has swung support to a number of pro-life
representatives and senators—including Senate Majority Leader
Harry Reid. DLA counts as many as thirty-seven pro-life demo-
crats in the 110th Congress. Emily’s List and other pro-choice fem-
inists are highly critical of DLA. At the same time, many in the
pro-life movement, especially the Republicans, criticize the pro-
life Democrats for remaining in a party that is pro-choice and for
opposing capital punishment, which most pro-life organizations
accept. 
Eagle Forum (EF)
www.eagleforum.org/
Phyllis Schlafly is the founder and president of EF, which calls
itself the “leader of the pro-family movement.” EF was formed in
1972 as a vehicle for Schlafly’s conservative agenda and made its
mark by successfully rallying support to stop ratification of the
equal rights amendment (ERA). Much of its success is attribut-
228
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

able to Schlafly’s political savvy and a strategy that organized lit-
tle EF’s at the state level, especially where ERA was on the leg-
islative agenda. Since the early 1980s, EF has moved on to other
conventional conservative issues, such as maintaining American
sovereignty, private enterprise, and strict construction of the
Constitution by judges. At 81 years, Schlafly has not tempered
her battle against feminism, however, which includes champi-
oning the full-time homemaker in marriage and a strong pro-life,
antichoice stand. 
Elliott Institute
www.afterabortion.org/
The Elliott Institute was founded in 1988 to support the research
and outreach of Dr. David Reardon, a biomedical ethicist who
claims to have conducted research on the impact of abortion on
women since 1983. The Institute bills itself as a mission and minis-
terial organization, dedicated to helping women who have been
injured by abortion. The group’s claim is that both pro-life and
pro-choice groups ignore women; their assumption is that all
women are adversely affected by abortion and many are exploited
and injured. The Institute collects testimonies of women to use in
its “Poor Choice” campaign. It proposes laws that would make it
easier for women to hold abortion providers liable for psycholog-
ical and physical effects of abortion. It uses its website—www
.afterabortion.org—for its Internet information and outreach proj-
ects. In addition, the Institute promotes Reardon’s books and a
variety of pamphlets and position papers.
Family Research Council (FRC)
www.frc.org
The FRC is a think tank and lobbying organization that promotes
policy that “values human life and upholds the institutions of
marriage and the family.” FRC was founded in 1983 with the goal
of shaping the debate over families and politics in a conservative
Christian direction. According to its website, FRC considers the
right to life the most fundamental human right. FRC is a major
component of the pro-life movement, lobbying against legal
abortion, for abstinence-only education, and against govern-
ment-supported family planning. However, FRC is also well
known for its strong opposition to gay rights. Its leaders have
been prominent in right-wing circles, especially Gary Bauer who
United States Organizations
229
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

230
Directory of Organizations
ran for U.S. president in 2000, and eventually became president
of FRC in 2007, and Tony Perkins, a frequent guest on conserva-
tive talk shows and in debates about social issues. 
Feminists for Life of America (FFL)
www.feministsforlife.org
FFL, formed in 1972, has the goal of meeting the needs of women
who are pregnant or parenting and to help them find alternatives
to abortion. To FFL, abortion represents society’s failure and the
victimization of women; their goal is to “eliminate the root
causes that drive women to abortion” and promote what they
call the core values of feminism: “justice, nondiscrimination, and
nonviolence.” The organization’s primary activities involve out-
reach to college campuses where they support the formation of
collegiate FFL groups and give speeches to show students they
can be both pro-life and pro-feminist. They gain much of their
inspiration from the lives and politics of women’s rights pioneers
Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, who opposed
abortion because they considered it a form of violence against
women. They are not reliable pro-life coalition members, how-
ever, as they are not interested in lobbying to promote other con-
servative values nor will they take a stand on contraception and
abstinence.
Feminist Majority and Feminist Majority Foundation
www.feministmajority.org and www.feminist.org/
The Feminist Majority and its sister organization, the Feminist
Majority Foundation, were formed in 1987. The name “Feminist
Majority” came in response to a Newsweek poll in the 1980s that
showed a majority—56 percent—of women self-identified as
feminists and that most men supported the women’s rights
movement. The Feminist Majority focuses on mobilization and
lobbying before state and federal governments while the founda-
tion funds research, educational programs, and forums on public
issues. Eleanor Smeal, former president of NOW, is president of
the foundation. Both organizations are dedicated to women’s
equality, reproductive health, and nonviolence, and the Feminist
Majority especially promotes empowerment and influence of
feminists. The Feminist Majority has taken leadership roles in
activities of the pro-choice coalition, including the March for
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

United States Organizations
231
Women’s Lives in 1992, the campaign for Freedom of Access to
Clinic Entrances (FACE) Act in 1994, and the appointment of jus-
tices to the Supreme Court to save Roe v. Wade.
Focus on the Family (FOF)
www.focusonthefamily.com/
FOF is best described as a ministry and media organization
established to promote “biblical principles to help families.” Dr.
James Dobson founded the organization in 1977 and continues
as chairman of the board. Dobson has a daily radio broadcast
that has a central place in the world of “conservative talk radio.”
FOF publishes ten magazines and lots of books, many written by
Dobson, and it sells CDs and videos to distribute its version of
Biblical values and family life. Dobson has been a major leader
of the religious right in the United States for nearly 30 years. He
has served as an adviser to the U.S. president on family issues
and on many boards and commissions. FOF and Dobson adhere
to a strict pro-life point of view, strongly opposing legal abor-
tion, gay rights, and anything other than abstinence-only sex
education. 
Guttmacher Institute
www.guttmacher.org
The Guttmacher Institute’s mission is to promote “sexual and
reproductive health” through social science research, policy
analysis, and public education. Founded in 1968 as an offshoot of
Planned Parenthood Federation of America (PPFA) called the
Center for Family Planning Program Development, it was
guided by PPFA president Alan Guttmacher and named after
him following his death in 1974. The Institute has a pro-choice
perspective as shown in its policy goals: to help people avoid
unplanned pregnancy, prevent and treat sexually transmitted
diseases, exercise the right to choose abortion, maintain healthy
pregnancies and childbirth, and maintain healthy sexual rela-
tionships. Nevertheless, advocates on both sides of the abortion
debate rely on the objectivity of the data on abortion practice pro-
duced by the Institute’s researchers. The Institute publishes three
journals: International Family Planning Perspectives, Guttmacher
Policy Review, and Perspectives on Sexual and Reproductive Health.
Copies of their articles are available at the website.
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Lambs of Christ
The Lambs of Christ formed what its founder Norman Weston
called a “rapid deployment force” to support antiabortion mili-
tancy. Founded in 1989 by Weston, a Roman Catholic priest and
former army paratrooper, and Operation Rescue’s Randall Terry,
the Lambs was one of the names given to a small group of 
militants—some called them nomads—who roamed about the
country, ready to target abortion providers through harassment,
blockades, and invasions. Their tactic was to do what it took to
get arrested and then refuse to give their names—calling them-
selves either Baby John Doe or Baby Jane Doe. This was intended
to tie up the resources of local law enforcement and hamper their
ability to deal with the pro-life activists. Related groups include
the Victim Souls of the Unborn Christ Child, Prolife Police, and
Rescue Outreach.
March for Life Education and Defense Fund
www.marchforlife.org
The March for Life Fund organizes and the supports the annual
pro-life March for Life in Washington, DC. The first march was
held January 22, 1974, on the one-year anniversary of the
Supreme Court’s decision in Roe v. Wade legalizing abortion. The
event proved to be an effective rallying and mobilizing event for
the pro-life movement; leaders formed the March for Life Educa-
tion and Defense fund as a nonprofit organization to organize the
march annually ever since. The group adheres to a set of “Life
Principles,” which call for the enactment of a Human Life
Amendment. The theme of the 2007 march was “Thou Shalt Pro-
tect the Equal Right to Life of Each Innocent Human in Existence
at Fertilization. No Exception! No Compromise!” The symbols of
the march are the red roses delivered to each member of Con-
gress along with a pro-life “Red Rose Letter.” 
Medical Students for Choice (MSFC)
www.ms4c.org/
MSFC responds to the recognized shortage in trained abortion
providers in the United States and Canada by mobilizing medical
students to work to increase training opportunities. The mission is
to “destigmatize abortion provision among medical students and
residents.” MSFC student groups are found at more than 120 med-
232
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

ical schools; they lobby their schools to provide courses and other
training in both the context and the practice of abortion. Because
most medical school graduates do internships in hospitals, where
fewer than 5 percent of abortions are conducted, rather than clin-
ics, MSFS runs an internship program to match students with
reproductive health clinics where they can develop necessary
skills to contribute to abortion practice. At their annual conven-
tion, students have opportunities to take clinical training as well as
learn about the place of abortion in the practice of medicine. 
Moral Majority Coalition
www.moralmajority.us
Evangelical preacher Jerry Falwell organized the Moral Majority
in 1979 as a mechanism to bring evangelical leaders together to
“engage the culture” to the pro-life, pro–traditional family mes-
sage. In the coalitions of the religious right, the Moral Majority
was a key component in promoting pro-life politics, especially
the successful campaigns of Ronald Reagan for president. Fal-
well disbanded the Moral Majority in 1989 to devote his attention
to establishing Liberty University. He brought the group back in
2004 in the form of the Moral Majority Coalition with a commit-
ment to lead it for 4 years. The Coalition’s main goal is to mobi-
lize voters for candidates of the religious right and to fight
against what Falwell called “out-of-control lawmakers and radi-
cal judges—working at the whims of society—to alter the moral
foundations of America.”  Falwell died in May 2007.
NARAL Pro-Choice America
www.prochoiceamerica.org/
Formed in 1969 as the National Association for Repeal of Abor-
tion Laws, NARAL remains the leading advocacy organization in
the pro-choice movement. It has kept a single focus on maintain-
ing legal abortion, despite  expansion of its mission to include
reproductive rights more generally. To that goal, the name
changed to National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action
League in 1993 and then NARAL Pro-Choice America in 2003.
NARAL has been at the center of the pro-choice victories and
defeats: the campaign for legal abortion that ended in Roe v.
Wade, countering the pro-life resurgence in the 1980s with its
Abortion Rights: Silent No More campaign, promoting the Free-
dom of Choice Act in Congress in the early 1990s, as a leading
United States Organizations
233
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

sponsor of the March for Women’s Lives in 1989 and 2004, and
opposing appointments of anti-Roe justices to the Supreme
Court. As a tireless advocate for “privacy and women’s right to
choose” NARAL mobilizes activists through NARAL organiza-
tions in many states, lobbies Congress and state legislatures, and
uses its political action committee funds to endorse pro-choice
candidates regardless of political party. 
National Abortion Federation (NAF)
www.prochoice.org/
The NAF is a professional association of abortion providers, orga-
nizing about 400 facilities in forty-seven states. The NAF’s agenda
is to maintain abortion as a safe, legal, and accessible procedure.
The group’s URL claims the pro-choice label, as does their belief
statement: “We believe that women should be trusted to make
private medical decisions in consultation with their health care
providers.” NAF sponsors training and education programs, but
it is especially active in monitoring and fighting against restrictive
state laws. Of special interest in recent years have been the so-
called “TRAP” bills—Targeted Regulation of Abortion Providers.
With these, state legislators try to put special restrictive regula-
tions on abortion clinics only; examples include special building
codes—down to the size of janitors’ closets—special additional
licensing requirements, collection of records, and frequent intru-
sive inspection of facilities. These are in addition to the regula-
tions already in place for providers as forms of outpatient clinics.
NAF asserts that these laws are based on erroneous claims that
abortion procedures are unsafe and unregulated.
National Coalition of Abortion Providers (NCAP)
www.ncap.com
The NCAP brought together “independent” abortion providers
in the 1990s to form a national trade organization that would
support and defend their members. NCAP’s slogan is “We Trust
Women.” Along with providing information about abortion ser-
vices of their members, they have launched a program called
“Need for a New Conversation.” This move is to counter the suc-
cess of the pro-life movement in demonizing abortion as an
immoral act and stigmatizing the women who have them. As
abortion providers, NCAP claims their members know first hand
the circumstances of women seeking abortions. Because of the
234
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

stigma, many women face delays, guilt, and remorse. Abortion
alienates and isolates them. This can be rectified, says NCAP, by
challenging the notion that abortion is immoral and spreading
the stories of real women. It’s time to learn from the patients and
lift the veil of secrecy to show the ethical core of abortion: “relief,
conflict, confusion, sadness and empowerment.”
National Latina Institute for Reproductive Health (NLIRH)
www.latinainstitute.org/
The Latina Institute formed in 1994 under the auspices of
Catholics for a Free Choice as part of its initiative to bring Lati-
nas into the discussion about reproductive rights. The self-stated
goal is “to ensure the fundamental human right to reproductive
health care for Latinas, their families and their communities
through education, policy advocacy and community mobiliza-
tion.” They call themselves a “social justice organization,” which
means they tend to get involved in the larger social, economic,
and political situation of Latinas that may affect their access to
reproductive health. The Institute runs training sessions for lead-
ership development and works to build local and regional net-
works. Policy goals include repealing the Hyde Amendment,
fighting against abortion restrictions, improving availability of
emergency contraception, achieving comprehensive sex and sex-
uality education, and promoting immigration reform.
National Pro-Life Action Center (NPLAC)
www.nplac.org/
The NPLAC bought a house on Capitol Hill in Washington, DC,
a few years ago and from there seeks to keep government offi-
cials aware of the pro-life position on issues through “informa-
tion, contacts and spiritual encouragement.” It publishes a
newsletter and links to National Pro-life Radio, which broadcasts
on the Internet 24 hours a day. The Center works for and with
three other pro-life organizations: Priests for Life, Catholics
United for Life, and Faith and Action.
National Network of Abortion Funds (NNAF)
www.nnaf.org
NNAF is a national umbrella organization for locally based abor-
tion funds. These funds arose in response to the denial of federal
United States Organizations
235
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

and state Medicaid funds to poor women. These are voluntary
organizations, relying on shoestring budgets to raise money for
grants and loans to needy clients. Working on one case at a time,
these fund organizations can arrange price cuts at clinics in cases
of extreme need. In 2006, NNAF joined with other groups in the
campaign to counter the Hyde Amendment, which denies use of
federal Medicaid funds for abortion: “30 Years is Enough!”
National Organization for Women ( NOW)
www.now.org
In 1967, NOW was the first national organization to advocate
repeal of criminal abortion laws; Betty Friedan was president of
the group, and this took place at NOW’s first annual convention.
Other top priorities for NOW in 1967 were publicly supported
child care and the equal rights amendment. Forty years later, in
2007, constitutional equality and reproductive rights remain the
top priorities for NOW, along with antiracism, lesbian rights,
countering violence against women, and economic justice. In
between, NOW has been at the center of the pro-choice move-
ment promoting an agenda of safe and legal abortion, birth con-
trol, emergency contraception, health services, and education for
all women. With its 500,000 members and 500 affiliates across the
country, NOW claims to be the voice of those who support equal-
ity. To NOW, reproductive rights are “issues of life and death for
women, not just choice.”
National Right to Life Committee (NLRC)
www.nrlc.org/
The place of NLRC in the pro-life movement is as a single-issue,
nonreligious, and nonpartisan organization. Indeed, it took a
leadership position in June 1973, when the NLRC came together
to counter the decision in Roe v. Wade. The national body is com-
posed of fifty state representatives; NLRC claims to have 3,000
chapters in all fifty states and the District of Columbia. Some say
it is the largest pro-life grassroots organization. In 1999, Fortune
magazine ranked it as the ninth most powerful lobbying organi-
zation on Capitol Hill. The goal of the organization is “to restore
legal protection to innocent human life.” Fighting legal abortion is
its primary mission, but it also takes positions on stem cell
research, euthanasia, and infanticide. NLRC does not take a posi-
tion or even comment on questions of contraception, sex educa-
236
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

tion, or capital punishment, so it is unlikely to form any coalitions
with pro-choice groups to stop unintended pregnancies as a way
to limit abortion. The legality of the practice is its sole concern.
National Women’s Law Center (NWLC)
www.nwlc.org/
The NWLC was established by women lawyers from the Center
for Law and Social Policy as a public-interest law group that
would “make law and public policy work for women and their
families.” Although one of its first projects was to protect poor
women from coercive contraception and sterilization, reproduc-
tive issues are a small part of the center’s activities. NWLC has
four major areas of action: education, employment, economic
security, and health. Health activities include “fighting to protect
reproductive rights and contraceptive coverage.” A recent
NWLC position paper warned that the appointments of justices
John Roberts and Samuel Alito to the Supreme Court in 2005 and
2006, respectively, were a threat to legal abortion guarantees in
Roe v. Wade.
National Women’s Political Caucus (NWPC)
www.nwpc.org/
The NWPC promotes its agenda through efforts to increase
women’s participation in politics. Its stated mission is to create a
women’s power base by recruiting, training, and supporting pro-
choice women candidates of both parties. The caucus dates back
to the early days of the women’s rights movement—1973—when
women in the Republican and Democratic parties found com-
mon ground in supporting women’s equality. As the Republican
Party became the anti-ERA and pro-life party, the caucus found it
difficult to connect with Republican women on pro-choice issues.
In 1999, however, the caucus was led, once again, by a Republi-
can president. Its agenda remains strongly pro-choice: maintain-
ing women’s access to abortion, comprehensive sex education,
and availability of RU-486 and emergency contraception. 
Operation Rescue
www.operationsaveamerica.org; www.operationrescue.org
The original Operation Rescue was formed by Randall Terry in
1988 to use a religious strategy and tactics of civil disobedience to
United States Organizations
237
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

shut down abortion clinics. Terry left the organization in 1989, and
the organization’s tactics have been limited by the federal FACE
regulations. In 2007, two groups lay claim to the Terry legacy.
Operation Rescue’s primary focus is an abortion clinic in Wichita,
Kansas—the one that was the scene of Terry’s longest campaign in
the 1980s. The other group—Operation Rescue/Operation Save
America—presents “Jesus as the standard” and seeks repentance
through street action for what they term the abortion holocaust in
America. 
Physicians for Life
http://physiciansforlife.org
Although the organization invites pro-life physicians to join,
Physicians for Life is primarily a website with many links to com-
mentary and research papers about issues from a pro-life point of
view. The group’s goal is to draw attention to issues of abortion,
euthanasia, stem cell research, cloning, infanticide, sexually trans-
mitted diseases, and out-of-wedlock sexual activity. Through the
website the organizers hope to build support for physicians who
have taken a pro-life stand. 
Physicians for Reproductive Choice and Health (PRCH)
www.prch.org/
The name identifies the members and purpose of this group
founded in 1992. PRCH is “committed to providing and advo-
cating the best possible care for patients.” Such care includes a
full range of reproductive choices. “We believe that all people
should have the knowledge, equal access to quality services and
freedom of choice to make their own reproductive health care
decisions.” To achieve its goals, the organization has three areas
of action: public policy and community organization, communi-
cation, and medical education. PRCH supports comprehensive
sexuality education. Another project is Voices of Choice, which
documents the experience of doctors who practiced abortion
before it was legalized in Roe v. Wade.
Pharmacists for Life International (PFLI)
www.pfli.org/
PFLI was founded in Ohio in 1984, but it has a national and even
international mission. Its founding statement declares a clear
238
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

pro-life belief: “PFLI defends, upholds and protects the sanctity
of all human life from conception to natural death, regardless of
age, biological stage, handicap or place of residence.” PFLI seeks
to promote this goal by persuading pharmacists and other med-
ical personnel to resist the use of any medication that is or could
be an abortifacient—an agent that causes an abortion, which
PFLI defines as preventing a fertilized egg from implanting in the
uterus. PFLI urges pharmacists to refuse to fill prescriptions for
any of these drugs—including RU-486, emergency contraception,
and many hormone birth control pills—and defend their legal
rights to do so as part of their rights of conscience. Two of their
mottos are: “Let the gift of medicines promote life, not destroy
life” and “Rights of conscience outweigh rights to abortifacient
chemicals.”
Planned Parenthood Federation of America (PPFA)
www.plannedparenthood.org/
Planned Parenthood traces its origins to Margaret Sanger’s first
birth control clinic in Brooklyn in 1916. In 2007, it calls itself the
“nation’s leading sexual and reproductive health care advocate
and provider.” Certainly, Planned Parenthood has been a central
player in the abortion debate since the 1950s, advocating reform
of criminal laws in the 1960s and then defending legal abortion
since 1973. Much of its advocacy work is done through its affili-
ates, which have been litigants in major cases challenging restric-
tive laws (e.g., Planned Parenthood v. Casey); 860 clinics and health
care centers provide services, all supporting PPFA’s creed that
the individual right to manage fertility is fundamental. Planned
Parenthood, the chief nemesis of most pro-life organizations, is a
member of the International Planned Parenthood Federation,
which takes the family planning message to international confer-
ences and other forums. 
Priests for Life (PFL)
www.priestsforlife.org/
Established in 1991, PFL presents itself as an organization for
anyone who wants to stop abortion and euthanasia. Its special
approach is to educate priests to unite and do all they can to give
top priority to the life issues, keeping them at the center of their
ministries. This organization is primarily a vehicle for the work
and writings of Father Frank Pavone who travels the country
United States Organizations
239
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

giving talks and seminars as well as networking with major orga-
nizations in the pro-life movement. In 2004, Pavone started
assembling a community of priests devoted to missionary work
on life issues. Two other top projects relate to claims that women
who have abortions suffer from lifelong psychological and emo-
tional damage: Rachel’s Vineyard retreats and the Silent No More
Awareness Campaign.
Pro-Choice Public Education Project (PEP)
www.protectchoice.org/
PEP is less an organization than an education project with close
links to some major pro-choice organizations, such as the Feminist
Majority, NARAL, Planned Parenthood, and the Religious Coali-
tion for Reproductive Choice. PEP is dedicated to educating young
women about reproductive freedom issues and choice, based on
the assumption that many young women, women of color, and
low-income women have been marginal to the pro-choice move-
ment. The group may also be reacting to polling data that show
dwindling support for choice among people younger than 25
years. PEP focuses on publications, outreach, and leadership train-
ing. One recent publication is She Speaks: African American and
Latina Young Women Speak on Reproductive Health and Rights.
Pro-Life Action League (PLAL)
www.prolifeaction.org/
The Pro-Life Action League formed in 1980 and has been led by
its founder Joseph M. Scheidler ever since. PLAL has a prominent
place in the pro-life movement through its use of direct but non-
violent action to stop abortions. One of its most important tech-
niques is sidewalk counseling. People are trained, almost as
missionaries, to intercept women and men coming to abortion
clinics and try to dissuade them from going through with a
planned abortion. PLAL members also picket clinics and sponsor
“Face the Truth” tours where they show large photos of aborted
fetuses. Scheidler and his organization were the object of a
decade-long lawsuit by NOW seeking damages under the federal
antiracketeering statutes. The case was finally resolved in 2003 in
Scheidler’s favor.
Pro-Life Alliance of Gays and Lesbians (PLAGAL)
www.plagal.org/
240
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

PLAGAL occupies the margins of both the pro-choice and pro-
life movements. Most gays and lesbians are thought to be associ-
ated with the ideas of pro-choice, that is, privacy, individual
rights, and sexual freedom. The pro-life philosophy, on the other
hand, often goes hand in hand with a fundamentalist view of
sexuality that condemns homosexuality and fights against gay
rights. PLAGAL confounds both sides by claiming that legal
abortion is just like homophobia. For example, the group asserts,
abortion denies fundamental humanity and rids societies of
human beings who are considered undesirable, just like homo-
phobia. The organization, formed in 1990, was originally called
Gays Against Abortion, but it expanded to reflect its membership
of lesbians (about one-third). This is a small group, but it distrib-
utes position pamphlets and participates in activities such as the
March for Life.
Religious Coalition for Reproductive Choice (RCRC)
www.rcrc.org/
With the mission of using the moral power of religious commu-
nities to ensure reproductive choice, RCRC was founded in 1973.
It seeks to provide a network for churches and religious people
who support reproductive rights and to counter the religious
claims of the pro-life movement. The Call to Justice Campaign,
for example, is to “fight against the ‘Religious’ Right’s assault on
mainstream America and for our pro-choice ideals.” Other initia-
tives focus on people of color—in African-American and Latina
churches, for example—and the poor. RCRC sponsors several
state affiliates and a group called Clergy for Choice, which sup-
port a wide range of reproductive rights including family plan-
ning and contraceptive services; comprehensive sex education;
safe, legal, and affordable abortion; affordable health; and child
care and adoption. 
Reproductive Health Technologies Project (RHTP)
www.rhtp.org/
The RHTP was founded in the late 1980s to provide information
about the French “abortion pill,” RU-486, and to make it more
likely that the United States would approve distribution of the
drug. Since then, RHTP has expanded its mission to gain public
acceptance of current and new technologies affecting reproduc-
tive matters. Its stated goal is “to advance the ability of every
United States Organizations
241
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

woman of any age to achieve full reproductive freedom with
access to the safest, most effective, appropriate and acceptable
technologies for ensuring her own health and controlling her fer-
tility.” RHTP works to counter efforts to limit access to technolo-
gies, for example, with respect to emergency contraception, and
to develop supportive networks with pharmacists and sellers of
medical devices. These campaigns have brought the organization
into coalitions that support the place of scientific research in fed-
eral policymaking. 
Republican Majority for Choice
www.gopchoice.org/
Like its sister organization, Republicans for Choice Political Action
Committee (PAC), the Republican Majority for Choice works to
protect reproductive rights by challenging the official pro-life plat-
form of the Republican Party. They contend that pro-life ideas run
counter to the Republican goals of limited government and per-
sonal freedoms and the current stance is “intrusive and alienating.”
This organization boasts a large number of prominent moderate
Republicans as members of its boards and committees. Its policy
agenda includes supporting stem cell research and emergency con-
traception for rape victims. 
Republican National Coalition for Life (RNCLIFE)
www.rnclife.org
Conservative activist Phyllis Schlafly formed this organization in
1990 to counter the attempts by the two Republican pro-choice
organizations to change the Republican pro-life platform. Floor
flights occurred at the conventions in 1992 and 1996, but the pro-
life coalition prevailed then and through the 2004 convention.
Between conventions the organization is little more than a blog
with occasional position papers to connect with the faithful. The
network remains in place, no doubt, to be ready for the next con-
vention battle in the Republican Party over the abortion issue. 
Republicans for Choice Political Action Committee (RCPAC)
www.republicansforchoice.com
Ann E. W. Stone founded Republicans for Choice in the wake of
the Supreme Court’s 1989 decision Webster v. Reproductive Ser-
vices, which showed that the majority of justices in favor of main-
242
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

taining legal abortion was dangerously close to disappearing. As
a PAC, the organization funds Republican candidates who sup-
port legal abortion and women’s privacy. Stone argues that this
platform is central to traditional Republican principles of limited
government and individual liberty. The strong pro-life stance of
the Republican Party in the 1990s has hurt the party, she claims,
alienating women voters especially. Republicans for Choice tries
to help so-called “moderate” Republicans who do not subscribe
to the pro-life views of the religious right. As Stone says, pro-
choice voters should look beyond party labels: some Democrats
are anti-choice; while some Republicans are pro-choice. She
works to protect the latter.
Sex Information and Education Council of the United States
(SIECUS)
www.siecus.org/
SIECUS was founded in 1964 by Dr. Mary S. Calderone. Then
and now its primary mission has been to promote sexuality edu-
cation for all, including reproductive health and services. Its
main contribution to the abortion conflict occurred in the 1960s
when it provided a forum for raising awareness about the limits
of criminal abortion laws and promoted law reform. Abortion is
no longer at the center of its mission, but related issues are, such
as emergency contraception, comprehensive sex education, and
gay rights. SIECUS uses its website to offer research and policy
updates on sexuality and sex education for educators, policy-
makers, journalists, and religious leaders. One such project for
school personnel is the School Health Clearing House Online.
Traditional Values Coalition (TVC)
www.traditionalvalues.org/
The TVC, founded in 1980 as a “non-denominational, grassroots
church lobby,” claims to speak for 43,000 churches of all faiths
and races. TVC is a component of the pro-life movement with a
goal of restoring values for strong families based on guidance
from a literal reading of the Bible. At the top of the list of values
is the right to life from conception to natural death, but TVC also
supports the power of government to execute murderers through
capital punishment. Other values on the traditional list are
fidelity in marriage, abstinence before marriage, and condemna-
tion of all sex outside of heterosexual marriage. The TVC is also
United States Organizations
243
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

against pornography and for patriotism and refuses to be toler-
ant of behaviors they believe destroy families. In 2007, the high-
est priority is the fight against homosexuality. 
United States Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB)
www.usccb.org/
The USCCB is the official hierarchy of the Roman Catholic
Church in the United States. It organizes itself into a series of
committees and secretariats to work on special topics. The Pro-
life Secretariat and Committee is one of the most active in assem-
bling educational materials, developing campaigns to promote a
pro-life agenda, and engaging in public policy efforts. The poli-
cies they support include the following: 
• Passage of a constitutional amendment that will protect
unborn children’s right to life to the maximum degree
possible, and pursuit of appropriate strategies to attain
this goal
• Federal and state laws and administrative policies that
restrict the practice of abortion as much as possible 
• Prohibition of support of human cloning, and research
that destroys human embryos
• Seeking to get the U.S. Supreme Court to reverse its
decisions regarding the legalization of abortion 
• Support for legislation that provides morally acceptable
alternatives to abortion, including funding to expand
education, health, nutrition, and other services for dis-
advantaged parents and their children
• Support for federal and state legislation that promotes
effective palliative care for those who are chronically ill
or dying
• Support for efforts to prevent legalization of euthanasia
and assisted suicide by legislation or referendum
• Support for efforts to end the death penalty
“As U.S. citizens and religious leaders, we see a critical moral
imperative for public policy efforts to ensure the protection of
human life. We urge our fellow citizens to see the justice of this
cause and to work with us to achieve these objectives.” The
USCCB is a major component and provides resources for the pro-
life movement.
244
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

International Organizations
Human Life International (HLI)
www.hli.org
Father Paul Marx founded HLI to promote the teachings of Roman
Catholicism about contraception and abortion around the world.
HLI calls itself the largest international, pro-life, pro-family, pro-
woman organization in the world. The organization uses the lan-
guage of missionary work to describe its efforts to inspire,
organize, train, and support pro-life activists in countries in
Europe, Latin America, Asia, and Africa. HLI claims to have ninety
offices in seventy-five countries and opposes family planning,
legal abortion, and sex education. These organizations separately
attend international conferences to enhance their antiabortion
clout. HLI has no official connection with the Roman Catholic
Church, although Pope John Paul II did endorse the work of its
founder, Father Marx. HLI presents itself as a sort of David to the
pro-choice, family planning Goliath—namely the Ford Founda-
tion. “They have money; we have God.” 
International Right to Life Federation
www.lifeissues.org/international/index.html
This federation brings leaders of national pro-life organizations
together to promote their common agenda. The federation pub-
lishes a newsletter at www.lifeissues.org. The President, Dr. Jack
Willke, gives talks all over the world, especially emphasizing the
message of the 1968 papal encyclical, Humanae Vitae. At the 2007
meeting of right-to-life leaders in Manila, the Philippines, the
group issued the following statement:
“We call on citizens throughout the world to demand
that innocent human life, from conception until natural
death, be protected from intentional killing in their
nations’ laws; we call on citizens throughout the world
to demand that only marriage between a man and a
woman be recognized in their nations’ laws; we call on
citizens throughout the world to demand that the
inalienable rights of parents as primary educators and
protectors be respected in their nations’ laws.” (www
.spuc.org.uk/news/releases/2007/january8)
International Organizations
245
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

International Women’s Health Coalition (IWHC)
www.iwhc.org
The premise of IWHC is that “women’s health and rights are cen-
tral to economic justice and global wellbeing.” To achieve its goal
the organization supports local organizations in Africa, Asia, and
Latin America. It also serves as an advocate for women’s health
rights at international conferences such as the UN Population
Fund, the World Health Organization, and the World Bank. Adri-
enne Germaine and Joan Dunlop formed IWHC in 1984. They
had both worked with the Population Council and saw an oppor-
tunity to develop a similar organization on behalf of women
worldwide. Germaine is the current president. She was a U.S.
delegate to both the Cairo Conference on population in 1994 and
the Beijing Conference on women in 1995.
Marie Stopes International (MSI)
www.mariestopes.org.uk
Named for the British birth control pioneer Marie Stopes, MSI
seeks to provide sexual and reproductive health services. It was
established in 1976 in London and is still based in the United
Kingdom. MSI reaches out to thirty-eight other countries
through its global partnership program and has centers in Africa,
Asia, Latin America, the Middle East, and Europe. 
Population Council
www.popcouncil.org
One of the leaders in the movement to curb population growth,
the Population Council has always had both a national and an
international focus. John D. Rockefeller III founded the Coun-
cil in 1952, and he used it to promote the legalization of abor-
tion in the United States in the 1960s and 1970s. More recently
the organization has focused on research on matters of repro-
ductive health to achieve a balance between people and re-
sources. It has programs in sixty countries and offices in
eighteen. With more than $70 million in the budget, the Coun-
cil funds research in biomedicine for safe pregnancies, gender
and family issues, HIV and AIDS, infants and children, and
reproductive health, especially contraception, postabortion
care, and unsafe abortions. 
246
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Society for the Protection of Unborn Children (SPUC)
www.spuc.org.uk
In 1966, when the act to legalize abortion was being considered
in the British parliament, SPUC formed because its members
were convinced that the new law would mean abortion on
demand. The group failed to prevent its passage but has been
active ever since as a “voice for the unborn.” SPUC argues that
the unborn child has a right to protection guaranteed by the 1959
UN Declaration of Rights of the Child. To advance its cause the
organization monitors and lobbies in the British and European
parliaments. SPUC also has an education charity called “How
You Began.” Along with leafleting and talks, they use fetal mod-
els showing stages of development to convince people that the
fetus is a child. They do not take direct action to picket or block-
ade abortion clinics. 
Women on Waves
http://womenonwaves.org
This Dutch organization’s goal is “to prevent unwanted preg-
nancy and unsafe abortion around the world.” It runs informa-
tive websites in several languages to talk about contraceptives,
abortion access, and news stories about these topics, and it pro-
vides a link to online medical abortion services. The organization
is probably most famous for its sea voyage campaigns. In these it
sends its ship, Borndiep, staffed with medical personnel, to a
country where abortion is illegal and anchors off shore. Then it
runs tenders from shore to the ship and performs medically safe
abortions. The ship’s presence stirred up much discussion about
criminal abortion when it visited Ireland in 2001, and, in 2004,
Portugal. 
Women’s Global Network on Reproductive Rights (WGNRR)
www.wgnrr.nl
This small NGO intends to offer a way to provide support to
local groups working on behalf of women’s reproductive rights
on all continents. It was originally based in Costa Rica but is now
working from Amsterdam, The Netherlands. This organization
defines reproductive rights as human rights—connected to the
global human rights movement—and advocates for access to
International Organizations
247
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

safe, legal abortion. However, laws do not confer rights on their
own without changes in the social, economic, and political con-
ditions that affect the capability of women to enjoy their rights.
One of their goals is to establish May 28 as International Day on
Women’s Health. They claim 2,000 members, mostly in the
regions of Latin America and the Caribbean, Asia Pacific, and
Africa and the Middle East. 
World Population Fund (WPF)
www.wpf.org
The WPF is based in the Netherlands and works at the national
(Dutch), European (EU), and international (UN) levels and in
developing countries. Their goal is to promote sexual and repro-
ductive health and rights. The group considers that freedom of
choice is essential to economic well-being and the end of poverty.
Along with alerting networks of activists to threats to sexual and
reproductive health and rights, the fund builds and supports
NGOs at local levels, especially in the developing countries. They
consider it important to increase the number of what they call
“stakeholders” in securing and maintaining rights.
248
Directory of Organizations
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

8
Resources
Introduction
Because the abortion issue has been on the public agenda for so
long, and because it is so contentious, there are more print and
nonprint materials than it is possible to keep track of, let alone
list in one place. So this list represents those I have found espe-
cially useful in my work over the past 30 years following the
abortion debates in the United States and internationally. Only a
few articles are listed because it is my experience that books give
the most complete versions of the various points of view in the
debate. Some of the resources are edited volumes that include
essays and articles; thus, they seem to be much more useful and
accessible than relying on a list of magazine or journal articles.
The nonprint sources are also the most well-known DVDs/
videos and websites.
Print Sources
General United States: Books
Belkin, Jack C. What Roe v. Wade Should Have Said. New York:
New York University Press, 2005.
Legal scholars got a chance to change history—hypothetically—
by rewriting the decision in Roe v. Wade. They were allowed to
use their experiences since 1973 but had to rely only on materials
available when the justices made the original ruling making
249
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

abortion legal in the first 6 months of pregnancy. The result is a
series of opinions, concurring opinions, and dissenting opinions
both for and against the right to abortion.
Blank, Robert, and Janna C. Merrick. Human Reproduction,
Emerging Technologies, and Conflicting Rights. Washington,
DC: CQ Press, 1995.
To feminists, the idea of reproductive rights means the ability of
women to get sex education, contraception, abortion, and health
care as well as the right not to be sterilized. The authors here pre-
sent a more detailed perspective of the concept of reproductive
rights to include the right not to have children, the right to have
children, and the right to choose the quality and characteristics
of one’s children. They then relate these rights to policymaking
contexts. New at the time the book was published were the
analyses of assisted reproduction and the survey of state policies
being developed to regulate the consequences—intended and
unintended—of in vitro fertilization, artificial insemination, sur-
rogacy, and the like.
Burns, Gene. The Moral Veto: Framing Contraception, Abortion,
and Cultural Pluralism in the United States. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2005.
For readers interested in an in-depth analysis of the framing
processes surrounding abortion debates in the United States, this
book is a good choice. It explores frames about abortion and con-
traception in public debate since the nineteenth century and
examines how these frames developed through the policy debates
of the twentieth century. The title reflects the author’s conceptu-
alization of the significance of framing. The frames of the pro-life
movement that express great moral passion make it difficult for
the movement actors to obtain their goals. At the same time these
frames prevent—that is, veto—the goals proposed by the pro-
choice activists. As a result, policy change is stymied.
Butler, J. Douglas, and David F. Walbert, eds. Abortion, Medi-
cine, and the Law, 4th ed. New York: Facts on File, 1992.
For this series on abortion law, the editors selected what they
considered to be the most important essays and articles from the
fields of law, medicine, and ethics to provide a comprehensive
250
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

reference work on all aspects of the issue. These essays are still
useful for understanding the debate in the 1980s and early 1990s.
Craig, Barbara Hinkson, and David M. O’Brien. Abortion and
American Politics. Chatham, NJ: Chatham House Publishers,
1993.
The purpose of Craig and O’Brien’s book is to describe and ana-
lyze the impact of abortion controversies on American politics.
At the same time, the authors review the events in policymaking,
both at the federal and state levels, from the 1970s to the 1990s.
Chapters are devoted to interest groups, state politics, Congress,
presidential politics, the courts, and public opinion. Three major
cases structure the time frame of the descriptions: Roe v. Wade in
1973, Webster v. Reproductive Services in 1989, and Planned Parent-
hood v. Casey in 1992.
Critchlow, Donald T. Intended Consequences: Birth Control,
Abortion, and the Federal Government in Modern America. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Critchlow is the founding editor of the Journal of Public History
and brings a historian’s eye to the changes in public policy affect-
ing contraception and abortion from the 1950s through the 1990s.
The goal is to describe the formation of the federal family plan-
ning policy and how the legalization of abortion changed the
debate over birth control. Key to the change was the growth of
the feminist movement, which moved the issue from the pur-
view of population control experts to the combative movements
in the abortion debate.
Garrow, David J. Liberty and Sexuality: The Right to Privacy
and the Making of Roe v. Wade. Berkeley: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1994, 1998.
Here is the definitive legal history of Roe v. Wade, the result of
meticulous research by Garrow, a professor of law at Emory Uni-
versity. Garrow finds the origins of the decision in the birth con-
trol campaigns of Katherine Houghton Hepburn in Connecticut
in the early part of the twentieth century. These politics eventually
led to the ruling that the decision whether or not to have a child
was fundamental and within a zone of constitutional privacy. The
book goes on to take the reader step by step through the litigation
Print Sources
251
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

that resulted in the legalization of abortion and the Supreme
Court’s rejection of conditional abortion laws. This is an essential
resource for anyone following the abortion debate.
Ginsburg, Faye. Contested Lives: The Abortion Debate in an
American Community. Berkeley: University of California Press,
1998.
The abortion clinic in Fargo, North Dakota, is the setting for
anthropologist Ginsburg’s ethnography of abortion debates. The
women’s health center in that Plains community has been one of
the most embattled in the United States. The study here delves
into the narratives of the participants on both sides of the divide
and places them in historic context. Like Gorney’s 1998 book on
a clinic in Missouri, it covers the period of the 1980s.
Gorney, Cynthia. Articles of Faith: A Frontline History of the
Abortion Wars. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1998.
Gorney tells the tale of the conflict over abortion between 1973
and 1989 from the point of view of impassioned advocates on
both sides. The scene is an abortion clinic in Missouri, but she
relates the events to the broader picture of abortion politics and
policy in the nation. The story ends with the decision in Webster v.
Reproductive Services. For a similar approach see Ginsburg (1998).
Herring, Mark Y. The Pro-Life/Choice Debate. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 2003.
Part of Greenwood’s series called Historical Guides to Contro-
versial Issues in America, Herring’s book provides an introduc-
tion to the debate through a historical survey of major periods.
His goal is to offer a nonpartisan approach so the guide will be of
use to students and the general public. It includes a bibliography
and a list of web sources on the issue.
Hull, N. E. H., Williamjames Hoffer, and Peter Charles Hoffer,
eds. Abortion Rights Controversy in America: A Legal Reader.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004.
Assembled by three law professors, this book collects primary
source documents about the abortion debate beginning in the
nineteenth century, including legal briefs, speeches, oral argu-
ments, court opinions, and newspaper articles. Each item has an
252
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

introduction that places it in a historical context. One item of 
special interest is an excerpt from a conference among Supreme
Court justices in which they discuss their views before deciding
the Roe v. Wade and Doe v. Bolton cases. This book is designed for
instructors and students who are exploring the abortion issue.
Levine, Phillip B. Sex and Consequences: Abortion, Public Pol-
icy, and the Economics of Fertility. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2004.
Levine wants to step away from what he terms the “ideological
extremes” provoked by abortion and bring in the cool rationality
of economic modeling. His model predicts that when abortion is
initially legalized, the rate of abortions will increase, and the rate
of both unwanted births and fertility will decline. However, as
access expands, the costs of abortion decrease, contraceptive use
declines, and more pregnancies result. Finally, when there are
limited restrictions on access to legal abortion, such as adminis-
trative hurdles and limits on Medicaid funding, there will be a
reduction in abortion demand, thus decreasing the number of
abortions without increasing the number of births. People will
increase their use of contraceptives when abortion is more costly.
Luker, Kristin. Abortion and the Politics of Motherhood. Berke-
ley: University of California Press, 1984.
By the 1980s, the conflict over the abortion issue had arrived at its
fully polarized form between the pro-life and pro-choice move-
ments. Luker’s classic study of the abortion issue places this
debate in a historical context, following the formation of the issue
from the early nineteenth century to the early 1980s. The descrip-
tions of her interviews with pro-choice and pro-life activists cap-
ture the early days of both movements and provide valuable
insights into the perspectives and motivations of the people on
both sides.
Maxwell, Carol J. Pro-Life Activists in America: Meaning,
Motive, and Direct Action. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2002.
This book is another example of ethnographic studies of abortion
activism, in this case the pro-life supporters who engaged in
direct action at clinics. Maxwell interviewed many of them to
Print Sources
253
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

search for the motives for their activism. She found more diver-
sity than might be expected, and the book details the profound
impact their activism had on their lives. This study covers the
campaigns in the 1990s.
McDonagh, Eileen L. Breaking the Abortion Deadlock: From
Choice to Consent. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.
In the early 1990s, McDonagh began a campaign to reframe the
rationale for legal abortion in a way that would combine the
goals of both sides. She argued that advocates for legal abortion
should accept the pro-life claim of equal personhood of the fetus.
Then, she reasoned that law would support the right of a woman
to consent to accept the embryo in her body for gestation and
birth and, at the same time, the right to withdraw that consent
through terminating the pregnancy. The legal principle is that no
person can live off the body of another without her consent. In
this book McDonagh elaborates her provocative argument.
McFarlane, Deborah R., and Kenneth J. Meier. The Politics of
Fertility Control: Family Planning and Abortion Policies in the
American States. New York: Chatham House Publishers, 2001.
Using techniques of comparative state policy analysis, McFarlane
and Meier examine claims that high levels of conflict and more
restrictive policies on contraception and abortion are ineffective
in addressing high rates of unintended pregnancy and have even
contributed to high pregnancy rates. They find that states with
lower levels of family planning have higher abortion rates. How-
ever, they conclude that with the moral component so important
in the debates on fertility control, it is unlikely that workable
policies will be developed soon.
Mohr, James C. Abortion in America: The Origins and Evolution
of National Policy, 1800–1900. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1978.
Probably the first detailed history of the politics and culture of
abortion criminalization in the nineteenth century, Mohr’s book
is an essential source used by all who study the abortion issue in
the United States. It is a very interesting read and the book
includes some wonderful photographs of abortion ads of the
254
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

period and newspaper stories of government enforcement of
laws. Although out of print, it is available in the used book mar-
ket and is well worth the search.
Mooney, Christopher Z., ed. The Public Clash of Private Values:
The Politics of Morality Policy. New York: Chatham House
Publishers, 2001.
The politic of moral issues is not limited to contraceptives, sex
education, and abortion policies. As shown in this edited collec-
tion, these issues include gay rights, gambling, death penalty,
drugs, and pornography. Readers will find case studies of all of
these here, as well as some cross-national studies and a review of
Catholic bishops’ statements from 1792 to 2000.
Morgen, Sandra. Into Our Own Hands: The Women’s Health
Movement in the United States, 1969–1990. New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press, 2002.
The women’s health movement developed at the same time as
feminists began demanding legal abortion: both efforts chal-
lenged male control over women’s health. This book describes
the origins of the movement and follows its development, focus-
ing especially on the grassroots efforts through clinics and self-
help groups. The movement faced many challenges but can look
to the increased funding for women’s health initiatives at federal
and state levels as real victories.
Olasky, Marvin. Abortion Rites: A Social History. Wheaton, IL:
Crossway Books, 1992.
Journalism professor Olasky explored documentary sources in
the Library of Congress to challenge Mohr’s view of nineteenth-
century history in Abortion in America (1978). Mohr claimed that
the mid-century increase in abortions included many white, mid-
dle-class, Protestant women and was the stimulus for the cam-
paign to criminalize the procedure. Olasky begins his book by
making the case that three groups of women—prostitutes, those
who had been seduced and abandoned, and the followers of free
love (in other words, women who were not respectable)—were
the main clients for abortionists. Overall, Olasky’s book is more
agreeable to pro-life advocates than Mohr’s book.
Print Sources
255
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Press, Eyal. Absolute Convictions: My Father, a City, and the
Conflict that Divided America. New York: Henry Holt, 2006.
Press is the son of an abortion doctor who practiced in Buffalo, New
York, in the 1970s and 1980s. An antiabortion activist murdered his
father’s colleague, Barnett Slepian, in 1998, and Press’s father was
warned he would be next. The author returned to Buffalo to dis-
cover the reasons behind such violence and rage and to try to
understand the motives of those who had blockaded his father’s
office for years. The result combines an interesting case study with
research on the rise of the evangelical antiabortion movement.
Reagan, Leslie J. When Abortion Was a Crime: Women, Medi-
cine, and Law in the United States, 1867–1973. Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1997.
Historian Reagan combines information about the private life of
women with problem pregnancies during the period when crim-
inal abortion laws were in place with descriptions of the public
campaigns against abortion and for law reform. An important
contribution of this book is to open up the period from the 1900s
to the 1960s when most thought the abortion issues was com-
pletely dormant. Her book brings to light evidence that the period
was anything but silent as far as abortion politics was concerned.
Riddle, John M. Eve’s Herbs: A History of Contraception and
Abortion in the West. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1997.
This history of medicine shows that women have used herbs to
regulate fertility ever since ancient times. Riddle has done the
research to uncover these practices and name the herbs. This
ancient knowledge has been passed down to women through the
years. However, the Catholic Church forbid these practices after
the fifteenth century, and condemned practitioners of these arts
as witches. Regular medicine then criminalized the use of these
herbs through law. Nevertheless, Riddle argues, these herbs are
still available and are still used today around the world.
Rubin, Eva. The Abortion Controversy: A Documentary History.
Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1994.
This book contains excerpts from some very interesting docu-
ments from the early nineteenth century up to the early 1990s.
256
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Although the book is out of print, it is available through several
e-book services on the Internet or at libraries.
Rudy, Kathy. Beyond Pro-Life and Pro-Choice: Moral Diversity
in the Abortion Debate. Boston: Beacon Press, 1996.
Rudy recounts the views of four groups on the abortion debate:
liberals, feminists, Roman Catholics, and evangelicals. Given the
diversity of the views of these groups, the author considers the
current legal doctrine of absolute rights to be part of the problem
in settling the issue. What courts provide is an abstract right of
abortion to a single individual. What is needed, she claims, is to
take account of the circumstances of pregnant women in all their
diversity. Let communities work out ways to care for women and
provide the conditions for real choice. She recommends the
repeal of all abortion laws.
Saletan, William. Bearing Right: How the Conservatives Won
the Abortion War. Berkeley: University of California Press,
2003.
This book delves into the process whereby issues are defined and
how these definitions affect outcomes. For his example, Saletan
focuses on the alliance between pro-choice activists and antigov-
ernment conservatives in the 1990s. The women’s rights frame
did nothing but lose support for legal abortion, especially in the
South. A particular referendum campaign in Arkansas showed
how packaging a pro-choice position in terms of opposition to
government interference was successful despite a high percent-
age of pro-life voters. This led to NARAL’s “Who Decides?” cam-
paign, which sought to connect with those who did not want
government to interfere in private family decisions. Saletan
claims that although the pro-choice movement has saved legal
abortion, it has lost the most important power: to define the issue
in pro-choice women’s rights terms.
Schroedel, Jean Reith. Is the Fetus a Person? A Comparison of
Politics across the Fifty States. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 2000.
Schroedel explores the emerging issue of fetal personhood in law,
politics, and state policymaking. The book begins with a chapter
on the history of the concept and how it has changed in English
Print Sources
257
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

and U.S. law. Chapters on state policymaking follow, covering
abortion, prenatal drug exposure, and third-party fetal killings.
In these chapters, the author frames the policy alternatives and
then summarizes the types of policies in the states. The effect of
the issue of fetal personhood on women’s abortion rights is cen-
tral to the analysis in the book.
Segers, Mary C., and Timothy A. Byrnes, eds. Abortion Politics
in American States. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1995.
Despite the media focus on Roe v. Wade and national debates
about partial-birth abortion, the issue is primarily a state matter
and the Constitution charges state legislatures with establishing
abortion policy. This book assembles a number of state-focused
studies, including studies in Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, and
California, where scholars describe their state’s involvement
with the issue. Most of these studies are still useful because they
show the social and political background of a state’s approach to
the issue, whether the state is pro-life, as is Louisiana, or the state
has seen a pro-choice outcome through initiative, as in Washing-
ton State.
Shapiro, Ian, ed. Abortion: The Supreme Court Decisions. Indi-
anapolis: Hackett Publishing, 1995.
Before the expansion of the Internet, many used books like this
one as reference sources. It contains abridged versions of the
major Supreme Court cases, beginning with Griswold v. Connecti-
cut in 1965 through Planned Parenthood v. Casey in 1992. Today the
full text of all the cases is available on the Internet from sources
like Findlaw.com (see nonprint sources). Still, given the length
and technical presentation of many of the decisions that come
directly from the Court, having the essential parts in a small
paperback is still useful.
Staggenborg, Suzanne. The Pro-Choice Movement: Organiza-
tion and Activism in the Abortion Conflict. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1991.
The author uses social movement theory to study the emergence
and activism of the pro-choice movement. The structure and
analysis reflects the work’s origins as a PhD dissertation. The
author conducted interviews with many activists in the move-
258
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

ment in national organizations as well as with those in state and
local activities, mostly in Illinois. The research shows the differ-
ent ways the movement gained access to policymakers. Staggen-
borg counters the media claims that the pro-choice movement
was dormant during the 1980s, yielding the ground to pro-life
activists. What was important, she claims, was that when
needed, as in response to the Webster decision, movement leaders
could rally grass roots activists to wage effective campaigns.
Tribe, Laurence H. Abortion: The Clash of Absolutes. New York:
W.W. Norton, 1990.
With his title and his book, legal expert Tribe, professor of law at
Harvard Law School, gave a cogent name to the nature of the abor-
tion debate in the United States—that it is a battle between beliefs
that defy compromise. The book appeared in the wake of the con-
troversy over the Webster decision where some justices invited
challenges to legal abortion. Using his knowledge of jurisprudence,
Tribe considers this divide, beginning with a historical and world
context and then delving into the claims about the law coming
from both sides. His discussion of rights to privacy and person-
hood in constitutional law are especially compelling. He concludes
that both sides can find common ground: “If advocates on both
sides of the abortion debate would just pause, they would recog-
nize at least one broadly shared interest, that of working toward a
world of only wanted pregnancies. Better education, the provision
of contraception, indeed the creation of a society in which the bur-
den of raising a child is lighter are all achievable goals that are lost
in the shouting about abortion” (p. 228).
General United States: Plays
Heffron, Elizabeth. Mitzi’s Abortion. Seattle, WA: ACT The-
atre, 2003.
Playwright Heffron struggled with the title for her play because
the term abortion has become such a controversial word in the
midst of the polarizing pro-life/pro-choice debate. But, she rea-
soned, if one can’t speak about something there will be great dif-
ficulty in finding closure. Her play tells the story of one woman’s
experience with a problem pregnancy and her struggle to make
the right choice. All the arguments about abortion find a place in
the words of one or another of the characters. The conclusion is
Print Sources
259
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

that, like any life experience, the experience of problem preg-
nancy is personal, and neither wholly positive or wholly negative.
General World and 
Comparative Studies: Books
David, Henry P., ed., with assistance of Joanna Skilogianis. From
Abortion to Contraception: A Resource to Public Policies and
Reproductive Behavior in Central and Eastern Europe from 1917
to the Present. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1999.
Using a common framework, experts on policy and demography
in Central and Eastern European countries from Albania to
Yugoslavia describe fertility behavior, family and abortion poli-
cies, and “the woman question.” The book is, thus, a detailed ref-
erence work. The first chapters place the country reports in
general context and pay special attention to what the authors call
the “abortion culture” in the region.
Ferree, Myra Marx, William Anthony Gamson, Jürgen Ger-
hards, and Dieter Rucht. Shaping Abortion Discourse: Democ-
racy and the Public Sphere in Germany and the United States.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
In the late 1990s, the authors conducted a large and complex
study to describe, analyze, and compare the public discourse on
abortion in the United States and Germany. They created a data-
base of newspaper articles from the two countries and used con-
tent analysis to uncover the form and substance of the debates.
This approach also enabled them to compare constitutional and
political patterns. They found, among other things, that abortion
has historically been a gendered issue in Germany while it has
more likely been framed in medical terms in the United States.
Githens, Marianne, and Dorothy McBride Stetson, eds. Abor-
tion Politics: Public Policy in Cross-Cultural Perspective. New
York: Routledge, 1996.
This book brings together distinguished scholars of abortion pol-
itics in comparative contexts and yields some interesting studies
that remain timely. Examples include the “stability of compro-
mise” in Western Europe, the pressures of European Union mem-
260
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

bership on restrictions in Ireland, and feminist perspectives on
abortion and reproductive technologies.
Haussman, Melissa. Abortion Politics in North America. Boul-
der, CO: Lynn Rienner, 2005.
It is unusual to find a study of policy that compares Mexico with
the United States and Canada, but the politics surrounding the
North American Free Trade Agreement encouraged Haussman to
look beneath the surface to find a common framework from
which to analyze the differences. There are two similarities: all
have federal constitutions and all face a paradox between the law
on the books and the law in practice. In addition, access to abor-
tion services is increasingly limited in all three countries.
Htun, Mala. Sex and the State: Abortion, Divorce, and the Fam-
ily under Latin American Dictatorships and Democracies. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
This book focuses on policies in Argentina, Brazil, and Chile dur-
ing the last third of the twentieth century. Forces of democratiza-
tion and modernization were in play, energizing new political
voices, such as feminists and other social groups. The states
responded with some gender-related policy reform but uni-
formly rejected any attempt to change criminal abortion laws.
The answers to the puzzle are complex, but the key is the grow-
ing influence of the Catholic Church on social policy. The book is
based on historical research and many interviews with policy
activists, religious leaders, and academics.
Kulczycki, Andrzej. The Abortion Debate in the World Arena.
New York: Routledge, 1999.
The title promises a more global perspective than what the book
actually delivers: three case studies of the abortion debate in
Poland, Kenya, and Mexico. The case studies provide alternative
views of the issue from the non-Western perspective; as the
author points out, sometimes the conflict is hidden, even unspo-
ken, in places where there are no concepts or vocabulary to
describe abortion as a public problem. Information about the
Kenyan case is especially useful because few studies of abortion
politics in Africa are available.
Print Sources
261
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Latham, Melanie. Regulating Reproduction: A Century of Con-
flict in Britain and France. Manchester, UK: Manchester Uni-
versity Press, 2002.
This book provides a very useful and comprehensive source of
information about reproduction law and politics in two Euro-
pean countries. The book is organized according to the three
component issues: contraception, abortion, and assisted concep-
tion. For each, a chapter describes the parallel development of
law in the UK and France since the early 1900s. In all these chap-
ters on law the author focuses on the different aspects of the com-
mon law/statute law legal system in Britain and the code/civil
law system in France to explain variations in the patterns of
change and the content of the laws. Each of these law chapters is
followed by a chapter that details the policy conflicts and inter-
est-group politics related to the development of the statutes and
case law in the two countries.
Lee, Ellie, ed. Abortion Law and Politics Today. New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 1998.
The first part of this book is a collection of articles on abortion
politics in Great Britain, including an interesting memoir of the
1960s by Madeleine Simms, one of the leaders behind campaign
for abortion law reform. The second part of the book puts British
policy in a larger context with discussions on Ireland, Poland,
the United States, and France. Finally, the book ends with arti-
cles on newer issues such as reproductive technology and men’s
rights.
McBride Stetson, Dorothy, ed. and contributing author. Abor-
tion Politics, Women’s Movements and the Democratic State: A
Comparative Study of State Feminism. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2001.
This book is both a collection of case studies of the development
of abortion politics in Western Europe and North America as well
as a comparative research project on the influence of women’s
movements and women’s policy agencies on abortion policies.
No other work covers the sweep of movement activism and pol-
icy outcomes among the Western democracies. The studies reveal
the complex paths policy actors have taken to come to similar
262
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

outcomes, that is, the legalization of abortion in the first weeks of
pregnancy. The exception is Ireland, where the dominant culture
makes feminists reluctant to campaign on the issue and instead
accept the “escape route” to England.
Rolston, Bill, and Anna Eggert, eds. Abortion in the New
Europe: A Comparative Handbook. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 1994.
In this collection, the “new Europe” refers to the effect of the end
of Soviet domination over parts of the continent and the recogni-
tion of the potential “Europeanness” of Russia, Poland, Hungary,
and the Czech and Slovak Republics. Along with Western Euro-
pean countries, each rates a separate chapter in this book pre-
pared according to a common outline: history of abortion law,
current abortion law and practice, and future debates. The book
remains a useful reference for tracking down policies in individ-
ual countries.
Tatalovich, Raymond. The Politics of Abortion in the United
Sates and Canada: A Comparative History. Armonk, NY: M. E.
Sharpe, 1997.
Tatalovich has published widely on moral debates in the United
States and Canada, but this is his most in-depth analysis of an
issue in the two countries. It places the highly divisive Ameri-
can debate in perspective and shows the effects of institutional
similarities—federalism—and differences—parliamentarism
versus presidentialism—on the abortion policy and its imple-
mentation in the two countries.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs.
Population Division. Abortion Politics: A Global Review. Vol-
umes I–III. New York: United Nations, 2001.
This three-volume series provides nuggets on all the countries in
the United Nations, listing the grounds on which abortion is per-
mitted, data on reproductive health in the country, and a descrip-
tion of the background for the abortion policy and politics. These
useful guides are also available on the United Nations website:
www.un.org/esa/population/publications/abortion/.
Print Sources
263
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

General World and 
Comparative Studies: Articles
Yishai, Yael. “Public Ideas and Public Policy: Abortion Politics
in Four Democracies.” Comparative Politics 25 (1993): 207–228.
This is one of the first systematic comparative studies of abortion
politics and policy. The democracies included are the United
States, Ireland, Sweden, and Israel. Yishai questions what the pat-
tern of abortion politics has to say about the status of women in
a country. The answer is very little. Despite women’s movement
activism, the official definitions of abortion policies rely on tradi-
tional public ideas: individualism in the United States, Catholic
doctrine in Ireland, the welfare state in Sweden, and demo-
graphic constraints in Israel.
Pro-Choice Books
Baer, Judith. Historical and Multicultural Encyclopedia of
Women’s Reproductive Rights in the United States. Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press, 2002.
Want a book that will provide not only a definition but an analy-
sis of just about every legal and political term you can imagine
pertaining to reproductive issues? Want it from a feminist per-
spective? Then this is an excellent reference work. From undue
burden standard to fetal protection policies to the squeal rule,
you’ll find it here. Baer recruited a large number of experts to
contribute entries, giving the encyclopedia a solid scholarly
foundation.
Baird-Windle, Patricia, and Eleanor J. Bader. Targets of Hatred:
Anti-Abortion Terrorism. New York: Palgrave, 2001.
The goal of this work is to raise the press and the public’s aware-
ness that terrorism in the United States is not limited to Timothy
McVeigh and the attacks of September 11, 2001. It reads like a
documented diary of the threats and violence abortion providers
have experienced since the 1960s. Here is a typical entry:
“December 28, 1991: Springfield Missouri: A man in a ski mask
walked into the Central Health Center for Women and asked to
see a doctor. When he was told that the physician had already
gone for the day, the man pulled out a sawed-off shotgun and
264
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

fired it. He seriously wounded the clinic receptionist and the
owner of the building. The gunman was not apprehended, and
the clinic closed its doors in early 1992. The pair were the first
victims of an abortion-related shooting” (p. 167)
Dombrowski, Daniel A., and Robert Deltete. A Brief, Liberal,
Catholic Defense of Abortion. Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 2000.
The authors review Catholic thought from the time of Augustine
and Thomas Aquinas, showing that the current official Catholic
view on abortion does not have an ancient history. In fact, neither
of these philosophers considered the embryo to be a person.
Today’s restrictive Catholic doctrine was established only in the
seventeenth century. The authors go on to show that the Catholic
Church’s view that moral sexual relations occur only for procre-
ation within marriage is too narrow and has devastating negative
consequences for people’s lives.
Ehrlich, J. Shoshanna. Who Decides? The Abortion Rights of
Teens. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2006.
Relatively little has been written on the effects of parental
involvement laws that the Supreme Court has ruled are constitu-
tional. This book explores the development of these rules and
their effects on the lives of young women. Ehrlich studied the
stories of twenty-six women to reveal the burdens of these laws
on their lives and choices.
Feldt, Gloria. The War on Choice: The Right-Wing Attack on
Women’s Rights and How to Fight Back. New York: Bantam
Books, 2004.
In the introduction to this book, Sally Blackmun, the daughter of
Justice Harry Blackmun, recalls what life was like at home when
her father was making his historic decision in Roe v. Wade. The
body of the book, is faithful to the promises in the title; each
chapter describes the status of an area of reproductive policy
with bullet points to make the message easy to understand. Top-
ics include restrictions on abortion, family planning, sex educa-
tion and abstinence, fetal personhood, right wing attacks on
science, and the fate of legal abortion.
Print Sources
265
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Hadley, Janet. Abortion: Between Freedom and Necessity.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1996.
The goal here is to look beneath the abortion wars to see how
women’s lives are affected. The first chapters look at countries
where the debates over legal abortion remain contentious: the
United States, Ireland, and Germany. The author then expands
her lens to cover prenatal diagnosis and sex selection in India,
China, and Britain, and the relation of contraception to abortion
in Russia, Holland, and Britain. She answers critics who say
abortion is immoral and makes the case that the right to abortion
is really about women’s rights to reproductive health.
Joffe, Carol. Doctors of Conscience: The Struggle to Provide
Abortion Before and After Roe v. Wade. Boston: Beacon Press,
1995.
The motivation for this study was to counter the image of those
who practiced abortion before it was legalized as “butchers.”
Joffe set out to interview doctors and others who helped women
get abortions and found that the practitioners were largely moti-
vated by their personal experience with the horrible effects of
botched abortions. They tried to help women because they
believed it was right, despite the risks of arrest and imprison-
ment. She also found that the stresses on abortion providers were
only slightly lessened after abortion became legal because of the
continued portrayal of abortion doctors as “baby killers,” even
by medical colleagues.
Kaplan, Laura. The Story of Jane: The Legendary Underground
Feminist Abortion Services. New York: Pantheon Books, 1995.
From 1969 to 1973, a group of Chicago women developed an
informal network to help women in need of abortions. At first
they handled referrals to willing doctors, but word soon spread
and the demand grew. Eventually, despite the law, they learned
to perform the procedure themselves. They also provided coun-
seling to women using the service. This is their story as told by
one of the members of the network.
Lader, Lawrence. Abortion. Boston: Beacon Press, 1966.
Like its author, this book played an important part in the abor-
tion reform movement. Through his investigative research, Lader
266
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

revealed the extent to which women sought abortions and doc-
tors performed them, despite the restrictive criminal laws. Even
more important was the evidence of the large number of illegal
abortions that threatened women’s health. With the study, Lader
provided the evidence of the need to reform these laws.
Lader, Lawrence. Abortion II: Making the Revolution. Boston:
Beacon Press, 1973.
Abortion II is Lader’s story of his experience with the abortion
reform/repeal movement. It was written in the wake of the Roe v.
Wade decision, which he saw as a victory for those demanding a
radical rejection of both the Catholic Church and the medical
bureaucracies. The book did not foresee the backlash against the
movement and the rise of the pro-life forces that stopped Lader’s
“revolution” in its tracks.
Maguire, Daniel C. Sacred Choices: The Right to Contraception
and Abortion in Ten World Religions. Minneapolis: Fortress
Press, 2001.
For those in the pro-choice movement who consider religion
their enemy, Maguire finds pro-choice sympathies in all of the
world’s religions alongside the antiabortion and anti–family
planning beliefs. Pro-life Catholics are especially critical of
Maguire’s work as it challenges the official doctrine and provides
support for groups such as Catholics for Choice. His main point
is that beliefs in most religions are pluralistic, not absolute, and
one does not have to reject one’s faith altogether to support the
goals of abortion rights.
Mason, Carol. Killing for Life: The Apocalyptic Narrative of
Pro-Life Politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2002.
Mason analyzes narratives that arose from the militants in the
pro-life movement in the 1990s and into the anthrax scares of
2001. Rather than the fringe ranting of a few dispossessed crimi-
nals, the author makes the case that the narrative is the culmina-
tion of a 30-year expansion of right wing thought that claims
American moral society is under threat from forces of evil, in fact,
following the steps toward Armageddon as predicted in the
Bible. The antiabortion warrior depicted is male, Christian, and
white.
Print Sources
267
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Michelman, Kate. With Liberty and Justice for All: A Life Spent
Protecting the Right to Choose. New York: Hudson Street Press,
2005.
Michelman combines her personal biography with her political
activism as long-time president of NARAL Pro-Choice America. It
begins with the story of her own abortion back in the pre-Roe days,
which required the consent of a hospital board of men as well as
the husband who had recently abandoned her and her three
daughters. She describes her role and her views of the politics of
pro-choice campaigns from 1985 to 2004. The book provides a use-
ful record of NARAL’s place in the pro-choice movement.
Nelson, Jennifer. Women of Color and the Reproductive Rights
Movement. New York: New York University Press, 2003.
Many who want to know “what were minority women doing
during the abortion debates?” turn to Nelson’s study of the cam-
paign for legal abortion. It covers activism by women of color
beginning in the 1960s. Nelson documents the success of these
activists in expanding the campaign from a narrow idea of abor-
tion rights held by women’s liberation and other mainstream fem-
inist groups to addressing a broad spectrum of reproductive
rights, including sterilization, child care, health care, and poverty.
Page, Cristina. How the Pro-Choice Movement Saved America:
Freedom, Politics, and the War on Sex. New York: Basic Books,
2006.
Page claims to uncover a covert war by the pro-life movement
against sex education, birth control, and in fact sexual freedom
itself. The effect of its campaign is to increase, not decrease, the
number of abortions by making it impossible for women to pre-
vent unplanned pregnancies. Thus, to Page, who is a top official
with NARAL Pro-Choice America, the abortion wars are not
about women’s privacy versus the unborn; the war is on sex itself,
that is, any sexual behavior that is not within heterosexual mar-
riage and for the purposes of procreation. Her conclusion is that
the pro-choice movement is doing the most to reduce abortions.
Petchesky, Rosalind Pollack. Abortion and Woman’s Choice:
The State, Sexuality, and Reproductive Freedom. Boston: North-
eastern University Press, 1984.
268
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Socialist feminism is not popular among feminist writers in the
2000s, so Petchesky’s analysis of the abortion issue in the early
1980s using a socialist feminist perspective is especially inter-
esting. The success of the pro-life attack on abortion rights
prompted her to write the book, in which she defends women’s
need for safe, legal abortion and develops a theory of social
relations and reproduction. Her approach is based on the
assumption that historical and cultural conditions shape ideas;
the book traces the abortion debate from the nineteenth century
to the 1980s. Her arguments presage contemporary arguments
that feminists must claim the moral argument for women’s
rights.
Powers, Meghan, ed. The Abortion Rights Movement. Detroit:
Greenhaven/Thomson/Gale, 2006.
Part of the American Social Movements series, this book uses
speeches and articles by activists and academics to describe the
origins, goals, strategies, and outcomes of the abortion rights
movement. Included are writings by Margaret Sanger, Betty
Friedan, and Gloria Feldt among others.
Sanger, Alexander. Beyond Choice: Reproductive Freedom in the
21st Century. New York: Public Affairs Press, 2004.
The grandson of Margaret Sanger takes a page from the ideology
of the family planning movement to offer a solution to the divi-
sive abortion debate: people should and will make decisions to
improve the chances for raising healthy children to adulthood.
Pro-choice ideas ignore the moral dimension of these decisions,
while the pro-life approach ignores the family well-being dimen-
sion. Sanger’s goal is to frame the matter of reproductive free-
dom to show contraception and abortion as moral choices
because without them parents will not be able to reproduce the
next healthy generation. Only individuals, not the government,
can decide whether they should become parents, so a pregnant
woman who does not have the will to be a parent is making a
moral choice by terminating a pregnancy. Sanger makes a
provocative argument for a new way of looking at the debate.
Schrage, Laurie. Abortion and Social Responsibility: Depolariz-
ing the Debate. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Print Sources
269
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

The solution to the polarization of the abortion debates, accord-
ing to philosophy professor Schrage, is to reframe the debate to
bring in the moral issues and the social conditions that influence
women’s lives. She lays blame on the frame of debate left by the
Roe v. Wade court—abortion on demand for the first 6 months of
pregnancy—which inflamed divisions on the issue rather than
healed them. The pro-life side has dominated not only the debate
but also the images of the debate, and the author suggests that it
is time for feminists to retake this territory, that is, “to move out
of the journals and museums and into newspapers, bus termi-
nals, the internet, film and TV” (p. 130). The author includes
many illustrations of feminist artwork and makes concrete sug-
gestions, such as limiting the time for nontherapeutic abortions
along with removing administrative and funding hurdles.
Silliman, Jael, Marlene Gerber Fried, Loretta Ross, and Elena
R. Gutiérrez. Undivided Rights: Women of Color Organize for
Reproductive Justice. Cambridge, MA: Southend Press, 2004.
Like Nelson’s 2003 book, Undivided Rights documents the role of
women of color in developing what the authors call “reproduc-
tive justice.” The material is organized according to organiza-
tions and their activities, such as the National Black Women’s
Health Project, and the health organizations for Asian, Native
American, and Latina women.
Solinger, Rickie, ed. Abortion Wars: A Half Century of Struggle,
1950–2000. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998.
Solinger has brought together eighteen articles that look at parts
of the abortion debate. Many of these are written by those who
participated in the events, such as the description of Jane, the
feminist clandestine abortion network, while others are more
scholarly works. All examine abortion politics from a feminist
perspective.
Pro-Choice Article
Thomson, Judith Jarvis. “A Defense of Abortion.” Philosophy
and Public Affairs 1 (1971): 47–66.
This controversial essay is a classic logical argument in favor of
legal abortion or, more accurately, against the denial of all abor-
270
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

tion. In it, Thomson responds to the difficulties in drawing a line
during pregnancy before which it is okay to kill a fetus because it
is not yet a person or a human being but after which it is not
okay. Instead, she grants that the embryo is a person and then
analyzes the problems related to its “right to life.” Does agreeing
that a fetus is a person mean abortion is always wrong? Does a
fetus have the right to occupy and threaten the life of another
without consent? To make her case she says, imagine “you wake
up in the morning and find yourself back to back in bed with an
unconscious violinist. A famous unconscious violinist. He has
been found to have a fatal kidney ailment, and the Society of
Music Lovers has canvassed all the available medical records and
found that you alone have the right blood type to help. They
have therefore kidnapped you, and last night the violinist’s cir-
culatory system was plugged into yours, so that your kidneys
can be used to extract poisons from his blood as well as your
own. The director of the hospital now tells you, “Look, we’re
sorry the Society of Music Lovers did this to you—we would
never have permitted it if we had known. But still, they did it,
and the violinist is now plugged into you. To unplug you would
be to kill him. But never mind, it’s only for nine months.” The
question is whether you would have to accept this or could deny
the use of your body to save the violinist. She goes on to conclude
that a woman can defend her life against the threat posed by an
unborn child. McDonagh picks up this argument in her book
Breaking the Abortion Deadlock: From Choice to Consent.
Pro-Life Books
Bachiochi, Erica, ed. The Cost of Choice: Women Evaluate the
Impact of Abortion. San Francisco: Encounter Books, 2004.
The authors of the twelve essays in this book have one theme:
legal abortion has harmed women socially, medically, psycholog-
ically, and culturally. This harm began with Roe v. Wade and Doe
v. Bolton, which struck down laws that balanced the life of the
unborn with the rights of women. The problems have been fur-
thered by the feminist pro-choice idea that abortion constitutes a
form of emancipation for women. These laws and ideas have
robbed women of support from the culture for bearing and rear-
ing children. One article promises to show the relationship of
breast cancer to abortion. Most of the authors in this book are
Print Sources
271
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

well-known critics of contemporary feminism, for example,
Mary Ann Glendon and Elizabeth Fox-Genovese.
Baird, Robert M., and Stuart E. Rosenbaum, eds. The Ethics of
Abortion: Pro-Life vs. Pro-Choice, 3rd ed. Amherst, NY:
Prometheus Books, 2001.
Although the title suggests a balanced presentation of views on
the abortion debate, the articles in this book are overwhelmingly
in support of the pro-life position. Even the articles by feminists
are pro-life. Designed as a textbook, the articles are all reprinted
from journals and newspapers. The authors are professors of phi-
losophy at Baylor University, a department that focuses on a pro-
life moral philosophy.
Beckwith, Francis J. Politically Correct Death: Answering Argu-
ments for Abortion Rights. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books,
1994.
From the perspective of logic and not religion, Beckwith offers an
argument against abortion based on “moral reasoning.” To the
author, the pro-life side has failed to convince the public that the
issue is not a matter of religious belief, but instead it is a matter
of absolute and defensible truth. Following are the essential parts
of the argument: 
1. “the unborn entity, from the moment of conception is
fully human;
2. it is prima facie wrong to kill an entity which is fully
human;
3. almost every act of abortion is intended to kill the
unborn entity, which is fully human;
4. therefore almost every act of abortion is prima facie
wrong” (p. 12)
The logic is impeccable if one accepts the assumption that the fer-
tilized egg is “fully human.” This assumption is a matter of
belief, and disagreement about that belief is the source of most
abortion conflicts. Thus, although Beckwith valiantly takes on all
pro-choice arguments, he does not provide evidence that would
convince everyone of the truth of his arguments.
272
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Critchlow, Donald. Phyllis Schlafly and Grassroots Conser-
vatism: A Woman’s Crusade. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 2005
This biography of the founder of Eagle Forum is included here
not because it focuses on the abortion issue, but because it tells
how Schlafly and her colleagues mobilized activists for conserv-
ative causes, beginning with her campaign against the equal
rights amendment in the 1970s. Her political biography shows
the shift the Republican Party made toward the right, beginning
with the presidential nomination of Barry Goldwater in 1964 and
culminating with the election of President Ronald Reagan in
1980. This shift brought the pro-life movement to a powerful
place in the nation’s party politics.
Dyer, Frederick. Physicians’ Crusade Against Abortion. Sag-
amore Beach, MA: Science History Publishers, 2005,
In 1996, Dyer published a detailed biography of the life and work
of Dr. Horatio Robinson Storer. In this 2005 book he focuses more
directly on Storer’s role as lead advocate for criminalizing abor-
tion in the nineteenth century. The book is presented as a chal-
lenge to assumptions that the people in the nineteenth century
wanted abortions to be illegal because they were dangerous to
women or because doctors wanted to drive “irregulars” who per-
formed them out of business. This book makes the case that the
primary reason was the protection and defense of the unborn
children. Thus, pro-life advocates today can show that their cru-
sade has strong roots in American history.
Hendershott, Anne. The Politics of Abortion. New York:
Encounter Books, 2006.
Although the author claims that this book is a scholarly study of
the abortion debate, it turns out to be highly critical of pro-choice
positions on the issue and sympathetic to the pro-life argument.
The presentation is based on the assumption that the Roe decision
polarized the abortion debate, denying pro-life advocates a pub-
lic hearing in legislatures and sparked a cultural divide that has
lasted for over 30 years. The author devotes several chapters to
showing the success of pro-life Catholic activists in regaining
control of the abortion debate.
Print Sources
273
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Kreeft, Peter. Three Approaches to Abortion: A Thoughtful and
Compassionate Guide to Today’s Most Controversial Issue. San
Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2002.
This is one of several books by professors of philosophy attempt-
ing to argue one or the other side of the abortion debate with
logic, not emotion. At the same time, the first pro-life essay starts
with an assumption (as all pro-life arguments based on logic do)
that we know what a human being is, just as we know what an
apple is, and from there the case against abortion follows. The
second essay tries to explain pro-life motives to pro-choice peo-
ple while the third is a script of a debate as imagined by a pro-life
philosopher.
Nathanson, Bernard. Aborting America. New York: Doubleday,
1979.
In this book, Nathanson, the former clinic director and founder
of NARAL, described his rebirth as a Christian and pro-life
advocate. He also told his story about his life as an advocate for
legal abortion in the 1960s. This book is oft quoted by pro-life
activists, especially the author’s confession that pro-choice peo-
ple made up statistics to make their case, in particular claiming
that thousands of women died because of backstreet illegal abor-
tions. The danger to women’s health of illegal abortion was fun-
damental to the pro-choice case and, according to this author, it
was all based on a lie. Nathanson went on to produce the film
Silent Scream.
Ramesh, Ponnuru. The Party of Death: The Democrats, the
Media, the Courts, and the Disregard for Human Life. Washing-
ton, DC: Regnery Publishing, 2006.
Ramesh, senior editor of the conservative National Review maga-
zine, selected a provocative title for his book describing how the
Democratic Party went from being primarily a pro-life party to
being a pro-choice party. He warns that abortion was the means
by which left-wing radicals took over the party, and now they
want to add euthanasia and embryo destruction to their agenda.
As a result, rights of humans will apply to a smaller and smaller
group while many of these radicals support animal rights. He
names Hillary Rodham Clinton as the most dangerous Democrat
274
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

in her campaign to bring the “party of death” to the White
House.
Reagan, Ronald. Abortion and the Conscience of the Nation.
Sacramento, CA: New Regency Publishing, 2000.
In this essay, originally published in 1983 to mark the tenth
anniversary of Roe v. Wade, President Reagan uses this medium
to denounce the decision to allow “abortion on demand through
nine months of pregnancy” (p. 37) and to call the pro-life faithful
to action. He states that the question is not when human life
begins, but: “What is the value of human life?” He uses the lan-
guage of equality to argue for the rights of the unborn and
endorses the human life amendment and human life bill then
under discussion in Congress. The Introduction is written by
Wanda Franz, president of the National Right to Life Committee.
Scheidler, Joseph M. Closed: 99 Ways to Stop Abortion, rev. ed.
Rockford, IL: Tan Books and Publishers, 1993.
This book is a guide to tactics for the pro-life true believer, that is,
the ordinary individual who, convinced that abortion is the same as
murder, wants to act to stop every single such “murder.” Scheidler,
the founder of the Pro-Life Action League, describes ninety-nine
nonviolent actions. The first is sidewalk counseling—“a method of
saving babies by talking to their parents in front of the abortion
clinic” (p. 19). The book describes each action, such as leafleting,
getting the story to the press, getting on talk shows, exposing abor-
tionist lies, and filing counter charges for false arrest, along with
organization contacts and other resources.
Wagner, Teresa, ed. Back to the Drawing Board: The Future of the
Pro-Life Movement. South Bend, IN: St. Augustine Press, 2003.
The editor of this book served for years as a lobbyist for the
National Right to Life Committee, so she was in a central place to
collect a series of essays from pro-life leaders for this book. The
purpose is to assess the status of the movement 30 years after Roe
v. Wade. Included are writings by James Dobson, Congressman
Chris Smith (R-NJ), Phyllis Schlafly, and Paul Weyrich. They and
others provide food for thought for the next generation of pro-life
leaders.
Print Sources
275
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Nonprint Sources
Video/DVD
Abort73.com. Laxafamosity Ministries, 2003. http://abort73.com. 
Mike Spielman and his group have established the website and
the video that is available there to make a case against abortion.
Although they have fundamentalist principles, they base their
case on secular evidence, not religious belief. That evidence con-
sists of graphic photos of aborted fetuses from 7 to 24 weeks.
Spielman and his group say that millions of children are dying by
a brutal act of violence and invite viewers to look at the video.
They also warn of the graphic nature of the pictures.
Abortion Denied: Shattering Young Women’s Lives. Feminist
Majority Foundation, 1990. www.feminist.org
Feminist Majority founder Eleanor Smeal cowrote this video,
which aims to show that parental consent and notification laws
discourage teens from getting help when they are pregnant. It
tells the story of Becky Bell and her parents; Bell had been so
reluctant to tell her parents she was pregnant that she fled to
another state for an illegal abortion and died as a result. This
video was shown on TV in 1990 and is available today primarily
in libraries.
Abortion for Survival. Feminist Majority Foundation, 1989.
www.feminist.org. 
This video makes the case for legal abortion. It begins by show-
ing a woman comfortable and confident before, during, and after
a vacuum aspiration abortion at 6 weeks. The film goes on to 
contrast the status of women under legal abortion and illegal
abortion, first through conversations with doctors who experi-
enced both in the United States. and then by comparing the situ-
ation in countries with criminal abortion laws, for example,
Brazil. The video is currently available at the Feminist Majority
website.
Can I Live? Cannon, Nick. 2005. www.nickcannon.com. 
In this music video, rap singer Nick Cannon’s song tells the story
of his mother’s decision not to have an abortion when she was
276
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

pregnant with him, at age 17. The music video portrays Cannon
trying to persuade his mother not to have the abortion, as she
comes to an abortion clinic in 1979. After the ultrasound shows
her unborn child, Cannon’s mother leaves the clinic and decides
to have her baby. At the end of the song, Cannon thanks his
mother for letting him live. Cannon sells “Can I Live?” T-shirts
on his website.
Cider House Rules. Miramax Home Entertainment, 1999.
This movie is based on the novel by John Irving. It tells the story
of a young man raised in an orphanage in the backwoods of
Maine. His surrogate father is the chief doctor who performs
abortions illegally on pregnant women in distress and passes on
his knowledge to his protégé. He believes he is doing the Lord’s
work by helping desperate young women. However, his “son”
believes it is immoral. When he glimpses another, more prosper-
ous life, he leaves the orphanage, but is called upon to perform
an abortion himself. Eventually he returns to the orphanage as
director.
If These Walls Could Talk. Home Box Office, 1996.
Using the stories of three women—in 1952, 1974, and 1996—this
film strongly portrays the complex interplay between the reali-
ties of women with unintended pregnancies and the social and
legal environments that constrain them. The first episode shows
the frustration and moral condemnation of a widow and the dan-
ger of clandestine abortion. In the third story, the woman’s con-
fusion grows in the context of threatening pro-life blockades at
legal clinics. Only in the second does the woman face a choice
that she could exercise without violence, although the effects of
that choice on her family and her own life are very serious. The
video is available for purchase.
The Last Abortion Clinic. Public Broadcasting System, 2005.
www.pbs.org.
In the summer of 2005, documentary filmmakers spent several
months in southern states examining the pro-life/pro-choice
debate. They found that since the ruling in Planned Parenthood v.
Casey, pro-life activists have taken advantage of the “undue bur-
den” standard to press state legislatures to pass restrictions. They
Nonprint Sources
277
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

have been quite successful in the South, especially in Mississippi,
which has enacted ten laws since 1992: fetal homicide prosecu-
tion, new clinic regulations, requirements to report abortion com-
plications, rights of conscience, and a law that would prohibit the
state’s last abortion clinic from offering abortions beyond the first
trimester. The effect is that abortion is legal but very difficult and
expensive to get. This video is available for viewing on the PBS
website.
A Private Matter. HBO Productions, 1992.
Based on the true story of Sherri Finkbine, this film portrays the
media frenzy that followed the Romper Room host as she sought
an abortion in 1962. Sissy Spacek stars as Sherri with Aidan
Quinn as her husband. The two face the uproar that followed
their realization that their fourth child would likely be horribly
deformed by thalidomide. The story traces the Finkbines’ ordeal
all the way to Sweden where the abortion was finally performed
after being denied in U.S. hospitals. Available through used
video outlets.
The Silent Scream. American Portrait Films, 1984. www.amport
.com
Widely available today for download or purchase, this video has
been very important for the pro-life movement. In it, Dr. Bernard
Nathanson narrates scenes portraying an abortion on an 11-
week-old fetus, as seen on an ultrasound screen. The makers of
the film claim that it demonstrates, unequivocally, the humanity
of the fetus. Pro-choice activists charge that it is the Nathanson
pro-life narration, not the images, that persuades the viewers
they have witnessed an abortion where the fetus fights back.
Available at www.silentscream.org/.
Turning Points in the Debate on Abortion and Birth Control.
CBS Reports, 1965.
This historic documentary focuses on the legal, moral, social, and
psychological aspects of abortion in the United States. Narrated
by Walter Cronkite, it includes interviews with clergy, lawyers,
and physicians and provides a glimpse of the campaign for legal-
ization of abortion before it became a feminist issue. May be
available in public and college libraries.
278
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Vera Drake. New Homeline Video, 2005.
British actress Imelda Staunton was nominated for an Academy
Award for her role in this film by Mike Leigh. Vera Drake is a
middle-aged cleaning lady in 1950’s London. She devotes herself
to her family and visits shut-ins and invalids. She also readily
helps young women with unwanted pregnancies by performing
abortions despite strict criminal laws. The film evokes a way of
life, a wife and mother, a family, and the destruction that ensues
when the police show up.
When Abortion Was Illegal: Untold Stories. Concentric Media,
1992. www.concentric.org/projects/when.html. 
Before Roe v. Wade legalized abortion, there was an aura of shame
around anyone having anything to do with the procedure.
Women, especially, were afraid to speak about their experiences
and their hardships. This award-winning documentary provides
an oral history of an unknown era. Women, many for the first
time, talk about their experiences. There is also testimony from
doctors, heath care workers, family, and friends.
Internet Sources
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Abortion Surveil-
lance Report. www.cdc.gov/mmwr/. 
This federal agency collects data on abortion rates and character-
istics of women who get abortions from health departments in
the states. They publish a surveillance report on the website of
the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR). Because
some states do not report and others may not have accurate data,
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data should be
compared with Guttmacher reports.
Findlaw for Legal Professionals. www.findlaw.com/casecode/
.com. 
Although it takes a little practice, most readers will be able to
use this website to find and download cases decided by the
Supreme Court as well as the circuit courts. There are also links
to the U.S. Code, the Code of Federal Regulations, and laws for
every state.
Nonprint Sources
279
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Guttmacher Institute. www.guttmacher.org. 
This is the premier source for data on practices relating to sexual
and reproductive health matters, including abortion, birth con-
trol, HIV/AIDS, and pregnancy in the United States and interna-
tionally. The Institute staff collects and makes available to the
public statistics as well as information on laws in all the states
and in other countries. A page allows users to make tables from
Guttmacher Institute data. In addition, articles from the Insti-
tute’s three journals can be downloaded.
Human Life Review. www.humanlifereview.com/. 
For those interested in scholarly writing from a pro-life perspec-
tive, this journal makes its articles available online. The journal’s
primary concern is abortion, but it also publishes articles dealing
with family, moral relativism and its effects, and “what the ‘abor-
tion mentality’ has done to our culture.”
I’m Not Sorry. www.imnotsorry.net/. 
This website posts stories from women who have had abortions.
Most of the women are positive about the experience they relate
and the relief they felt after it was over. The site was started by a
Virginia woman in 2003. It also has a news update section and a
guestbook where people can rate the site.
Kaiser Family Foundation. http://kaisernetwork.org 
Kaisernetwork.org is a project of the Kaiser Family Foundation to
provide up-to-date information on health policy and politics.
One of the topics it monitors is women’s health policy, where
there are news stories on such matters as abortion rights, preg-
nancy and child birth, and breast cancer in the states, nationally,
and in other countries. This is a very useful source for keeping up
with the latest information on the topic of reproductive health.
Sex Respect. www.sexrespect.com/. 
This website offers materials and advice to help parents and
teachers offer abstinence-only sex education for teens. An entire
curriculum plus videos and other materials are available. Guides
such as “What do I tell my 10 year old girl about womanhood?”
and “What do I tell my son?” are also offered. Guidebooks and
280
Resources
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

manuals are available for teachers, parents, and students as well
as “I’m worth waiting for” stickers. The program was developed
by Colleen Kelly Mast. According to her website: “The curricu-
lum defines human sexuality, recognizes influences on sexual
decision making, identifies emotional, psychological, and physi-
cal consequences of teenage sexual activity; discusses dating
guidelines; teaches how to say “no”; shows how to change for-
mer sexual behavior and explores the responsibilities of marriage
and parenthood. It is being used at the seventh, eighth, ninth and
tenth grade levels.”
Nonprint Sources
281
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Glossary
abortifacient
Any drug or practice that terminates a pregnancy.
abortion manifesto
A pro-choice tactic whereby women admit to hav-
ing had illegal abortions and challenge the police to arrest them; this has
been effective when challenging criminal abortion laws.
abortion reform
A process to make small changes in existing laws,
such as expanding the conditions for legal abortions.
abortion repeal
The removal of all government policies regulating
abortion; treating abortion like any medical procedure. 
case law
All the judicial decisions pertaining to a particular issue under
litigation, such as states’ power to regulate abortion or birth control. 
civil law
The system of law derived from formal codes, such as the
Roman Law Code, and found in European countries as well as many
countries in Latin America, Africa, and Asia.
Comstock Act
The 1873 federal law that outlawed the provision of
information about contraception and abortion.
common law
Also called “judge-made law”; it is the legal system found
in England and many of its former colonies, including the United States.
compulsory pregnancy
A term used by feminists to characterize the
effect of criminal abortion laws on women’s lives. 
conditional abortion law
A policy that regulates abortion according to
the circumstances of pregnancy, such as threats to the life and health of
the mother, fetal deformity, or pregnancies resulting from rape or incest.
Also called an indications law.
constitutional law
The provisions of the U.S. Constitution and all judi-
cial interpretations, especially those of the Supreme Court.
diagnosis
That portion of a pro-choice or pro-life collective action
frame that defines the reasons a particular situation is a public problem.
283
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

frames
Ways of giving meaning to a particular condition, question, or
problem; social movements use frames to mobilize followers and
achieve public policy goals.
gender regime
The norms and customs that pertain to the relative sta-
tus and roles of women and men in society.
“irregular” physicians
A term used in the nineteenth century to refer
to people who practiced medicine but who had no formal training. 
Islamic law
Also called sharia, this is a legal system found in some
Muslim countries.
issue frame
The terms of the debate on a public problem used by pol-
icymakers in government institutions. 
judicial bypass
The provisions in parental involvement laws that
allow a judge to grant permission for an abortion to be performed on a
minor if informing the parents would cause hardship to the young
woman.
litigation strategy
A plan to change policy by bringing challenges to
existing laws to courts, urging them to declare the laws unconstitutional
or interpret the laws is a particular way. 
Medicaid
The government health program for poor families and the
destitute that is funded by both the federal and state governments.
menstrual regulation treatments
Seen as an alternative to abortion,
this procedure extracts the contents of the uterus before results of preg-
nancy tests are known.
mifepristone
The drug used in the so-called abortion pill or medical
abortion. It involves two doses, one of mifepristone and the second of
misoprostol, which bring about miscarriage. In the 1980s, it was called
RU-486. 
nontherapeutic abortion
terminating a pregnancy for other than
health reasons, such as economic or personal reasons or inability to care
for a child. 
parental involvement laws
Regulations in states requiring the notifi-
cation or permission of parents before physicians can perform abortions
on minors (usually defined as a girl younger than 18 years.
periodic abortion law
A policy that regulates abortion according to
stages of pregnancy, for example weeks of gestation or trimesters. 
personhood
The status of individuals under the U.S. Constitution,
especially in reference to the rights to due process and equal protection
under the Fourteenth Amendment. 
policy debate
A structured discussion about a public problem that takes
place in a public arena, usually centered on a government institution.
284
Glossary
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

postabortion syndrome
The pro-life claim that women who have
abortions suffer psychological trauma. There is little scientific evidence
that this syndrome exists. 
precedent
Also called stare decisis, it is the practice in U.S. courts to
decide current cases the same way previous cases were decided. 
privacy, right to
The constitutional limit on the government’s power to
make laws that interfere with an individual’s decisions in a particular
area of life; has been applied to the individual’s decision whether to bear
or beget a child.
prognosis
That portion of a pro-life or pro-choice movement’s collec-
tive action frame that sets forth the solution to a problem, in most cases,
it refers to what they want government to do about a problem they have
described.
quickening
The point in a pregnancy where the mother can feel the
fetus move; also called animation.
“regular” physicians
A term used in the nineteenth century to refer to
those practicing medicine who had received some formal training.
religiosity
The degree to which religion is important in people’s lives.
strategic frames
The definition or diagnosis of a problem and the pol-
icy solution or prognosis offered by movement actors in particular pol-
icy debates.
therapeutic abortion
Terminating a pregnancy for reasons of health of
the mother or the fetus.
triad
The pattern of relationships among the government, doctors, and
women that results from any abortion policy. 
undue burden standard
States may limit abortion practice up to the
point where the regulations constitute an insurmountable obstacle to a
woman’s liberty to exercise her right to seek abortion.
unintended pregnancy
When a woman is pregnant but does not want
to be pregnant at that time. It does not imply whether or not the woman
wants the baby that results.
vacuum aspiration
The preferred technique for surgical abortion in
the early stages of pregnancy. 
viability
The state in the gestation of a fetus when it is able to live out-
side the mother’s uterus either naturally or with artificial assistance.
Glossary
285
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Abortion Act of 1967 (Great
Britain), 84
Abortion clinics, 46–47, 88,
184–185, 209–210 (tables)
Abortion controversies
attempts to overturn Roe v.
Wade, 35–42
clinic access, 46–47
constitutional amendments,
32–35
contraceptives, 65–67
domestic and global funding
restrictions, 50–52
and elections, 71–73
embryonic stem cell research,
62–63
fetal homicide laws, 60–62
fetus as a person, 58–65
“gag” rules, 50–52
government funding/support
of abortion, 47–52
Hyde Amendment, 48–50
informed consent, 44–45
parental notification and
consent, 43–44
“partial birth” abortion, 54–58
possible solutions, 73–78
prenatal drug laws, 59–60
public opinion polls, 211–216
(tables)
RU-486 (mifepristone), 53–54
sex education, 65–67, 69–71
spousal notification and
consent, 45
See also History of abortion
controversy
Abortion in America (Mohr), 4
Abortion Law Reform Association
(ALRA), 84
Abortion Law Reform Association
of New Zealand, 86
Abortion laws (proposed and
enacted), 1–2, 9
Adolescent Family Life Act, 71
Born Alive Infants Protection
Act, 64
Comstock Act of 1873, 6, 8, 11,
163–164
English common law, 2–3, 8,
162
fetal homicide laws, 60–62
Fetus Farming Prohibition Act,
63
Freedom of Access to Clinic
Entrances (FACE) Act, 47,
184–185
Freedom of Choice Act
(FOCA), 39, 182–183
international perspective, 82
National Institutes of Health
(NIH) Revitalization Act, 62
Partial Birth Abortion Ban Act
of 2003, 55–57, 185–186
287
Index
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Abortion laws, cont.
periodic vs. conditional forms,
3, 8, 12–13
prenatal drug laws, 59–60
Prevention First Act, 189–191
Unborn Child Pain Awareness
Act, 187–189
Unborn Victims of Violence Act
(UVAA), 186–187
Welfare Reform Act, 71
See also History of abortion
controversy; State statutes;
Supreme Court decisions;
specific states and countries
Abortion Manifesto (France), 87
Abortion procedures, 52–58
D&C procedure, 9
“partial birth” abortion, 54–58,
185–186
RU-486 (mifepristone), 53–54
Abortion Rights Mobilization
(ARM), 53, 221
Abortion statistics
abortion clinic violence,
208–210 (tables)
abortion services by region,
208, 209 (table)
abortion-related deaths, 207
(table)
characteristics of women
having abortions, 206 (table)
intended and unintended
pregnancies and outcomes,
208 (table)
number, ratio, and rate of
abortion (U.S.), 204–205
(tables)
public opinion polls, 211–216
(tables)
ratio of abortions in different
countries, 205 (table)
Abstinence, 69–71
ACLA. See American Coalition of
Life Activists
ACLU. See American Civil
Liberties Union
Adolescent Family Life Act, 71
Africa, 103–106
African-Americans, 13, 14, 206
(table), 216 (table)
Age, and abortion statistics, 206
(table)
AGI. See Alan Guttmacher
Institute
Alabama statutes, 193–199
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Alan Guttmacher Institute (AGI),
203, 204, 231
Alaska statutes, 15, 38, 193–199
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Algeria, 104
Alito, Samuel, 40, 57
ALL. See American Life League
ALRA. See Abortion Law Reform
Association
AMA. See American Medical
Association
American Birth Control League,
11
American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU) Reproductive
Freedom Project, 221
American Coalition of Life
Activists (ACLA), 222
American Law Institute (ALI), 11,
164–165, 222
American Life League (ALL),
222–223
American Medical Association
(AMA), 5–6, 163
American Society for
Reproductive Medicine
(ASRM), 223
288
Index
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Americans United for Life (AUL),
40, 60, 223
Anthony, Susan B., 7
Antiobscenity movement 
(1870s), 5
Arizona statutes, 193–199 (tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Arkansas statutes, 15, 193–199
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
ARM. See Abortion Rights
Mobilization
Army of God, 47, 224
Asia, 99–103
ASRM. See American Society for
Reproductive Medicine
Augustine, St., 7
AUL. See Americans United for
Life
Australia, 84, 85
Baird, Bill, 137–138
Barrett, James, 139, 146
Bell, Becky, 43
Bellotti v. Baird, 43
Bensing, Sandra, 17
Beyond Choice: Reproductive
Freedom in the 21st Century
(Sanger), 77–78
Birth control. See Contraceptives
Black Women’s Health
Imperative, 224
Blackmun, Harry, 17, 37
Blackstone, William, 8, 161
Blackstone’s Commentaries, 162
Blagojevich, Rod, 69
Bork, Robert, 36–37, 138–139
Born Alive Infants Protection Act,
64
Brazil, 98
Breast cancer, 198, 201 (table)
Breyer, Steven, 40
Britton, John Bayard, 139, 146
Brown, Judie, 140
Bush, George H. W., 37
and government funding
restrictions/gag rules, 52
and Reagan, 72
Supreme Court appointments,
39
Bush, George W.
and abstinence programs, 71
and fetal homicide laws, 61
and fetal tissue research, 63
and “partial birth” abortion, 55
Supreme Court appointments,
40
Calderone, Mary Steichen,
140–141
California statutes, 15, 38, 44, 61,
193–199 (tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Callahan, Sidney, 23
Canada, 84–86, 205 (table)
CARASA. See Committee for
Abortion Rights and
Against Sterilization
Abuse
Carter, Jimmy, 49, 72
Case law. See specific names of
cases  
Casey, Robert, 38
Catholic Church. See Roman
Catholic Church
Catholics for a Free Choice
(CFFC), 224–225
Caucasians, 206 (table)
CBR. See Center for Bio-Ethical
Reform
Ceaus¸escu, Nikolai, 95
CEDAW. See Convention for
Elimination of
Discrimination Against
Women
Center for Bio-Ethical Reform
(CBR), 225
Index
289
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Center for Reproductive Rights
(CRR), 225–226
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), 203,
204, 217
Central and Eastern Europe,
94–96
CFFC. See Catholics for a Free
Choice
Chicago Women’s Liberation
Union, 13
Children’s Health Insurance
Program (CHIP), 63–64
Chile, 97
China, 99, 101–103
CHIP. See Children’s Health
Insurance Program
Choisir, 87
Christian Coalition of America,
226
Chronology of events, 113–135
Citizens’ Committee for Humane
Abortion Laws, 13
City of Akron v. Akron Center for
Reproductive Health, 36
Civil law systems, 82, 87, 90
Clinic access, 46–47, 184–185,
209–210 (tables)
Clinton, Bill, 39
and common ground in
abortion debate, 76
election of, 72
and fetal tissue research, 62
and government support for
abortion, 50, 52
and RU-486, 53
Supreme Court appointments,
40
Clinton, Hillary Rodham, 68, 76
Code law. See Civil law systems
Coffee, Linda, 17
Collective action frames
and possible solutions to
abortion conflicts, 77–78
pro-choice frame, 24–27
pro-life frame, 21–23
See also specific issues listed
under Abortion controversies
Colombia, 99
Colorado statutes, 15, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Committee for Abortion Rights
and Against Sterilization
Abuse (CARASA),
226–227
Common Ground Network for
Life and Choice, 227
Common law systems, 82, 83–85,
90
“Compulsory pregnancy,” 13, 25
Comstock, Anthony, 6
Comstock Act of 1873, 6, 8, 11,
163–164
Concerned Women for America
(CWFA), 227–228
Conditional forms of abortion
law, 3, 8, 11–13, 12–13. See
also specific states and
countries
Condoms, 69–70
Congress. See Abortion laws
(proposed and enacted)
Congressional Pro-Choice
Caucus, 218
Congressional Pro-Life Caucus,
218
Connecticut statutes, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
See also Griswold v. Connecticut
Constitution, U.S.
constitutional guidelines for
state statutes, 18
Human Life Amendment
proposals, 32–35, 181–182
and Hyde Amendment, 50
and privacy, 17
290
Index
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Contraceptives
and abortion reform movement
of the mid-20th century, 11
in Africa, 104–105
in Asia, 100–101
and Catholic Church, 66,
167–168
in Central and Eastern Europe,
94–96
and Comstock Act, 6, 8, 163–164
controversies over, 65–67
emergency contraception, 67–69
in Latin America, 97
Prevention First Act, 189–191
and pro-choice movement, 25,
26
and pro-life movement, 66
sex education, 65–67, 69–71
Supreme Court decisions, 12
See also Eisenstadt v. Baird;
Griswold v. Connecticut
Convention for Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination
Against Women (CEDAW)
(1979), 107
Counseling, mandatory, 194,
195–196 (table), 199–200
(table)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 199–200, 201
(table)
Crack babies, 59
CRR. See Center for Reproductive
Rights
Cuba, 97
CWFA. See Concerned Women for
America
Czech Republic, 205 (table)
D&C procedure, 9
Delaware statutes, 15, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Democratic Party, 71–73, 215
(table)
Democrats for Life of America
(DLA), 228
Denmark, 88–90, 205 (table)
Depression, the, 10
District of Columbia statutes,
193–199 (tables)
DLA. See Democrats for Life of
America
Doctors. See Medical 
practitioners
Doe v. Bolton, 16–19, 21
excerpts, 173–175
Drugs. See Prenatal drug laws
Eagle Forum (EF), 228–229
East Germany, 91–92
Eastern Europe, 94–96
Egypt, 104
Eisenstadt v. Baird, 169–171
El Salvador, 97
Elections, 71–73
Elliot Institute, 229
Embryonic stem cell research,
62–63
Emergency contraception, 67–69
English common law, 2–3, 8, 
161
Evangelical Christianity, 71
Falwell, Jerry, 21
Family planning, and government
funding restrictions/gag
rules, 50–52
Family Research Council (FRC),
229–230
Feldt, Gloria, 141–142
Female-selective abortion (FSA),
102–103
Feminism, 13–14, 65–66
Feminist Majority, 230–231
Feminist Majority Foundation, 53,
230–231
Feminists for Life of America
(FFL), 230
Index
291
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Fetus
and Children’s Health
Insurance Program (CHIP),
63–64
debate over beginning of
human life, 33–34
debate over fetus as a person,
35, 58–65
debate over moral status of
fetus, 2, 6, 8, 23, 26, 77
embryonic stem cell research,
62–63
female-selective abortion,
102–103
fetal abnormality, 3, 11, 12, 13,
48, 195–196 (table)
fetal homicide laws, 60–62,
186–187
pain felt by, 64–65, 187–189, 200
prenatal drug laws, 59–60
“quickening,” 2–3, 8
viability and abortion law, 1–2
See also Framing
Fetus Farming Prohibition Act, 63
FFL. See Feminists for Life of
America
Finkbine, Sherri, 12, 89, 142–143
Finland, 88–90, 205 (table)
First National Conference on
Abortion Laws (1969),
12–13
Florida statutes, 38, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
FOCA. See Freedom of Choice Act
Focus on the Family (FOF), 231
FOF. See Focus on the Family
Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), 53, 67–69, 218
Ford, Gerald, 72
Foreign aid, 50–52, 105, 220–221
Framing, 21–29
changing terms of debate in the
mid-20th century, 14–15, 35
issue frames, 29
and possible solutions to
abortion conflicts, 73–78
pro-choice collective action
frames, 24–27
pro-life collective action
frames, 21–24
strategic frames, 28
See also specific issues listed
under Abortion controversies
France, 82, 86–88, 205 (table)
Franz, Wanda, 143
FRC. See Family Research Council
Freedom of Access to Clinic
Entrances (FACE) Act, 47,
184–185
Freedom of Choice Act (FOCA),
39, 182–183
FSA. See Female-selective
abortion
Fundamental right to decide See
Eisenstadt v. Baird
Funding for abortion. See
Government funding/
support of abortion
“Gag” rules, 50–52
Gandy, Kim, 143–144
Georgia statutes, 15, 17, 193–199
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
See also Doe v. Bolton
Germany, 82, 90–92, 205 (table)
Ginsburg, Ruth Bader, 40, 57
Giscard d’Estaing, Valery, 87
“Global Gag Rule,” 51–52
Gonzales v. Carhart, 57
Government funding/support of
abortion, 47–52, 195–196
(table)
domestic and global funding
restrictions, 50–52
“gag” rules, 50–52
Hyde Amendment, 48–50, 192
292
Index
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Great Britain, 83–84, 205 (table)
Blackstone’s Commentaries,
162
Lord Ellenborough’s Act of
1803, 83, 162–163
Great Depression, 10
Greece, 93
Griswold v. Connecticut, 12, 16
excerpts, 168–169
Gunn, David, 147
Guttmacher, Alan, 11, 144–145
Guttmacher Institute, 203, 204, 231
Hames, Margie, 17
Haskell, Martin, 145
Hatch, Orrin, 33
Hatch Amendment, 33, 35
Hawaii statutes, 15, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Health, women’s. See Women’s
health
Health insurance
Children’s Health Insurance
Program (CHIP), 63–64
Medicaid and the Hyde
Amendment, 48–50
Helms, Jesse, 33, 35
Hendershott, Anne, 74
Hickman, Harrison, 145–146
Hill, Paul, 47, 139, 146–147
Hispanics, 206 (table)
History of abortion controversy,
1–29
abortion reform movement of
the mid-20th century, 9–16
AMA resolution against
abortion (1859), 5–6
antiobscenity movement of the
1870s, 5
chronology of events, 113–135
Comstock Act of 1873, 6, 8, 11,
163–164
criminalization in the 19th
century, 3–9
English common law, 2–3, 8,
162
pro-choice movement, 24–27
pro-life movement, 20–24
Roe v. Wade and Doe v. Bolton,
16–19
See also Abortion controversies;
Abortion law
Hitt, Jack, 97
HLI. See Human Life Amendment
“Holly’s Law,” 54
Homicide. See Fetal homicide
laws
Human Life Amendment, 32–35,
72, 181–182
Human Life International (HLI),
99, 245
Humanae Vitae, 165–168
Hungary, 95, 205 (table)
Husbands. See Spousal
notification and consent
Hyde, Henry, 147–148
Hyde Amendment, 48–50, 192
Iceland, 88–90, 205 (table)
ICPD. See UN International
Conference on Population
and Development
Idaho statutes, 38, 193–199
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Illinois statutes, 44, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Incest
and American Law Institute
model penal code, 11, 13
and Hyde Amendment, 48
and parental
notification/consent,
197–198 (table)
and state funding, 48, 195–196
(table)
Index
293
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

India, 102–103
Indiana statutes, 193–199 (tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Indications model of abortion
law. See Conditional forms
of abortion law
Indonesia, 99
Infanticide, 102
Informed consent, 44–45, 64–65,
196, 198, 199–200 (table)
Intact dilation and evacuation
(Intact D&E), 57
International Right to Life
Federation, 245
International Women’s Health
Coalition (IWHC), 246
Iowa statutes, 193–199 (tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Ireland, 90–91
Islamic law, 82
Israel, 104
Issue frames, described, 29. See
also specific issues listed
under Abortion
controversies
Italy, 92–93, 205 (table)
IWHC. See International Women’s
Health Coalition
Japan, 100–101
John Paul II, Pope, 96, 98
Judicial bypass, 192, 197–198
(table)
Kansas statutes, 15, 193–199
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Kennedy, Anthony, 37, 57, 58
Kentucky statutes, 193–199
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Kenya, 104
Kissling, Frances, 148
Korea, 102, 103
“Laci and Connor’s Law,” 61,
186–187
Lader, Lawrence, 53, 148–149
Laissez les vivre, 88
Lambs of Christ, 232
Latin America, 97–99
Law. See Abortion laws (proposed
and enacted)
See also individual court cases
Lejeune, Jerome, 34
Life of the mother, preservation
of. See Women’s health
Lord Ellenborough’s Act of 1803,
83, 162–163
Louisiana statutes, 38, 193–199
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Luker, Kristen, 10, 20
Maginnis, Patricia, 13
Maine statutes, 193–199 (tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Mandatory counseling and
waiting periods, 44–45,
64–65, 194, 195–196
(table), 198, 199–200
(table)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 199–200, 201
(table)
March for Life Education and
Defense Fund, 232
Marie Stopes International (MSI),
246
Marital status, 206 (table)
Marx, Paul, 150–151
Maryland statutes, 15, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
294
Index
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Massachusetts statutes, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
See also Eisenstadt v. Baird
McCormack, Ellen, 149–150
McCorvey, Norma, 16, 150
McDonagh, Eileen, 77
Medicaid, 48–50
Medical practitioners
AMA resolution against
abortion (1859), 5–6
formation of, 5
19th century, 4–6
reasons for doctors’ opposition
to abortion, 5–6
and state statutes, 193–194
(table)
See also specific states and
countries
Medical Students for Choice
(MSFC), 232–233
Men, public opinion polls, 216
(table)
Menstrual Regulation, 97
Menstruation, and 18th-century
common law, 3
Mental health of women, 11, 13,
44–45, 198, 201 (table)
Mexico, 99
Mexico City policy, 51–52, 97–98,
105, 220–221
Michelman, Kate, 151
Michigan statutes, 15, 193–199
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Middle East, 103–106
Mifepristone (RU-486), 53–54
Minnesota statutes, 193–199
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Mississippi statutes, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Missouri statutes, 37, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Mohr, James, 4
Montana statutes, 38, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Moral Majority Coalition, 233
Morality
changing pro-life and pro-
choice frames, 74–77
debate over beginning of
human life, 33–34
debate over moral status of
fetus, 2, 6, 8, 23, 26, 77
and pro-life movement’s
opposition to contraception,
66
public opinion polls, 212 (table)
See also specific issues listed
under Abortion controversies
“Morning-after pill,” 67–69
Mortality rate, 207 (table)
MSFC. See Medical Students for
Choice
MSI. See Marie Stopes
International
Murray, Patty, 68
NAF. See National Abortion
Federation
NARAL. See National Association
for the Repeal of Abortion
Laws
NARAL Pro-Choice America,
233–234
Nathanson, Bernard, 152–153
National Abortion and
Reproductive Rights
Action League, 66
National Abortion Federation
(NAF), 234
Index
295
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

National Abortion Rights Action
League, 24
National Association for the
Repeal of Abortion Laws
(NARAL), 12–13, 24, 66, 76
National Black Women’s Health
Project, 224
National Coalition of Abortion
Providers (NCAP),
234–235
National Institutes of Health
(NIH) Revitalization Act,
62
National Latina Institute for
Reproductive Health
(NLIRH), 235
National Network of Abortion
Funds (NNAF), 235–236
National Organization for Women
(NOW), 13, 236
National Pro-Life Action Center
(NPLAC), 235
National Right to Life Committee
(NRLC), 60–61, 236–237
National Women’s Law Center
(NWLC), 237
National Women’s Political
Caucus (NWPC), 237
Navada statutes, 193–199 (tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
NCAP. See National Coalition of
Abortion Providers
Nebraska statutes, 193–199 (tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Neiertz, Véronique, 88
Nelson, Jennifer, 66
The Netherlands, 205 (table)
New Hampshire statutes, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
New Jersey statutes, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
New Mexico statutes, 15, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
New York City Redstockings, 13
New York statutes, 15, 44,
193–199 (tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
New Zealand, 84, 86
Nicaragua, 97, 98
NLIRH. See National Latina
Institute for Reproductive
Health
NNAF. See National Network of
Abortion Funds
Nordic countries, 88–90, 205
(table)
North Carolina statutes, 15,
193–199 (tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
North Dakota statutes, 15,
193–199 (tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Norway, 88–90
NOW. See National Organization
for Women
NPLAC. See National Pro-Life
Action Center
NRLC. See National Right to Life
Committee
NWLC. See National Women’s
Law Center
NWPC. See National Women’s
Political Caucus
O’Connor, Sandra Day, 35–36, 37
Offenses Against the Person Act,
83
Office of Family Planning (OFP),
218
Office of Women’s Health
(OWH), 219
OFP. See Office of Family
Planning
296
Index
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Ohio statutes, 193–199 (tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Oklahoma statutes, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Olasky, Marvin, 74
“One child” policy (China),
101–102
Operation Rescue, 46, 88, 237–238
Oregon statutes, 15, 44, 193–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
OWH. See Office of Women’s
Health
Packwood, Bob, 35
Pain felt by fetus, 64–65, 187–189,
200
Parental notification and consent,
36, 43–44, 192–193
“Partial birth” abortion, 54–58,
185–186
Paul VI, Pope, 15, 165–168
Pennsylvania statutes, 38, 45,
194–199 (tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
See also Planned Parenthood v.
Casey
PEP. See Pro-Choice Public
Education Project
Periodic forms of abortion law, 3,
8. See also specific countries
Peterson, Laci, 61
Peterson, Scott, 61
PFL. See Priests for Life
PFLI. See Pharmacists for Life
International
Pharmacists for Life International
(PFLI), 68, 238–239
Physicians. See Medical
practitioners
Physicians for Life, 238
Physicians for Reproductive
Choice and Health
(PRCH), 238
Pius IX, Pope, 7
PLAGAL. See Pro-Life Alliance of
Gays and Lesbians
PLAL. See Pro-Life Action League
Plan of Action for UN Fourth
Conference on Women,
107–108
Planned Parenthood Federation
of America (PPFA), 11, 239
Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 38–40,
45, 57
excerpts, 175–181
Poland, 96
Political parties, and role of
abortion controversy in
elections, 71–73
Population Council, 53, 246
Portugal, 93–94
PRCH. See Physicians for
Reproductive Choice and
Health
Pregnancy crisis centers, 45
Prenatal drug laws, 59–60
Prevention First Act, 189–191
Priests for Life (PFL), 239–240
Privacy
and Eisentstadt v. Baird, 169–171
vs. fetal personhood, 35
and Griswold v. Connecticut, 16,
168–169
and issue frame, 29, 41, 74
and parental
notification/consent, 43
and Roe v. Wade, 17, 19, 29, 41,
171–173
Pro-choice movement, 24–27
collective action frames, 24–27
and Democratic Party, 71–73
framing tactics, 27
and possible solutions to
abortion conflicts, 73–78
Index
297
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

Pro-choice movement, cont.
See also specific issues listed
under Abortion controversies
Pro-Choice Public Education
Project (PEP), 240
Pro-Life Action League (PLAL),
46, 240
Pro-Life Alliance of Gays and
Lesbians (PLAGAL),
240–241
Pro-Life Democrats, 73
Pro-life movement, 20–24
collective action frames, 21–23
and contraception, 66
framing tactics, 23–24
harassment of clinics and
patients, 46–47
origins of, 20–21
and possible solutions to
abortion conflicts, 73–78
and Republican Party, 20–21,
35, 71–73
See also specific issues listed
under Abortion controversies
Pronatalism, 87
Psychological effects of abortion,
44–45, 198, 201 (table)
Public opinion polls, 210, 211–216
(tables)
“Quickening” of fetus, 2–3, 8, 9
Race, and abortion statistics, 206
(table)
Rape, 3
and American Law Institute
model penal code, 13
and Hyde Amendment, 48
and parental
notification/consent,
197–198 (table)
and state funding, 48, 195–196
(table)
RCPAC. See Republicans for
Choice Political Action
Committee
RCRC. See Religious Coalition for
Reproductive Choice
Reagan, Ronald
and fetal tissue research, 62
and gag rules, 50–51
and pro-life movement, 35, 71
Supreme Court appointments,
35–37
Rehnquist, William, 37
Religion, and international
perspective on abortion,
82. See also specific
countries
Religious Coalition for
Reproductive Choice
(RCRC), 241
Reproductive Health
Technologies Project
(RHTP), 241–242
Republican Majority for Choice,
242
Republican National Coalition for
Life (RNCLIFE), 242
Republican Party, 71–73, 215
(table)
and pro-life movement, 20–21,
35
role of abortion controversy in
elections, 71–73
Republicans for Choice, 73
Republicans for Choice Political
Action Committee
(RCPAC), 242–243
Rhode Island statutes, 194–199
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
RHTP. See Reproductive Health
Technologies Project
RNCLIFE. See Republican
National Coalition for Life
Roberts, John, 40, 57
Robertson, Pat, 21, 47
Roe v. Wade, 16–19
attempts to overturn, 35–42
contemporary debate, 40–42
excerpts, 171–173
298
Index
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

issue frame, 29, 41
public opinion polls, 213–214
(tables)
Roman Catholic Church
in Africa, 104–105
in Central and Eastern Europe,
95, 96
Conference of Bishops in U.S. ,
244
and contraception, 66, 167–168
and fetal tissue research, 62–63
in France, 82, 88
in Germany, 82
Humanae Vitae, 165–168
in Ireland, 90
in Latin America, 98–99
in Mediterranean countries,
92–93
and mid-20th-century reform
movement, 14, 15
19th-century views on
abortion, 7–8
and pro-life movement, 20
Romania, 95
Rosenberg, Leon E., 34
RU-486 (mifepristone), 53–54, 88
Russia, 94–96, 205 (table)
Saletan, William, 76
Sanger, Alexander, 77–78
Sanger, Margaret, 11, 153
Scalia, Antonin, 36, 37
Scheidler, Joseph, 46, 153–154
Schroedel, Jean Reith, 58
Schroedel, Ruth, 60
Schroeder, Patricia, 154–155
September 11, 2001, 47
Sex education, 65–67, 69–71
Prevention First Act, 189–191
Sex Information and Education
Council of the United
States (SIECUS), 243
Sex ratio in Asian countries,
102–103
Sexually transmitted diseases
(STDs), 69–70
Prevention First Act, 189–191
SIECUS. See Sex Information and
Education Council of the
United States
Smeal, Eleanor, 155
Smith, Christopher, 156
Society for the Protection of
Unborn Children (SPUC),
247
Souter, David, 39
South Africa, 105–106
South Carolina statutes, 15,
194–199 (tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
South Dakota statutes, 40, 41–42,
194–199 (tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Soviet Union, 94
Spain, 93
Spousal notification and consent,
45
SPUC. See Society for the
Protection of Unborn
Children
Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 7
State statutes, 1–2, 42–45, 193–201
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 199–200, 201
(table)
constitutional guidelines, 18
and contraceptives, 12, 69
and fetal homicide, 61–62
and judicial bypass, 197–198
(table)
mandatory counseling and
waiting periods, 44–45,
64–65, 198, 199–200 (table)
19th-century statutes, 8
Index
299
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

State statutes, cont.
and parental notification/
consent, 43–44, 197–198
(table)
and “partial birth” abortion, 54
and prenatal drugs, 59–61
state policies if Roe fell, 200, 202
(table)
See also specific states
Statistics. See Abortion statistics
STDs. See Sexually transmitted
diseases
Stem cell research, 62–63
Stenberg v. Carhart, 54, 57
Stone, Ann E. W., 156–157
Storer, Horatio Robinson, 157–158
Strategic frames, described, 28.
See also specific issues listed
under Abortion
controversies
Supreme Court appointments,
35–37, 39, 40
Supreme Court decisions, 168–181
on administrative
hurdles/restrictions, 36–40,
45. See also Doe v. Bolton;
Planned Parenthood v. Casey
attempts to overturn Roe v.
Wade, 35–42
on contraceptives. See
Eisenstadt v. Baird; Griswold v.
Connecticut
on parental notification, 43
on “partial birth” abortion
restrictions, 54–57
public opinion polls, 213–214
(tables)
on right to an abortion. See Doe
v. Bolton; Roe v. Wade
Sweden, 88–90, 205 (table)
Teen sex, 69–71
Tennessee statutes, 194–200
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Terry, Randall, 46, 158
Texas statutes, 194–200 (tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
See also Roe v. Wade
Thalidomide, 12
Thomas, Clarence, 38
Thompson, Tommy, 63
Thornburgh v. American College of
Obstetricians &
Gynecologists, 36
Traditional Values Coalition
(TVC), 243–244
Tribe, Laurence, 75–76
Tunisia, 104
TVC. See Traditional Values
Coalition
UN International Conference on
Population and Develop-
ment (ICPD), 107, 108
Unborn Child Pain Awareness
Act, 64, 187–189
Unborn Victims of Violence Act
(UVAA), 61,186–187
UNDAW. See United Nations
Division for the
Advancement of Women
UNECE. See United Nations
Economic Commission for
Europe
United Nations, 106–108
United Nations Division for the
Advancement of Women
(UNDAW), 219
United Nations Economic
Commission for Europe
(UNECE), 203, 205
United Nations Population
Division, 219–220
United States Conference of
Catholic Bishops
(USCCB), 244
U.S. Agency for International
Development (USAID),
220–221
300
Index
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

USCCB. See United States
Conference of Catholic
Bishops
Utah statutes, 38, 194–200 (tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
UVVA. See Unborn Victims of
Violence Act
Veil, Simone, 87–88
Vermont statutes, 194–200 (tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Viability of fetus, 1–2, 193–194
(table)
Vinguerie, Richard, 159
Violence against abortion clinics,
47, 209–210 (tables)
Virginia statutes, 15, 194–200
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
“Voluntary motherhood,” 7
Waiting periods, 2, 36, 194,
195–196 (table)
Washington statutes, 15, 44,
194–200 (tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Webster v. Reproductive Health
Services, 37, 75
Weddington, Sarah, 16, 
159–160
Welfare Reform Act, 71
West Virginia statutes, 194–200
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
WGNRR. See Women’s Global
Network on Reproductive
Rights
White, Byron, 37
Wisconsin statutes, 194–200
(tables)
accuracy of counseling
materials, 201 (table)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Wolf, Naomi, 74, 75
Women
characteristics of women
having abortions, 206 (table)
health of. See Mental health of
women; Women’s health
public opinion polls, 216 (table)
status of, 82. See also Women’s
rights
Women on Waves, 247
Women’s Global Network on
Reproductive Rights
(WGNRR), 247–248
Women’s health, 3
and American Law Institute
model penal code, 11, 13
exception for, see Doe v. Bolton
and government funding
restrictions/gag rules, 48, 52
and “partial birth” abortion,
54–55
and pro-choice movement, 41
and state statutes, 195–196
(table), 197–198 (table)
See also Mental health of
women
Women’s rights
and mid-20th-century reform
movement, 13–14
19th-century feminists’ views
on abortion, 7
See also Privacy
Wood, Susan, 69
World Population Fund (WPF),
248
WPF. See World Population Fund
Wyoming statutes, 194–200
(tables)
policy if Roe fell, 202 (table)
Index
301
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

About the Author
Dorothy E. McBride (formerly Stetson) is Emeritus Professor of political
science at Florida Atlantic University, where she was a founder of the
women’s studies program. As a professor, she has taught and written
about the politics of abortion in the United States and internationally
since the mid-1970s. She is co-convener (with Amy G. Mazur) of the
Research Network on Gender, Politics and the State, a network of U.S.
and European scholars who are studying the impact of women’s move-
ments on policy and the role of women’s policy agencies. As part of this
project, Dr. McBride was editor and contributing author of Abortion Pol-
itics, Women’s Movements and the Democratic State: A Comparative Study of
State Feminism (2001). She was also coeditor (with Marianne Githens)
and a contributing author to Abortion Politics: Public Policy in Comparative
Perspective (1996). She lives in Washington State and is a visiting profes-
sor at the University of Washington (2006–2008).
303
www.abc-clio.com
ABC-CLIO
1-800-368-6868

