About PVC-U 
ouble Glazed 
indows 
 
This is an 
excellent, highly insulate material, which 
benefits 
from little or no external maintenance. It is 
readily 
available and well tested and is usually the 
lowest cost option of all three materials. It is mainly seen in white but also 
available in Mahogany and Oak woodgrain styles. PVCu is by far the most popular 
material for windows and doors today. 
 
There are many well-proven PVCu extrusions available. Problems with 
discoloration are virtually unheard of and most suppliers will warrant against this. 
The design of the windows varies from company to company. Here are a few of 
the main points. You may like to raise them with your supplier. 
 
Internal or Externally glazed windows 
 
Most PVCu systems will now give you this option. As a generalisation Internally 
beaded windows (where the glass is held in from the inside) are considered more 
secure and burglar resistant. That said there are a lot of satisfactory externally 
beaded PVCu systems about - many of which feature either internal wedge 
gaskets or a "double sided" tape which holds the external bead firmly in place. 
You should investigate this particular issue with your supplier. 
 
Thickness of PVCu walling? 
 
Most PVCu systems for window and door construction are "multi-walled" with 
internal reinforcement by means of either Aluminium or Galvanised Steel box 
section. Wall thickness can vary from system to system - most are around 3 - 3.5 
mm thickness. Generally speaking the "thicker" the walling - the stronger the 
section. Ask your supplier for an example section and enquire if the frames 
are fully reinforced. Note also that the greater the number of internal walls - the 
greater the strength. 
 
 
Depth or thickness of frame 
 
Actual depth of frame extrusion varies from as low as 50 mm to a number at 70 
mm and above. Most are in the 60 - 65 mm region. Clearly this does have an 
effect on the structural strength of your replacement window or door. This is 
especially worth bearing in mind when comparing prices. It would not for instance 
be fair to compare the price of a conservatory built using a 55 mm depth of frame 
with a window made using 70 mm depth of frame. 
 
We bring the points above to your attention purely to give you a feel for the sort 
of questions you should ask a potential supplier. The above is by no means the 
whole story, and there will be varying arguments one way and the other. 
 
Here is a short list of PVCu systems companies supplying extrusion for the 
manufacture of PVCu windows and doors in the UK. These include Rehau, Veka, 
Spectus and Synseal. 
 
For some, however, PVCu lacks authenticity when it comes to the more traditional 
D
W

designs. It is not acceptable to planners for us
an
 
C
 
What colour do you want? You name it and today you can almost certainly get it
Standard colours for PVCu and aluminium are white, whilst for hardwood it is a 
natural stain option such as mahogany, walnut or light oak. You can, however,
have hardwood already primed in green, cream and teak plus a whole host o
options to your specification. PVCu in mahogany woodgrain and cherry oak
woodgrain styles is also increasingly popular. Additionally, both PVCu and 
aluminium can be specially colour
th
 
The above only really touches the surface on some of the options 
s
 
This article is about PVC-U Windows (also referred to as upvc, pvcu and pvc 
windows). Other mate
H
 
For more information on Double G
e on listed buildings 
d not popular with planners in conservation areas. 
oloured Frame Options 
. 
 
f 
 
ed in red, blue, green, black and orange! (and 
at's just a few of the options!) 
available. Your 
upplier will be pleased to give you a more detailed specification. 
rials used for windows include Aluminium and Timber / 
ardwood 
lazed replacement windows visit Windows 
Today http://www.windowstoday.co.uk/
Buyers Tips - Top Design Tips 
 
ng stage. These aspects 
an often turn out to be very important to the buyer.  
One such issue is "equal sight lines"  
In this section we introduce you to some very important but often overlooked 
issues when choosing window designs. Regrettably we find that quite often some
aspects of window design are not discussed at the buyi
c
 
 
 
Unequal Sight Lines 
Equal Sight Lines 
When manufacturing most modern replacement windows it is normal for there to 
be smaller areas of glass wherever there are openings (sashes) fitted. Where the 
frames are fixed the glass area will be larger. This "unequal" site line is quite 
normal and acceptable to most people. 
 
However on a lot of older properties (and indeed some newer ones) it was more 
common to have an equal sight line. (i.e. you would not be able to tell from the 
outside which windows opened and which did not.) Fitting "dummy sashes" or 
"dummy openers" into the frames created this "equal" sight line. 
 

As you will see from the photographs 
above the windows can have a 
considerably different appearance 
 
Equal sight lines are not for everybody - indeed some will not like the 
"bulkier" appearance. However there is no doubt that for some types of 
y this will be a "better bet". It is also a very good alternative with 
equal site lines adds to the overall cost of your replacement windows and 
 reason many peop
hile con
r possible alternative is to consider having "vertical equal sight lines". W
roach fixed windows are always above fixed windows and opening 
s are always above opening windows. Ask you suppliers for more 
information on this if this is unclear to you. 
 
Another design issue that is often overlooked is whether to use black 
gaskets or white gaskets on your white PVCu windows. 
 
B
In the past white gaskets had not been favoured as it was not always possible to 
get a "matching" white and it was not also possible to offer a "colour fast" 
guarantee. This has now changed and more and mor
companies now offer bo
We feel white gaskets are a good alternative - especially o
"panelled" doors. 
This photograph shows a panelled door design with black 
gasket. It would have looked better with a white gasket. 
 
An alternative to white gaskets are "low profile" black 
 
One disadvantage of white gaskets reported by some people 
l often appear grubby and
id
too often!) 
h
ows it is sometimes worth considering the effect of your 
ll appearance of the street or road where you live. 
 
dependant on whether or not they have 
equal sight lines. 
propert
Georgian and Leaded Light window designs as it allows you to have rectangles / 
squares that are more equal in size. 
 
Having 
for this
le do not favour this approach. That said -- it is still a 
worthw
sideration in our opinion. 
 
Anothe
ith 
this app
window
lack coloured gaskets are the norm with most companies and are widely fitted. 
e 
th alternatives. 
 
n 
 
gaskets which are very slim and less obtrusive. 
 show up the dust/dirt. This may 
be an important cons
eration is you live close to a major road network etc. (Or 
don't fancy cleaning 
 
Whatever your choice we do especially recommend white gaskets on white PVCu 
panelled doors. 
 
Consider your Neig bours 
 
When replacing wind
changes on the overa
For instance if you and your neighbour both agree on a style for your windows 
the overall effect can be considerably better if you both agree to use similar 
designs. It doesn't matter if you both use the same company or even have the 
work done at the same time. 
 
is that the gasket wil
overall 

Sometimes using "
e neighbourhood. As can be seen in the photograph below 
n both of these porches has added to the
 
conflicting" styles or designs "side by side" will spoil the 
appearance of th
using 
similar designs o
 visual appearance for 
these two neighbours. 

