About bathrooms 
 
Because replacing your bathroom is an operation that 
will have a lot of influence in your daily live for a few 
weeks, it is probably not something you will do for 
pleasure. But think of the result, and it will all be 
worthwhile. This article will guide you to a relaxing 
and refreshing bathroom! 
 
Bathroom Planning 
 
It makes a lot of sense to assess the needs of you and your family before you 
start planning your bathroom. Are you single, living together or having a family 
with different age groups? All these things matter when you choose your fixtures, 
storage, flooring and wall coverings. 
 
Families will use a bathroom very intensely at all times of the day. Especially in 
the morning members of the family might need to use the bathroom at the same 
time. Young children will appreciate toys they can play with in the bath and stools 
to stand on when brushing their teeth and all these things will need storage, so 
plan this carefully. 
 
When you're single or living together, you don’t need to worry about storage that 
much. Get a few smart storage boxes for your toiletries and even the most 
compact bathroom will look clean and uncluttered. You can opt for more luxurious 
wall coverings and flooring, because it will get less wear and tear.  
 
Bathroom Design 
 
There are a lot of different styles to be found in 
bathroom fixtures, so that you can choose the style that 
reflects the rest your house. In bathrooms, everything is 
possible, so let your fantasy loose on gleaming taps, 
funky toilet seats and tiles that make a statement. 
 
Colour is a keynote in the design of your bathroom. 
Fixtures are available in a lot of colours. Although white 
goes with most of the styles, if you really want 
something different, a coloured fixture might be 
something for you. How about a frosted glass basin with 
a chrome pedestal or a shower enclosure made of glass bricks? Wood is also a 
successful material to use in the bathroom.  
 
Not only bath, shower or toilet design or colour have influence on the atmosphere 
of your bathroom, taps, shower fittings and levers do too. They will really set off 
your design and take your bathroom to another level. There are a lot of designs 
available, from Victorian taps and overhead showers to state-of-the-art chrome 
shower mixers or levers. 
 
Buying a Bathroom 
 
Set a budget for your bathroom: how much can you spend maximum on your 
fittings? Bear in mind that when you buy at a DIY-shed but can't install the 
bathroom yourself, that you have to hire somebody to do it for you. Try to get a 
few good quotes from recommended plumbers before you start the project. 
 
Also make sure you list the possible redecorating costs. The fittings might be the 

first step to your new bathroom, but your walls and flooring will make all the 
difference. Accessories and storage are the just as important to create the look 
that you want. Include them in your budget as well. 
 
If you decide to your new fittings in the same place as your old ones, then 
measure them before you go to look for a replacement. That way you know that 
your new bath will fit. Check that the shower tray you're buying has a non-slip 
surface. Check with your plumber that the drainage can take the amount of water 
your shower is producing. Nothing is worse than having an overflowing tray. And 
always buy the enclosure and the tray as a set. This way you know that the 
enclosure fits to the shower tray. And last but not least, try to match your taps 
and levers with the style of your bathroom. If you have chosen romantic fittings 
then ultramodern will just not do! 
 
Top Planning Tips 
• 
Plan your bathroom so that all the members of your 
family will enjoy it. Keep the safety of your children in 
mind when choosing your flooring and lighting.  
• 
Keep the existing service points in mind when planning 
your bathroom as rewiring and re-plumbing takes a lot 
of time and money.  
• 
Think about what you want to do with your window. 
Maximise the amount of light that comes in without 
having to suffer from glare.  
• 
Plan enough different types of storage. Shelving for 
products for every day use, cupboards for occasionally 
used products and towels, and bins for laundry. In 
families, plan also storage for typical children's bathroom accessories and 
toys.  
• 
Decide whether you have the space to install a separate shower enclosure 
or a shower above the bath. A separate shower will take more space, but 
two people can use the bathroom at the same time.  
• 
For larger families, a second cloakroom would come in very handy, 
especially in the morning when everybody needs to get ready at the same 
time.  
 

