Academic 
Writing
AN INTRODUCTION
This electronic material is under
copyright protection and is
provided to a single recipient
for review purposes only.  
www.ebook3000.com

Review Copy

Academic
Writing
AN INTRODUCTION
Second Edition
Janet Giltrow
Richard Gooding
Daniel Burgoyne
Marlene Sawatsky
broadview press
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

© 2009  Authors
All rights reserved. The use of any part of this publication reproduced, transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, or 
stored in a retrieval system, without prior written consent of the publisher—or in the case 
of photocopying, a licence from Access Copyright (Canadian Copyright Licensing Agency), 
One Yonge Street, Suite 1900, Toronto, Ontario M5E 1E5—is an infringement of the 
copyright law.
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
	
Academic writing : an introduction / Janet 
Giltrow ... [et al.]. -- 2nd ed.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-55111-908-3
	
1. Academic writing.  2. Report writing.  3. English
language--Rhetoric.  I. Giltrow, Janet, 1949- 
PE1408.G54 2009                  808’.042             C2009-903911-7 
Broadview Press is an independent, international publishing house, incorporated in 1985. 
Broadview believes in shared ownership, both with its employees and with the general public; 
since the year 2000 Broadview shares have traded publicly on the Toronto Venture Exchange 
under the symbol BDP.
We welcome comments and suggestions regarding any aspect of our publications—please 
feel free to contact us at the addresses below or at broadview@broadviewpress.com.
North America	
PO Box 1243, Peterborough, Ontario, Canada K9J 7H5 
	
2215 Kenmore Ave., Buffalo, New York, USA 14207
	
Tel: (705) 743-8990; Fax: (705) 743-8353
	
email: customerservice@broadviewpress.com
UK, Ireland, and	
NBN International, Estover Road, Plymouth, UK PL6 7PY
continental Europe	
Tel: 44 (0) 1752 202300; Fax: 44 (0) 1752 202330
	
email: enquiries@nbninternational.com
Australia and	
NewSouth Books
New Zealand	
c/o TL Distribution
	
15-23 Helles Ave., Moorebank, NSW, Australia 2170
	
Tel: (02) 8778 9999; Fax: (02) 8778 9944
	
email: orders@tldistribution.com.au
www.broadviewpress.com
Broadview Press acknowledges the financial support of the Government of Canada through 
the Book Publishing Industry Development Program (BPIDP) for our publishing activities.
This book is printed on paper containing 100% post-consumer fibre.
PRINTED IN CANADA
Review Copy

Contents
	
Preface	
ix
	
1	 Introducing Genre 	
1
	
1A	
Hearing Voices 	
1
	
1B	
Hearing Genres	
4
	
1C	
High-School vs. University Writing	
8
	
1D	
The University as Research Institution	
10
	
2	 Readers Reading I 	
13
	
2A	
Who Do You Think You’re Talking To?	
13
	
2B	
Attitudes Toward Language	
16
	
2C	
Traditions of Commentary on Student Writing	
18
	
2D	
An Alternative to Traditional Commentary: 
The Think-Aloud Protocol	
21
	
2E	
Adapting the Think-Aloud Protocol in the 
Writing Classroom	
23
	
2F	
Reading on Behalf of Others	
34
	
2G	
Reliability of Readers	
36
	
3	 Citation and Summary 	
39
	
3A	
Introducing Scholarly Citation	
40
	
3B	
Is Citation Unique to Scholarly Writing?	
45
	
3C	
Why Do Scholars Use Citation?	
52
	
4	 Summary 	
57
	
4A	
Noting for Gist	
59
	
4B	
Recording Levels	
62
	
4C	
Using Gist and Levels of Generality to 
Write Summary	
63
	
4D	
Establishing the Summarizer’s Position	
71
	
4E	
Reporting Reporting	
77
	
4F	
Experts and Non-experts	
78
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

vi 
CONTENTS
	
5	 Challenging Situations for Summarizers 	
87
	
5A	
High-level Passages	
87
	
5B	
Low-level Passages	
91
	
5C	
Summarizing Narrative	
95
	
6	 Orchestrating Voices 	
103
	
6A	
Making Speakers Visible: Writing as Conversation	
103
	
6B	
Orchestrating Scholarly Voices	
111
	
6C	
Identifying Different Genres and Orchestrating 
Non-scholarly Voices	
121
	
7	 Definition 	
135
	
7A	
Dictionaries	
136
	
7B	
Appositions	
137
	
7C	
Sustained Definitions	
142
	
7D	
The Social Profile of Abstractions and Their 
Different Roles in Different Disciplines	
148
	
8	 Readers Reading II 	
157
	
8A	
Think-Aloud and Genre Theory	
157
	
8B	
The Mental Desktop	
164
	
9	 Scholarly Styles I 	
175
	
9A	
Common and Uncommon Sense	
175
	
9B	
Is Scholarly Writing Unnecessarily Complicated, 
Exclusionary, or Elitist?	
178
	
9C	
Nominal Style: Syntactic Density	
180
	
9D	
Nominal Style: Ambiguity	
185
	
9E	
Sentence Style and Textual Coherence	
189
	 10	 Scholarly Styles II 	
195
	
10A	 Messages about the Argument	
195
	
10B	 The Discursive I	
197
	
10C	 Forecasts and Emphasis	
200
	
10D	 Presupposing vs. Asserting	
205
Review Copy

CONTENTS 
vii
	 11	 Making and Maintaining Knowledge I 	
209
	
11A	 Making Knowledge	
210
	
11B	 Method Sections	
215
	
11C	 Qualitative Method and Subject Position	
221
	 12	 Making and Maintaining Knowledge II 	
229
	
12A	 Modality	
230
	
12B	 Other Markers of the Status of Knowledge	
234
	
12C	 Tense and the Story of Research	
244
	 13	 Introductions 	
253
	
13A	 Generalization and Citation	
254
	
13B	 Reported Speech	
257
	
13C	 Documentation	
264
	
13D	 State of Knowledge and the Knowledge Deficit	
270
	
13E	 Student Versions of the Knowledge Deficit	
274
	 14	 Conclusions and the Moral Compass of the 
Disciplines 	
277
	
14A	 Conclusions	
278
	
14B	 The Moral Compass of the Disciplines: 
Research Ethics	
286
	
14C	 The Moral Compass of the Disciplines: 
Moral Statements	
290
	
Further Readings	
295
	
Glossary 	
297
	
References	
311
	
Index		
321
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

Review Copy

ix
Preface
Consider Academic Writing: An Introduction your invitation to join the 
scholarly community. 
Possibly you consider this course of studies a requirement—and 
maybe it is. Or at least an obligation: people should pay attention to 
their writing. Everybody says it’s important. But instead of thinking of 
this course as a requirement or an obligation—or a last chance to fix 
your grammar—try thinking of it as an invitation to participate in the 
knowledge-making activities of research communities. 
Should such a direct invitation be necessary? After all, you are (prob­
ably) already admitted to university and enrolled in your courses. That 
should be invitation enough. Unfortunately—or not entirely unfortu­
nately, as we will see in a minute—students’ undergraduate situation is 
not always entirely hospitable. Lectures and readings can make assump­
tions which you may feel are unwarranted: taking for granted principles 
and ways of reasoning which are not familiar to you or are quite unlike 
those you are used to from secondary school or from everyday experience. 
Moreover, you are probably enrolled in courses in several different disci­
plines. What is assumed in one discipline differs from what is assumed 
in another discipline. What your history professor likes and expects in an 
essay is different from what your sociology professor likes and expects. 
These can seem like inhospitable conditions—not very inviting. 
Fortunately, these very conditions of difference—the distinctiveness 
of scholarly habits of reasoning, the differences amongst the disciplines—
have also produced rich resources: styles of writing, ways of asking and 
addressing questions, habits of attending to the voices of others. These 
resources are available to you, and they are means for you to take part in 
the work that research communities do. 
Getting access to these resources, you will find that many of the 
problems that bother the traditional writing classroom will be silenced. 
The intimidating problem of “plagiarism,” for example: once you get the 
habit of scholarly attentiveness to the voices of others, and appreciation 
for the scholarly exchange of ideas, the plagiarism monster will be a mere 
wisp, nothing. So too the problem of your “own opinion”: where do 
you get to state your own views? Once you join the scholarly conversa­
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

x 
PREFACE
tion, and learn how to orchestrate that conversation, your own position 
will emerge, commanding attention. And the problem of your role as a 
writer: in the traditional classroom you might read an essay by Carl Sagan 
on the galaxy, or by George Orwell on his shooting of an elephant: what 
are you supposed to write? Something about another galaxy or another 
elephant? An argument in favour of galaxies or elephants, calling for their 
protection? In this course of studies, your reading is your writing: just as 
the research authors associated with this course of study have read other 
research, and represent their reading, you too, as a research author, will 
represent your reading, and thereby yourself as a scholar.
As you will soon find, this book refers to a theory of language based 
in rhetorical study of genre. Without attempting to define “genre” here 
(see Chapter 1), I will say that a genre-based approach to academic 
writing sees the disciplines not as accumulations of facts in history or 
in anthropology or in other fields but as “forms of life”: ways of doing 
things together. As such, disciplines are teeming with attitudes, values, 
interests—and motives. Scholars are moved to research, to read, to write; 
they identify with their disciplines. In some ways, the writing you do at 
university—and in this course—may be the most demanding you have 
ever done. But, in other ways, the writing you do in this course may be 
the easiest. For it will be motivated: there is a reason for it, a use for it. It 
is for making knowledge. And you will be the one making knowledge—
asking questions, advancing proposals, indicating possibilities. 
Janet Giltrow
University of British Columbia
April 2005
Review Copy

PREFACE 
xi
Preface to the Second Edition
When we’ve made the points above about differences in the disciplines, 
about the diversity of values and attitudes, people still ask us, but isn’t 
there something universal about writing? Something fundamentally true 
that everyone should know? Our colleagues, our fellow instructors in 
other disciplines, ask us this. People want there to be something basic, 
something that can be taught and learned once and for all, the final word. 
Maybe you are expecting that final word. 
But you have been in school for a long time. One would think that, 
if there is something universally right for writing, you would have heard 
about it by now. Someone would have told you. Or maybe you have 
been told—about funnels or keyholes, or about the five-paragraph essay 
and thesis statement, for example. When people are looking for writing 
universals, they tend to come up with a structure, and, most often, it’s the 
classroom that prompts the urge for such a form: something that can be 
taught and tested. It’s not only teachers who want that structure. Know­
ing they are going to be tested, students want to learn the form. 
Yet we have little or no evidence that the five-paragraphs-with-thesis 
form lives anywhere but in the classroom setting. Nowhere else are peo­
ple motivated to write this way. So, even though it is a structure, it is far 
from universal. And it’s the best that anyone has come up with, so far, as 
a teachable universal.
It’s possible that classrooms, with their regimes of teaching and test­
ing, and universities, with their mandate to get students totally equipped 
for life, are particularly prone to the wish for universals in writing: rules 
for the one way to write, the best way. Rules for the one way, the best 
way, however, lead to an impasse for writing courses, for the useful thing 
about language is that it’s always ready to be different for different scenes, 
to change its ways according to what’s going on, what people are doing. 
The samples of academic writing you meet in this book are not models 
of how to write but signs of things going on, people working together. 
So this course will be not so much about how to write an essay but 
about getting involved in those activities—which are themselves liable to 
change and differentiate. 
And even as there are no universal structures guaranteeing that you 
will always have something correct to write down, there may be a general 
condition that all writers share, even as they are involved—or because 
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

xii 
PREFACE
they are involved—in diverse activities. Always, as writers or speakers, we 
are estimating the minds of our readers or listeners: what do they have in 
mind? What can we bring to mind? As readers, we experience the other 
side of this condition, as we come across what writers have estimated to 
be in the minds of readers. Every sentence we offer or encounter is an 
experiment in estimating the minds of others. 
Having been involved in shared activities, writers in the research 
disciplines have experience of their colleagues’ frames of mind, and 
make their estimates accordingly. As you get involved in the activities 
of the disciplines, these estimates will get easier: as readers, you won’t be 
stumped by the statements of researchers and theorists; as writers, you 
will find yourself beginning to share the frame of mind of academic read­
ers. This is what will come of taking up the invitation to the disciplines. 
April 2009
Review Copy

1
1A Hearing Voices 
The seven passages below are in English. The observation that they are 
all written in English may be less important than the grounds on which 
they differ. As you read them, think about what they have in common 
and how they differ from one another. Issuing from decidedly different 
moments in North American life, each passage voices a different cultural 
situation. No one could say which of these passages is “best,” or which 
is proper English and which is not. But we can think about how each 
voice—each style of expression—serves the situation from which it arises. 
PASSAGE 1 
Eugenics theory powerfully influenced late nineteenth- and early 
twentieth-century U.S. policies concerning the groups then known 
as “the dependent, defective, and delinquent classes” (Henderson 
1901, U.S. Department of the Interior 1883). In essence, eugenicists 
held that the “fit” should be encouraged to reproduce (“positive” 
eugenics) and the “unfit” prevented from doing so (“negative” 
eugenics). Historians generally agree that between 1900 and 1920 
this doctrine formed the basis for a full-fledged social movement with 
research centers, propaganda vehicles, and strong middle-class sup­
port (Haller 1963, Kevles 1985, Ludmerer 1972, Pickens 1968). Less 
commonly acknowledged is the fact that eugenics theory affected 
public policy for decades before becoming the social movement’s 
1
Introducing Genre
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

foundation and that eugenic ideas long outlived the movement 
itself, in ways that a new generation of historians is just starting to 
explore (Dann 1991, Noll 1990, Reilly 1991). Even today, eugenics 
arguments occasionally make their way into debates about such 
matters as population growth and crime control (e.g., Wattenberg 
1987, Wilson 1989; for a recent analysis see Duster 1990). 
Nicole H. Rafter 1992 “Claims-making and socio-cultural context in the first U.S. eugenics 
campaign.” Social Problems 39 (1): 17. 
PASSAGE 2 
Crescent Beach park bench - w4m
Reply to: pers-XXXXXXX@XXXXXX.org
Date: 2007-08-06, 4:16PM PDT
You: goatee, sunglasses, sitting on bench at the beach under 
a tree at the roundabout around 1:30 today. 
Me: blonde, sunglasses driving by looking for parking...we 
exchanged smiles... 
Interested in exchanging dialogue sometime? 
PASSAGE 3 
My name is Jersey and I am only 15 weeks old. My mom is Amy and 
she is just 1 year old. My mom and I are best buds and are always 
found together! Why won’t people adopt us together? Please don’t 
make us be adopted separately, we want to stay together!! Come 
meet us and you’ll see! We are both awesome and you’ll have endless 
entertainment…mom sometimes likes to talk so maybe she’ll tell you 
a story? We are currently hangin with VOKRA so please go to the 
site and fill out an adoption application if you are interested in us...
PASSAGE 4 
In baseball, the home run is a sure way to score and the problem of 
hitting the ball as far as possible is as old as the game. An analysis of 
the problem consists of two phases: impact and flight. Many previ­
ous investigations have considered one or both of the phases of this 
problem. Briggs1 investigated the effects of velocity and spin on the 
lateral deflection of a curve ball. Baseballs spinning about a vertical 
axis were dropped through a horizontal wind tunnel. The lateral 
2 
INTRODUCING GENRE
Review Copy

deflection of the ball was found to be proportional to the spin and 
the square of the translational velocity for speeds up to 150 ft/s and 
spins up to 1800 rpm. Achenbach2 characterized the drag on spheres 
as a function of the Reynolds number Re and the surface roughness. 
He showed that there is a critical Reynolds number at which the drag 
coefficient CD decreases dramatically and that this critical Reynolds 
number decreases as the roughness increases. Although a baseball 
is not uniformly rough, the spinning seams cause boundary layer 
behavior similar to that of a rough surface.
Gregory S. Sawicki and Mont Hubbard 2003 “How to hit home runs: Optimum baseball bat 
swing parameters for maximum range trajectories.” American Journal of Physics 71 (11): 1152.
PASSAGE 5 
PANORAMIC VIEW! Super 2 yr old 1 bedroom apartment in prime 
South Slopes, features 180 degree Gulf Island view, 9’ ceilings, in-
suite laundry, 6 appliances, fantastic kitchen with oak cabinets, track 
lighting, balcony off living room & bedroom, gas f/p & more. Comes 
with 2 parking places. Unit located at 0000 Station Hill Court. Call 
now, priced to sell $447,900. Barry Wilson, Viewtime Realty. 
PASSAGE 6 
If the Tenant terminates this Tenancy Agreement as aforesaid the 
Tenant shall be liable to pay rent hereunder to the date that the 
Tenant vacates the premises, and where such date of termination 
does not coincide with the date upon which the Tenant is obligated 
to pay rent hereunder (rent payment date) the Tenant shall pay rent 
calculated by dividing the monthly rental payment hereunder by 
the number of days for the period commencing on and including 
the last rent payment date and ending on and including the day 
preceding the rent payment date following the termination date, and 
multiplying the result of such calculation by the number of days for 
the period commencing on and including the last rent payment date 
and ending on and including the termination date. 
PASSAGE 7 
“Memories give me the strength I need to proceed, the strength I 
need to believe.” Puff Daddy. This babygirl faced many challenges 
& brings with her wisdom, strength & sweet memories. Much luv 
HEARING VOICES 
3
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

to God & her loving parents. FM’s: B&E’s, YB ’95-97 crew, Vox/ 
R#17, fireworks, 290 guy (Minty? Sarah?), car races (boom!) eject’n 
seat/ Chungism w/Mike, killing 007/starfish w/Ho, who’s Paul?, 
Summer Jam, jon z’s w/evil one & STM grad/ 101 w/Brian. Shouts: 
my girl 2107 (&pops), Jenn, Geoff, Ang, Bear (you’re mine! 112 
hugs), all my buddies & bad boyz [sic]! FP: skydive, be happy & 
live the good life! 
Exercise 1 
Name the types of writing exemplified in Passages 1–7 and the 
cultural situation—the circumstances that connect the writer and 
intended reader of the passage—which each serves. 
1B Hearing Genres
The passages above not only serve the cultural situations in which they 
arise, they also embody them. They represent distinct occasions in our 
culture; at the same time, people recognize and respond to them in ways 
that are generally seen as typical. So, when we hear these different voices, 
we also “hear” the setting in which they operate. The sounds of these 
passages indicate typical moments which culture has produced: occasions 
of professional publication, dating, or legal agreement. In each case, situ­
ation has left its mark on, or imprinted, English. It has pressed into the 
general shape of the language features—for example, patterns of word 
choice and sentence construction—which mark it for use in particular 
contexts. The imprint makes language characteristic: something we 
recognize as typical of how people communicate with one another in 
particular circumstances. 
To name the types and situations for each of these passages, you have 
to call upon your knowledge of North American culture. Perhaps Passage 
3 escaped you: your life experience may not have included contact with 
the situation which has produced this particular kind of pet-adoption 
advertisement. Or, if you are not from North America or Europe, you may 
be surprised by the willingness of the woman in Passage 2 to approach a 
stranger for what seems to be a date. Hearing and speaking, reading and 
writing, we enact our experience of the world as that experience has been 
shaped by culture. 
4 
INTRODUCING GENRE
Review Copy

As the diversity of the seven passages shows, language is sensitive to 
situation. Moreover, the way we use language changes as new situations 
arise. For example, new technologies have given rise to new situations 
and new ways of using language, such as instant messaging. In this situ­
ation, instead of using conventional spelling and full sentences, we often 
use single letters, numbers, and emoticons; and our friends recognize 
this way of writing as a typical and appropriate, not incorrect, use of 
English. In recent years, this sensitivity has been captured and studied 
in new ways of thinking about genre. This book takes advantage of new 
reasoning about genre. 
See page 295 for a list of readings on genre theory. 
Before sketching the new ideas about genre, let us glance at the old 
ones. Chances are that when you hear the word “genre,” you think of 
music or movies. For example, you may think of the difference between 
hip hop and classical music, or between slasher movies and psychologi­
cal thrillers. Or you heard the word in the high-school classroom in 
connection with literary studies. Genre was, for instance, a way of say­
ing that poems, novels, and plays are different. So the notion of genre 
helped school boards make their curriculum orderly and helped English 
departments keep courses separate. For these purposes, genre was a useful 
concept, tending toward traditional descriptions of literary form. 
But then, at the end of the twentieth century, more and more schol­
ars began to think of genre in terms of the social and political contexts of 
knowledge. Scholars considered the ways in which the quality of state­
ments about the world depended on who was making the statement. Alert 
to new opportunities, genre offered itself as a way of thinking about the 
context-dependency of language—the ways in which language depends 
upon and responds to the social and political contexts that produce it. 
While old ideas of genre had slipped into regarding only form, the 
new ideas insisted that it was not form alone that constituted genre, but 
situation and form: 
situation + form = genre
Or, to put it another way, the situations that writers find themselves in 
give rise to genres. 
HEARING GENRES 
5
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

This new understanding of genre gave researchers a way of talking 
about similarities of form not as rules but as signs of common ground 
among communities of readers and writers: shared attitudes, practices 
and habits, positions in the world. Forms of speaking are connected to 
social contexts where people do things—like renting an apartment, or 
finding a pet. Different routines of social behaviour—habits of acting in 
the world—create different genres of speech and writing. 
In this light, consider the thank-you note as a genre. People who 
know this genre not only know how to compose the note—what to men­
tion, how much to say, how to begin, how to conclude, what kind of 
writing materials to use—but also when to do all this: soon after receipt 
of a certain type of gift from a person in a certain relation to the recipi­
ent. (So, in all probability, you would not send a thank-you note to your 
parents for the gift of a laptop computer or to the Students’ Union for 
the daily planner or student handbook you were handed as you walked 
across campus on the first day of classes. And if you delay sending a 
thank-you note where one is called for, you will feel—consciously or 
unconsciously—that you are failing to comply with the genre’s norms, no 
matter how perfectly you compose the note itself.) The thank-you note 
genre is made up not only of a characteristic type of written expression 
but also of the situation in which it occurs. It is a way of acting in the 
world. People with know-how in this genre understand not only its form 
but also its situation. We could even say that, at some deep, perhaps 
unconscious level, these people also share an understanding of the role of 
the genre in larger social or cultural situations—systems of relationship 
amongst family and friends, symbolized by the exchange of gifts and 
expressions of recognition and gratitude. 
Once scholars began to consider genre outside traditional literary 
studies, it became clear that English classes weren’t its only, or even its 
best, place of work. Increasingly, other kinds of writing began to be 
thought of in terms of genre: auditors’ reports, news accounts of violent 
crime, case reports in publications in veterinary medicine, architects’ 
proposals, primary school show-and-tell sessions, and—most important 
to our interests—academic writing. At all these sites, genre was a means 
to investigate similarities in documents occurring in similar situations. 
Genre theory gave researchers a way of talking about these similari­
ties not as rules but as signs of common ground among communities of 
readers and writers: shared attitudes, practices and habits, positions in 
6 
INTRODUCING GENRE
Review Copy

the world. So the style of Passage 5 comes about not because somebody 
followed rules, but because it embodies a widely recognized situation—
property transaction in a market economy—through its typical, list-like 
naming of qualities that the users of this genre recognize as valued and 
translatable into dollars. Views are good, so is newness, and so is oak fin­
ishing on kitchen cabinets. The document assumes that readers recognize 
the value of parking spaces and the desirability of laundering clothes at 
home. It assumes that readers will not interpret “6 appliances” as a sign 
of overcrowding in a small apartment, and that readers don’t need to 
be told what these appliances are, or what they do. It also assumes that 
readers are familiar with the customary practice of buying and selling a 
dwelling—contacting a broker specializing in this kind of transaction. 
Note that such knowledge is not universal but cultural. In another cul­
ture, where people inherit their homes from their parents, or share them 
with co-workers, such a genre would not exist at all. Or some culture, 
somewhere, might value a home not for its appliances or parking spaces 
but for its human history: while in our culture we exchange homes with 
strangers, dwellings in some other place might be identified with their 
residents. Then the genre accompanying property transactions might 
develop techniques for describing the dwelling’s current occupant in 
appealing or prestigious terms. In either case, the genre suits the cultural 
situation. 
Perhaps, a hundred years from now, historians will examine personal 
ads or rental agreements to piece together vanished systems of association 
amongst people. Or they will look at the genres which report research in 
physics or social history to understand the systems of relationship and 
production which held academic communities together at the turn of 
the millennium. 
Exercise 2
Consider one of the following pairs of popular genres, or come up 
with your own pair:
• the romantic comedy and the spy film;
• the infomercial and the brief television ad;
• manga and the American-style comic book;
• email and instant messaging;
• hip hop and electronic dance music. 
HEARING GENRES 
7
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

  What are some differences in form between the two genres 
you’ve chosen? How do those differences embody the different social 
situations that those genres serve?
1C High-School vs. University Writing 
Genre theory predicts that diversity of expression will reflect the com­
plexities of social life, whether that life takes place in a chat room or 
on a hockey rink or in a university classroom. Because people interact 
for a lot of different purposes, they write and speak in a lot of different 
ways. And, as the world changes, so too will ways of writing and speaking 
change. If we apply genre theory to the kinds of writing that take place in 
a university, we can better understand what communities of scholars do 
and how they typically communicate with one another. The benefits for 
the student just beginning a university career are inestimable. 
Writing instruction, however, has tended to focus on one type of 
writing: the schoolroom essay. Different kinds of assignments may pro­
duce different versions of the essay—the “argument” essay, for example, 
or the “expository” essay—but, generally, when students arrive at col­
lege or university, they are experienced in producing forms of writing 
which serve the high-school classroom. Along with this experience, they 
absorb—from teachers, from handbooks, from public sentiments—ideas 
about writing. It should be “clear” and “concise,” for example; it should 
not be “vague” or “wordy.” Writing should also be “logical” and “well 
organized.” 
But then, at university, students encounter writing that would not 
be “clear” to most people (consider Passage 4), and writing that most 
people would not call “concise” (consider the fourth sentence of Passage 
1). And what seems to be “logical” in one discipline is not thought to be 
“logical” in another. For example, a physics student, recording findings 
from an experiment, may be expected to privilege unbiased observation 
and objective recording of data, while an anthropology student, writing a 
report on the behaviour of a community, may be asked to recognize that 
the community needs to accept and even edit results. A course in Victo­
rian poetry may ask a student to come up with a thesis on a writer’s use of 
metaphor, while a philosophy course in logic may apply rules that seem 
8 
INTRODUCING GENRE
Review Copy

to defy common sense. “Organization” in a book review for history is not 
“organization” in a psychology lab report, and neither resembles “organi­
zation” in an “argument” essay in high school. After long experience in 
the schoolroom essay, and long contact with rules and pronouncements 
about good writing, university students face many examples of expres­
sion which contradict the schoolroom tradition. 
Genre theory tells us that the schoolroom essay—in its style—serves 
its situation. Inspecting the situation, we might look for connections 
between the kinds of features prized in student essays and the larger func­
tion of the schoolroom itself. We might consider the schoolroom’s role in 
socializing youth, in controlling the time of young people, in accrediting 
some and discrediting others, in scheduling some students for further 
education—in well-paid occupations that structure and regulate social 
life—and scheduling others for poorly paid or low-prestige occupations. 
Since the essay is a persistent genre, it must be doing an adequate job of 
serving and maintaining and defining schoolroom situations. 
But the schoolroom situation and the university classroom situation 
are different. Accordingly, the kind of writing that suits the schoolroom 
tends not to suit the university classroom. That is, these two kinds of 
writing represent two different genres (in both situation and form) of 
writing.
Exercise 3
Develop a list of features that, in your experience, define essays you 
wrote in high school. Consider in particular anything that may have 
been presented as a rule. (For example, “never refer to yourself in 
the first person.”) In each case, try to identify the social function 
the feature served in the high-school classroom. (Did it, for instance, 
seem to coincide with expectations about the format of standard­
ized exams? Did it encourage—or discourage—certain kinds of 
stances, attitudes, or tones?) Present your list to the class and have 
your instructor comment on how many of these features pertain 
to writing that experienced university students—or, for that matter, 
university researchers—produce. 
HIGH SCHOOL VS. UNIVERSITY WRITING 
9
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

1D The University as Research Institution 
The most important distinction between high-school and university situ­
ations is that the latter are located in research institutions. While students 
may see themselves as learners rather than researchers, they neverthe­
less do their learning under the direction of people who are trained as 
researchers and who read and write research publications. The knowledge 
that university students acquire is the kind of knowledge that comes from 
the techniques of inquiry developed by the various academic disciplines. 
We could go so far as to say that in the university the very wording of the 
facts and concepts students must absorb derives from research practice: 
the routines, habits, and values which motivate scholars to do the work 
they do. This wording represents research communities’ beliefs and their 
members’ shared techniques for interpreting the world. At the same time, 
such wording is also the medium in which students must work. 
If university students are not writing schoolroom essays, what are 
they writing? What wordings will represent the student’s position in the 
university situation? While it would be too much to say that students 
should write research articles, it is not too much to say that their writing 
shares features of the research genres. After all, one goal of the under­
graduate curriculum is to prepare students for graduate work so that they 
can eventually assume positions as researchers in universities and other 
research institutions. The style of the information students encounter in 
their university courses is shaped by the research situations that produced 
it. So, as students work with a particular type of research information, 
the style of that research genre becomes the most appropriate for them to 
adopt. And while the wording of research writing shares some features with 
the schoolroom essay—both are, after all, English—for our purposes the 
differences are more meaningful than the similarities. (Equally, the styles 
of the different disciplines share many features, but the differences can be 
meaningful, and can have consequences.) This book puts student writers 
in touch with the wording of the research genres. It shows student writers 
what the salient, or distinguishing, features of scholarly expression are—
features which distinguish the scholarly genres and which we recognize as 
typical of academic situations. At the same time, it encourages students 
to develop informed perspectives on scholarly styles and situations. As 
sites for shared understandings, and shared means of interpreting the 
world, genres can seem like worlds unto themselves—self-justifying and 
10 
INTRODUCING GENRE
Review Copy

removed from the concerns of everyday life. But the research genres (like 
any others) are not in fact worlds unto themselves. They are involved in 
all the social and political complexities of their times. 
Exercise 4 
The styles of expression in Passages 1 to 7 differ in many respects. 
In the chapters which follow, you will acquire means of identify­
ing and using salient features of 1 and 4—the two passages from 
research genres. But you might begin to develop your awareness of 
style here by inspecting and comparing all seven samples. First, and 
most broadly, what distinguishes 1 and 4 from the others? Second, 
and more narrowly, can you distinguish between the styles of 1 and 
4? (Both passages are the first paragraph of the article’s introduc­
tion.) In approaching these tasks, you might take into account these 
features: 
• ways the writers are represented in the text (most obviously, do 
they mention themselves?); 
• words—their commonness (would they show up in, for example, 
conversation between neighbours?), their recurrence (to what 
degree do these writers repeat the same words?); and sentences—
their length, completeness; 
• capital letters, parentheses, names, dates. 
How would you describe the relation between writer and reader in 
each of these passages? 
  From what you know (or can guess) about the ways of life sur­
rounding each of these samples, estimate how each of the writers 
learned to write this way (on the job? in class? on a weekend 
seminar?). 
THE UNIVERSITY AS RESEARCH INSTITUTION 
11
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

Review Copy

13
Handbooks for writing recommend knowing your audience. This seems 
like sound advice. But who is your audience when you write at college 
or university? In Chapter 1, we noted that the university is a research 
institution that includes very different types of readers involved in their 
own disciplines. How do you get to know these sorts of readers? What 
causes these readers to react negatively or positively to a student’s writ­
ing? To answer these questions, we need to learn more about academic 
readers—their reading practices, values, and expectations. This chapter 
will help us begin to think about our readers by learning how to practise 
the think-aloud protocol. This technique can be used to engage with 
academic writing that you are assigned to read and to share your own 
and fellow students’ writing in order to better understand how a reader 
experiences your writing. But before we begin our examination of read­
ers and their reactions, let’s look at the ways in which social context or 
circumstance affects how we use language and how people respond to us.
2A Who Do You Think You’re Talking To?
In everyday conversation, we have a good idea of who our listener is: it’s 
the person in front of us. Sometimes the person is a family member or 
a friend, and conversation is easy. Sometimes the person is a stranger, 
and this can make conversation more difficult. But usually we have some 
legitimate, acknowledged reason for addressing the stranger: they’re a 
2
Readers Reading I
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

receptionist in a doctor’s office; a sales clerk; a person enrolled in the 
same fitness class—we have information that enables us to address them 
usefully in the situation. In any case, once we get going, we check the 
listener’s response; we make inferences, and adjust our emphases, our 
themes, and the ways we address people. 
Still, even face-to-face, we can sometimes struggle with inferences 
about our audience. Language and cognitive specialists study these 
efforts: Herbert Clark’s work on “audience design” (1992), for example, 
investigates people’s habits of inference in addressing others, finding 
that conversation keeps us busy at various levels of consciousness as we 
estimate the frame of mind of our co-conversationalists and others who 
might overhear us. We estimate others’ knowledge of the world, calcu­
lating the extent of mutual knowledge—what can be safely assumed 
and what needs to be explained. Some studies by Wallace Chafe (1994) 
discover, in addition to these calculations, our ongoing estimates of lis­
teners’ centre of attention: what is in the spotlight for them, what has 
slipped into the shadows. 
When we are writing, we can’t see our audience in front of us, to 
watch their reactions, but often we know so much about them that we 
don’t need to see them. For example, working in genres like the post­
card or the personal letter, we normally have a reliable picture of our 
reader. Also, we have received postcards and letters ourselves, so we have 
experience of our own responses to certain forms, and also of the social 
occasions and expectations which call for postcards and letters. 
On the other hand, when we are working in genres like the letter of 
complaint (e.g., to request compensation for a defective product) or the 
letter of application, we have, generally, much less information about 
our audience—except, probably, as a social type: a corporate employee 
handling public relations, or a human-resources director. If we have not 
ourselves received many complaints or applications, we can’t rely on our 
own response to such documents when we make decisions about what 
to include, what to leave out, how to word things, and what order they 
should take. If, however, we are dedicated complainers or job applicants, 
we may be familiar with typical outcomes of our writing—redress or 
silence, offers or brush-offs. From these responses, we infer aspects of the 
situation and alter our approach for the next time. 
How do student writers of university essays learn to position them­
selves in relation to their readers? How do student writers infer aspects of 
14 
READERS READING I
Review Copy

this situation? The exercises which follow can help you and your instruc­
tor talk about how you interpret your situation as a student writer.
Exercise 1 
In groups of three or four, compare your answers to the questions 
below. If you haven’t yet had writing returned to you at college or 
university, then use your experience of high-school assignments and 
then guess at or estimate university-level expectations and response. 
Make notes of the answers and your discussion. You will need them 
for Exercise 2.
• What do you do and how do you feel when you get marked essays 
returned? For example, do you look at the grade, read the instruc­
tor’s comments, throw the assignment out, re-read it, tear it to 
bits, show it to your friends? 
• What do you consider typical marking commentary on essays? What 
kinds of things do markers say about your essays in particular? 
Collaborate with other members of your group to compose a 300- 
to 400-word summary of your findings, accounting for differences 
and similarities in your habits and perceptions. Try to make a connec­
tion between your habits and attitudes upon having a marked essay 
returned to you and your ideas of markers’ typical remarks. For 
example, if you celebrate the return of the essay, this may be directly 
related to teachers’ typically expressing delight at particular aspects 
of your essays.
Exercise 2 
Using the information you have gathered in Exercise 1, and sharing 
your findings with other members of the class, locate the student 
writer’s distance from or proximity to her or his markers: in what 
sense do student writers “know” those who read and mark their 
work—as friends, acquaintances, strangers, social types? Is the stu­
dent writer’s experience of the academic genres like that of the 
writer of the postcard or that of the writer of the job application? 
How does it compare to writing essays in high school? From the 
information you have collected in Exercise 1, what inferences would 
you make about the situation, and about academic readers? How 
WHO DO YOU THINK YOU'RE TALKING TO? 
15
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

do you picture readers of your essays? How do these readers read? 
What do you know about them, so far?
2B Attitudes Toward Language
Student writers can have negative opinions about readers’ sincerity 
and open-mindedness. Sometimes they attribute a disappointing grade 
to insincere efforts and closed-mindedness on the part of their reader/
marker. There are occasions when this assessment might be justified: in 
any writing context, we can find readers with agendas of their own, a 
bone to pick, or a chip on their shoulder. 
But to dwell on the idiosyncrasy and resistance of markers is to lose 
sight of more productive characterizations of readers. As a first step in 
building a more helpful characterization of readers, we will consider aca­
demic readers’ responses in a very broad context: that of attitudes toward 
language itself. 
People tend to have rather pejorative—and moralistic—attitudes 
toward unfamiliar ways of using language. For example, as we shall see 
later, according to popular views, creole expression is not only incorrect 
and corrupt but also ugly and coarse. It’s worth noticing that linguists 
themselves can be involved in perpetrating these views, but it’s perhaps 
even more noteworthy that laypeople—non-experts—are confident and 
ready in their judgements of the status of other people’s speech. It seems 
that when we learn language, we also acquire instruments for ranking 
other users of language.
Just as we learn to rank others, we can also learn to rank ourselves. 
Pierre Bourdieu (1991) analyzes people’s attitudes toward language as 
evidence of “symbolic domination”: domination, that is, which oper­
ates not through physical coercion but through psychological and social 
processes. Undergoing these processes, people internalize the values that 
subordinate some members of society to the advantage of others. Through 
their experience of schooling especially, but also from other social experi­
ence, people learn to disparage their own speech and writing, to suspect it 
of errors, and to feel intimidated by the speech of those whom they have 
been taught to regard as exemplary—usually the members of the privi­
leged classes, or those who have spent a long time studying in institutions 
of higher learning. 
16 
READERS READING I
Review Copy

Outlining and reflecting on the origins and history of Standard 
English, James Milroy and Lesley Milroy (1991 [1985]) identify the 
“complaint tradition”: the cultural practice of publicly deploring the 
state of the language, announcing its decline from an earlier perfection 
(this ideal time usually coinciding with the complainer’s own school­
days). Young people’s speech and writing in particular are often the target 
of complaint. Milroy and Milroy trace the complaint tradition back sev­
eral centuries, and other scholars have traced North American traditions 
of complaint about student writing to the 1880s at least, when changes 
in the social order in late nineteenth-century America resulted in new, 
middle-class populations seeking higher education—and meeting the 
disapproval of élite classes. 
Instances of the complaint tradition are not hard to find. For example, 
in a recent opinion piece in a newspaper, a “[j]ournalist and biographer ... 
of William Shakespeare” condemns the Harry Potter books as simple and 
publicity-seeking only, as not deserving the excitement which attends 
them. The Harry Potter books, he says, are not like the Alice books, or 
the Simpsons, or other contemporary and excellent books and programs 
for children. Thrown into this severe evaluation of a popular series are 
some claims from the complaint tradition: (1) “Britain is a country with 
dramatically declining standards of literacy, increasingly dragged down to 
the lowest common denominator by the purveyors of all forms of mind­
less entertainment”; and (2) the object of the writer’s disdain and the 
public’s delight has “a pedestrian, ungrammatical prose style which has 
left [him] with a headache and a sense of a wasted opportunity” (Holden 
2000; emphasis added). 
The complaint tradition has a long history and promises to persist 
into the future, despite scholarly efforts to discredit complainers. Either 
language is always and perpetually in decline, or complainers are always 
and perpetually complaining, no matter what. Referring to complaints 
and panics about standards of literacy, Milroy and Milroy also point out 
that there is no evidence to suggest that levels of literacy today are in 
decline. 
Nevertheless, language remains the site of stigma, social ranking, and 
evaluation. We could think of speakers who disparage their own or others’ 
speech and writing as participating in the political life of the language. 
Most commentators on this situation mention the role of education 
(as an institutional practice) in providing the experience and criteria 
ATTITUDES TOWARD LANGUAGE 
17
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

for evaluating speech and writing. Without mass education, modern 
complainers would have fewer reasons and occasions for complaint, and 
speakers and writers would be less intimidated, and less susceptible to 
symbolic domination. 
From this broad perspective on attitudes toward language, we can 
narrow our focus to the practices of academic readers. Like anyone 
else, academic readers and markers participate in the political life of the 
language. 
It’s possible, then, that some elements of the typical commentary that 
students get on their work (e.g., their writing is “sloppy,” “careless,” or 
“awkward”) are motivated by ideas about standardized usage, including 
the complaint tradition. These aspects of commentary tend to be more 
informative about attitudes toward speech and writing, and about social 
ranking (teaching people to know their place), than about the writer’s 
success as a participant in the scholarly conversation. We can regard this 
as useful information: in the long run, it is probably good to come into 
realistic contact with evaluative attitudes toward language. As Bourdieu 
(1991) points out, “linguistic relativism” (any usage is as good as any 
other) can be “naïve.” But continuous contact with evaluative attitudes 
can also overshadow more practical information about readers’ expecta­
tions of scholarly writing.
2C Traditions of Commentary on Student Writing
As we saw in Chapter 1, genre theory—the idea, that is, that typical 
ways of speaking and writing enable typical social activities—suggests 
that different writing situations will call for different forms of expression. 
The research genres display features which are not necessarily unique to 
them but which are arranged in ways that distinguish research writing 
from other kinds of writing. And the research genres differ amongst 
themselves: marine biology has things in common with archaeology but 
has ways of speaking that it doesn’t share with archaeology; anthropology 
resembles psychology in some ways but not in others. Diverse ways of 
doing research tend toward diverse ways of using language. 
The complaint tradition, on the other hand, presupposes that where 
variety exists, there is only one correct form (Milroy and Milroy (1991 
[1985]). These unitary views of language produce their own genres: 
handbooks of usage, for example (“Improve your English with this handy 
18 
READERS READING I
Review Copy

and authoritative reference text!”). We could also call the marker com­
mentary on student essays a “genre,” one traditionally supported by 
unitary views of language. Composition textbooks often provide their 
users (students and teachers alike) with marking symbol guides: run-on, 
gr, awk, logic, vague, ww (= “wrong word”), org (= organization), evidence. 
Designed to operate universally across genres, the symbols can suggest that 
“[lack of] logic” or “vagueness” is identifiable regardless of reader or situ­
ation. Traditional advice given to students on their essays often mentions 
“argument” (you need one) and “evidence” or “details” (you need these to 
support your argument). But these all-purpose terms can be misleading. In 
her study of writing in history, Sharon Stockton (1995) found that
“[a]ll faculty agreed ... that argument is the key word for good writing 
and that the absence of argument constitutes the central problem in 
students’ written work” (50), but that expectations differed depend­
ing on students’ level, and “[i]n fact, faculty assignments, grades, and 
comments on student papers seem to imply that explicit argument as 
such was not the central issue of concern” (51). Despite professors’ 
calls for argument, “[u]ltimately, assignments and evaluations show 
that written sophistication in student writing was in this department 
a function of narrative complexity”—“a certain specialized form of 
narrative” (52). When professors said “argument,” they had a variety 
of other things in mind. 
Janet Giltrow 2000 “‘Argument’ as a term in talk about student writing.” In Learning to Argue 
in Higher Education, ed. S. Mitchell and R. Andrews. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton Cook/ 
Heinemann, 132–33.
In this case, traditional advice on (or complaint about) student writing 
was misleading. In other situations, traditional commentary can use­
fully represent a reader’s uneasiness and yet fail to point to the particular 
conditions which would satisfy the reader’s expectations. For example, a 
literature professor, reading a student’s essay for a Shakespeare class, wrote 
“evidence?” in the margin next to the writer’s claim: “In the absence of 
the romantic bond, Othello’s life would lose much of its meaning, and he 
would revert to his role as a ‘soldier for pay’.” When asked to explain his 
comment, the professor elaborated:
There are a number of problems there; I asked for evidence. I am ask­
ing for evidence as to whether [Othello] was ever spoken of in those 
TRADITIONS OF COMMENTARY ON STUDENT WRITING 
19
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

terms by anyone including himself as a “soldier for pay” because that 
has certain connotations to it and he is a general after all. Is “soldier 
for pay” a formulation which matches someone’s view of Othello 
in the play? Is there any evidence that he loses the romantic bond? 
That this would happen? That he would go back to being a general?
Giltrow 2000: 134.
Here the traditional comment “evidence?” unfortunately obscures a par­
ticular marker’s more complete and informative response: a reader of a 
literature essay needed to hear some voice from the play corroborating 
the student writer’s prediction about Othello. Using general terms like 
“evidence,” marginal commentary can fail to express the reader’s genre-
specific expectations—in this case, the literary-critical expectation that 
the student writer’s statements will be woven with wordings from the 
original text. In a different research genre, “evidence” would mean some­
thing else. 
Sometimes traditional notations can appear contradictory. For exam­
ple, an academic reader sometimes asks for “specifics” in the presence of 
specifics: a student writes in a paper for a course in the sociology of the 
environment, “our water comes from a metal tap and flows down a metal 
drain ... we drive over concrete roads and highways”; and the professor 
responds, “This is the point at which I wonder when it’s going to get 
more specific” (reported in Giltrow 2000: 136). In this case, the “specif­
ics” the student has offered failed to impress the reader of a sociology 
paper. But if used in another genre—for example, in an “essay” question 
on a language-proficiency examination—these “specifics” could inspire a 
positive response. 
It is therefore possible that traditional marking commentary can go 
on at too high a level of abstraction (see Chapter 4 for further discussion 
of abstractions) to be entirely informative to writers; as the above exam­
ples show, traditional notations can transmit misleading, incomplete, or 
contradictory information. This high level of abstraction and generality 
no doubt has its own social function: it suggests unanimity, a consensus 
about what “good” writing is (it is “clear,” “coherent,” “logical”; it has an 
“argument”), a solidarity amongst authoritative readers. The idea that 
“good” writing can be identified and characterized in these ways is no 
doubt comforting to markers. Yet student writers often remain puzzled 
by these responses in the margins of their papers. 
20 
READERS READING I
Review Copy

We can see, then, that traditional commentary has its shortcomings. 
For one thing, it can be influenced by the ideologies of language which 
produce the complaint tradition—deeply held views about correctness 
and commitments to protecting the language from the (perceived) mess 
its users make of it. Taking traditional commentary to heart, writers 
might come to think of writing mainly as a struggle to reach an inac­
cessible ideal: their sentences will never be good enough. But more 
important perhaps is the generality of commentary, suggesting a timeless 
and universal standard for expression, when, in fact, even in the research 
disciplines, diversity and change prevail. 
Rather than give up on feedback altogether, we can work on devel­
oping techniques for giving and getting useful response to writing. The 
techniques we concentrate on in the following sections focus on the read­
er’s experience of using the text: how the reader understands, anticipates, 
makes meaning. We find out about how readers behave when they meet 
words, sentences, paragraphs. From this information, we draw a portrait 
of the reader.
2D An Alternative to Traditional Commentary: The 
Think-Aloud Protocol
People studying readers’ behaviour try to find out about reading compre­
hension: how do readers get messages from texts? What kind of writing 
makes the message obscure? What kind makes it clear? You can probably 
imagine that this kind of research is not easy. If we want to find out about 
how people obey traffic signals, we can put ourselves at an intersection 
and watch cars speeding up, slowing down, stopping, and then going 
again. But how can we watch people read?
THE THINK-ALOUD PROTOCOL 
21
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

To catch readers in the act, researchers have devised ways of measuring 
physical signs of reading, like eye movement. And other measures try to 
get at comprehension itself by asking readers questions about what they 
have read, or asking them to do other tasks connected with their reading. 
Another technique for researching the reading process is the think-
aloud protocol. The think-aloud method (Waern 1988) asks subjects to 
report the ideas that are going through their heads as they perform a task, 
like writing an essay or reading one. Think-aloud reports are like eyewit­
ness testimony of events that researchers can’t witness themselves. Rather 
than using typical marking expressions, such as “wrong word” or “faulty 
diction,” readers simply report what is going through their heads as they 
come to an understanding of what they are reading. With this kind of 
report available, writers can decide what revisions might benefit readers. 
The think-aloud protocol resembles forms of usability testing of 
documents. In the process of composing manuals, instructions, informa­
tion bulletins, and other genres, technical writers sometimes test their 
documents’ efficiency by having them read out loud—by people who 
might purchase software, for example, or citizens who might seek infor­
mation about a government program, or car owners who might need 
to know about a vehicle recall. As they read aloud, the subjects report 
their understanding, and their difficulties. In light of these reports, and 
informed about where other readers are likely to have trouble, writers 
then revise (or not). The think-aloud protocol is thus both an instrument 
of research and a tool for professional writers. 
It can also contribute to students’ conceptions of their readers, as 
research conducted by Karen Schriver (1994 [1992]) has shown. Gath­
ering her subjects from senior writing classes and dividing them into 
experimental and control groups, Schriver provided the experimental 
group with ten transcripts, over a six-week period, of readers using 
written instructions for aspects of operating a computing system. In 
the meantime, the control group was taught audience analysis and text 
design by more traditional methods. 
In the following excerpt from a transcript, a reader reports his 
thoughts (italics) while reading (bold type):
OK, now I’m going to try ... Commands for English Text. EMACS 
enables you to manipulate words, sentences, or paragraphs of 
text. These commands sound like the ones I’d use all the time—good. 
In addition, there are commands to fill text, and convert case. I 
22 
READERS READING I
Review Copy

don’t know what it means to fill text. I guess it means putting data from 
one text into another ... that is, filling the text with what you want in 
it. Well, I guess I’ll soon find out. 
  Editing files of text in a human language human language? Boy 
that sounds strange, what could they be distinguishing here? Maybe 
computer language or machine language from human language? ought 
to be done using Text mode rather than Fundamental mode. Well, 
I don’t know what text mode or fundamental mode is, so how will I 
know which I’m in? Let’s see ... Invoke M-X Text Mode to enter Text 
mode. I won’t do that because I do not have time to see the other section. 
That’s terrible to tell me to ... See section 20.1 [Major Modes], p. 85.
Karen Schriver 1994 (1992) “What document designers can learn from usability testing.” 
Technostyle 19 (3/4): 22 (emphasis added).
Testing at the beginning of the study showed that the two groups of 
students were equivalent in their ability to predict when readers would 
have trouble with what they were reading. Testing after six weeks of 
instruction found that, while the control group had not changed in their 
ability to predict readers’ difficulties, the experimental group’s ability to 
identify where actual readers had in fact had trouble understanding what 
they were reading improved by 62 per cent. Improving dramatically in 
the accuracy of their analyses, these students also changed in the way 
they talked about problems: their remarks became more reader-centred 
(“readers might not see the connection here,” “I don’t understand this 
word”) and less text-centred (“this paragraph is too long”). The control 
group changed much less in this dimension of analysis.
2E Adapting the Think-Aloud Protocol in the 
Writing Classroom
Think-aloud can be practiced on any piece of writing, for any piece of 
writing is a document to be used, in some way, and readers can report 
their experience of making use of it. This method can be adapted for use 
in the academic writing classroom. 
Like technical writers observing a person working with a draft of 
a software manual, we observe a reader working with an instance of 
scholarly writing—a summary, a proposal, a research paper. From these 
observations, we learn where potential readers may have problems with 
ADAPTING THE THINK-ALOUD PROTOCOL 
23
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

a particular piece of writing. But we also learn about more than just 
particular sentences in particular writings. As Schriver’s research shows, 
writers can also learn from think-aloud when the read-aloud text is not 
their own: overhearing a reader working on someone else’s writing, they 
gain experience which they can use to sketch their portrait of the reader. 
Schriver’s research suggests that this kind of close-up experience of read­
ers’ behaviour can be generalized—to anticipate readers’ responses to our 
own work-in-progress, to explain responses to previous work, to help us 
plan future work. 
Thinking out loud while reading doesn’t necessarily come naturally. 
For one thing, most thinkers-aloud have long experience of traditional 
marking commentary and, in their first attempts, are liable to reproduce 
its sounds (“this is well organized,” “there should be a thesis statement,” 
“this flows”). And, face-to-face with the writer, thinkers-aloud may be 
tempted to praise, contracting perhaps for praise in return. It’s also 
tempting just to read, and not to comment. 
Recognizing that readers may not be sure of how to break the silence, 
we have developed models and guidelines for thinking aloud. The model 
below has been used in research studies. Here an instructor is thinking 
aloud as she reads (original text, in bold; reader thinking aloud, in italics):
The purpose of this paper will be to show how the representation 
of Africans can be extended to the representation of women in 
Heart of Darkness written by Joseph Conrad. This sounds like the 
essay question to me. That’s not terrible, but I find I don’t really pay 
attention when I hear the sound of an essay question. “The Heart of 
Darkness written by Joseph Conrad”—that sounds as if I don’t know 
Conrad wrote Heart of Darkness. I’d prefer something like “Conrad’s 
Heart of Darkness.” This will be accomplished by the analysis 
of the inhuman role of women in the story, “the inhuman role 
of women”—I stop there—the women behave in a non-human way? 
that doesn’t seem to be right—oh, maybe. I’m thinking of Kurtz’s 
“Intended” ... “inhuman”? oh well ... the supremacy imposed upon 
them, and their physical attributes which emit a darker figure of 
the human woman. “Supremacy”? in what sense? I think I see what 
he’s getting at, but it’s hard work getting through this sentence: what 
does “supremacy” have to do with “inhuman” and then “darker figure”? 
“human woman”? Maybe the body ... there could be something here in 
24 
READERS READING I
Review Copy

the disparity between dark interpretations of the body and interpretations 
of woman as supreme ideal, but this whole first paragraph reminds me of 
the introduction to a five-paragraph essay: thesis statement, three points.
We also provide explicit guidelines for those who will be responding in 
instructional situations—students, teaching assistants, professors.
Guidelines for Readers
You are not a marker/evaluator; you are a person using a document. You 
make no judgements; you only report what’s going on in your mind. 
As you read, report moments when you’re working inefficiently—not 
understanding.
But rather than saying ... 
aim for ... 
this is ungrammatical 
I’m having trouble with this sentence. 
There’s something about it that makes me 
stop. I’ve read this sentence twice. Now 
I’m going on but I’m still not sure.... 
this is the wrong word 
This word makes me stop. Why do you 
say “social” agenda? That’s a positive term 
to me, but you seem to be using it in a 
negative way. I don’t really know what 
“peer review” means. I have no idea. 
there’s no thesis statement 
OK, I’m through the first paragraph, 
but I can’t really say what you’re going 
to focus on. Is it the public perception, 
or the corporate model? I’m through the 
first paragraph, and I figure you see a 
connection between the “back-to-basics” 
idea and the “standardization” Zieber 
mentions. I think you’re going to talk 
about that. 
repetition 
I think you already said this—or did I get 
it wrong? Is there something different here 
and I missed it? 
ADAPTING THE THINK-ALOUD PROTOCOL 
25
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

no transition 
I’m having a hard time making a con­
nection between this paragraph and this 
one—this is about the university’s “service 
agenda” and this one is about “deperson­
alization.” Is the connection that they’re 
both individualistic? That’s my guess but 
I don’t know if that’s what you intend. It’s 
hard work here. 
the main point should be at 
the start
Oh now I see what you’re saying.  I’m 
going to go back and re-read to see if I 
missed something. 
As you read, report moments when you’re working efficiently—under­
standing, getting new ideas of your own:
who learns and why yes I see that—the “who” is about access, and 
that’s a question of social class and the distribution of wealth, and 
the “why” is about the role of knowledge in the society, or in the 
economy. I’m thinking it’s also “what”—if you put the who and the 
why together you start to go towards the answer to the “what”—what 
should be taught?
Offer frequent reports of the gist of what you’re reading:
OK so far I have this main idea in mind: the Zieber article might seem 
more radical but it’s actually more traditional. That’s what I’m getting 
from this.
If you notice what appear to you to be “errors” in spelling or grammar, 
say so. It’s part of your experience of using the piece of writing, and 
useful information for the writer. If spelling and grammar turn out to be 
tremendous obstacles to your appreciation of the writer’s intentions, then 
you need to report this circumstance. But you might also try to report the 
degree to which missing apostrophes or odd spellings are confounding 
your efforts to find meaning:
I notice that “is” comes after “institution and government”—that should 
be “are,” I think, but it’s not stopping me ... 
I’ve lost this sentence, I thought it was ending. Now I see a comma, so 
I’m going back to re-read ... 
26 
READERS READING I
Review Copy

By giving the writer the measure of difficulty—“it’s minor, so fixing this 
isn’t going to make much difference overall”; or, “it’s a big block, so it 
had better be attended to”—you make “grammar” a matter of the reader’s 
experience of the text, rather than a matter of living up to the rules for 
correctness. 
And to these suggestions for readers, we add guidelines for writers, 
encouraging them to take advantage of this opportunity to see what hap­
pens when their writing is out in the world, on its own, without their 
recommendation or apology. 
Guidelines for Writers
You don’t need to explain or justify what you’ve done. Instead, value 
the chance to watch someone making meaning from what you’ve writ­
ten. Listen carefully to your reader’s comments. Take notes. Your reader’s 
response will guide your revision strategies.
Earlier in this chapter, we said that think-aloud can be practiced on 
any piece of writing. Here is an example of an experienced academic 
reader thinking aloud as she reads a passage from Ian Hunter’s 1988 
book, Culture and Government:
Unlike classical education I guess I have a general idea of what this is, 
although I’m not sure how he sees it in this context, Romantic aesthetic 
education I’m stopping here, “Romantic aesthetic education,” does that 
mean that “Romantic education” was aesthetic? or that “aesthetics” was 
one branch of Romantic education? I think it’s the latter was directed at 
the individual’s aesthetico-ethical organisation “aesthetico-ethical,” 
I don’t like “o” suffixes, but lots of people use them; so this would be 
moral development going along with learning to appreciate beauty—at 
producing here is an explanation a synthesis out of the divided 
“ethical substance” I stop there, what is that? I’m just going back, 
maybe I missed something, no ... ; and this practice of ethical recon­
ciliation has indeed passed into the modern teaching of English. 
I don’t understand the “divided substance” but I have a hunch about 
reconciliation—not that I could explain this to anyone, so far. Unlike 
the latter, however, OK the romantic idea is different from the modern 
one the Romantic aesthetics of self-cultivation was for most of the 
nineteenth century a more or less voluntary “practice of the self” 
ADAPTING THE THINK-ALOUD PROTOCOL 
27
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

“practice of the self,” not sure what that is but I like the sound of it, I 
guess it’s equivalent to “self-cultivation,” improving yourself, something 
you do on your own initiative, confined to caste groupings at one 
remove from the emerging machinery of popular education it was 
something the élite did, I think that’s it, although “one remove” sounds 
not very far away and the élite would be very far away from the classes 
served by “popular education,” maybe I don’t use “at one remove” the 
proper way. OK it was élite practice, I think that’s it, but I wish there 
were a specific—what groups of people did this, what did they do? Maybe 
it doesn’t matter that I don’t know what “divided substance” is; I’m not 
sure what it has to do with the élite being separate from the masses. But 
I get the general idea that ... 
What should the writer do with the reader’s commentary? Well, he 
doesn’t have to do anything: his book is published, and he is well known. 
But when we overhear this commentary, we learn about the difficulties 
a reader can have when she encounters many complicated abstractions 
without examples or details.
Exercise 3 
Passage 1 below is the opening section of a literary narrative, writ­
ten in a fairly traditional “realist” style. Guided by the suggestions 
and models above, practise think-aloud: read Mistry’s text aloud, 
stopping and reporting those moments when you experience an 
unusual effort to understand (after a word, phrase, sentence, end of 
paragraph), including places where you need to re-read, question and 
speculate, or want to offer ideas of your own. Do this exercise with 
a partner; remember to read and report aloud. 
PASSAGE 1 
The morning express bloated with passengers slowed to a crawl, 
then lurched forward suddenly, as though to resume full speed. 
The train’s brief deception jolted its riders. The bulge of humans 
hanging out of the doorway distended perilously, like a soap 
bubble at its limit. 
  Inside the compartment, Maneck Kohlah held on to the 
overhead railing, propped up securely within the crush. He felt 
28 
READERS READING I
Review Copy

someone’s elbow knock his textbooks from his hand. In the seats 
nearby, a thin fellow was catapulted into the arms of the man 
opposite him. Maneck’s textbooks fell upon them. 
  “Ow!” said the young fellow, as volume one slammed out of his 
lap and back onto the seat. “Everything all right, Om?” 
  “Apart from the dent in my back, everything is all right,” said 
Omprakash Darji, picking up the two books covered in brown 
paper. He hefted them in his slender hands and looked around 
to find who had dropped them. 
  Maneck acknowledged ownership. The thought of his heavy 
textbooks thumping that frail spine made him shudder. He 
remembered the sparrow he had killed with a stone, years ago; 
afterwards, it had made him sick. 
  His apology was frantic. “Very sorry, the books slipped and —” 
  “Not to worry,” said Ishvar. “Wasn’t your fault.” To his nephew 
he added, “Good thing it didn’t happen in reverse, hahn? If I fell 
in your lap, my weight would crack your bones.” They laughed 
again, Maneck too, to supplement his apology. 
  Ishvar Darji was not a stout man; it was the contrast with 
Omprakash’s skinny limbs that gave rise to their little jokes 
about his size. The wisecracks originated sometimes with one and 
sometimes the other. When they had their evening meal, Ishvar 
would be sure to spoon out a larger portion onto his nephew’s 
enamel plate; at a roadside dhaba, he would wait till Omprakash 
went for water, or to the latrine, then swiftly scoop some of his 
own food onto the other leaf. 
  If Omprakash protested, Ishvar would say, ‘What will they 
think in our village when we return? That I starved my nephew 
in the city and ate all the food myself? Eat, eat! Only way to save 
my honour is by fattening you!
Rohinton Mistry 1995 “Prologue: 1975.” A Fine Balance. Toronto: McClelland & 
Stewart, 3–4. 
Passage 2 below is the opening section of an article about Jamaican 
Creole, and attitudes toward that language. In contrast to Mistry’s 
style in the passage above, this passage is written in a scholarly style. 
Guided by the suggestions and models above, practise think-aloud: 
ADAPTING THE THINK-ALOUD PROTOCOL 
29
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

read Wassink’s text aloud, stopping and reporting those moments 
when you experience an unusual effort to understand (after a word, 
phrase, sentence, end of paragraph), including places where you need 
to re-read, question and speculate, or want to offer ideas of your 
own. Do this exercise with a partner; remember to read and report 
aloud.
PASSAGE 2 
Recent discussion among both Jamaican scholars and laypeople 
suggests that Jamaicans’ attitudes toward Jamaican Creole 
(hereafter JC) are changing.1 This change, some suggest, has 
accompanied the increased popularity of Dancehall culture 
and nationalistic “consciousness raising” efforts (Christie 1995, 
Shields-Brodber 1997).2 Concurrent with these revisionist efforts, 
there came a call in 1989 by the (Jamaican) National Association 
of Teachers of English (NATE) to validate JC in the schools. 
This event reflected movement at an institutional, policy-making 
level, while the rise of Dancehall operated at the level of popular 
culture. Such a shift in attitudes toward “things Jamaican” marks 
a significant conceptual reorientation, in light of the high esteem 
that historically has been given to British culture, and more 
recently to American culture.
A history of low prestige 
It has been said that language is the theater for the enacting of 
the social, political, and cultural life of a people, as well as the 
embodiment of that drama (Alleyne 1993). After roughly 150 
years of Spanish occupation, Jamaica came under British control 
in 1655. English became the language of prestige and power 
on the island, reflecting the social status of its users, while the 
emergent Creole was regarded as the fragmented language of a 
fragmented people.3 One theory of creole genesis holds that, 
because slaves were transported to the West Indies from a number 
of different ethnic groups along the western coast of Africa, they 
shared no common language; thus, in the new colony, they 
acquired a simplified variety of English in order to communicate 
with their British rulers and one another, while retaining no 
30 
READERS READING I
Review Copy

West African forms (Turner 1949; Alleyne 1984, Chap 6; Holm 
1989: 471–2). Historically, then, the speech of the slaves has 
been regarded as infantile by laypeople and linguists alike (Turner 
1949)—as language that was not fully formed. It was not “proper” 
English; but then, because many of its lexical items resembled 
English ones, there was no reason to think it might be anything 
other than English.4 
  Language-internal clues also corroborate the low-prestige of 
JC. The language-internal phenomenon of pejoration, which 
has accompanied the emergence of many creole languages, has 
also figured into the history of Jamaican Creole “Patois.” Lexical 
items from West African sources have taken on negative con­
notations, particularly in communities with large acrolect- or 
standard English-speaking populations. An example of one such 
pejoratized word is nyam “to eat,” which has come to suggest 
an animal’s way of eating rather than eating in a general sense. 
When used to describe human eating, nyam connotes sloppy or 
uncultivated devouring of food, as in “Don’t nyam your dinner” 
(Alleyne 1976), or, “He had to nyam and scram!” 
  In a socio-linguistic investigation of attitudes toward a language 
variety that arose out of contact among groups of people coexist­
ing under conditions of unequal power, it must be recognized that 
such social conditions affected the context of development of the 
new language. Research has shown that attitudes toward language 
can be markedly polarized and tightly held—both institutionally 
and personally, openly and internally.
Notes
1	 Linguists tend to refer to this language as “Jamaican Creole,” but it 
is widely referred to as “Patois” by native speakers. The two terms 
will be used interchangeably in this paper, particularly because the 
term “Patois” was widely used by respondents in the interviews 
reported. 
2	 Briefly, “Dancehall” is a largely urban working-class phenomenon 
in vernacular Jamaican culture, associated with styles of dance, 
music, clothing—and (important in this context) lyrics that 
strongly favor Jamaican Creole (Cooper 1993).
ADAPTING THE THINK-ALOUD PROTOCOL 
31
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

3	 Interested readers are directed to Lepage 1960 and Cassidy 1961 
for introductions to the history of the island which discuss issues of 
linguistic development.
4	 Taylor (1963: 804) gives an example of how lexical correspondence 
and similar phonological form have mistakenly been taken as 
adequate grounds for assuming that the grammatical categories of 
one language (French) operate in another (Martinican Creole).
Alicia Beckford Wassink 1999 “Historic low prestige and seeds of change: Attitudes toward 
Jamaican Creole.” Language in Society 28: 57–92, 57–58.
Exercise 4 
After reading and thinking-aloud about the passages in Exercise 3, 
answer the following questions:
• What have I learned about my own reading practices? 
• What expectations do I have when reading literary narratives as 
opposed to reading scholarly work? 
• What have I learned about the reading practices of others? 
Exercise 5
Practise think-aloud protocol on the following introduction from an 
article published in the journal Social Work:
Autistic children never play normally with other children. They 
often do not respond normally to their mothers’ affections or to 
any tenderness. (Freedman, Kaplan, & Sadock, 1976, p. 449)
The sociopath persistently violates the rights of others, shows 
indifference to commitments, and encounters conflict with the 
law. (Rathus, 1984, p. 451)
These quotes are two examples of how the use of diagnostic terms 
can sometimes worsen the stigma of mental illness. Stigma can 
significantly undermine the quality of life of people with mental 
illness. The social opprobrium that results from stigma can 
rob people labelled mentally ill of a variety of work, housing, 
and other life opportunities commonly enjoyed by adults in 
32 
READERS READING I
Review Copy

the United States. It can also prevent some people who might 
otherwise benefit from clinical services from pursuing treatment 
in an effort to avoid the label. One important part of the system 
of care—clinical diagnosis—may strengthen the stereotypes that 
lead to stigma. Diagnosis may intensify both the “groupness” 
and the “differentness,” aspects governing public perceptions of 
people with mental illness.
Patrick W. Corrigan 2007 “How Clinical Diagnosis Might Exacerbate the Stigma of 
Mental Illness.” Social Work 52 (1): 31–39, 31.
Exercise 6
The passage in exercise 5 above is taken from the introduction to 
Corrigan’s article. The following passage is taken from the conclu­
sion. Practise think-aloud on the passage. What stylistic features of 
the passage seem to belong to conclusions? Compare your reading 
experience of the introduction and the conclusion.
Diagnostic classifications augment public perceptions of the 
groupness and differentness of people with mental illness. These 
classifications are perceived as homogeneous, and composite traits 
are seen as stable. As a result, individual members of a diagnostic 
class tend to be seen in terms of their diagnosis instead of the idio­
syncratic nature of their problems. One way to change this kind 
of stigma is to challenge the very foundation on which it rests. 
Changing to a dimensional perspective of diagnosis undermines 
the sense of difference perpetuated by diagnosis and replaces 
psychiatric classification with a continuum that includes normal 
life. Stressing the evidence that supports recovery will diminish 
the stigma related to diagnosis. Facilitating interactions between 
professionals and people in recovery will also challenge the stigma.
Corrigan 2007: 37.
ADAPTING THE THINK-ALOUD PROTOCOL 
33
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

2F Reading on Behalf of Others
Classroom situations bring to light some special conditions of think-
aloud response. Readers who are fellow students or the instructor share 
with the writer certain knowledge of the immediate scholarly situation: 
readings, assignments, circumstances exclusive to that course. Consider 
the following first sentence of an essay, and two possible comments on 
the part of the marker:
The four articles have in common a focus on the experience of 
marginalized identities in times of social change.
traditional commentary: What articles? 
think-aloud commentary: I know which articles you’re referring to, 
but others wouldn’t. 
For the student writer, the “traditional” remark “what articles?” can seem 
odd. After all, the marker knows about the articles. A reader who is trying 
to avoid traditional commentary may choose to keep quiet at points like 
those exemplified above. After all, she does know which articles the writer 
is referring to. But readers are reading on behalf of other readers: people 
who have not been in this class and are unfamiliar with the reading list. 
So think-aloud includes one’s own reactions and the reactions of readers 
whose difficulty in understanding is predictable. Similarly, in reading the 
following sentence, a marker encounters a specialist term which has been 
thoroughly discussed in class:
Chavez’s work (1994) on undocumented immigrants offers new 
perspectives on transnational communities.
The instructor marking the essay might respond with a traditional instruc­
tion: “Define.” Since the marker was present during discussion, and has 
read the materials being discussed, this too can seem odd. Or it can be 
taken as a blanket directive to define everything in sight, no matter how 
apparently well known. A thinker-aloud might also stop and report at 
this point, not because they don’t know the meaning of “transnational 
community” but because they sense the possibility of another reader—
another participant in scholarly discussion—coming across this specialist 
term. They want the meaning of the specialist term to be established to 
accommodate readers who were not privy to the classroom discussion. 
34 
READERS READING I
Review Copy

If, thinking aloud in response to a fellow student’s writing, you find 
yourself concerned about others’ understanding, report your estimate of 
a possible difficulty on behalf of other readers. What does this attention 
to other readers say specifically about student writing in the university? It 
suggests an awareness of the way in which academic writing does not just 
respond to the immediate concerns of a given course, but bridges the gap 
between the classroom and a broader research situation: the instructor-
reader needs to see the writing relating to the larger conversation that the 
course intersects with. 
Above, we saw how traditional commentary taking the form of a 
question—“what articles?”—might confuse a student writer. In fact, 
markers often respond with questions. A study conducted with five writ­
ers responding online to one another’s work showed the ambiguity of 
reader questions (Cowan et al. 1998). As the researchers worked on ana­
lyzing responses and measuring the revisions which resulted, they found 
that the meaning of the questions could be ambiguous.
text: According to Kabeer, following Giddens, community member­
ship is made up of both rules and resources.
marker: What’s the difference? 
In this example, does the question mean that the reader doesn’t know what 
the difference is between “rules” and “resources”? 
What’s the difference? meaning: I don’t know what the difference is.
Or is the question really an instruction to do something?
What’s the difference? meaning: You should define these terms and 
explain the difference.
Or is the question a sign of the reader engaging with the point?
What’s the difference? meaning: I’m thinking that the difference is com­
plicated. Maybe a “rule” can be a “resource” in some circumstances. 
I wonder if the “rule” about female seclusion could be a “resource” 
contributing to ethnic identity.
When reporting a question in think-aloud protocols, try to specify your 
intentions:
READING ON BEHALF OF OTHERS 
35
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

• I don’t know what this is. 
• I can imagine readers appreciating seeing this briefly discussed. 
• You’ve made me think about this, and now I wonder ... 
2G Reliability of Readers
How far can you count on your thinking-aloud reader? What if your 
reader is not particularly experienced in the genre in which you are writ­
ing? What if you are inexperienced and the reader is as inexperienced 
as you are? What if you are asked to think aloud on a paper for a social 
geography course, and you have never seen a paper or taken a course in 
social geography before?
If you are the reader, declare your position: “I don’t even know what 
social geography is.... I don’t know anything about social geography, but 
still I’d say that it’s hard to see how this paragraph relates to what you 
say in your introduction ... now this seems to repeat what you’ve said 
before ... OK what you’re saying is....”
If you are the writer, consider the source: this is a novice’s effort to 
understand what you have written. The novice will have some experi­
ence of scholarly writing, and their responses will still be valuable.
All think-aloud responses to a piece of writing are inevitably formed by 
the reader’s particular position in the world, a position that includes per­
sonal experiences, interests, disciplinary affiliation, political leanings, and 
many other factors. 
We might wonder, then, how idiosyncratic responses are, overall. 
In the study mentioned above (Cowan et al. 1998), the researchers 
were particularly interested in the degree to which readers’ independ­
ent responses agree. They found that, during the four-month period of 
the study, agreement amongst readers increased. It seems that being in 
earshot of readers reading, thinkers-aloud developed a sense of a larger 
audience and became spokespersons for that audience, which included 
them but also went beyond them. Without explicit coaching to do so, 
readers began to read on behalf of others, or their ways of expressing their 
responses made them more representative of others’ reactions. This is a 
limited finding, but enough to encourage the practice of listening in on 
other writers getting feedback. 
36 
READERS READING I
Review Copy

Exercise 7
The excerpt below is the beginning section of a student paper. Prac­
tise thinking-aloud with a partner, using the suggestions and model 
above: read out loud, stop and report your thinking. When you 
experience difficulty in understanding, stop and report this difficulty; 
when you are reading efficiently, report this experience.
Everyone has their own definition of community. For some people 
it is the place they grew up. For others it is the place they live 
and work in. Anderson says community is “imagined” (quoted in 
Chavez 1994). But what is community? Webster’s (1987) defines 
community as “a unified body of individuals; ... the people with 
common interests living in a particular area; ... an interacting 
population of various kinds of individuals ... in a common loca­
tion.” What happens to a community when its original basis, 
the idea people have of its founding and its reason for existing, is 
threatened? In this paper I will investigate one such case: coastal 
communities where fishing has been a way of life and now the 
salmon stocks are greatly reduced and, in some cases the fishery 
has been closed.
Exercise 8
Using a draft of a work in progress or an exercise that you have com­
pleted, exchange your writing with a partner and take turns reading 
aloud and practising think-aloud protocol. (We encourage you to use 
think-aloud on an ongoing basis with the essays you write in this or 
other classes.) 
RELIABILITY OF READERS 
37
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

Review Copy

39
In Chapter 1 we considered genre in terms of social and cultural situation. 
As we have seen, genres involve patterns of form and style which represent 
common ground (shared purposes) between writers and readers. When 
they respond to and often judge what they are reading, academic readers 
rely on aspects of situation that they are familiar with—the expectations 
and shared values of a discipline. Academic writers also rely on aspects of 
situation—including the typical reading practices, values, and expectations 
of their audience—when they present their topics or research. We could 
say that successful writing depends upon readers’ recognition of features 
of the genre. 
	
In the next two chapters we head for summary—an important and 
highly recognizable feature of the research genres. Summary may not seem, 
at first, an attractive destination. Or a serious one. With its schoolroom 
role as a check to see if you’ve done assigned reading, or its role in exams 
in seeing if you understand what you read (“List the three main points 
the author makes. Write in complete sentences.”), summary can appear to 
be a mechanical exercise. But for scholarly writers, summary fulfils quite 
different functions. In summarizing, academics identify with a community 
of researchers, establish what positions have been taken by others, and take 
a position themselves. All of these activities allow them to construct new 
knowledge. In this sense, summary is a central activity of scholarly life. 
	
So, to put summary in the context of research itself and to show how 
summary is part of the scholarly community of practice, we are going to 
3
Citation and Summary
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

40 
CITATION AND SUMMARY
begin by examining how citation occurs in different disciplines, noting 
similarities and differences in citation practices. We will also look at how 
citation in scholarly discourse differs from citation in everyday conversa­
tion and other situations. 
3A Introducing Scholarly Citation
Here is a way of writing which somebody unaccustomed to scholarly 
writing in archaeology might find peculiar: 
PASSAGE 1
It is widely believed that the archaeological traces of the last Neander­
thal and earliest anatomically modern human populations in western 
Europe are represented by the Chatelperronian and Aurignacian 
cultures, respectively 1–10. The Chatelperronian culture is confined 
essentially to western France and northern Spain, and shows strong 
technological links with the immediately preceding Mousterian 
technologies. The Aurignacian culture is distributed over the whole 
of western, central and eastern Europe, and apparently reflects a 
major population dispersal across these regions (deriving ultimately 
from the Near Eastern region) over the period approximately 
43,000–36,000 before present (BP) (uncalibrated radiocarbon 
years) 9. Skeletal remains associated with the Chatelperronian and 
Aurignacian industries, although not abundant, bear out these 
correlations 1,2,9,11,12.
Notes
1	
Bar-Yosef, O. The Upper Paleolithic revolution. Annu. Rev. 
Anthropol. 31, 363–393 (2002).
2	
Hublin, J.-J. in The Geography of Neandertals and Modern Humans 
in Europe and the Greater Mediterranean (eds Bar-Yosef, O. & Pil­
beam, P.) 157–182 (Peabody Museum, Harvard Univ., Cambridge, 
2000).
3	
Klein, R.G. Archaeology and the evolution of human behaviour. 
Evol. Anthropol. 9, 7–36 (2000).
4	
Conard, N. & Bolus, M. Radiocarbon dating the appearance of 
modern humans and the timing of cultural innovations in Europe: 
new results and new challenges. J. Hum. Evol. 44, 331–371 (2003).
Review Copy

5	
Zilhaõ, J. & d’Errico, F. The chronology and taphonomy of the 
earliest Aurignacian and its implications for the understanding of 
Neanderthal extinction. J. World Prehist. 13, 1–68 (1999).
6	
Zilhaõ, J. & d’Errico, F. (eds) The Chronology of the Aurignacian and 
of the Transitional Technocomplexes: Dating, Stratigraphies, Cultural 
Implications (Instituto Português de Arqueologia, Lisbon, 2003).
7	
Mellars, P.A. The Neanderthal problem continued. Curr. Anthropol. 
40, 341–364 (1999).
8	
Mellars, P.A. in The Geography of Neanderthals and Modern Humans in 
Europe and the Greater Mediterranean (eds Bar-Yosef, O. & Pilbeam, 
P.) 35–48 (Peabody Museum, Harvard Univ., Cambridge, 2000).
9	
Mellars, P.A. Neanderthals and the modern human colonization of 
Europe. Nature 432, 461–465 (2004).
10	 Mellars, P.A. The impossible coincidence: a single species model for 
the origins of modern human behaviour in Europe. Evol. Anthropol. 
14, 12–27 (2005).
11	 Gambier, D. in The Human Revolution: Behavioural and Biological 
Perspectives on the Origins of Modern Humans (eds Mellars, P.A. & 
Stringer, C.) 194–211 (Edinburgh Univ. Press, Edinburgh, 1989).
12	 Churchill, S. & Smith, F. Makers of the early Aurignacian of Europe. 
Yb. Phys. Anthropol. 43, 61–115 (2000).
Brad Gravina, Paul Mellars, and Christopher Mellars 2005 “Radiocarbon dating of interstrati­
fied Neanderthal and early modern human occupations at the Chatelperronian type-site.” 
Nature 438 (3): 51–56, 51.

But this kind of citation—using superscripts at the ends of sentences—isn’t 
peculiar to archaeologists. Other researchers—physicists and hist­or-
­ians, for instance—write this way, too. Sociologists, by contrast, include 
the names of cited authors within sentences: 
PASSAGE 2 
Initial skepticism over the impact of neighborhood conditions and 
neighborhood contexts on the behavior of adolescents and young 
adults (Jencks and Mayer 1990) has spurred considerable research 
purportedly documenting such effects (Aneshensel and Sucoff 1996; 
Billy, Brewster, and Grady 1994; Corcoran et al. 1992; Duncan 1994; 
Duncan, Connel, and Klebanov 1997; Elliott et al. 1996; Entwisle, 
Alexander, and Olson 1994; cf. Evans, Oates, and Schwab 1992). 
INTRODUCING SCHOLARLY CITATION 
41
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

42 
CITATION AND SUMMARY
Grounded primarily in Wilson’s (1987) prominent treatise on The 
Truly Disadvantaged, several recent studies have examined the impact 
of neighborhood disadvantage on family-related events, including 
the timing of first sexual activity (Billy et al. 1994; Brewster 1994; 
Brewster, Billy, and Grady 1993), first marriage (Hoffman, Duncan, 
and Mincy 1991; Massey and Shibuya 1995), and nonmarital and/
or teenage childbearing (Billy and Moore 1992; Brooks-Bunn et al. 
1993; Crane 1991). 
Scott J. South and Kyle D. Crowder 1999 “Neighborhood effects on family formation: 
Concentrated poverty and beyond.” American Sociological Review 64: 113–32, 113–14. 
Neanderthals may be unfamiliar as a topic of discussion for most of us, 
while neighbourhoods are probably exceedingly familiar. But both of 
these passages share ways of talking about their topic. For example, both 
topics are referred to using somewhat rare wording: “earliest anatomi­
cally modern human populations in Western Europe” and “the impact 
of neighborhood disadvantage on family-related events.” There are also 
some conspicuous formal features—clusters of superscripts in Passage 1 
and long parenthetical interruptions to the sentences in Passage 2, with 
only names and years in them. Why do Gravina, Mellars, and Mellars 
write, “Skeletal remains ... bear out these correlations 1,2,9,11,12”? Why 
do South and Crowder write, “the timing of first sexual activity (Billy 
et al. 1994; Brewster 1994; Brewster, Billy, and Grady 1993), first mar­
riage (Hoffman, Duncan, and Mincy 1991; Massey and Shibuya 1995), 
and nonmarital and/or teenage childbearing (Billy and Moore 1992; 
Brooks-Bunn et al. 1993; Crane 1991)”? What kind of writing finds such 
references so important? 
These patches of parenthetical references and superscripts are a con­
densed, concentrated way of telling us that somebody other than the 
present writer has said something: they signal citation. Other writers in 
different research disciplines use different citing strategies. They unpack 
the clumps of names and dates, show us that these statements have been 
uttered by other speakers, and even permit us to hear their actual words. 
In the next passage, Ann Taylor Allen, an historian, is beginning a discus­
sion of what others have said about moods of uncertainty at the turn of 
the previous century (people feeling insecure, alienated). We’ve used bold 
type to emphasize the reporting expressions which attribute statements 
about those moods to writers other than Allen. 
Review Copy

PASSAGE 3 
Most of the literature on European and North American intellec­
tual history at the turn of the century emphasizes the problematic 
and disorienting effects of (as Everdell puts it), “the impossibility 
of knowing even the simplest things that the nineteenth century 
took for granted.”1 In fact, the characterization of the period from 
1890 to 1914 as an era of pessimism, alienation, and anxiety has 
become a cliché of intellectual history. In German political thought, 
Fritz Stern describes a mood of “cultural despair”;2 for the social 
sciences, writes Lawrence Scaff, “the central problem appears to be 
the same in every case: a sense that unified experience lies beyond 
the grasp of the modern self and that malaise and self-conscious guilt 
have become inextricably entwined with culture.”3 Eugen Weber 
remarks that, in France at the turn of the century, “the discrepancy 
between material progress and spiritual dejection reminded me of 
my own era.”4 In Britain, the literary critic Terry Eagleton refers 
to a “cataclysmic crisis of Victorian rationality.”5 
Notes
1	 William R. Everdell, The First Moderns: Profiles in the Origins of Twen­
tieth-Century Thought (Chicago, 1997), 10–11.
2	 Fritz Stern, The Politics of Cultural Despair: A Study in the Rise of the 
Germanic Ideology (1961; rpt. edn., New York, 1965).
3	 Lawrence A. Scaff, Fleeing the Iron Cage: Culture, Politics, and Modern­
ity in the Thought of Max Weber (Berkeley, Calif., 1989), 80.
4	 Eugen Weber, France: Fin de Siècle (Cambridge, Mass., 1986), 3. For 
other examples, see [...].
5	 Terry Eagleton, “The Flight to the Real,” in Cultural Politics at the Fin 
de Siècle, Sally Ledger and Scott McCracken, eds. (Cambridge, 1995), 
13. 
Ann Taylor Allen 1999 “Feminism, social science, and the meanings of modernity: The debate 
on the origin of the family in Europe and the United States, 1860–1914.” The American 
Historical Review 104 (4): 1085–1113, 1085–86. 
We might compare the way names of cited authors, numbers in super­
script, and “Notes” are used by an historian with the forms of citation 
used by a literary critic. In the following passage, Joyce Irene Middleton 
discusses what others have said about the novels of Toni Morrison. We’ve 
INTRODUCING SCHOLARLY CITATION 
43
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

44 
CITATION AND SUMMARY
used bold type to emphasize the reporting expressions by which Middle­
ton attributes statements about Morrison’s novels to writers (including 
Morrison herself):
PASSAGE 4
Literary critics praise Toni Morrison’s novels as “modernist” and 
“experimental,” but such criticism overlooks the extent to which 
her fiction draws on the oldest literary tradition of all, that of oral 
storytelling. Morrison’s achievement has been to illuminate the values 
of an ancient form within the modern novel. By using this highly 
literate and literary genre, she privileges oral memory and the oral 
culture of the African-American community and dramatizes the cul­
tural conflicts between oral and literate traditions. Morrison herself 
emphasizes the traditional elements of her work and distinguishes 
herself from the lineage of the modern novel, asserting in an inter­
view with the African-American literary scholar Nellie McKay,
I am not like James Joyce; I am not like Thomas Hardy; I 
am not like Faulkner. I am not like in that sense ... I am not 
experimental, I am simply trying to recreate something out of 
an old art form in my books. (426–27)
Toni Morrison’s novels are especially rich in participatory oral forms 
such as songs, poetic language, formulaic features, the language of 
ritual and oral epic, which appeal for audience involvement and do 
not support an aesthetic view of art for art’s sake. Furthermore, a 
central concept in her work is that of oral memory, highly valued 
in an oral culture but ignored and devalued in a highly literate one. 
Joyce Irene Middleton 1993 “Orality, Literacy, and Memory in Toni Morrison’s Song of 
Solomon.” College English 55 (1): 64 (italic emphasis in the original).
Unlike research in history, where names of cited authors and details of 
publication are made available at the bottom of the page, Passage 4 uses 
a list of references at the end of the paper. These references, however, 
would be recorded in a format quite different from the references in 
the archaeologists’ article on Neanderthals or the sociologists’ study of 
neighbourhoods. 
But whether researchers refer to cited authors by number, by name 
and date, or simply by name, the practice of citation—the attributing of 
Review Copy

a statement to another speaker—produces one of the distinctive sounds 
(and looks) of scholarly writing. The distinctiveness of this way of writ­
ing could lead to one or two views of scholarly writing which, while not 
necessarily unfounded, may be misleading. The first is that only scholars 
repeat the words and ideas of others. The second is that scholarly cita­
tions are a shortcut to “authority,” simply a way to support an argument, 
and that scholarly writing is a platform for those who have a knack for 
repeating the words of others. We discuss each of these views below. 
Exercise 1
Compare your experience reading passages 1–4 above. How do the 
different ways of citing affect your reading and comprehension of the 
passages? Does one style of citation seem more familiar to you than 
another? Try to estimate how a researcher, a reader in the discipline, 
might respond to the citations in each passage.
3B Is Citation Unique to Scholarly Writing? 
So commonly do people in everyday conversation repeat the sayings of 
others that specialists in language studies investigate this speech habit. 
For example, Wallace Chafe (1994) focuses on how speakers’ represen­
tations of others’ words involve awareness of contexts distant from the 
setting of the conversation; Patricia Mayes’s study of citation in spoken 
English finds that “at least half of the direct quotations are not authentic 
renditions, and many are the invention of the speaker” (1990: 358); and 
Greg Myers (1999) proposes methods to classify the many functions of 
citation, showing that the speech technique of representing the words 
of others involves complex purposes and, on the listener’s part, subtle 
interpretive schemes. These are all studies of citation in commonplace 
settings: people telling about their experiences and feelings, explaining 
themselves, or passing on information about others. 
And, if we consult our own experience, we too can readily tune in to 
citation in our daily encounters: 
(a) So this guy comes over and says is that your car and I’m like yeah 
and he goes you gonna leave it there and I’m like—what??? 
(b) So they say the urban coyotes are getting pretty bad. 
IS CITATION UNIQUE TO SCHOLARLY WRITING? 
45
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

46 
CITATION AND SUMMARY
(c) The weather channel says showers in the morning but then 
clearing.
Compare the second-hand report in Passage (d) with the third-hand report 
in Passage (e): 
(d) Judy—you know, from Student Loans—she called me the other 
day, and she says they haven’t received my cheque. And I say, I sent 
it last week. And she says, Oh. 
(e) Pat’s friend Sally is breaking up with her boyfriend. Apparently 
Sally is very upset and phones Pat all the time, and Pat is getting 
really tired of this. I guess Sally is always saying, Why me? So Pat 
finally said, Why not you? I think Pat’s getting a bit frustrated. 
In (d) a speaker (“I”) reports a conversation between herself and another 
speaker (Judy). In (e), a speaker (“I”) says what her friend (Pat) said her 
friend (Sally) said, and what she (Pat) said she said to her friend (Sally).
In Passage (f ) below, a speaker telling a dog-bites-man story says what 
her mother said she said, and what her mother said someone else said 
(notice how the daughter quotes the mother directly, but the stranger’s 
words are swallowed by descriptions of his attitude, e.g., “this man was 
going absolutely mad”): 
(f) [My mother] took—she’s got these two Dobermans who are 
really unruly but very sweet. She took them for a walk on the beach 
one day, and this was at the height of the Rottweiler scare, and this 
jogger’s running along the beach at Liverpool, and Sophie, her dog 
that she can’t control, decided to run along after the jogger and 
bit him on the bottom. And this man was going absolutely mad, 
and my mother started off by being nice to him and saying, “I’m 
terribly sorry; she’s only a pup and she was just being playful,” and 
so on, and he got worse, so the more she tried to placate him, the 
more he decided he was gonna go to the police station and create 
a scene about it. So she said, “Let me have a look,” and she strode 
over to him and pulled his <LAUGHS> pulled his tracksuit bottoms 
down, and said, “Don’t be so bloody stupid, man, there’s nothing 
wrong with you, you’re perfectly all right.” At which point he was 
so embarrassed he just jogged away. 
Cited in Jennifer Coates 1996 Women Talk: Conversation between Women Friends. Cambridge: 
Blackwell, 100–01. 
Review Copy

Why is citation so common in everyday conversation? Possibly 
because much of what we know about the world we learn only from 
what others have said, and because conveying this knowledge as coming 
from a particular source gives us a chance to take a position in relation 
to other people’s positions in the world. For example, the speakers in (a) 
and (d) take an oppositional stance vis-à-vis the other speaker they cite, 
and cite their own speech to confirm this position. Mentioning coyotes, 
the conversationalist in (b) cites a consensus he has detected in news 
reports of the day; the speaker in (c) uses citation to show the source of 
his prediction about the weather. (It seems rare, in Western culture, to 
hear a weather prediction without at least an implicit citation of weather 
professionals, e.g., “it’s supposed to rain then clear up”). In (f), the story 
about the jogger and the dog, the storyteller manages the speech of others 
in such a way as to lead us to sympathize with the dog owner rather than 
with the man who was bitten. 
Sometimes writers in non-academic genres—in (g), a writer of a 
letter to the editor of a small-town newspaper—use citation to typify 
what they take to be a general message from other sources (in this case, 
sources with which the writer strongly disagrees) by putting words in 
others’ mouths: 
(g) Disincentives are everywhere for drivers.... “take transit so we can 
clog our arteries with fuel-hogging buses.” I don’t like it, and there 
is nothing I can do about it. 
Letter to the editor. Tri-City News 26 April 2000. 
In (h), the speaker is one of a group of British “working-class men” who 
are on probation after having been convicted of money-related crimes. 
Like the speaker in (i), he puts words in others’ mouths: 
(h) They can rip off millions and pay nothing, then someone gets 
caught, twenty, thirty pounds DSS an’ “they’re a criminal scum-bag”. 
Sara Willott and Chris Griffin 1999 “Building your own lifeboat: Working-class male offenders 
talk about economic class.” British Journal of Social Psychology 38: 445–60, 451. 
Notice that the speaker is not stating that small-time thieves are criminal 
scum-bags. He is stating that others (what we might call Big Interests) say 
that small-time thieves are criminal scum-bags, and he aligns himself in 
opposition to these others: his citation distinguishes his interests from 
IS CITATION UNIQUE TO SCHOLARLY WRITING? 
47
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

48 
CITATION AND SUMMARY
the interests of those he perceives as embezzling and pillaging on a large 
scale. On the other hand, the next speakers (from the same group) self-
cite not to oppose others but to establish solidarity amongst themselves: 
(i) Mark: always said, right, you don’t take from somebody who’s 
just as bad off as you. I’d rather take from somebody who could 
afford to lose. 
Andy: What you say, “you don’t take off your own kind.” 
Mark: Exactly.
Steve: Your own doorstep. 
Andy: Yup, your own doorstep ...
Willott and Griffin 1999: 456. 
Sometimes in everyday conversation, we simply repeat what we have 
heard, sewing it with invisible stitches into our utterances. Someone who 
has himself conducted no studies of climate change and has not visited 
South Asia could say—
(j) There are droughts in South Asia ... global warming 
—and his listeners could infer that he read this somewhere, or heard it 
on television. 
Other times, a view of our own gets a boost from citing a source 
people consider authoritative. 
(k) He was black and blue from head to toe, the doctor says it was 
a miracle he survived. 
Much of our performances as speakers is citation—repeating what others 
have said, attributing statements to those with authority, or those with 
whom we disagree: naming some of our sources (“Judy, from Student 
Loans,” “my mother”), typifying others (“the doctor,” “the weather chan­
nel”), leaving some anonymous (“they say,” “this guy”), or leaving some 
cited claims unattributed. Some citation is more or less verbatim; some is 
paraphrase; some is invented. 
Seeking recognition and sympathy for our position, or spreading the 
news or playing our part in rumour and hearsay, we repeat what others 
have said. 
Review Copy

Exercise 2 
Locate the speaker (or source of information) and the reported 
speech in the examples above. For instance, Passage (a) above can 
be worked out as follows: “So this guy (speaker) comes over and 
says (reporting expression) is that your car (reported speech) and I 
(speaker)’m like (reporting expression) yeah (reported speech) and 
he (speaker) goes (reporting expression) you gonna leave it there 
(reported speech) and I’m (speaker) like (reporting expression)—
what??? (reported speech).” 
Exercise 3
Citation in everyday conversation: Without offending anyone’s 
privacy, listen to discussions which you overhear or in which you 
participate: listen for, and record, two or three instances of citation 
in everyday conversation. How does this speaker (who might be you) 
attribute his or her cited statement to a source? Is the source named 
(“Barb,” “Prince Charles”), typified (“the Registrar’s Office,” “the 
vet”), anonymous (“I heard ...,” “they”)? What role does the citation 
play in the conversation? 
Exercise 4
Citation in news genres: Citation not only plays a part in many 
conversational situations, it also has a major function in newspaper 
reports, in Western cultures especially. To get a sense of its char­
acteristic operation in constructing public information, inspect the 
passage below. Identify the statements that are citations. Which 
are paraphrase? Which are presented word for word? Which cited 
speakers are fully identified? Which are typified or anonymous? What 
would the passage sound like if we removed the expressions attrib­
uting statements to others? For example, removing the reporting 
expression from the following sentence—
Ms. Fehlauer had testified earlier yesterday that she did not see 
anything unusual when she was cleaning.
IS CITATION UNIQUE TO SCHOLARLY WRITING? 
49
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

50 
CITATION AND SUMMARY
—we would get:
Ms. Fehlauer did not see anything unusual when she was cleaning.
Speculate on the function of citation in the news genres generally—
and in this article in particular.
THE PICKTON TRIAL—TESTIMONY
A close friend of Robert Pickton saw lots of blood everywhere in 
Mr. Pickton’s trailer on one occasion in the mid-1990s, the jury 
at the first-degree murder trial heard yesterday.
	
However, the jury was not told anything else about the bloody 
scene. Mr. Pickton’s friend, Ingrid Fehlauer, was not asked to 
elaborate on her testimony.
	
Instead, her credibility became an issue for the jury to consider.
	
Ms. Fehlauer had testified earlier yesterday that she did not see 
anything unusual when she was cleaning Mr. Pickton’s trailer in 
late 1996 or early 1997. “Just the amount of dirt on the carpet,” 
Ms. Fehlauer said with a chuckle.
	
But in cross-examination by Crown prosecutor Mike Petrie, 
Ms. Fehlauer agreed that she saw “lots of blood everywhere.” She 
told the court she did not say anything about the blood earlier 
because defence lawyers had told her the matter would not be 
mentioned in court.
	
Ms. Fehlauer agreed with Mr. Petrie that, despite taking an 
oath to tell the truth, she chose to say something that she knew 
was untrue.
	
Mr. Justice James Williams told jurors to consider Ms. Feh­
lauer’s credibility. “She answered in a way that was not truthful,” 
Judge Williams said. The defence lawyers did not do anything 
improper in telling her that the matter would not be mentioned 
in court, he added, without explaining the basis for the lawyers’ 
advice.
	
Ms. Fehlauer was the seventh witness for the defence to testify 
at Mr. Pickton’s trial. A middle-aged mother of two children, she 
had known Mr. Pickton since she was a youngster of five or six. 
She lived across the street from the Pickton farm in the mid-1990s 
Review Copy

and did housecleaning for Mr. Pickton on six or seven occasions. 
Her sister was the common-law wife of Mr. Pickton’s brother.
	
Ms. Fehlauer told the court she was on the farm two or three 
times a week and again on weekends from 1992 to 1998. She 
said the farm was bustling with activity in those years. Later, she 
added that the farm at various times was a dark place with almost 
no one there.
	
Her description of Mr. Pickton was in sharp contrast with 
the image presented earlier this week by defence lawyer Adrian 
Brooks, who said in an opening to the jury before calling defence 
witnesses that jurors would hear Mr. Pickton is a person of limited 
intelligence.
	
In response to questioning by Mr. Petrie, Ms. Fehlauer agreed 
that Mr. Pickton was a pretty smart guy with a good memory. 
Mr. Pickton actively participated at pig auctions, worked on 
construction of buildings and was a deft mechanic who could 
build a vehicle from the ground up, she said. He was a competent 
businessman, farmer and construction worker, she said.
	
Ms. Fehlauer recalled going to animal auctions with Mr. 
Pickton on Saturday mornings. Mr. Pickton had a pretty good 
eye for picking out valuable pigs and was a proficient bidder who 
seemed to know what he was doing at the auction, she said.
	
Ms. Fehlauer did general office duties at a demolition and used-
building supplies business run by Mr. Pickton and his brother, 
Dave. She said Mr. Pickton would come by the office on Fridays 
to sign cheques.
	
Ms. Fehlauer also knew Mr. Pickton as a skilful mechanic. He 
could fix tractors, dump trucks, excavators, motor vehicles and 
all kinds of mechanical equipment, she said.
	
Mr. Pickton was also a skilled construction worker, she said. 
She had seen a house that he had worked on and a garage that 
he built. She believed Mr. Pickton did a good job, she told the 
court.
	
Mr. Pickton is on trial for the murder of six women between 
mid-1997 and late 2001. The trial continues.
“Witness admits seeing ‘lots of blood’ in trailer.” The Globe and Mail 6 September 2007: 
A7.
IS CITATION UNIQUE TO SCHOLARLY WRITING? 
51
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

52 
CITATION AND SUMMARY
3C Why Do Scholars Use Citation? 
In the last section we saw that citation is a feature of everyday conversa­
tion; it is therefore not peculiar to scholarly writing. It is nevertheless 
conspicuous in this kind of writing. It is a salient feature: it sticks up or 
stands out; it makes academic research recognizable from a distance. Cita­
tion is a feature which these genres don’t seem to be able to do without. 
But what about the claim—or, as it’s sometimes expressed, the 
accusation—that scholarly writers repeat others simply to support their 
claims or sound impressive? Do citations merely serve the purpose of 
making the writer sound authoritative—learned and important? 
Let’s look again at Passage 2, from the beginning of the chapter, start­
ing with the first sentence:
Initial skepticism over the impact of neighborhood conditions and 
neighborhood contexts on the behavior of adolescents and young 
adults (Jencks and Mayer 1990) has spurred considerable research 
purportedly documenting such effects (Aneshensel and Sucoff 1996; 
Billy, Brewster, and Grady 1994; Corcoran et al. 1992; Duncan 1994; 
Duncan, Connel, and Klebanov 1997; Elliott et al. 1996; Entwisle, 
Alexander, and Olson 1994; cf. Evans, Oates, and Schwab 1992).
Notice that South and Crowder don’t claim that neighbourhoods have 
good or bad effects, or no effects, on the young people who live in 
them. Instead, they report that someone (Jencks and Mayer) has said 
that neighbourhoods may not have much effect on young people, and 
that some skeptical researchers (the remaining citations) reacted and set 
out to test this possibility. Are South and Crowder skeptical themselves? 
No, they attribute the skepticism to these other researchers. But then the 
adverb “purportedly” suggests that they do not necessarily occupy the 
same position as those whose work has challenged that skepticism. 
In the next sentence, South and Crowder interpret the eight clusters 
of speakers (appearing at the end of the sentence) as having been influ­
enced by yet another speaker—the author of what they call a “prominent 
treatise”: 
Grounded primarily in Wilson’s (1987) prominent treatise on The 
Truly Disadvantaged, several recent studies have examined the impact 
of neighborhood disadvantage on family-related events, including 
the timing of first sexual activity (Billy et al. 1994; Brewster 1994; 
Review Copy

Brewster, Billy, and Grady 1993), first marriage (Hoffman, Duncan, 
and Mincy 1991; Massey and Shibuya 1995), and nonmarital and/
or teenage childbearing (Billy and Moore 1992; Brooks-Bunn et al. 
1993; Crane 1991). 
So, why do scholars use citation? Have South and Crowder got “author­
ity” by citing others? So far, they have told a story of others speaking, 
and they have taken a reserved position, neither disputing nor accepting 
others’ statements. In fact, rather than imparting an authoritative status, 
the citations seem to cultivate a stance of uncertainty, which is elaborated 
as the discussion continues: 
While a general consensus appears to be emerging that, net of 
individual and family attributes, at least some neighborhood char­
acteristics significantly influence these and other life-course events, 
thus far these studies have generated inconsistent findings regarding 
the existence, strength, and functional form of neighborhood effects 
on marriage and nonmarital childbearing. 
South and Crowder don’t say that neighbourhoods do in fact influence 
young people’s “family-related” behaviour, but that, from a certain posi­
tion (theirs), you can see that researchers might be beginning to agree 
that some aspects of neighbourhoods can have some effect. Note how the 
use of “while,” “appears,” and “at least some” casts doubt on the “general 
consensus” and prepares the reader for an alternative position. Then, in 
the second part of the sentence, the writers make a claim of their own—
and it turns out to be not about neighbourhoods, but about the state of 
knowledge about neighbourhoods. What they claim is that findings are 
“inconsistent”: taken together, these studies do not provide a clear answer 
to questions about the influence of neighbourhoods on young people 
growing up in them. They continue with more assertions of their own: 
More important, several key elements in Wilson’s theory relating 
neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage to family formation 
patterns have been treated only cursorily, if at all. And virtually all 
prior studies of neighborhood effects on marriage and childbearing 
suffer from one or more methodological deficiencies that limit their 
contribution to our knowledge in this area. 
What is South and Crowder’s position on this topic? Neither embrac­
ing nor disputing any of the studies they refer to, South and Crowder 
WHY DO SCHOLARS USE CITATION? 
53
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

54 
CITATION AND SUMMARY
assemble the findings of a group of speakers and, taking these findings 
together, estimate the state of knowledge on a topic: in this case they 
find a deficit in the current state of knowledge—a knowledge deficit. 
Moreover, at the same time they position their own voice amongst these 
other voices—they identify with this deficit: “our knowledge in this area” 
(emphasis added). Collectively, all these speakers, including South and 
Crowder themselves, own the knowledge (such as it is). 
See Chapter 6 (page 104) and Chapter 13, Sections 13D and 
13E (pages 270–76) for further discussion of 
state of knowledge and knowledge deficit. 
Someone looking for answers to questions about “good” neighbour­
hoods and “bad” ones, desirable behaviour and undesirable, might be 
disappointed. Experts seem to be less sure of these things than non-experts. 
Examining Passage 3 above, we find, in the first sentence, that Allen 
does not say that it is impossible to know “even the simplest things,” 
but that people now say that (other) people thought this way at the end 
of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth. She goes 
on to bring other speakers to the page who seem to agree that, at that 
time, people felt that way. While she arranges for these voices to converse 
with one another, and come to an agreement, she positions herself at 
some distance from these views, referring to them as “a cliché of intellec­
tual history.” Although in this passage Allen does not explicitly identify 
a deficit in our understanding of this period of Western thought, we 
can anticipate that she will show that, despite this apparent agreement 
amongst experts, something has been missed. (Later, she will show us 
what it is.) 
Do scholarly writers acquire authority by citing? Few (if any) of the 
citations we’ve looked at here “back up” the writer who refers to others, 
or who repeats the words of others. Moreover, the citations can add up to 
uncertainty rather than authority. 
We will find cases, though, where scholarly writers do position 
themselves beside an important figure and share his or her authority or 
prestige. It would be wrong to say that scholarly writers don’t acquire 
some status—and a right to speak—by citing others. By convening fel­
low scholars, and arranging for conversation amongst them, the writer 
gets to 
Review Copy

• take a position in relation to the other voices; 
• identify himself or herself as a member of a group collectively; 
• take a turn in the conversation; 
• construct knowledge. 
In the research genres, citation represents and enables certain actions: 
listening to the statements of others; identifying the position from which 
the statement comes; evaluating established knowledge and paying atten­
tion to the possibility that it may be incomplete, contradictory, or even 
wrong; watching for opportunities to improve the state of knowledge.
Exercise 5
In this passage, those expressions which attribute a statement to 
another speaker have been emphasized with bold type. 

Within the context of the tecato subculture, previous research­
ers have linked machismo almost exclusively to hypermasculine 
aspects of drug use and aggression. Thus Bullington (1977: 108, 
115) regards machismo as both an adaptive, efficacious attitude 
in navigating through prison experience and an underlying 
variable related to the expression of criminal behavior. Likewise 
Casavantes (1976), in his study of “el tecato” [the male Mexi­
can heroin addict], emphasizes the hypermasculine aspects of 
this model. He notes that “... machismo in its exaggerated form 
[includes] fighting, drinking, performing daring deeds, seducing 
women, asserting independence from women, and ... bragging 
about escapades” (Casavantes, 1976: 149). 
Gilbert A. Quintero and Antonio L. Estrada 1998 “Cultural models of masculinity 
and drug use: ‘Machismo,’ heroin, and street survival on the U.S.-Mexican border.” 
Contemporary Drug Problems 25: 147–65. 
In the following passage these expressions have been removed.

Within the context of the tecato subculture, machismo is con­
nected with hypermasculine aspects of drug use and aggression. 
Machismo is both an adaptive, efficacious attitude in navigating 
through prison experience and an underlying variable related to 
WHY DO SCHOLARS USE CITATION? 
55
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

56 
CITATION AND SUMMARY
the expression of criminal behavior. Machismo in its exaggerated 
form includes fighting, drinking, performing daring deeds, seduc­
ing women, asserting independence from women, and bragging 
about escapades. 
In general, how does removing citation alter the reader’s understand­
ing of the state of knowledge? In particular, how does the absence 
of reporting expressions alter the degree of certainty the writer 
expresses?
Exercise 6
Identify the reporting expressions in this passage, and rewrite the 
passage removing these reporting expressions. 
The problem of teenage parenthood, acknowledged to be a 
significant social problem in the United States since the late 
1960s, has been the subject of much study (Alan Guttmacher 
Institute, 1985; Chilman, 1980; Furstenberg, Lincoln, and 
Menken, 1981; Lancaster and Hamburg, 1986; Hayes, 1987). 
Efforts to understand its causes have generally focused on the 
issue of individual choice regarding the decision to engage in 
sexual behavior (Chilman, 1978; Pete and DeSantis, 1990) and 
to use contraceptive devices (Finkel and Finkel, 1975; Goldsmith, 
Gabrielson, and Gabrielson, 1972). The association of teenage 
motherhood with dropping out of school prematurely (Gray 
and Ramsey, 1986; Roosa, 1986), not being employed (Trus­
sell, 1976), and becoming dependent on government subsidies 
(Klerman, 1986; Moore, 1978) is well-documented. In general, 
consideration of how schools and educational policies contribute 
to the high rate of teenage motherhood has been limited to how 
dropping out affects the likelihood of a girl becoming pregnant, 
how pregnancy affects the probability of dropping out, and the 
relationship between education aspirations and pregnancy rates 
(Moore, Simms, and Betsey, 1986). 
Helen Rauch-Elnekave 1994 “Teenage motherhood: Its relationship to undetected learning 
problems.” Adolescence 29 (113): 91–103, 91–92.
Review Copy

57
At the beginning of the last chapter we mentioned that we needed to 
examine citation in order to understand summary. This is because we can 
look at each of the cited statements in our passages as tiny summaries. 
In a single sentence from a passage we examined at the beginning of 
Chapter 3, South and Crowder present the gist of one report (that type 
of neighbourhood may not affect young people’s behaviour) as well as 
the gist of what eight others have said (that neighbourhoods do affect 
behaviour). Each repetition represents an aspect of the cited work which 
is relevant to the current discussion: 
Initial skepticism over the impact of neighborhood conditions and 
neighborhood contexts on the behavior of adolescents and young 
adults (Jencks and Mayer 1990) has spurred considerable research 
purportedly documenting such effects (Aneshensel and Sucoff 1996; 
Billy, Brewster, and Grady 1994; Corcoran et al. 1992; Duncan 1994; 
Duncan, Connel, and Klebanov 1997; Elliott et al. 1996; Entwisle, 
Alexander, and Olson 1994; cf. Evans, Oates, and Schwab 1992). 
Sometimes the summaries are tiny (one sentence); sometimes they’re 
much longer. South and Crowder go on to summarize more extensively 
the “prominent treatise” by Wilson. (The expressions that attribute, char­
acterize, and evaluate the statements about neighbourhoods are in bold.) 
Perhaps the most prominent and influential theoretical expla­
nation of how neighborhoods influence the life course of young 
4
Summary
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

58 
SUMMARY
adults comes from Wilson (1987; 1996). To some extent, Wilson’s 
thesis subsumes the main causal mechanisms linking disadvantaged 
neighborhoods to undesirable behavioral outcomes described by 
Jencks and Mayer (1990:115). These include the epidemic (or 
contagion) model, which emphasizes the role of peer influence, the 
collective socialization perspective, which emphasizes the positive 
impact of successful adult role models (and which is Wilson’s main 
focus), and the institutional model, which focuses on how adults 
from outside the community, such as teachers and police officers, 
affect the behavior of children and young adults. The thrust of 
all these models—and Wilson’s argument—is that the presence 
of disadvantaged neighbors (or the relative absence of advantaged 
neighbors) increases the likelihood that young persons will engage in 
nonnormative or otherwise undesirable behaviors, such as dropping 
out of school, committing crimes, eschewing marriage, and bearing 
children out of wedlock. 
South and Crowder 1999: 114.
Without summary, South and Crowder would not be able to introduce 
Wilson, or Jencks and Mayer, into their article. With summary, South 
and Crowder arrange for these different writers to take their turn—and 
go on, in this article, to report and discuss their inquiries into the influ­
ence of concentrated poverty on “nonmarital fertility.” In this way, South 
and Crowder create a type of scholarly conversation. 
Just as conversations in daily life differ, so do scholarly conversations. 
And we might predict that summaries will change accordingly. South and 
Crowder are not the only sociologists to summarize Wilson. Looking at 
another summary of Wilson, this time by Quillian, will prepare you to 
appreciate (a) how important summary of even well-known works is to 
scholarly discussion (South and Crowder may read Quillian, and Quil­
lian may read South and Crowder), and (b) how each summary is a new 
version for new purposes and emphases. 
William Wilson’s book The Truly Disadvantaged (1987) first pointed 
out that, starting in the 1970s, areas of concentrated urban poverty 
increasingly took on a different character than they had earlier 
in the century. Like the ethnic ghettos that have long interested 
urban sociologists, dwellers in modern poor urban neighborhoods 
Review Copy

are almost all members of minority races or ethnicities. Unlike 
older ethnic ghettos, however, Wilson argues that the minority-
populated urban neighborhoods of the 1970s and 1980s contained 
an especially high concentration of poor families. He hypothesizes 
that one cause of this trend is that middle-class blacks in the 1970s 
and 1980s increasingly relocated to predominately white suburbs, 
leaving behind neighborhoods composed largely of poor or new 
poor families. 
Lincoln Quillian 1999 “Migration patterns and the growth of high-poverty neighborhoods, 
1970–1990.” American Journal of Sociology 105 (1): 1–37, 1. 
Summary isn’t just for researchers and professors; it also provides stu­
dents with a means to join scholarly conversations. While you may not 
be ready to cite 18 sources in two sentences, as South and Crowder do 
at the beginning of their article, you can compose the kinds of summa­
ries we see above, bringing to the page the voices you read. This chapter 
is devoted to developing your skills as a summarizer of scholarly mate­
rial, and becoming involved in the kinds of activities that are enabled 
by and represented in the research genres. In the next two sections, you 
will study related methods for approaching summary: the first notes 
for gist as you read; the second explores the original as an arrange­
ment of levels—levels of generality and detail, of abstract and concrete 
reference. 
4A Noting for Gist 
In this method, we write as we read, noting what we predict should be 
remembered in preparation for writing. The notes answer this ques­
tion: if I were reading this with the intention of going on to write, 
what would I estimate as important from each paragraph? Avoiding full 
sentences and straight copying, the notes capture the gist—the point 
or basis—of each section in a form that is temporary, pliable, ready for 
other uses. 
Reading for gist, we produce a set of wordings that partly depend on 
the original wordings but are also partly free of the original, too. These 
wordings prepare for a new version of what has been said by someone 
else, incorporating ties to the first speaker but also putting a new accent 
on those words. 
NOTING FOR GIST 
59
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

60 
SUMMARY
Social practices, norms, and institutions are 
designed to meet heterosexual systems’ need to 
produce sex/gender dimorphism—masculine 
males and feminine females—so that desire can 
then be heterosexualized. Gendered behavioral 
norms, gendered rites of passage, a sexual 
division of labor, and the like, produce differently 
gendered persons out of differently sexed persons. 
Prohibitions against gender crossing (e.g., against 
cross-dressing, effeminacy in men, mannishness 
in women) also help sustain the dimorphism 
necessary to heterosexualize desire.
heterosexual systems: 
social norms → the 
masc. & fem. gender
  Children and especially adolescents are 
carefully prepared for heterosexual interaction. 
They are given heterosexual sex education, 
advice for attracting the opposite sex, norms of 
heterosexual behavior, and appropriate social 
occasions (such as dances or dating rituals) for 
enacting desire. Adult heterosexuality is further 
sustained through erotica and pornography, 
heterosexualized humor, heterosexualized dress, 
romance novels, and so on. 
children: social ­customs 
→ preparation for 
heterosexuality
adults: gendered 
­attitudes, clothes → 
sustain heterosexual 
desire
  Heterosexual societies take it for granted 
that men and women will bond in an intimate 
relationship ultimately founding a family. 
As a result, social conventions, economic 
arrangements, and the legal structure treat 
the heterosexual couple as a single, singularly 
important, social unit. The couple is represented 
linguistically (boyfriend-girlfriend, husband-wife) 
and is treated socially as a single unit (e.g., in 
joint invitations or in receiving joint gifts). It is 
legally licensed and legally supported through 
such entitlements as communal property, joint 
custody or adoption of children, and the power to 
give proxy consent within the couple. The couple 
is also recognized in the occupational structure via
expected, socially, legally, 
econ.: men & women 
in intimate couple, for 
family
social, linguistic 
­convention: 
M/F couple
law: M/F couple
Review Copy

such provisions as spousal healthcare benefits 
and restrictions on nepotism. Multiple practices 
and institutions help heterosexual individuals 
to couple and create families and support the 
continuation of those couples and couple-based 
families. These include dating services, match-
makers, introductions to eligible partners, 
premarital counseling, marriage counseling, 
marriage and divorce law, adoption services, 
reproductive technologies, family rates, family 
health care benefits, tax deductions for married 
couples and so on.
economic & institu­
tional structures: M/F 
couple
  The sum total of all the social, economic, 
and legal arrangements that support the sexual 
and relational coupling of men with women 
constitutes heterosexual privilege. And it is 
privilege of a peculiar sort. Heterosexuals do 
not simply claim greater socio-political-legal 
standing than nonheterosexuals. They claim as 
natural and normal an arrangement where only 
heterosexuals have socio-political-legal standing. 
Lesbians and gay men are not recognized as social 
beings because they cannot enter into the most 
basic social unit, the male-female couple. Within 
heterosexual systems the only social arrangements 
that apply to nonheterosexuals are eliminative 
by nature. The coercive force of the criminal law, 
institutionalized discrimination, “therapeutic” 
treatment, and individual prejudice and violence 
is marshalled against the existence of lesbians 
and gay men. At best, lesbians and gay men have 
negative social reality. Lesbians are not-women 
engaged in nonsex with nonrelationships that 
may constitute a nonfamily.
all this ( “multiple”) → 
privilege for hetero­
sexual couple seems 
normal, natural
the privilege makes 
non-heterosexuals 
unrecognizable...
...except as something to 
be “fixed”
only negative 
social standing for 
nonheterosexuals

Cheshire Calhoun 1994 “Separating lesbian theory from feminist theory.” Ethics 104: 558–82, 
579–80.
NOTING FOR GIST 
61
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

62 
SUMMARY
4B Recording Levels
We could write a summary from these gists alone. But, doing so, we 
might be missing an opportunity to get a better picture of the original, 
or leaving to chance some of our recollection of that original when we 
write the summary. 
You might notice that the passage is full of details that our gist notes 
eliminate— “cross-dressing,” for example, “dances,” “romance novels,” 
“family rates.” In our everyday conversational “summarizing,” we also 
eliminate details. For example, we’d probably say—
A.	How was your cruise? 
B.	Excellent, very well organized, good food and tours at each port. 
—instead of—
A.	How was your cruise? 
B.	On the third night I had a delicious salmon terrine with juni­
per berries, followed by a peach sorbet garnished with a sprig 
of mint. Paul had the .... In Copenhagen we went on a bus to 
Tivoli, there were two buses, we got on the second one, the buses 
were waiting when we went ashore ... and then ... 
—although some people tend towards the detail technique, and may 
encounter social disapproval as a result. If we don’t eliminate details, the 
summary would be too long, and risk not being a summary at all. (Imag­
ine if the traveller told every detail—then the answer to the question 
might be longer than the cruise itself!) Yet, still, some details seem to be 
important, since they give specific examples of more abstract ideas. 
Abstraction
Cutting across the high levels of generality are planes of abstraction. 
“Prohibition” is one such abstraction—a word for an idea or con­
cept. Mention of the stop sign at the bottom of a lane, prohibiting 
drivers from rolling down the lane and directly out into the road, 
is a concrete reference. We can touch the sign, and locate it in the 
physical world, the way we cannot “touch” prohibition, although 
we experience the abstract phenomenon prohibition each time we 
encounter stop signs. (On the plane of generality, the stop sign 
would be a “detail,” or “specific.”) 
Review Copy

At a very general level, the first paragraph of the Calhoun passage is 
about something like the heterosexualization of desire through sex/gender 
dimorphism—what is that? At a less general level, we encounter “prohibi­
tions against gender crossing” ... and “gender crossing” would be ... what? 
At a still less general and more specific level, we get the answer, finding 
prohibitions “against cross-dressing” as an example. Now we have a grasp 
on “sex-gender dimorphism” (probably). 
The second paragraph begins at a high level, too—“Children and espe­
cially adolescents are carefully prepared for heterosexual interaction”—and 
then goes down to the level of specifics: dating, dances, and so on. 
We could create a diagram of the gists that traces the process of read­
ing, the up and down shifts in levels of generality. Such a diagram would 
show the levels in action, descending and rising. Or we could create a tree 
diagram that deliberately ignores the process of the passage, and that just 
shows the overall organization of generality and detail (see Figure 4.1).
What might we learn from this pattern? As readers, if we find the 
beginning claims of a scholarly paragraph difficult (what is “dimor­
phism”?), we might be patient, and wait to see if these high-level claims are 
demonstrated with examples or instances that might link the claim to our 
concrete experience; as writers, we might anticipate that our readers will 
look for these lower levels, so they can get a firmer grasp of what we’re talk­
ing about. Notice how the diagram in Figure 4.1 shows how higher-level 
generalizations relate to one another, and how certain details are significant.
4C Using Gist and Levels of Generality to Write 
Summary
Taking the clusters of gist produced by reading-and-noting Calhoun’s 
passage, and keeping an eye on the structure of generality and detail, we 
can write a short summary of these four paragraphs. 
Calhoun (1994) explains how heterosexual society makes hetero­
sexuality seem natural and creates a “negative social reality” for 
lesbians and gay men. She identifies social practices like dating, 
sex education, and erotica that construct sex/gender dimorphism. 
She also catalogues social conventions (e.g., joint invitations to 
husband-and-wife) and legal and economic structures (e.g., adoption 
procedures, spousal health benefits) which produce the “single unit” 
of man and woman. 
USING GIST AND LEVELS OF GENERALITY 
63
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

64 
SUMMARY
heterosexualization of desire
social practices, norms, 
­institutions which produce 
sex/gender dimorphism
expectation of man/woman 
bonding in intimate relationship 
to produce family
prohibitions
preparation 
of children & 
adolescents
sustaining 
of hetero­
sexuality in 
adults
social 
­conventions, 
economic, legal 
structures
law, institu­
tions, practices 
against gay & 
lesbian
sex education, 
advice, social 
occasions
discrimina­
tion, therapy, 
violence
[against] cross- 
dressing, etc.
dances, dating
erotica, porn, 
clothes, 
romance 
novels, jokes
[social:] 
“husband-wife,” 
joint gifts & 
invitations
[economic]: 
spousal health 
benefits, etc.
[legal]: adoption, 
joint custody
Figure 4.1. Diagram of the levels of generality in the Calhoun passage. Read from top 
to bottom, the diagram shows high to low levels of generality. The columns show how 
mid-level generalizations provide a context for higher-level abstractions, and how they are 
in turn supported by low-level details. The diagram, like a snapshot or a portrait, captures 
an analysis of Calhoun’s reasoning in the passage. 
Review Copy

As well as representing content, the summary
• attributes these statements as originating with another writer 
(“Calhoun (1994)”); 
• characterizes the action of the original (Calhoun “explains” how 
society has come to view heterosexuality as natural); and
• describes the development of the discussion (it “identifies” prac­
tices and “catalogues” examples).
Including select details in a summary allows a reader to understand it: to 
grasp what the abstractions mean. Calhoun’s persuasiveness depends at 
least partly on the way she summons so many examples of the practices and 
norms which heterosexualize desire: the summary preserves this quality 
of the original. Similarly, when South and Crowder summarize Wilson 
(in the passage at the beginning of this chapter), they also recover some 
details from the original:
These include the epidemic (or contagion) model, which emphasizes 
the role of peer influence, the collective socialization perspective, which 
emphasizes the positive impact of successful adult role models (and 
which is Wilson’s main focus), and the institutional model, which 
focuses on how adults from outside the community, such as teachers 
and police officers, affect the behavior of children and young adults. 
(Bold-face added for emphasis)
While noting-for-gist is a means of recording compactly—or “remem­
bering”—a spread of details which might otherwise escape your recollec­
tion, you might also think of it as a “forgetting”: once the high-level gist is 
transferred to the summary, it “forgets” the details which accompanied it. 
By reintroducing select details, as South and Crowder do above, you can 
help generalities “remember” their origins, and show them to your reader.
With each of these moves—identifying the speaker-who-is-not-me, 
characterizing the action of the original, and describing its develop­
ment—a writer takes a position in relation to the original. 
This position might be developed by saying what larger phenom­
enon this one is part of; for example:
Calhoun’s discussion reminds us that what we view as “natural” can 
often be traced not to nature but to social custom. She takes a social 
constructionist view of ... 
USING GIST AND LEVELS OF GENERALITY 
65
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

66 
SUMMARY
The position could also be developed by estimating the commonness or 
uncommonness of the claims made by the original. For example, saying
Summoning arguments established by feminist reasoning, Calhoun ... 
locates Calhoun in current, and fairly common, claims about the social 
construction of gender. 
It also secures a position for the writer of the summary and makes 
this an independent version by not sticking to the order of the original. 
By beginning with points from the last paragraph—heterosexuality pro­
duced as “natural,” “negative social” reality for gays and lesbians—the 
summary takes a reader to this element of the original first, thereby the­
matizing this aspect of Calhoun’s discussion. This is not to say that it is 
more correct to do so, only that for the purpose of this summary—per­
haps an emphasis on the naturalizing effects of social norms—this order 
is good. With other intentions, or another perspective on the topic, a 
writer might have started at another point—for example:
Calhoun (1994) describes legal and institutional discrimination 
against gays and lesbians (adoption and custody laws, for example, 
spousal benefits in the workplace), but also brings to light the array 
of social habits which extend such discrimination: we learn what 
is “natural” and expected—and what is “unnatural”—not only 
from laws and policy but also from everyday practice—routines of 
socializing like dating and dances among adolescents, for instance, 
and, among adults, social invitations to the man–woman couple.
Other summaries might arrange for still other emphases by selecting 
another point at which to begin, and another order to follow. 
Review Copy

While there are no rules for recording and manipulating these “gists,” 
it can be a good idea to arrange them on a single page or to write them on 
separate slips of paper and rearrange them in different patterns so you can 
see them all at once. In the same way, creating a diagram of the levels of 
generality clarifies relations between abstractions and the details that they 
organize. That way, you can escape the order of the original, and design 
your own. And by arranging gists in a non-linear way, you can induce 
them to make new connections with one another. By making new con­
nections amongst claims, you offer new perspectives on the original. That 
is, even if the reader of the summary had already read the original, the 
summarized version is new: it is reconfigured for the present purposes. 
Your arrangement of the materials of the original is an expression of your 
position vis-à-vis the original, and, however familiar readers are with the 
original, the summary will be new to them.
Exercise 1
Create a tree diagram mapping out the levels of generality for the 
following passage. 
Institutional buildings rise in people’s neighbourhoods, mark­
ing the connection between public and private domains. The 
architecture of community hospitals expresses institutional 
health strategies addressed to individual patients. Like a family 
caring for its members, the hospital cares for members of the 
community. But the scale of care is not domestic and private, 
like family care, but civic and public. This conflict in scale can 
disorient and alienate the patient, confusing or coercing him, 
adding to his distress. The hospital building itself focuses these 
conflicts in scale at the interface between public presence and 
private life, and some hospital design now tries to rationalize 
the interface, making it readable and clear rather than confusing 
and imposing. At the Bethnal Green Health Centre in London, 
architectural design tries to harmonize institutional prominence 
with personal outlook. 
USING GIST AND LEVELS OF GENERALITY 
67
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

68 
SUMMARY
Exercise 2
The following passage examines the relationship between stress and 
disease. Create a tree diagram that maps out the levels of general­
ity connecting different types of stress and effects with particular 
examples. Write a 50-word summary of the passage. 
Generally, stressful events are thought to influence the patho­
genesis of physical disease by causing negative affective states (eg, 
feelings of anxiety and depression), which in turn exert direct 
effects on biological processes or behavioral patterns that influence 
disease risk.1 Exposures to chronic stress are considered the most 
toxic because they are most likely to result in long-term or per­
manent changes in the emotional, physiological, and behavioral 
responses that influence susceptibility to and course of disease.1-2 
This includes stressful events that persist over an extended dura­
tion (eg, caring for a spouse with dementia) or brief focal events 
that continue to be experienced as overwhelming long after they 
have ended (eg, experiencing a sexual assault).3 
  Behavioral changes occurring as adaptations or coping 
responses to stressors such as increased smoking, decreased exer­
cise and sleep, and poorer adherence to medical regimens provide 
an important pathway through which stressors influence disease 
risk. Stressor-elicited endocrine response provides another key 
pathway. Two endocrine response systems are particularly reactive 
to psychological stress: the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical 
axis (HPA) and the sympathetic-adrenal-medullary (SAM) sys­
tem. Cortisol, the primary effector of HPA activation in humans, 
regulates a broad range of physiological processes, including anti-
inflammatory responses; metabolism of carbohydrates, fats, and 
proteins; and gluconeogenesis. Similarly, catecholamines, which 
are released in response to SAM activation, work in concert with 
the autonomic nervous system to exert regulatory effects on the 
cardiovascular, pulmonary, hepatic, skeletal muscle, and immune 
systems. Prolonged or repeated activation of the HPA and SAM 
systems can interfere with their control of other physiological 
systems, resulting in increased risk for physical and psychiatric 
disorders.1-2 
Review Copy

Notes
1	 Cohen S, Kessler RC, Gordon UL. Strategies for measuring stress 
in studies of psychiatric and physical disorder. In: Cohen S, Kes­
sler RC, Gordon UL, eds. Measuring Stress: A Guide for Health 
and Social Scientists. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 
1995:3–26.
2	 McEwen BS. Protective and damaging effects of stress mediators. N 
Engl Med. 1998;338(3):171–179.
3	 Baum A, Cohen L, Hall M. Control and intrusive memo­
ries as possible determinants of chronic stress. Psychosom Med. 
1993:55(3):274–286.
Sheldon Cohen, Denise Janicki-Deverts, and Gregory E. Miller 2007 “Psychological Stress 
and Disease.” JAMA 298: 1685–87.
Exercise 3
Here is a passage from an article examining how clinical diagnosis 
might make the stigma of mental illness worse. We may think that 
psychiatric diagnoses lead to treatments and possible cures, but Cor­
rigan examines how these diagnoses can increase how people see the 
mentally ill as a different group. In this passage, he outlines what he 
calls the “stigma process.” 
  Use the reading-and-noting technique to capture the passage’s 
gists, and the mapping technique to create a tree diagram displaying 
its range from generality to detail. It might help to focus, first, on the 
up-down relations between abstractions (e.g., “cues” and “discrimina­
tion”) and details (e.g., “Jim Crow laws”). Then modify the diagram 
to reflect the causal process analyzed in the passage: e.g., how does 
believing a stereotype lead to a different result than disbelieving 
it? You might use arrows to indicate how one abstraction leads to 
another. When you are satisfied with your tree diagram, write a two- 
or three-sentence summary of the passage.
Researchers working at the interface of social work and psychol­
ogy have framed the stigma process in terms of four cognitive 
structures: cues, stereotypes, prejudice, and discrimination. This 
model [...] parallels a cognitive behavior model of action by 
USING GIST AND LEVELS OF GENERALITY 
69
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

70 
SUMMARY
specifying signal, cognitive mediator, and behavioral result (Cor­
rigan, 2000). The process begins with stigmas, which are the cues 
that signal subsequent prejudice and discrimination.
  Goffman (1963) adopted the term stigma from the Greeks who 
defined it as a mark meant to publicly and prominently represent 
immoral status. Stigmas are typically the marks that, when 
observed by a majority group member, may lead to prejudice. 
Goffman noted that some stigmas are readily apparent and based 
on a physical sign such as skin color (a cue for ethnicity) or body 
size (a cue for obesity). Other stigmas are relatively hidden; for 
example, the public cannot generally tell who among a group of 
people falls into such stigmatized groups as gay men, Catholics, 
undereducated people, and people with mental illness. Instead of 
an unequivocal physical cue, hidden stigma is signaled by label 
or association (Link, Cullen, Frank, & Wozniak, 1987; Penn 
& Martin, 1998). Labels may be self-promoted (“I am a gay 
male”) or given by others (“That person is mentally ill”). Hidden 
stigma can also be ascertained based on association; for example, 
observation of someone leaving a psychiatric clinic might lead to 
the assumption that the person is mentally ill.
  Theorists in this area of study view stereotypes as knowledge 
structures that are learned by most members of a cued social 
group (Augoustinos, Ahrens,& Innes, 1994; Judd & Park, 1993; 
Krueger, 1996). Stereotypes are especially efficient means of 
categorizing information about social groups. Just because most 
people have knowledge of a set of stereotypes does not imply that 
they agree with them (Devine, 1989; Jussim, Nelson, Manis, & 
Soffin, 1995). For example, many people can recall stereotypes 
about different racial groups but do not agree that the stereotypes 
are valid. People who are prejudiced, on the other hand, endorse 
these negative stereotypes (“That’s right; all people with mental 
illness are violent”) and generate negative emotional reactions as 
a result (“They all scare me”) (Devine, 1995; Krueger, 1996). In 
contrast to stereotypes, which are beliefs, prejudicial attitudes 
involve an evaluative (generally negative) component (Eagly & 
Chaiken, 1993). 
Review Copy

  Prejudice, which is fundamentally a cognitive and affec­
tive response, leads to discrimination, the behavioral reaction 
(Crocker, Major, & Steele, 1998). Discriminatory behavior 
manifests itself as negative action against the out-group. Out-
group discrimination includes outright violence (for example, 
lynching experienced by African Americans and assaults directed 
at gay men) and coercion (for example, laws that restrict the full 
rights of people in an ethnic or religious minority group, such 
as the Jim Crow laws of the late 1800s through the early 1960s). 
Out-group discrimination may also appear as avoidance, not 
associating with people from the out-group. This can be especially 
troublesome when employers decide not to hire and landlords 
decide not to rent to people from an ethnic or religious minority 
group to avoid them.
Corrigan 2007: 32–33.
4D Establishing the Summarizer’s Position
We have identified several ways in which summarizers take a position in 
relation to the writer whose ideas they are representing. 
They can use reporting expressions (“Calhoun explains”; “Corrigan 
argues”). By doing so, they characterize the action of the original—in 
this case, as an explanation or an argument. Or the original might be 
characterized as an analysis, or some observations, or a commentary on 
something, or a review of research on something, or an explanation. 
Summary can also mention what kind of study produces the knowl­
edge: field research, for example, or statistical analysis, or experimental 
or theoretical inquiry. 
Summarizers can also take a position by pointing to issues not men­
tioned in the original but whose wider applications the original suggests. 
By taking such a position, summarizers can estimate the generalizabil­
ity (or limits) of the statements presented in the original. This is what 
the authors of the next passage do, as part of their article reporting an 
anthropological study of “RVers.” RVers are people who spend much of 
their year in recreational vehicles: motorhomes, truck-campers, trailers. 
In the field-work reported below, researchers found amongst RVers a 
ESTABLISHING THE SUMMARIZER’S POSITION 
71
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

72 
SUMMARY
sub-category, the “private-park RVers,” who stay in organized, commer­
cial facilities:
When RVers select a place to park their rigs they are also making a 
choice about lifestyle and about identity. Some choose private resort 
parks where their personal space is limited but where they feel safe 
and comfortable. They seek the protection of walls and guards; they 
enjoy the luxury of water and sewer hookups, electricity and cable 
TV; their space is organized into streets and blocks where each RV 
has its own “pad”; and leisure activities are organized by professionals 
who encourage and promote contact among park residents. Many 
private resort parks have strictly enforced rules about how a rig 
may be parked, where dogs may be walked, the conditions under 
which residents may have guests, and for how long and under what 
circumstances children and grandchildren may visit. Many of the 
people who choose this lifestyle see themselves holding standards 
of affluence, respectability and orderliness and they particularly 
appreciate the fact that the other park residents are similar to 
themselves in age, social standing, consumption level and interests. 
In thinking about private parks one is reminded of the distinction 
made by Bellah et al. between “lifestyle enclaves” and communities. 
Lifestyle, they point out, “brings together those who are socially, 
economically, or culturally similar, and one of its chief aims is the 
enjoyment of being with those who ‘share one’s lifestyle’” (Bellah et 
al. 1985: 72). In their terms, groups such as retirement “communi­
ties,” organized around a common lifestyle, are “lifestyle enclaves,” 
not communities. A community is inclusive and focusses on the 
interdependence of private and public life while recognizing and 
tolerating the differences of those within it. In contrast, “lifestyle is 
fundamentally segmental and celebrates the narcissism of similarity. 
It usually explicitly involves a contrast with others who ‘do not share 
one’s lifestyle’” (Bellah et al. 1985: 72).
Dorothy Ayers Counts and David R. Counts 1992 “‘They’re my family now’: The creation 
of community among RVers.” Anthropologica 34: 153–82, 169. 
As summarizers, Counts and Counts take Bellah et al.’s distinction 
between “lifestyle enclaves” and communities and apply it to RVers, a 
group Bellah et al. do not consider in their original study. It’s not difficult 
to see how another writer summarizing Bellah et al. could apply this 
Review Copy

distinction to still other groups of people living together, such as gated 
communities, kibbutzim, or residents of inner cities. 
Alternatively, summarizers can estimate the limits of statements that 
appear in the original. A little later in their study of RVers, Counts and 
Counts argue that another category of RVers, the boondockers, “epitomize 
the values upon which America was founded.” Someone summarizing 
Counts and Counts might identify a limitation to their discussion by 
suggesting difficulties that might arise in discussion of Canadian, British, 
or French RVers. 
Exercise 4 
Write a two- to three-sentence summary for each of the passages 
below. Practise the reading-and-noting technique, producing gists 
whose order you can arrange or re-arrange according to the perspec­
tive you want to offer your reader. To get a feel for the structure 
of each passage, attempt a rough sketch of its levels: pick out the 
lowest level of detail, and the higher levels of generality. Use some 
of the techniques discussed above to establish your position as a 
summarizer.
a) In “Sickness as a resource,” Mary Douglas demonstrates an 
“anthropological approach” to the study of cultural difference in the 
medical disciplines. From the evidence of this passage we might say 
that an anthropological approach would not focus on testing differ­
ent practices for their success in “curing” sick people (and such tests 
in themselves might be regarded as culture-specific—what counts as 
a cure for one group may not count as a cure for another group). 
Instead, the anthropological approach would focus on social norms 
and community.
social norms	 	
	
	
community 
norms for being sick 
 
 
therapeutic community 
At the lowest levels, you will find a congregation of types, including 
“the sick Londoner,” “the African patient,” “friends [asking] if the 
doctor has been called in yet.” At the end of the first paragraph, you 
ESTABLISHING THE SUMMARIZER’S POSITION 
73
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

74 
SUMMARY
will find a fairly high-level statement which does not descend directly 
to particulars: Douglas refers to situations where there may be 
“political pressure not to convert to the other side”—not to go over 
to alternative medical practices, whether those be “exotic” or “tradi­
tional.” Can you think of examples of what such situations might be? 
In the first sentence, Douglas mentions “complementary medicine”: 
from a Western point of view, complementary medicine might 
include acupuncture, herbal therapies, and homeopathic healing.
SICKNESS AS A RESOURCE 
[...] the sick Londoner who is choosing complementary medicine 
[is] equivalent to the African villager who is confronted by the 
reverse option. The choice is not between science or mumbo-
jumbo, but choosing the traditional versus the exotic system, and 
in effect it means choosing between therapeutic communities. The 
African patient faced with the choice between the Christian mis­
sionary doctor with an exotic pharmacopoeia and the traditional 
diviner with his familiar repertoire is under the same sort of 
pressures as a Westerner choosing between traditional and exotic 
medicine. For minor ailments he can pick and choose separate 
remedial items without incurring censure, but if it is his own life 
or the life of his child that is at risk, his therapeutic community 
will take a strong line. He may have friends on either side of the 
divide, or choosing may involve him in a complete switch of 
loyalties. It is rather like religious conversion: if there is a strong 
political alignment dividing the two therapies, there will be 
political pressure not to convert to the other side. That is a good 
beginning for the anthropological approach. 
  The next step is to follow the monitoring that is going on in 
any community. Wherever there is illness, warnings are being 
issued, and informal penalties being threatened. Talcott Parsons 
founded medical sociology when he identified and named the 
“sick role.” When a person defines himself as sick, he can escape 
censure for doing his work badly, being late, being bad-tempered, 
and so on, but the community which indulges the sick role also 
exacts a price: the sick person is excused his remiss behaviour on 
condition of accepting the role, eating the gruel or whatever is 
Review Copy

classified as invalid food, taking the medicine, and keeping to the 
sick room, out of other people’s way. 
  Having adopted the sick role, a person cannot play his or her 
normally influential part. The patient is reproved for trying to go 
on working; if the patient complains of pain, the answer is that 
complaining is aggravating the condition and a more severely 
restricted diet may have to be prescribed; every complaint is met 
with potential criticism so that the patient ends by lying back 
and accepting the way others have defined the sick role. Dragging 
around looking tired, his friends ask if the doctor has been called 
in yet, and if so, they want to know who, and are free with advice 
as to who can be trusted. It is a matter of pride for them if their 
favourite doctor is called, and a threat of withdrawn sympathy 
if it is one they disapprove. These friends interacting with the 
patient, listening to symptoms and offering advice, form what 
the anthropologist John Janzen (1978) calls the “therapeutic 
community.” 
  At the early stages of illness, there is some choice: either behave 
as if you are well or admit to being sick and bear the consequences. 
If the illness worsens and the invalid refuses the advice of friends 
and family, it is going to be difficult to ask for the neighbourly 
services or the loans of money on which lying in bed depends. 
The rival merits of traditional and alternative medicines are put 
to the test, not according to the patient’s recovery but according 
to the negotiating of the sick role. The outcome will depend on 
the therapeutic community. For the sick person, the power of the 
medical theory counts for less than issues of loyalty and mutual 
dependability, unless he or she is completely isolated. 
  The background assumption is that any society imposes nor­
mative standards on its members. That is what being in society 
involves. Living in a community means accepting its standards, 
which means either playing the roles that are approved, or nego­
tiating the acceptability of new ones, or suffering from public 
disapproval. The option for spirituality is a form of negotiation. 
But of course communities differ in the amount of control they 
exert: some are quite lax and standardization is weak; others exert 
ferocious control. In this perspective it would be interesting to 
ESTABLISHING THE SUMMARIZER’S POSITION 
75
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

76 
SUMMARY
know whether the persons who have chosen alternative therapy 
have also chosen a therapeutic community to support them with 
friendship and counsel. 
Mary Douglas 1996 “The choice between gross and spiritual: Some medical preferences.” 
In Thought Styles. London: Sage, 33–35. 
b) At the lowest level in this excerpt from James Clifford’s book 
about “people going places” (1997: 2)—about people’s place being the 
product not only of their location but also of their journeys and oth­
ers’ journeys—we find the example of Matthew Henson and Robert 
Peary, and their trip to the North Pole. At the highest level, we find 
the abstractions racism and class—but you may also be able to con­
struct other high-level terms with which to understand the episodes 
Clifford refers to. 
TRAVELING CULTURES 
What about all the travel that largely avoids the hotel, or motel, 
circuits? The travel encounters of someone moving from rural 
Guatemala or Mexico across the United States border are of a 
quite different order; and a West African can get to a Paris banlieu 
without ever staying in a hotel. What are the settings that could 
realistically configure the cultural relations of these “travelers”? As 
I abandon the bourgeois hotel setting for travel encounters, sites 
of intercultural knowledge, I struggle, never quite successfully, to 
free the related term “travel” from a history of European, literary, 
male, bourgeois, scientific, heroic, recreational meanings and 
practices (Wolff, 1993). 
  Victorian travelers, men and women, were usually accompanied 
by servants, many of whom were people of color. These individu­
als have never achieved the status of “travelers.” Their experiences, 
the cross-cultural links they made, their different access to the 
societies visited—such encounters seldom find serious representa­
tion in the literature of travel. Racism certainly has a great deal to 
do with this. For in the dominant discourses of travel, a nonwhite 
person cannot figure as a heroic explorer, aesthetic interpreter, or 
scientific authority. A good example is provided by the long strug­
gle to bring Matthew Henson, the black American explorer who 
Review Copy

reached the North Pole with Robert Peary, equally into the story 
of this famous feat of discovery—as it was constructed by Peary, 
a host of historians, newspaper writers, statesmen, bureaucrats, 
and interested institutions such as National Geographic magazine 
(Counter, 1988). And this is still to say nothing of the Eskimo 
travelers who made the trip possible!1 A host of servants, helpers, 
companions, guides, and bearers have been excluded from the role 
of proper travelers because of their race and class, and because 
theirs seemed to be a dependent status in relation to the supposed 
independence of the individualist, bourgeois voyager. The inde­
pendence was, in varying degrees, a myth. As Europeans moved 
through unfamiliar places, their relative comfort and safety were 
ensured by a well-developed infrastructure of guides, assistants, 
suppliers, translators, and carriers (Fabian, 1986).
Note 
1	 Lisa Bloom (1993) has written insightfully on Peary, Henson, 
Eskimos, and the various efforts by National Geographic to retell a 
deeply contested story of discovery. 
James Clifford 1997 Routes: Travel and Translation in the Late Twentieth Century. Cam­
bridge, MA: Harvard UP, 33–34.
4E Reporting Reporting
Since scholarly writers so often cite the words of others, summarizers of 
scholarly writing can find themselves citing others’ citations—reporting 
reporting. 
Writing about the experience of undocumented immigrants in the 
southwestern US, and analyzing that experience for evidence of “com­
munity,” Leo R. Chavez cites another’s ideas: 
Suffice it to say that despite all the work that has been carried out on 
communities, the question still remains: What underlies a sense of 
community? Anderson (1983) examined this question and suggested 
that communities are “imagined.” Members of modern nations can­
not possibly know all their fellow-members, and yet “in the minds 
of each lives the image of their communion [....] It is imagined as a 
REPORTING REPORTING 
77
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

78 
SUMMARY
community because, regardless of the actual inequality and exploita­
tion that may prevail in each, the nation is always conceived as a 
deep, horizontal comradeship” (Anderson 1983: 15–16). In this 
view, members of a community internalize an image of the com­
munity not as a group of anomic individuals but as inter-connected 
members who share equally in their fundamental membership in 
the community. 
Leo R. Chavez 1994 “The power of the imagined community: The settlement of undocu­
mented Mexicans and Central Americans in the United States.” American Anthropologist 96 
(1): 52–73, 54.
A careful summary of this passage would account for Chavez’s own sum­
marizing activity:
In his study of the settlement patterns of undocumented immigrants 
in the US southwest, Chavez (1994) cites Anderson’s notion of com­
munity as “imagined”: a subjective sensation of being connected with 
others, despite inequality and the absence of face-to-face contact, an 
“image of [...] communion with others” (Anderson cited in Chavez, 
p. 54).
This sort of “double reporting” defines the summarizer’s position. The 
summary is not saying that people imagine communities, nor is it saying 
that Chavez says people imagine communities. What it is saying is that 
Chavez says that Anderson says that people imagine communities. 
Here part of the contribution to the scholarly conversation lies in 
tracing the history of a statement. In the summarized version, “imagined 
community” starts with Anderson, then steps over to Chavez, and then 
steps again—into the summary. This summary records the idea’s journey: 
its point of departure, its use in another location, its arrival into a new 
piece of writing, trailing behind it mementos of its journey.
4F Experts and Non-experts
In the case above, Chavez is citing other scholars. But sometimes, in some 
kinds of scholarly writing, the cited voice belongs not to a scholar but to a 
research subject: someone who has been interviewed, or whose voice has 
been otherwise captured for study. In this next passage, researchers have 
studied racist and anti-racist attitudes in an inner-city neighbourhood in 
Rotterdam.
Review Copy

The existence of discrimination is not denied by the participants who 
hold more racist views. Dutch people ‘haven’t always been angels 
themselves, that’s for sure, because they’ve completely discriminated 
against people’, and ‘foreigners are certainly discriminated against, 
if only because their skin’s a different colour’ (participants ‘K’ and 
‘L’ respectively). Several times during the discussions, however, it 
is pointed out that it is not so much ethnic minorities who are 
discriminated against, but Dutch local residents (K: ‘I feel now 
like I’m discriminated against instead of them’). Community and 
social workers, housing corporations, schools, and also municipality 
officials were accused of favouring ethnic minorities and of only 
standing up for minority groups. It was held, for instance, that 
Dutch children would receive less attention in schools and might 
even be left behind.
Maykel Verkuyten, Wiebe de Jong, and Kees Masson 1994 “Similarities in anti-racist and 
racist discourse: Dutch local residents talking about ethnic minorities.” New Community 20 
(2): 253–67, 257.
Whereas Chavez appears to agree with Anderson’s notion of “imagined 
community”—or at least to take a position very near Anderson’s—the 
writers of the passage above probably do not agree with some of what 
they cite from their research subjects. But, in a way, whether they agree or 
disagree is not the point. They are not arguing for or against the idea that 
ethnic minorities are favoured by official policy, and their study provides 
no evidence to support either position. Instead, Verkuyten et al. cite the 
words of others as indications of social phenomena. If we summarize the 
passage above as—
In their research into attitudes toward ethnic minorities in an inner-
city neighbourhood in Rotterdam, Verkuyten et al. (1994) discovered 
not only a generally shared acknowledgement of racism but also a 
perception of a kind of reverse discrimination: some informants 
expressed the view that ethnic minorities were favoured by official 
policy and institutional practice.
—we are not saying that racism exists or that ethnic minorities are 
officially favoured; nor are we saying that Verkuyten et al. say that rac­
ism exists or that ethnic minorities are favoured. Rather we are saying 
that Verkuyten et al. say that some people say that racism exists and that 
minorities are favoured. If we were to summarize the passage as—
EXPERTS AND NON-EXPERTS 
79
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

80 
SUMMARY
Verkuyten et al. report that, in the inner-city neighbourhood of 
Rotterdam which they studied, ethnic minorities were favoured by 
official policy and institutional practice.
—we would be misrepresenting the original. 
We could say that when Chavez cites Anderson, he is citing fellow 
experts, and joining them in conversation. And when Verkuyten et al. 
cite “K,” they are reporting the words of a person who is a non-specialist, 
not involved in the research conversation. But the categories expert 
and non-expert are not airtight, and the boundary between them can 
be contested. Below is an example where experts—“scientific circles”—
and non-experts are cited, both groups providing examples of attitudes 
toward creole languages.
Today, even in scientific circles, a persistent stigma is attached to 
creole languages.1 Because their formative period was relatively 
recent, the 17th and 18th centuries, they are often seen as not 
yet fully formed complex languages. The descriptions of creole 
languages in some linguistic circles are similar to the attitudes of 
many creole speakers toward their languages. These languages are 
described as “reduced,” simple, and easy to learn; lacking in abstract 
terms, they are inadequate for scientific, philosophical, and logical 
operations. For most of their histories, creole languages have not 
been considered adequate for government, schooling or Western 
religious services. 
  The effect of pseudoscientific arguments or preconceived 
emotional ideas are evident in the negative attitudes lay persons 
generally hold toward creole languages and their speakers, and 
are revealed by the many pejorative terms used by both native 
and non-native speakers alike. Folk terminologies describe the 
French lexicon creoles as “broken French,” “patois,” “dialects,” or 
“jargons,” and many assume that creole languages are “diminished,” 
“reduced,” “deformed,” “impoverished,” “vitiated,” “bastard” forms 
of the European standard languages that contributed to their 
birth.2 Many educated and middle-class Haitians, members of the 
petite-bourgeoisie, as well as Haitian élites, view kreyòl [creole] 
as a simplified form of French at best. Many claim it is not a real 
language at all, but a mixture of languages without a grammar. The 
different varieties of kreyòl are viewed by Haitians of these social 
categories with a great deal of ambivalence. Kreyòl rèk [rough creole] 
Review Copy

and gwo kreyòl [vulgar creole] are often associated with pejorative 
connotations regarding the sounds (harsh, not harmonious, gut­
tural, deformed), the grammatical features (debased, corrupted, 
elementary, lacking complexity), the social origin of speakers (rural, 
lower class), and defects usually attributed to the speakers themselves 
(coarse, clumsy, stupid, illiterate, uneducated). On the positive 
side, the same varieties have been associated with national identity, 
authenticity, independence, sincerity, and trustworthiness. Much of 
this is connected to romantic notions about rural people—rough, 
coarse, but also authentic, real.
Notes
1	 Diamond’s (1991) article in Natural History titled “Reinventions of 
Human Language: Children Forced to Reevolve Grammar Thereby 
Reveal Our Brain’s Blueprint for Language” includes the following:
Between human languages and the vocalizations of any ani­
mal lies a seemingly unbridgeable gulf [....] One approach to 
bridging this gulf is to ask whether some people, deprived 
of the opportunity to hear any of our fully evolved modern 
languages, ever spontaneously invented a primitive language 
[....] Children placed in a situation comparable to that of the 
wolf-boy [...] hearing adults around them speaking a grossly 
simplified and variable form of language somewhat similar 
to what children themselves usually speak around the age of 
two [...] proceeded unconsciously to evolve their own lan­
guage, far advanced over vervet communication but simpler 
than normal languages. These new languages were the ones 
commonly known as creoles. [p. 23, emphasis added]
2	 August Brun, a French scholar writing in the early part of the 20th 
century, claimed that “une langue est un dialecte qui a réussi. Un patois 
est une langue qui s’est dégradée” (quoted in Pressoir 1958: 27). �������
(A lan­
guage is a dialect that has been successful. A patois is a language that has 
deteriorated.) Such a view is still held by some educated Haitians today. 
Bambi B. Shieffelin and Rachelle Charlier Doucet 1994 “The ‘real’ Haitian creole: ideology, 
metalinguistics, and orthographic choice.” American Ethnologist 21 (1): 176–200, 181–82. 
An account of what people say can be analyzed for levels, with the lowest 
levels (in the analysis below) being named speakers quoted directly (Figure 
4.2).
EXPERTS AND NON-EXPERTS 
81
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

82 
SUMMARY
Figure 4.2. Levels of generality for Shieffelin and Doucet (1994).
(Notice that only the specialist speakers, in this passage, are specifically 
identified. What do you make of that?) The analysis incorporates a higher 
level than appears in the original, naming the larger phenomenon to 
which this situation belongs. (Higher still could be social distinction, rank­
ing.) The analysis also diagrams a conflict, a complication or ambivalence 
the passage presents: the co-occurrence of negative and positive attitudes 
toward Haitian Creole. The following summary assigns statements to this 
company of speakers:
Shieffelin and Doucet’s (1994) survey of attitudes toward creoles 
reminds us of the persistent social habit of evaluating and ranking 
speech and speakers. In their descriptions of creoles, even linguists 
have tended to stigmatize these languages, referring to them as 
incomplete, and insufficient for use in government or schooling. 
Lay people also stigmatize creoles, characterizing these languages as 
illegitimate, “deformed,” “impoverished”: middle-class Haitians, for 
example, according to Shieffelin and Doucet, judge the sounds of 
Haitian Creole and the origins of its speakers pejoratively, yet, at the 
same time, celebrate an ideal notion of the rural classes.
[social judgements of speech]
stigmatization of creole languages
professional or scholarly	
lay stigmatization of creoles,
stigmatization of creoles	
French creoles
in linguistic circles: 	
among elite, middle-class, petite 
only recent, therefore simple, easy;	
bourgeois Haitians: pejorative 
lacking abstractions for gov’t, 	
descriptions of sounds, grammar
schooling...	
and origins of speakers
Diamond says “...”;	
“broken,”
Brun is said to have said “...”	
impoverished	
	
BUT
	
  romantic notions re: rural people 
	
  and national authenticity
Review Copy

Think of what the summary would be like without reporting expres­
sions—something like “Haitian Creole is a reduced, simple language 
unfit for use in government or education; its sounds are coarse ...” This 
would be a radical misrepresentation of the original. 
While the distinction between experts and non-experts may seem 
pretty clear when one considers professional ethnographers and their 
research subjects, it’s not so clear in the next passage, which comes from 
an article analyzing the historical circumstances of “open admissions” in 
the US in the 1970s, when large numbers of “non-traditional” students 
entered university: members of minority and marginalized groups joined 
members of the groups which had traditionally comprised university 
populations. Here Lu cites Geoffrey Wagner (Professor of English at City 
College, New York) and author of The End of Education. Wagner is one of 
the “gatekeepers” whose reaction to open admissions Lu analyzes. Notice 
also the scholarly technique for indicating added emphasis: “(emphasis 
mine).” Sometimes you will see “(emphasis added)” or “(italics added).” 
In your own writing make sure you distinguish between emphasis you’ve 
added and emphasis that appears in the sources you quote.
To Wagner, open admissions students are the inhabitants of the 
“world” outside the sort of scholarly “community” which he claims 
existed at Oxford and City College. They are dunces (43), misfits 
(129), hostile mental children (247), and the most sluggish of 
animals (163). He describes a group of Panamanian “girls” taking 
a Basic Writing course as “abusive, stupid, and hostile” (128). [...] 
Wagner predicts “the end of education” because of the “arrival in 
urban academe of large, indeed overwhelming, numbers of hostile 
mental children” (247; emphasis mine). 
Min-Zhan Lu 1992 “Conflict and struggle: The enemies or preconditions of basic writing?” 
College English December: 891–913, 893–94.
Originally, Wagner might have considered himself an “expert,” but Lu’s 
citation seems to have the effect of undermining that status, of trans­
forming his words into indications of social attitudes, or earmarks of a 
political phenomenon. Just as Verkuyten et al. do not enter into scholarly 
conversation with the Rotterdam residents whom they cite, Lu captures 
Wagner as a social type rather than a fellow scholar. In this passage, for 
example, Lu cites isolated patches (“dunces (43), misfits (129)”); com­
mandeers verbatim wordings (“‘girls,’” “‘abusive, stupid, and hostile’”) to 
EXPERTS AND NON-EXPERTS 
83
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

84 
SUMMARY
exemplify the original; adds emphasis by using italics where none appear 
in the original—in all, forcefully re-accents the original. 
Let’s take one more look at this process of contextualizing reported 
statements. The next passage comes from an elderly woman’s memoir 
(recorded as oral history) of her childhood experiences 60 years before in 
a Catholic boarding school for aboriginal children in Canada.
... oh my was I ever homesick. You know home wasn’t much, in fact 
the nuns didn’t call it home, they called it our camp. And that used 
to hurt me. It still does when I think about it. When we’d talk about 
going home, they’d say, “You’re not going home you’re going back 
to your camp.” That was their impression of the reserve. Well in a 
way they were right because the homes we had in those days were 
made out of great big log houses.
Mary Englund 1981 “An Indian remembers.” In Now You Are My Brother, ed. Margaret 
Whitehead. Victoria, BC: Provincial Archives, 59.
An accurate summary would not be:
The children’s homes were only camps.
At the very least, quotation marks would show that the writer is not 
vouching for this word:
The children’s homes were only “camps.”
More explicitly, the word can be attributed to its original speakers:
The nuns at the school referred to the children’s homes as “camps.”
But still we are missing aspects of context, which we can retrieve by 
adding another layer of citation—
Mary Englund remembers that the nuns at the school referred to 
the children’s homes as “camps.”
—and another layer of context:
Sixty years later, Mary Englund remembers that the nuns at the 
school referred to the children’s homes as “camps.”
Now the citation process includes a record of the survival of that word 
“camp”—enduring a lifetime in Englund’s recollection, uttered once 
more on the occasion of the oral historian’s research.
Review Copy

Exercise 5
The following passage comes from an essay by Raymond A. Ansel-
ment on seventeenth-century responses to smallpox. Write a three- 
or four-sentence summary of this excerpt, making sure you main­
tain the distinction between the positions occupied by Anselment, 
the professional historians Anselment discusses, and Anselment’s 
seventeenth-century sources. Of particular importance here is Ansel­
ment’s assessment of the expert historians who preceded him.
Seventeenth-century letters, memoirs, and diaries personalize the 
mounting figures in the Mortality Bills [weekly records of deaths 
occurring in London]. Not all families were as fortunate as that 
of Ralph Josselin, four of whose children survived the smallpox. 
John Chamberlain’s letter to Sir Dudley Carlton informed him 
that viscount Lisle “hath lost his eldest sonne [i.e. son] Sir William 
Sidney of the small pockes, which were well come out and yet 
he went away on the sodain [i.e. suddenly]; he that now but one 
sonne left.”... In his autobiography, William Stout described the 
sorrow that overwhelmed his mother when her two youngest sons 
died of smallpox soon after their father: 
The loss of these two children, so near together and so 
soon after their father, was so [great an] affliction to my 
mother that she continued in much sorrow for a long 
time; as was also my sister, which added to her other 
bodily infirmities, reduced her very low.1 
... Neither these reactions nor the moving responses of Mary, 
Countess of Warwick and Ann, Lady Fanshawe support the 
widely accepted modern belief that the high mortality rate among 
infants and children in the seventeenth century inured parents to 
their children’s deaths. When “it pleased God to take” her only 
son just before he came of age and despite her efforts to save 
him, the Countess of Warwick wrote that her “sad and afflicted 
husband ... cried out so terribly that his cry was heard a great way; 
and he was the saddest afflicted person could possibly be.” Her 
own actions left her sorrow unstated yet obvious: she “instantly” 
left her house in Lincoln’s Inn Field “and never more did I enter 
that house; but prevailed with my Lord to sell it.”2.... 
EXPERTS AND NON-EXPERTS 
85
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

86 
SUMMARY
  None of these poignant expressions of grief confirms Philippe 
Ariès’s influential suggestion that parents sought refuge from 
pain and sorrow in a deliberate indifference to the danger of 
death so commonplace among their children.3 The grief of both 
mothers and fathers, on the contrary, suggests an emotion only 
partly accountable by Lawrence Stone’s controversial view of 
the period’s gradual transition from the “Restricted Patriarchal 
Nuclear Family” to the “Closed Domesticated Nuclear Family.”4 
In their understated eloquence, the sufferings of these parents 
are as heartfelt as any Stone found for the later years of alleg­
edly growing family importance. Perhaps as he and others have 
suggested, the economic, humanistic, and religious forces of 
the Renaissance helped to shape the sensibilities that gave new 
importance to the value of the family as well as the individual. 
But perhaps the grief is instinctive.
Notes
1	 William Stout, The autobiography of William Stout of Lancaster, 
1665–1752, ed. J.D. Marshall, Manchester, Chetham Society, 
1967, p. 76.
2	 Warwick, op. cit. pp. 30–31.
3	 Philippe Ariès contended in Centuries of Childhood that “People 
could not allow themselves to become too attached to something 
that was regarded as a possible loss” (p. 38). Dr. W.F. Bynum kindly 
called my attention to Michael MacDonald’s criticism of Ariès’s 
position: in Mystical Bedlam, Cambridge University Press, 1981, 
particularly 75–85, MacDonald questioned the prevalence in the 
seventeenth century of “emotional austerity and indifference to 
members of the immediate family.”
4	 Lawrence Stone, The family, sex and marriage in England, 1500–
1800, New York, Harper & Row, 1977.
Raymond A. Anselment 1989 “Small pox in seventeenth-century English literature: Reality 
and the metamorphosis of wit.” Medical History 33 (1): 72–95, 81–83. 
Review Copy

87
So far, we’ve looked at passages from scholarly articles that contain a wide 
range of generality. We’ve considered strategies that help summarizers 
record gists and reproduce the sense of the original in their summary, and 
we’ve used tree diagrams to examine patterns of generality. We’ve seen 
that, in composing a summary, the summarizer establishes a position and 
creates something new—a compact piece of writing, ready to be used in 
new contexts. 
Passages that offer only high-level generalities or, at the opposite 
extreme, only low-level details can prove particularly challenging for the 
summarizer. This circumstance presents itself not only in scholarly writ­
ing but also in everyday situations—for instance, when taking minutes at 
a meeting, reviewing a movie, conducting an interview, or telling a story. 
In this chapter we begin by looking at passages that remain at high 
levels, that is, they omit the low-level examples that demonstrate the 
abstract ideas at work. Then we’ll look at passages that remain at low 
levels, those that tend to omit high-level abstractions. As we shall see, our 
summarizing strategies can be adapted to fit diverse circumstances. 
5A High-level Passages
Some passages (and even whole articles and books) remain at high levels 
of generality. The following passage, for example, presents no details, no 
specifics—only high-level abstractions. 
5
Challenging Situations for 
Summarizers
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

88 
CHALLENGING SITUATIONS FOR SUMMARIZERS
According to commemorative rhetoric, the past makes the present. 
Commemoration is a way of claiming that the past has something 
to offer the present, be it a warning or a model. In times of rampant 
change, the past provides a necessary point of reference for identity 
and action (Shils 1981). In contrast, the literature on social memory 
often emphasizes the importance of contextual factors in shaping 
commemorative practices and symbolism (Olick and Robbins 
1998). Images of the past are malleable. Traditions are “invented” 
and memories are altered for instrumental reasons in the present 
(Hobsbawm and Ranger 1983). Social memories are subject to, 
and are products of, production conflict and purposeful memory 
entrepreneurship (Wagner-Pacifici and Schwartz 1991). Producers, 
moreover, cannot control the ways in which images of the past are 
perceived (Savage 1994). Scholars therefore look at how people use 
memory to create identities and at how dominant narratives suppress 
alternative ones, and view the past as a terrain on which competing 
groups struggle for position (Bodnar 1992; Foucault 1977). These 
accounts emphasize that commemoration is explainable in terms of 
its contemporary circumstances: the present, from this perspective, 
makes the past. 
Jeffrey K. Olick 1999 “Genre memories and memory genres: A dialogical analysis of May 8, 
1945, commemorations in the Federal Republic of Germany.” American Sociological Review 
64: 381–402, 381.
An analysis of this passage for levels of generality produces something 
like Figure 5.1: 
	
commemorative rhetoric	
study of social memory
	
        |	
        |
	
the past as message for the present	
past as invention of the present
	
        |	
        |
	
warnings, models	
identity needs struggle for dominance
	
        |	
        |
	
      ———	
      ———
Figure 5.1. Diagram of high levels of generality in the Olick passage.
As you can see, the lower levels on our diagram are empty—and if, in 
summarizing this passage, you wanted to put your reader in closer touch 
with these ideas, you would have to come up with supporting details or 
Review Copy

specific examples. In the example below, the details supplied by the sum­
marizer are emphasized.
Public commemorations of the past include monuments, cer­
emonies, speeches, symbols, and anthems. Describing scholarly 
approaches to such commemorations, Olick (1999) points to 
contrasting schools of thought. One of these schools studies “com­
memorative rhetoric,” and treats commemoration as a message from 
the past for the present (p.381). So, the public ways of commemorat­
ing a national tragedy or a social movement, for example, would 
be seen as a message from the past to the present: an example to 
avoid or to follow. On the other hand, theories of “social memory” 
analyze commemoration as a story about the past invented in the 
present to advance some present interests over others (p.381). We 
could think of yearly commemorations of the 9/11 tragedy in the 
U.S. as an example: these reminders might be seen as promoting 
ideas which benefit some groups rather than others, years after 
the event occurred. We could apply Olick’s distinction to the 
ways, in Canada, that accounts of the “birth” of national health 
care in the 1960s are repeated years later. We can speculate that 
commemorative rhetoricians would analyze these accounts as a 
“warning or a model” (p.381), while sociologists of public memory 
would analyze them as strategies in a current struggle to control the 
culture and economy of health care. 
It’s hard work summarizing a passage that is composed at a very high 
level of abstraction. And risky—perhaps these specific mentions are not 
the best illustrations of the phenomenon under examination. But, by 
coming up with examples, summarizers can measure their understand­
ing of the passage and also offer readers handholds as they make their 
High-level generality ... low-level details
HIGH-LEVEL PASSAGES 
89
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

90 
CHALLENGING SITUATIONS FOR SUMMARIZERS
way across these high-level ideas. The specific mentions provided by the 
summarizer show the summarizer’s position—his or her perspective on 
the material summarized—without attributing that position to Olick. 
Notice, however, that this summary is nearly as long as the original. This 
may be a tendency of summary that attempts to represent a passage that 
remains at the higher “levels.”
Exercise 1
In his much-cited analysis of modernity in the late twentieth century, 
Anthony Giddens explains “trustworthiness.” In the following pas­
sage, he distinguishes two types of trust: trust in persons and trust 
in systems. He also talks about “access points,” which are “points 
of connection between lay individuals or collectivities and the repre­
sentatives of abstract systems. These are places of vulnerability for 
abstract systems, but also junctions at which trust can be maintained 
or built up” (88). This passage stays at high levels, which presents 
a challenge for both summarizer and reader. Adding details would 
locate Giddens’s distinctions within current conditions and thus 
secure a position for the summarizer and guide a reader’s under­
standing. Try to come up with some specifics that illustrate these 
high-level ideas. Then write a two- or three-sentence summary that 
includes this lower-level material.
TRUST IN ABSTRACT SYSTEMS
Trustworthiness is of two sorts. There is that established between 
individuals who are well known to one another and who, on the 
basis of long-term acquaintance, have substantiated the credentials 
which render each reliable in the eyes of the other. Trustworthiness 
in respect of the disembedding mechanisms is different, although 
reliability is still central and credentials are certainly involved. In 
some circumstances, trust in abstract systems does not presuppose 
any encounters at all with the individuals or groups who are in 
some way “responsible” for them. But in the large majority of 
instances such individuals or groups are involved, and I shall refer 
to encounters with them on the part of lay actors as the access points 
of abstract systems. The access points of abstract systems are the 
meeting ground of face-work and faceless commitments. It will be 
a basic part of my argument that the nature of modern institutions 
Review Copy

is deeply bound up with the mechanisms of trust in abstract systems, 
especially trust in expert systems. 
Anthony Giddens 1990 The Consequences of Modernity. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press. 83 (emphasis in original).
5B Low-level Passages
The next passage presents information at a much lower level than the 
readings above about “commemorative rhetoric” and “trustworthiness.”
BRIAN 
Brian is 14; his behaviour at school troubles staff and other students; 
he has become aggressive at home and at school; he sniffs glue. He is 
referred to a counselling clinic, and a schedule is arranged for him. 
  Brian is escorted each day to and from school either by family or by 
social services personnel. At school he is given “jobs” in the class-room 
during breaks. Two evenings weekly he is taken to a voluntary youth 
club run by some police officers in their spare time, and at weekends 
he joins a church youth centre for youngsters like himself, for outings 
and organized games. Once a week he also goes to an intermediate 
treatment centre, and one morning weekly he attends the clinic for 
group counselling and activities like painting and building models. 
Adapted from Denis O’Connor 1987 “Glue sniffers with special needs.” British Journal of 
Education 14 (3): 94–97.
The preference for low-level detail in the O’Connor passage is represented 
by Figure 5.2:
	
  ——	
  ——
	
    |	
    |
	
troublesome,	
arrangements
	
aggressive behaviour	
    |
	
    |	
    |
	
sniffs glue	
escorted;“jobs” in breaks; youth-club visits; 
	
	
outings and games; counselling; painting …
Figure 5.2. Diagram of low levels of generality in the O’Connor passage.
If you were to summarize this passage, you might find it hard to get free 
of the details or to make the summary any shorter than the original. But 
LOW-LEVEL PASSAGES 
91
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

92 
CHALLENGING SITUATIONS FOR SUMMARIZERS
to summarize this low, “flat” passage for a scholarly context, you need to 
construct the higher levels—find words that name and condense these 
details. That is, you need to interpret the details as meaning something. 
So, for example, the high-level abstractions deviance and surveillance 
might be used to construct a higher level. The summarizer interprets 
details as meaning “deviance” and “surveillance.” From this, an even 
higher level can be constructed: social control (Figure 5.3). 
	
	
social control
	
deviance	
	
surveillance
	
|	
	
|
	troublesome, aggressive behaviour	
	
arrangements
	
|	
	
|
	
sniffs glue	
	escorted; “jobs” in breaks; youth-club visits;
	
	
	outings and games; counselling; painting …
Figure 5.3. Diagram of reconstructed levels of generality for the O’Connor passage.
It’s hard work summarizing a passage that is composed at extremely low 
levels. And risky—perhaps these abstractions are not right. Maybe devi­
ance is a rather negative interpretation of Brian’s behaviour. A summarizer 
might take a more positive view and might interpret Brian’s behaviour as 
resistance, to school and family impositions, for example. Or surveillance 
might fail to capture the arrangements for Brian as good for him. A sum­
marizer might interpret the details as evidence of therapy, and healing. Or 
his troublesomeness might be interpreted as dysfunction. Each of these 
high-level abstractions is an interpretation of the details, and the sum­
mary which uses them will express the summarizer’s point of view. One 
person might summarize the passage this way:
The case of Brian, reported in O’Connor (1987), illustrates insti­
tutional practices of therapeutic surveillance. The 14-year-old’s 
deviant behaviour is identified, and then managed through a series 
of monitoring activities, mechanisms of social control executed at 
the level of daily life.
Another person might summarize the passage as illustrating means of 
attending humanely to dysfunction and incorporating the troubled 
boy into supportive social networks. As interpretations, such high-level 
abstractions show the summarizer’s position: his or her perspective on the 
material summarized.
Review Copy

Exercise 2
The following passage is from Amit-Talai’s research into adolescent 
friendships. Here we see the writer’s abstractions working along­
side the words of a student interviewed at a Montreal high school. 
High-level abstractions, such as friendship, sociability, disclosure, 
and concealment, enable the researcher to examine adolescent 
relationships in the context of institutional structures. Identify the 
abstractions that the researcher uses to interpret the interview 
data. Then come up with alternative abstractions. Using the abstract 
terms you have generated, write a two- to three-sentence summary 
reporting Mike’s situation.
DISJUNCTION
As graduation approached some students tried to reassure them­
selves and each other that their high school friendships would 
persevere [...]. 
  Most of the friends, however, didn’t believe that such continuity 
was possible. As much as they dreaded yet another institutional 
dislocation, they expected high school friendships to give way 
before the new affiliations of college or work. Mike was sure that 
once summer ended and college began, his friends would no 
longer see each other. Everything would be different in college. 
Well, college is where you will find everyone from all 
different schools and they get together and you see how 
they are different from each other. You get to see how 
they act and everything. And in that way, you are seeing a 
totally new change, you know. Everything that you do is 
going to change. Your social life is going to change. Your 
behaviour is going to change. It is all going to change 
once you go to college, that’s what I think. 
Discontinuity of peer relations might be resented and feared, but 
by the end of high school it had come to be seen as an inevitable 
and natural outcome of institutional passages.
Vered Amit-Talai 1995 “The waltz of sociability: Intimacy, dislocation and friendship in a 
Quebec high school.” In Youth Cultures: A Cross-Cultural Perspective, ed. Vered Amit-Talai 
and Helena Wulff. London: Routledge, 1995.
LOW-LEVEL PASSAGES 
93
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

94 
CHALLENGING SITUATIONS FOR SUMMARIZERS
Exercise 3
Find abstract words to construct higher levels of meaning in the 
following passage, a report from sociological research on attitudes 
toward crime. In a two- or three-sentence summary, report Mae’s 
situation, using the abstract terms you have come up with. (It’s pos­
sible that not all the terms you propose will come into play in your 
summary.)
INTERVIEW WITH MAE 
Mae is 68 years old, Australian-born of British ancestry; she lives 
alone in a small country town in New South Wales. She lives in 
her home behind multiply-deadlocked front and back doors and 
windows, afraid of “home invasion.” The only time Mae has had 
to contact the police was when a neighbour threw a firework on 
her roof. Mae is not poor—living in her own home in retire­
ment—and is reasonably fit and well. Eighteen months ago, her 
husband died of natural causes. Since then, Mae has stopped 
watching any crime series on television—even series she had 
watched comfortably with her husband before he died. Indeed, 
the same shows seem to have changed for her since then: “That’s 
the trouble, they’re getting too much like what’s happening out 
on the streets ... like what you read in the paper.”
  While she avoids all crime on television because “You see 
these things happening and I think you imagine that it’s going to 
happen to you,” Mae has taken to reading the local and national 
newspapers far more since her husband died. Her knowledge of 
crime comes almost entirely from this media source, since she does 
not go out much and has never experienced a criminal incident. It 
is in these newspapers that Mae has “become far more aware of the 
drug problem now.” In the local paper she scrupulously reads the 
court cases, finding here the accounts of “home invasions” which 
she fears so much. Her reading of the paper tells her that nine 
out of ten cases are “about drugs”; and Mae is thus quite able to 
construct a causal narrative of crime, where youth unemployment 
leads to drug-taking and thus to “home invasions.” As a result, 
she has “only recently” begun worrying about her grandchildren 
and drugs. This is also something she “sees so much of on TV, 
Review Copy

where people are dying from taking drugs. Peer pressure and all 
those sorts of things. It doesn’t matter how good a child is—they 
can be turned around, can’t they?”
Adapted from Deborah Lupton and John Tulloch 1999 “Theorizing fear of crime: 
Beyond the rational/irrational oppositions.” British Journal of Sociology 50 (3): 507–23, 
516–17.
5C Summarizing Narrative
Narratives are organized chronologically: things, people, places are men­
tioned according to the order in which events occurred. Scholarly writers 
meet narratives in many sectors of the disciplines, but they are probably 
most likely to encounter them in literary studies and history. When we 
look at narrative from a summarizer’s point of view, we find conditions 
something like those we have just been investigating, in anecdotal reports 
and research interviews. Narratives typically remain at a low level: par­
ticular people and things, particular actions and events. Consider, for 
example, the narrative passage below. It is the beginning of the well-
known fairy tale “Little Thumb.”
There was once upon a time a man 
and his wife, fagot-makers by trade, 
who had seven children, all boys. The 
eldest was but ten years old and the 
youngest only seven. 
many children, close in age 
→ fertility 
8 males → masculine 
dominance
  They were very poor, and their 
seven children incommoded them 
greatly, because not one of them was 
able to earn his bread. That which gave 
them yet more uneasiness was that the 
youngest was of a very puny constitu­
tion, and scarce ever spoke a word, 
which made them take that for stu­
pidity which was a sign of good sense. 
He was very little, and when born no 
bigger than one’s thumb, which made 
him be called Little Thumb. 
poor → poverty 
needy children → 
dependency 
very small → diminutiveness 
LT stays quiet → reticence
people are wrong about him 
→ misjudgement
SUMMARIZING NARRATIVE 
95
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

96 
CHALLENGING SITUATIONS FOR SUMMARIZERS
  The poor child bore the blame of 
whatsoever was done amiss in that 
house, and, guilty or not, was always 
in the wrong; he was, notwithstand­
ing, more cunning and had far greater 
share of wisdom than all his brothers 
put together; and if he spake little he 
heard and thought the more. 
always blamed → injustice
wiser, alert → intelligence, 
attentiveness
  There happened now to come a 
very bad year, and the famine was so 
great that these poor people resolved 
to rid themselves of their children. 
One evening, when they were all in 
bed and the fagot-maker was sitting 
with his wife at the fire, he said to her, 
with all his heart ready to burst with 
grief: 
they get even poorer → 
hardship, scarcity
decide to get rid of children
father is sad → sentiment, 
love
  “Thou seest plainly that we are not 
able to keep our children, and I can­
not face to see them starve to death 
before my face; I am resolved to lose 
them in the wood tomorrow, which 
will be very easily done; for while they 
are tying up fagots, we may run away 
and leave them without their taking 
any notice.” 
but he plans to leave them 
→ trickery, conspiracy, 
ambivalence
  “Ah!” cried the wife, “and cans’t 
thou thyself have the heart to take 
thy children out along with thee on 
purpose to lose them?” 
mother loves the boys, 
protests → love, sentiment, 
conflict
  In vain did her husband repre­
sent to her their extreme poverty: 
she would not consent to it; she was 
indeed poor, but she was their mother. 
However having considered, what a 
grief it would be to her to see them 
perish with hunger, she at last con­
sented, and went to bed all in tears.
mother resists, father per­
suades → dispute, conflict, 
persuasion
mother agrees but weeps → 
grief, regret
Review Copy

  Little Thumb heard every word that 
had been spoken; for observing, as he 
lay in his bed, that they were talking 
very busily, he got up softly and hid 
himself under his father’s stool that 
he might hear what they said without 
being seen. 
LT notices the talk → 
attentiveness
hides & listens → conceal­
ment, cunning
Charles Perrault 1969 “Little Thumb.” In The Blue Fairy Book, ed. Andrew Lang. New York: 
Airmont, 266–67. 
Figure 5.4 illustrates how readers of this narrative may pay attention to 
the following details, actions, and conditions:
man and 	
7 children, 	
	
	
a decision
wife 	
ages 7-10,
	
puny youngest	
blaming of 	
no food	
“… to lose them in 
	
	
youngest, 	
 	
the wood tomorrow”
	
	
who is silent
Figure 5.4. Analysis of low-level information in the “Little Thumb” passage.
A summary could be written from this analysis:
Having seven sons between the ages of seven and ten, and no food, 
a man and wife decide to abandon their offspring in the forest. The 
youngest child is puny, and gets unfairly blamed for everything.
However, such an analysis might raise questions as to the significance of 
these events and conditions—the connections between blame and aban­
donment, for example. And some aspects of the story which are evident 
in the original—the father’s ambivalent sentiments, the smallest boy’s 
intelligent silence—are lost in condensation. Telling details vanish. By 
using the techniques suggested in Chapter 4 and the last section (5B), 
you can write a more conceptual summary—one suitable for scholarly 
purposes—which supplies the higher-level concepts that the original text 
doesn’t provide and preserves the effect of these details. You can also give 
names to the story’s episodes and build the higher levels by reading for 
abstractions which interpret the lower-level details. 
This reading for abstraction provides materials for a more concep­
tual, interpretive summary:
SUMMARIZING NARRATIVE 
97
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

98 
CHALLENGING SITUATIONS FOR SUMMARIZERS
In a situation of great scarcity, Little Thumb’s parents resolve to 
abandon their seven hungry sons in the forest. But scarcity and 
abandonment are complicated by injustice in the family—Little 
Thumb is unfairly blamed for everything—and by misjudgement—
he is reckoned as dull, when in fact his intelligence of the world is 
sharper than others’: he overhears the parents’ conspiracy. This is a 
story not only of hardship and scarcity but also of concealments 
lurking in abandonment, hidden virtue, and secret intentions.
Other summarizers might come up with different abstractions to inter­
pret the story’s details, and still others might have different focuses, for 
example, fertility—the abundance of children amidst this scarcity, or grief 
and ambivalence—the complexity of the father’s sentiments, or masculine 
dominance—the mother is outnumbered by males, and the father over­
comes the mother’s objections. (If you know the rest of the story, you may 
remember that Little Thumb and his brothers come to an ogre’s house in 
the forest. The ogre’s wife is genuinely concerned for the little boys, while 
her husband plans to eat them. But Little Thumb outsmarts everybody.) 
In literature courses, students are often warned not to retell the story; 
their papers may be penalized for what their readers call “plot summary,” 
that is, a list-like account of events in the original work. Yet professional 
scholars often summarize plot. Here, a literary scholar, publishing in a 
major journal in the field, summarizes the plot of a novel his readers may 
or may not know about, although the opening phrase—“A novel by a 
Maori writer from New Zealand”—suggests that he estimates that many 
of his readers do not know about this book:
A novel by a Maori writer from New Zealand, Witi Ihimaera’s Tangi, 
shows how a strategic refusal to accommodate the reader can stand 
at the very core of a work’s meaning. 
  The story of a young man’s coming to terms with the death of his 
father, Tangi revolves around the Maori extended funeral service that 
gives the book its title. Tama has left the small Maori community in 
which he was born, gone to the “big city” (Wellington), and found a 
pakeha (white) girlfriend, but by the end of the novel he has decided 
to come home to take care of the family farm. Though the point is 
not spelled out, this return, a return to the Maori values represented 
by Tama’s father, entails leaving his pakeha girlfriend and, in a larger 
sense, the pakeha world that he has entered in Wellington. 
Review Copy

  The novel thus is about arrivals and departures and the greetings 
and partings that accompany them. 
Reed Way Dasenbrock 1987 “Intelligibility and meaningfulness in multicultural literature in 
English.” PMLA 102: 10–19, 16.
What makes “plot summary” like this acceptable? Its generalizing, inter­
pretive abstractions seem to be the features which distinguish it from the 
kind of “plot summary” that literature teachers object to. For example, 
Dasenbrock begins by mentioning “a strategic refusal to accommodate 
the reader.” This interpretive abstraction brings the story within the 
range of the research question Dasenbrock is asking: how to understand 
misunderstanding; how to understand “multicultural literature” with­
out resorting to either the idea that “good” literature is “universal” and 
should be comprehensible to everybody (we are all the same) or the idea 
that authentic literature will be understandable only to the particular, 
local culture which produces it (we are all different). For someone else 
summarizing Tangi—someone with a different research perspective—the 
interpretive abstraction would be different.
Exercise 4
“School” is from the memoir of Mary Englund, a transcribed oral his­
tory collected in 1980, late in Englund’s life (we encountered another 
passage from her memoir in Chapter 4). Here Englund is answering 
an historian’s questions about her experience in a residential school 
at Mission, British Columbia, during the second decade of the twen­
tieth century. As Englund reports at the beginning of this memoir, 
children of school age were gathered from First Nations villages and 
settlements by priests, and transported to boarding schools. Using 
note-taking for abstractions, introduced earlier in this chapter, write 
a three- to four-sentence interpretive summary of the narrative frag­
ment below. 
SCHOOL 
We weren’t allowed to speak our language in school. We had to 
speak English right from day one. [...] It was a difficult situation. 
See they had different Indian dialects. Along the Fraser Valley they 
had the Stalo and the Thompson and us here was the Chelhalis. 
SUMMARIZING NARRATIVE 
99
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

100 
CHALLENGING SITUATIONS FOR SUMMARIZERS
We talked very differently than they did. So if we talked to them it 
was all English. Even if we could talk with one another, the nuns 
wouldn’t allow it. Of course, there was a lot of us that could talk 
the same language; you take from Fountain to Pavillion down to 
Mount Currie we all talked the same language. When we were 
alone in some corner we did talk our own language and if the 
Sisters caught us it was, “You talk English!” That’s where a lot of 
girls kind of forgot their language. If you’re there, stayed there a 
certain length of time, you forget certain words in Indian. You 
couldn’t explain yourself too much in Indian as you would in 
English. They said it was better for us to speak English because 
we could learn English and read and write better if we kept our 
English, if we spoke English instead of talking Indian. 
  When the principal came over—Father Rohr, he was French—
they’d sit and talk French and we knew very well they were talking 
about us, all of us, they could talk French. We used to tell them 
that, “How come you can talk French in front of us, and you 
wouldn’t allow us to talk Indian in front of you?” And of course 
they got after us for that. You weren’t allowed to question. Oh 
yes, they weren’t very nice in that respect. 
  Of course all the parents thought that was great you see, that 
we should talk English and be able to write so that we’d be able 
to write letters when we got home, to do things for the Indian 
people. You were something great when you come home, “Oh she 
can write now.” They were kind of proud of us in a way once you 
were able to write your name, your mother’s name, your father’s 
name and whoever was in the family. We were doing all right. 
They were proud of you then. I remember my grandmother—I 
don’t know how old she was but she was partly blind and she 
was all crippled with arthritis—she’d pat us on the head because 
we can write. 
  We were not to tell our parents what went on in the school. 
That was another rule. We were not allowed to discuss what goes 
on in school when we go home. We never got sugar at school, no 
sugar in our porridge or in our tea so when we went home I guess 
this one girl was telling her parents how she never got sugar at 
school. When she got back to school she was really reprimanded 
Review Copy

by the principal Father Rohr. And he didn’t go about it in a nice 
way. He went about it in a way very insulting, telling you what 
you did in your camp and what you told your father and mother 
and the tattletales. And your parents never had anything to say of 
what you were doing in the school because they didn’t know. [...] 
Englund 1981: 63–64. 
Exercise 5
“Alert Bay,” excerpted from An Error in Judgement, provides an 
historical account of conditions in a small, isolated community on 
Vancouver Island, British Columbia. In this section of her book, Cul­
hane Speck focuses on the effect of the residential schools on the 
Alert Bay community. This passage is written for a scholarly context, 
and it proceeds at a much higher level of generality than the passage 
in Exercise 4. Using reading-and-noting techniques, write a three- to 
four-sentence interpretive summary of this passage. 
ALERT BAY 
An Anglican-administered industrial residential school, St. 
Michael’s, which housed upwards of 200 students, was established 
in Alert Bay in 1929. Attendance was compulsory, and the Indian 
Act provided for a variety of punishments which could be levied 
against uncooperative parents, including fines and jail sentences. 
Students were prohibited from speaking their own language, and 
along with training in Christian scriptures and a basic academic 
program up to a grade 8 level, boys were taught carpentry, 
mechanics, farming, and animal husbandry, while girls received 
instruction in cooking, sewing and homemaking.
  The explicit goal of the residential school system was to break 
the bonds between generations, thus “freeing” the young from the 
shackles of tradition and the influence of their families. Native 
parents, of course, made every effort to thwart this estrangement 
from their children and more and more people migrated from 
the smaller, more isolated Kwakwaka’wakw villages to Alert Bay 
in order to be able, at least, to visit with their children regularly. 
For the most part graduates of the residential schools did not 
SUMMARIZING NARRATIVE 
101
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

102 
CHALLENGING SITUATIONS FOR SUMMARIZERS
assimilate into Canadian society. Many had no desire to, and 
others who tried found the doors closed to them. At the same 
time, when they returned to their home villages they often found 
they had lost both the ability to communicate fluently with 
parents and grandparents, and the practical, as well as social, skills 
necessary to fit into village life.1 
  While rank and social status determined by the potlatch 
system continued to function within Kwakwaka’wakw society, 
new divisions rooted in colonial relations arose and either over­
lapped with the aboriginal hierarchy or co-existed beside it. The 
terms and conditions for survival and opportunities for upward 
mobility—often synonymous terms in this context—were now 
defined by the dominant non-Native society and were therefore 
most available to Native people who possessed one or more of 
the following attributes: conversion to Christianity, mission or 
residential school education, at least formal denunciation of 
potlatching and other elements of aboriginal culture, mixed 
blood, and residence in Alert Bay rather than in one of the 
outlying villages. Some Indians did become successful skippers or 
boat owners in the commercial fishing industry and a few found 
steady work in logging. Others owned and ran small stores on the 
reserves. The majority, however, worked when work was available 
and/or received government relief. [...]
  By the end of the 1930s, most of the Kwakwaka’wakw living 
in Alert Bay had converted to Christianity, and education, rather 
than being resisted, began to be encouraged for the young. 
  “We had to think about what will be best for the kids,” a 
Kwakwaka’wakw elder would later explain.”2
Notes
1	 Ernest Willie, presentation to The Goldthorpe Inquiry, (1980), 
Transcript. Vol. 1, pp. 94–113.
2	 Jack Peters, presentation to The Goldthorpe Inquiry, (1980), Tran­
script. Vol. 1, p. 48.
Dara Culhane Speck 1987 An Error in Judgement: The Politics of Medical Care in an Indian/
White Community. Vancouver, BC: Talonbooks, 84–85. 
Review Copy

103
Up to this point, each of your summaries has brought one writer (or one 
partnership of writers, in the case of co-authored articles) to the page. 
You have concentrated on making arrangements for this speaker, those 
arrangements also indicating the position you are taking. But it is prob­
ably rather rare for scholarly writers to enter into dialogue with only 
one other writer. As a rule, they convene the scholarly conversation by 
bringing several or many other voices to the page, and arrange for these 
speakers to talk to one another. In this chapter, you will work on making 
arrangements to bring several writers into a unified conversation—you 
will orchestrate this conversation. You may already be familiar with the 
activity of developing an essay by using two or more writers. You may 
have been asked to write comparison essays or you may have written 
research essays citing your sources. Here we see this gathering of voices as 
a conversation, and we use the term orchestration to emphasize that you 
as a summarizer are arranging this conversation. 
6A Making Speakers Visible: Writing as Conversation
While in some disciplines (particularly the sciences), the speakers in a 
conversation may remain nearly invisible (e.g., appearing only as super­
scripted numbers), in this chapter we will focus on more prominent 
appearances of speakers—on using the techniques of reporting and sum­
marizing that we practised in Chapters 3 through 5. So, as we integrate 
6
Orchestrating Voices
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

104 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
our summaries of various writers, we will make these writers visible as 
speakers joining a developing conversation. 
In Chapter 3, we encountered orchestration when we looked at why 
scholars use citation and noted that in introductions they sometimes 
construct a state of knowledge in which the key voices speak briefly, 
providing a snapshot of research on a given subject. In this way, orches­
tration is an important means to begin an essay, to set the terms of the 
conversation. But orchestration is also a way to develop an article or an 
essay, to structure the larger practices of summary and reporting of your 
research. And it can extend to non-scholarly voices—to the construction 
of examples or to the inclusion of the voices of research subjects. Because 
orchestration emphasizes the reporting of voices, it becomes a means to 
organize aspects of your writing as a conversation. 
Let’s begin by listening to a few different ways that scholarly writers 
incorporate other researchers as they convene a scholarly conversation. 
Sometimes, as is the case in the article by South and Crowder at the 
beginning of Chapter 3, the guest speakers talk all at once, the common 
themes of their writings amounting to a chorus:
Initial skepticism over the impact of neighborhood conditions and 
neighborhood contexts on the behavior of adolescents and young 
adults (Jencks and Mayer 1990) has spurred considerable research 
purportedly documenting such effects (Aneshensel and Sucoff 1996; 
Billy, Brewster, and Grady 1994; Corcoran et al. 1992; Duncan 
1994; Duncan, Connel, and Klebanov 1997; Elliott et al. 1996; 
Entwisle, Alexander, and Olson 1994; cf. Evans, Oates, and Schwab 
1992). 
South and Crowder 1999: 113. 
Because their work raised a key research question, Jencks and Mayer 
(1990) are given their own brief summary: they express “skepticism” 
about the relationship between neighbourhoods and behaviour. This 
skepticism set in motion a whole series of research studies, the chorus of 
voices in the second parentheses. Not much is heard about these studies 
except that they “purportedly document” such effects. But this suffices 
for South and Crowder’s early need to signal that there has been consid­
erable scholarly discussion about this issue. The orchestration captures 
something of the state of knowledge on this topic.
Review Copy

Other times, two or three voices are heard in exchange with one 
another. Here an archaeologist first cites three writers (or two pairs and 
a single) on the connection between the status and position of producers 
of goods and the nature of social complexity in the surrounding com­
munity. Then two of the cited voices (Costin 1991 and Clark and Parry 
1990) engage in conversation with each other:
Recent studies of links between the organization of production and 
sociopolitical complexity have explored the importance of different 
kinds of craft specialization, particularly the difference between inde­
pendent and attached specialization (Brumfiel and Earle 1987; Clark 
and Parry 1990; Costin 1991). Independent specialists “produce for 
a general market of potential customers” while “attached production 
is sponsored and managed by élite or governmental institutions 
or patrons” (Costin 1991). Thus independent specialists generally 
produce utilitarian goods in response to a social “demand,” while 
attached specialists typically make luxury goods, wealth items, or 
weaponry at the behest of powerful patrons (Costin 1991, 11–13).
  There is some diversity of opinion about how broadly the general 
notion of craft specialization and attendant concepts such as attached 
and independent specialization should be defined. Costin (1991) 
favours fairly narrow definitions appropriate to the analysis of the 
productive regimes of quite complex societies. Clark and Parry 
(1990) use the same terms much more broadly, identifying elements 
of specialization even in situations of minimal sociopolitical com­
plexity. In this respect, my discussion follows Clark and Parry more 
closely than Costin, but I am not particularly interested in insisting 
that the makers of Paso de la Amada figurines were “specialists” or 
“non-specialists.” What I find useful in craft specialization theory 
is the perspective it provides on producer/consumer dynamics with 
respect to alienable goods—in particular, the idea that independent 
artisans producing goods specifically for alienation emerge as a 
response to consumer demand. 
Richard Lesure 1999 “Figurines as representations and products at Paso de la Amada, Mexico.” 
Cambridge Archaeological Journal 9 (2): 209–20, 210.
The writer gives the other speakers room to demonstrate their differences, 
positioning himself closer to one than to the other. But he then disen­
gages himself from the conflict to select the overall consensus of their 
MAKING SPEAKERS VISIBLE: WRITING AS CONVERSATION 
105
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

106 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
ideas as applicable to his inquiry into small ceramic figurines and their 
capacity to tell us about social organization. Here orchestration maps out 
various approaches to the issue, clarifying differences between different 
speakers, and it becomes a means to find a position in the conversation. 
The circumstances of this exchange belong to the summarizer who has 
called on these speakers in particular, found a point of shared or interest­
ingly divergent interest, and set the terms of the conversation. 
Orchestration isn’t confined to introductions—it is also an ongo­
ing activity for many scholarly writers. In the following passage from an 
article on how diagnosis increases the stigma of mental illness, Corrigan 
(2007) links diagnosis to “groupness” and in turn to prejudice against the 
group created by a diagnosis of mental illness. Observe how he arranges 
for different researchers to contribute to the discussion—sometimes 
alone, sometimes in tandem with other researchers—while still manag­
ing to add his own insights and emphasis.
Groupness, or entitativity, is the degree to which a collection of 
people is perceived as a unified or meaningful entity (Campbell, 
1958; Hamilton & Sherman, 1996). Groups have a sense of dif­
ferentness from the population, based on a salient and socially 
important characteristic. Eye color and foot size are generally not 
qualities that lead to meaningful groups, whereas skin color and 
bizarre behavior are. Diagnosis adds to the salience of groupness 
for the collection of people with mental illness (Link & Phelan, 
2001). It distinguishes people who are somehow different in terms 
of their psychiatric status from the general population. Note that the 
collection of people with mental illness still has a sense of groupness 
even without diagnostic systems. Research has shown a nonspecific 
prejudice against people who are mentally ill compared with people 
with other health conditions (Corrigan et al., 2000; Weiner, Perry, & 
Magnusson, 1988). However, diagnostic labels such as schizophrenia 
and psychosis seem to worsen the level of prejudice (Phelan, Link, 
Stueve, & Pescosolido, 2000).
Corrigan 2007: 34.
The orchestration in this passage is quite complex. Here is a close read­
ing of it that follows Corrigan’s orchestration step by step. The passage 
begins with a definition of groupness offered by prior researchers Camp­
bell (1958) and Hamilton and Sherman (1996). The dates here suggest a 
Review Copy

history of usage, an established meaning for this term developing over 50 
years of discussion. Corrigan then speaks directly to add his own emphasis, 
contending that groupness is a function of “a salient and socially impor­
tant characteristic” like behaviour. He then stops and introduces Link and 
Phelan (2001), who link diagnosis to groupness. Corrigan’s own agree­
ment with their claim is apparent as he elaborates on how this link works. 
But he then falls silent and lets other researchers explain how groupness 
also involves prejudice. First he cites an article that he wrote with others 
(Corrigan et al., 2000) and an earlier study by Weiner, Perry, and Magnus­
son (1988). Phelan, Link, Stueve, and Pescosolido (2000) then offer the 
more specific observation that certain diagnostic labels like schizophrenia 
worsen prejudice. In all of these cases, Corrigan relies on summary or 
paraphrase, indirectly reporting each speaker’s position. The orchestration 
works to link diagnosis of mental illness to enhanced groupness and a 
worsening of prejudice against those who are diagnosed as mentally ill. 
Here is another example of orchestration taken from a study of 
parents’ perceptions of the dangers posed to their children who use com­
puters to go online. Valentine and Holloway speak directly about their 
position—“We argue that ...”—but then introduce a series of speakers 
who develop the argument for them. Note how they introduce a group 
of these speakers and then let one of them (Canon 1987) speak directly 
at length. Notice also how the last sentence of the passage is begun by 
one speaker (Wenger 1987) and completed by another group of speakers 
(Bingham, Holloway, and Valentine 1999b).
We argue that, counter to parents’ anxieties, technology does not 
simply impinge on society from outside or follow a predetermined 
course. Rather, activities such as playing and learning are shaped 
by shifting associations (and disassociations) between hu­mans and 
nonhuman entities in which the properties of technology are not 
inherent but emerge in practice (Law 1994). In doing so, we draw 
upon an approach—Actor Network Theory—that is well developed 
within the sociology of science and technology (Canon 1987; Latour 
1993; Star 1995). Canon (1987, 93) explains that:
The actor network can be distinguished from the traditional 
actors of sociology, a category generally excluding any non­
human component and whose internal structure is rarely 
assimilated to that of a network. But the actor network should 
MAKING SPEAKERS VISIBLE: WRITING AS CONVERSATION 
107
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

108 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
not, on the other hand, be confused with a network linking 
in some predictable fashion el­ements that are perfectly well 
defined and stable, for the entities it is composed of, whether 
natu­ral or social, could at any moment redefine their identity 
and mutual relationships in some new way and bring new 
elements into the network.
Thus, computers cannot be viewed as invari­ant objects, nor as 
impacting on social relations in fixed ways producing a predictable 
set of ef­fects. Rather, they must be seen as “things” that materialise 
for people as diverse social practices and that may vary as much as 
the contexts in which they are used (Law 1994; Bingham, Hol­loway 
and Valentine 1999b). Indeed, technol­ogy may play very different 
roles within differ­ent “communities of practice” (Wenger 1987) 
and so may emerge as a very different tool within them (Bingham, 
Holloway, and Valen­tine 1999b).
Gill Valentine and Sarah Holloway 2001 “On-line dangers?: Geographies of parents’ fears for 
children’s safety in cyberspace.” Professional Geographer 53 (1): 71–83, 75.
Occurring well into the second section of this article, this passage shows 
Valentine and Holloway using orchestration to develop a particular way 
of seeing computers rather than to establish an initial state of knowledge. 
They introduce a specific sociological approach—Actor Network The­
ory—and the group of researchers who adopt this approach. In doing so, 
they align themselves with these researchers and speak as part of a group.
It takes some skill to make hospitable arrangements for speakers—to 
introduce strangers to one another, to renew acquaintances. The sections 
which follow offer you a chance to develop this know-how by focusing 
on different types of speakers.
Exercise 1
Passage 1 is taken from an article by Ronnie Hawkins that exam­
ines how our relatively recent self-identification as primates helps 
us understand and possibly modify our behaviour. In this excerpt, 
Hawkins surveys research looking at identification with groups and 
the implications of this identification.
  Passage 2 is taken from a famous study on obedience conducted 
by Stanley Milgram in the early 1960s. In this experiment, subjects 
were told they were playing the role of a teacher in a learning 
Review Copy

study. The “teachers” asked “learners” questions and administered 
electric shocks when the learners answered incorrectly. For every 
wrong answer, the amount of the electric shock increased, rising 
to obviously excessive levels labelled as “Extreme Intensity Shock,” 
“Danger: Severe Shock,” and just “XXX.” The “learners” were 
actually actors who pretended to be shocked and complained or 
otherwise protested as the experiment proceeded. The actual aim 
of the experiment was to see whether the “teachers” would obey 
orders from the researcher and continue to apply the electric shock 
when it was obviously unsafe. The passage is taken from the end of 
the article, where Milgram discusses the findings.
  Write a summary of Hawkins that expands upon the mention of 
Milgram. Introduce and directly summarize Milgram. Conclude by 
explaining the implication of this emphasis on Milgram for Hawkins.
PASSAGE 1
While some researchers emphasize rational factors such as mate­
rial rewards or maintaining self-esteem in identifying with and 
overvaluing one’s own ingroup, others point out that the dynamic 
underlying our “groupness” is far less “rational” than emotional—
a fact that is clearly borne out by the phenomena that emerge 
from crowds or mobs. For some, the experience of merging with 
a crowd is likened to taking a drug—described by some British 
soccer fans as “‘the crack, the buzz, and the fix’” (Bill Buford, as 
quoted in Wrangham and Peterson 1996, 197–8). In reviewing 
different theories regarding group identification, Judith Harris 
recognizes “the immense power of group behavior” stemming 
from its place in our evolutionary history and points out the 
intense peer pressure that forces children to become part of a 
group and the severe penalties that are imposed for not “fitting 
in” (Harris 1998, 138–9, 168–71). A tendency for individuals to 
adopt the most common cultural beliefs and practices in a human 
population, termed “conformist transmission,” has been found 
to be of adaptive value in computer simulation studies, and thus 
potentially to be a major factor in maintaining within-group 
similarities and between-group differences (Henrich and Boyd 
1998), and de Waal likewise recognizes a strong “desire to be like 
MAKING SPEAKERS VISIBLE: WRITING AS CONVERSATION 
109
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

110 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
others” in the chimpanzees he studies, proposing the urge to “fit 
in” as the motivation underlying primate social learning, which 
he terms BIOL, Bonding- and Identification-based Observational 
Learning (de Waal 2001, 224–32). Social pressure to conform 
within human groups, however, can cause individuals to doubt 
their own perceptual judgments (Asch [1952] 1987), to forego 
giving aid to others who seem to be in need (Latane and Darley 
1970), and even to deliberately produce what is believed to be 
severe pain in others under instruction from an authority figure 
(Milgram 1963). Individuals immersed in an ingroup may lose 
the ability to assess situations realistically in their intense desire for 
group cohesion, a phenomenon noted to interfere with intelligent 
decision making in the international arena that has been termed 
“groupthink” (Janis 1972). Such “groupthink” may, in fact, 
figure large in our tendency to believe we are being “rational” by 
destroying the natural world to amass “capital” or by continuing 
to develop weapons for nuclear, chemical, and biological warfare.
Ronnie Zoe Hawkins 2002 “Seeing ourselves as primates.” Ethics & the Environment 7 
(2): 60–103, 88–89.
PASSAGE 2
Of the 40 subjects, 26 obeyed the orders of the experimenter 
to the end, proceeding to punish the victim until they reached 
the most potent shock available on the shock generator. At 
that point, the experimenter called a halt to the session. (The 
maximum shock is labeled 450 volts, and is two steps beyond the 
designation: Danger: Severe Shock.) Although obedient subjects 
continued to administer shocks, they often did so under extreme 
stress. Some expressed reluctance to administer shocks beyond the 
300-volt level, and displayed fears similar to those who defied the 
experimenter; yet they obeyed.
  The experiment yielded two findings that were surprising. The 
first finding concerns the sheer strength of obedient tendencies 
manifested in this situation. Subjects have learned from childhood 
that it is a fundamental breach of moral conduct to hurt another 
person against his will. Yet, 26 subjects abandon this tenet in 
following the instructions of an authority who has no special 
powers to enforce his commands. To disobey would bring no 
Review Copy

material loss to the subject; no punishment would ensue. It is 
clear from the remarks and outward behavior of many participants 
that in punishing the victim they are often acting against their 
own values. 
Stanley Milgram 1963 “Behavioural study of obedience.” Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology 67 (4): 371–78, 376. 
6B Orchestrating Scholarly Voices
In this section, we will continue to focus on orchestration of scholarly 
voices. These voices are relatively easy to orchestrate because they have 
much in common: they come from researchers publishing their find­
ings for other researchers. That said, there are different types of speakers 
that pose their own particular difficulties: speakers already in dialogue, 
speakers with similar research situations who have never referred to one 
another’s work, and speakers with different research situations who use 
the same abstractions.
Summary of more than one speaker can sometimes reproduce a 
discussion that has taken place face-to-face—or, that is, “page-to-page”: 
A wrote something, and B responded to what A wrote. A and B know 
each other—or, at least, B has read what A wrote—and the summarizer 
reproduces this part of the conversation. For example, in 1973 David 
Rosenhan published an article entitled “Being Sane in Insane Places” 
which reports on a study that involved sending pseudopatients—healthy 
people feigning certain symptoms—to a number of psychiatric hospitals 
in the United States. In 1994 Jim Schnabel published an article on sci­
entific hoaxes in which he introduces Rosenhan’s study and discusses it 
at length. Here is an excerpt from Schnabel’s article in which the author 
summarizes Rosenhan’s study:
Rosenhan published a description of these experiments, and descrip­
tions of the rather depressing environments within psychiatric hos­
pitals, in Science, concluding: “It is clear that we cannot distinguish 
the sane from the insane in psychiatric hospitals. The hospital itself 
imposes a special environment in which the meaning of behavior 
can easily be misunderstood” (Rosenhan 1973, 257).
Jim Schnabel 1994 “Puck in the laboratory: The construction and deconstruction of hoaxlike 
deception in science.” Science, Technology, & Human Values 19 (4): 459–92, 466. 
ORCHESTRATING SCHOLARLY VOICES 
111
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

112 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
Schnabel considers Rosenhan’s study a “hoax” because it involved active 
deception of the psychiatrists and staff in the target hospitals, but he 
argues that it was an ineffective hoax “because the hypotheses and insti­
tutions targeted still seem to be intact.” Orchestrating Rosenhan and 
Schnabel is relatively easy to do because Schnabel has already established 
the conversation. If we are summarizing Schnabel, we can easily introduce 
Rosenhan as an example of an attempted (and unsuccessful) scientific 
hoax: e.g., As Schnabel (1994) argues, Rosenhan’s pseudopatient study is 
an unsuccessful hoax because it didn’t create much change in psychiatric 
practice. (See Chapter 4E.)
The obvious limitation with recreating “page-to-page” dialogue is 
that the orchestration of speakers is largely set by B: Schnabel only allows 
Rosenhan to speak in brief excerpts, and it is difficult to start a new 
conversation. So our summary will tend to agree with Schnabel’s assess­
ment of Rosenhan. One way around this limitation is to read Rosenhan 
directly, in which case we might be surprised to discover that Rosenhan 
does not see his study as a hoax; and we might see what was left out of 
Schnabel’s summary—namely extensive descriptions of the depersonal­
izing environment of the psychiatric hospitals. This might provide an 
occasion to let Rosenhan speak directly, and to disagree with Schabel’s 
assessment. By summarizing Rosenhan directly, we could create contro­
versy or debate. Just as scholars rarely create a dialogue with just one 
speaker, they infrequently orchestrate a discussion of writers they haven’t 
read directly. 
In other cases, the “face-to-face” quality of the speakers’ relation­
ship is not so immediate. It’s not so much that one wrote in reaction to 
another, but that they are in earshot of one another. They research similar 
objects, address similar questions. So here a researcher (Hyland 1999) 
who is investigating citation itself cites two writers (or a single and a 
pair) in the same paragraph, weaving their findings together, representing 
them in shared sentences (and also providing direct contact with each of 
the sources). 
Myers (1990) and Berkenkotter and Huckin (1995) have traced the 
passage of research articles through the review procedure and see the 
process as one of essentially locating the writer’s claims within a wider 
disciplinary framework. This is achieved partly by modifying claims 
and providing propositional warrants, but mainly by establishing a 
narrative context for the work through citation. One of Myers’s case 
Review Copy

study subjects, for example, increased the number of references from 
57 to 195 in a resubmission to Science (Myers 1990: 91). Both Myers 
and Berkenkotter and Huckin see academic writing as a tension 
between originality and humility in the community, rhetorically 
accommodating laboratory activity to the discipline. So while Berk­
enkotter and Huckin’s scientist subject sought to gain acceptance for 
original, and therefore significant, work, the reviewers insisted “that 
to be science her report had to include an intertextual framework for 
her local knowledge” (Berkenkotter and Huckin 1995: 59).
Ken Hyland 1999 “Academic attribution: Citation and the construction of disciplinary 
knowledge.” Applied Linguistics 20 (3): 341–67, 342–43.
While Berkenkotter and Huckin do not directly mention Myers—and 
so, the relationship is not exactly “face-to-face”—the similarity of their 
studies (how researchers revise their work to get it published) is similar 
enough for Hyland to let them speak one after the other on the same 
topic. Differences between the cited writers are set aside, in the interests 
of establishing common ground: a finding confirmed by at least two stud­
ies. This common ground is mapped by the summarizer. (For another 
occasion, though, the differences might be the theme of the summary.) 
The examples above involve writers who directly summarize other 
writers or who share a common research situation with them. The 
similarity of the research situation, or of the fact that their publications 
directly responded to one another, makes orchestrating the different writ­
ers relatively straightforward. Sometimes, however, writers seem to have 
something in common because they use the same terms or abstractions; 
but because they research different things, orchestrating them is more 
difficult. The two passages below both involve a technical term and its 
acronym—“traditional ecological knowledge” (TEK)—but the use of the 
term issues from different research situations. In the first passage, Henry 
Huntington and his co-authors briefly define TEK in the context of their 
study of beluga whales.
Beluga whales (Delphinapterus leucas) are circumpolar in distribu­
tion and are hunted by indigenous peoples throughout the Arctic 
(Kleinberg et al., 1964). While some previous biological research on 
belugas has used the expertise of local hunters to plan the research 
and to add to data gathered from scientific observations (e.g., Frost 
and Lowry, 1990), a practice which continues through the work of 
ORCHESTRATING SCHOLARLY VOICES 
113
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

114 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
the Alaska Beluga Whale Committee (Adams et al., 1993), little 
has been done to document systematically such local expertise, also 
known as traditional ecological knowledge (TEK). The primary 
purpose of this research was to capture TEK data in order to (1) 
describe beluga ecology as seen by indigenous hunters and elders and 
(2) identify specific contributions such data can make to scientific 
understanding of beluga ecology. 
Henry Huntington and the Communities of Buckland, Elim, Koyuk, Point Lay, and 
Shaktoolik 1999 “Traditional knowledge of the ecology of beluga whales (Delphinapterus 
leucas) in the Eastern Chukchi and Northern Bering Seas, Alaska.” Arctic 52 (1): 49–61, 69.
In the next passage, which is taken from the beginning of another article, 
George W. Wenzel focuses on different definitions of TEK.
[TEK is] knowledge and values which have been acquired 
through experience, observation, from the land or from 
spiritual teachings, and handed down from one generation to 
another. (Definition of TEK in GNWT policy statement, as 
quoted in Abele, 1997: iii) 
TEK is knowledge. (Hunn, 1988: 14, italics in original)
In recent years, scientists have come to Nunavut in search of Inuit 
traditional ecological knowledge.... when Inuit knowledge is col­
lected ... it is almost always taken out of context, misinterpreted or 
given meaning different than it had in the first place (Stevenson, 
1996a: 3). 
  The first of the above statements constitutes the formal defini­
tions of traditional knowledge as defined by the Government of the 
North-west Territories. The second and third, both by anthropolo­
gists, encapsulated two important contemporary, if not necessarily 
harmonious, views of traditional ecological knowledge that together 
intimate not only why TEK has become an important intellectual 
issue, but also an increasingly political topic in the contemporary 
North. 
George W. Wenzel 1999 “Traditional ecological knowledge and Inuit: Reflections on TEK 
research and ethics.” Arctic 52 (2): 113–24, 113.
These writers obviously have something in common: TEK. They work in 
the same scholarly area, and there is good reason for them to get to know 
one another. An online search of databases would find them both, maybe 
Review Copy

side by side. But their claims about TEK issue from different kinds of 
research situations—differences the search results would not display 
conspicuously. Whereas Huntington et al. use TEK in their research on 
the migrations and movements and other behaviours of beluga whales in 
Alaska, Wenzel reflects on TEK itself. Arranging for these two researchers 
to speak to each other, we would need to explain the different circum­
stances from which their statements issue—an important occasion for 
putting to use your practice in characterizing the discussion you are 
citing. Huntington et al. (1999) is an instance of research in marine biol­
ogy; Wenzel (1999) is an instance of review of and reflection on research 
methodology. 
It is also possible for a writer to orchestrate a scholarly discussion 
between some speakers who are already in dialogue with each other and 
others who are not. The specific circumstances of these types of conversa­
tions require careful negotiation. A reader needs to be able to see that 
the new speakers did not directly address the central research situation. 
The next passage comes from a report by researchers who are studying 
South Africans’ accounts of beaches as places following the elimination of 
apartheid and the end of segregated beaches. Here they first provide an 
historical account of, as they say, the “concept of place-identity in envi­
ronmental psychology.” You will see that, at this stage, the cited speakers 
“know” each other: the Proshansky et al. paper is a response to “earlier 
calls”; that paper in turn is criticized and appreciated, and its proposed 
concept is narrowed in definition. 
THE CONCEPT OF PLACE-IDENTITY IN ­
ENVIRONMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY
A key moment in environmental psychology’s critique of a disem­
bodied notion of identity was the publication of Proshansky, Fabian, 
and Kaminoff’s (1983) paper on place-identity (cf. Groat, 1995). 
Although it has been subjected to various criticisms, the paper was 
invaluable in establishing place-identity as a sensitizing construct, 
bringing to fruition earlier calls for an “ecological conception” of 
self and personality (cf. Craik and McKechnie, 1977). Adopting a 
general and inclusive definition, Proshansky et al. described place-
identity as a “potpourri of memories, conceptions, interpretations, 
ideas and related feelings about specific physical settings as well as 
type setting” (1983, p. 60). As a distinctive substructure of the self, 
ORCHESTRATING SCHOLARLY VOICES 
115
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

116 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
they reasoned, place-identity might function to underwrite some 
personal identities, render actions or activities intelligible, express 
tastes and preferences and mediate efforts to change environments. 
  Later researchers have found this formulation suggestive, if a 
little nebulous. Though using Proshansky as a theoretical resource, 
Korpela (1989) prefers a narrower definition of place-identity: as a 
psychological structure that arises out of individuals’ attempts to 
regulate their environments. Through practices of environmental 
usage, he argues, we are able to create and sustain a coherent sense of 
self and to reveal our selves to others. At the heart of this psychologi­
cal structure is a sense of belonging, for “place-belongingness is not 
only one aspect of place-identity, but a necessary basis for it. Around 
this core the social, cultural and biological definitions and cognitions 
of place which become part of the person’s place-identity are built” 
(Korpela, 1989, p. 246, emphasis in original). In this conception, 
human actors are cast as imaginative users of their environments, 
agents who are able to appropriate physical contexts in order to 
create, here, a space of attachment and rootedness, a space of being. 
The personalization of dwellings is an oft-cited example. By this 
practice, “home” places are organized and represented in ways that 
help individuals to maintain self-coherence and self-esteem, to realize 
self-regulation principles. 
John Dixon and Kevin Durrheim 2000 “Displacing place-identity: A discursive approach to 
locating self and other.” British Journal of Social Psychology 39: 27–44, 28–29.
Continuing, Dixon and Durrheim then introduce a stranger (Rowles 
1983) to the conversation. To make it quite clear that this speaker is not 
responding directly (or even indirectly) to the previous contributions, 
the writers point to another group—“scholars working in other research 
traditions”—and we take the speaker who gets the floor next as belong­
ing to this group working in an ethnographic, rather than psychological, 
tradition.
The importance of belonging to processes of self-definition has been 
noted by scholars working in other research traditions, confirming 
Korpela’s claim that it is a central feature of place-identity (see e.g., 
Cuba and Hummon, 1993; Tuan, 1980). Rowles’ (1983) research 
with the elderly residents of an Appalachian community provides an 
eloquent empirical demonstration of the idea. Rowles distinguished 
Review Copy

between three senses of “insidedness”, expressing different aspects 
of his respondents’ affinity with their surroundings. “Physical 
insidedness” designated their “body awareness” of their environment, 
expressed as a kind of tacit knowledge of the physical details of place 
(e.g., knowing how to find one’s way). “Social insidedness” desig­
nated their sense of connection to a local community, a recognition 
of their “integration within the social fabric” (p. 302) (e.g., of know­
ing others and being known). Finally, “autobiographic insidedness” 
designated their idiosyncratic sense of rootedness. Often unspoken 
and taken for granted, autobiographical insidedness seemed to arise 
out of individuals’ transactions within a place over time. It was this 
mode of place identification, Rowles suggested, that was especially 
important to his elderly respondents. Although they had witnessed 
considerable changes in their home town of Colton and had found 
their mobility increasingly restricted, they were able to maintain a 
sense of belonging by remembering incidents, places, contributions 
and relations in their personal lives there. 
Dixon and Durrheim 2000: 28–29. 
Other scholars writing in environmental psychology might have pro­
duced an account similar to the first two paragraphs. But after that point, 
Dixon and Durrheim present a voice that would be a less predictable 
contributor: their introduction to the conversation of Rowles’ study of 
Appalachian elders is a novel arrangement. They have introduced some­
one (relatively) unknown to the others in the field, and they make him 
welcome by telling where he comes from (an “empirical” project), giving 
him lots of time to speak, and especially recommending his “eloquent” 
contribution.
Exercise 2 
Write a summary of the passage from Huntington et al. (above, 
pp. 113–14) that focuses on the term “traditional ecological knowl­
edge” (TEK). Then develop it by bringing Huntingdon et al. into 
conversation with Wenzel (p. 114). In doing so, you might consider 
Huntington et al. as an example of how TEK is used, rather than 
putting Huntington et al. up against Wenzel all by themselves (for 
this could somewhat misrepresent the case: Huntington et al. and 
Wenzel are not in direct dialogue with one another).
ORCHESTRATING SCHOLARLY VOICES 
117
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

118 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
Exercise 3 
The two passages below are both concerned with Norbert Elias’s 
theory of the civilizing process. Orchestrate a discussion between 
John McGuire and John Pratt that is careful to note each of their 
research contexts. 
  In Passage 1, John McGuire, a social historian, is talking about 
capital punishment and analyzing episodes in the history of capital 
punishment in Australia. Everyday experience might lead us to 
expect that he will focus on the debate over whether there should be 
capital punishment at all, but, actually, his focus is on the staging of 
the act itself. He refers to Michel Foucault’s famous and compelling 
account (Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison 1979 [1975]) 
of the transformation of public execution—grisly and fatal tortures 
performed before large audiences of citizens—into the much less 
public techniques of punishment carried on in modern prisons. But 
McGuire also says that Foucault’s interpretation of the history of 
state-sponsored punishment is now competing with another inter­
pretation: Norbert Elias’s theory of the “civilizing process.” 
PASSAGE 1 
The decision to conceal the execution ritual from public scrutiny 
has attracted little scholarly attention from historians of capital 
punishment in Australia [....] The body of English-speaking work 
that has been produced on the subject has mainly concentrated 
upon the end of the spectacle in America and England.1  Among 
this work, there is evidence of a trend to de-emphasize what 
David Garland has described as Foucault’s “power perspective,”2 
in which the symbolic act of execution is interpreted as having 
fulfilled a decisive political function in reasserting the power of 
sovereign over subject until its dramatic replacement in the late 
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries by a new disciplinary 
technology of power—the prison. In its place has emerged a 
greater attention to the role of cultural factors in determining 
the movement away from public punishments.3 Louis Masur’s 
work in particular has emphasized that transforming sensibilities 
towards violence in American society provided the impetus for 
the concealment of the offensive and brutalising spectacle of the 
Review Copy

public execution.4 The motivation for this culturalist approach has 
stemmed from the work of the sociologist, Norbert Elias, whose 
attention to the influence of psychological sensibilities on the 
process of historical change has inspired scholars in a variety of 
fields, including the study of punishment.5 While Elias’s work has 
provoked a number of criticisms,6 the concept of the “civilizing 
process” is a useful explanatory tool when applied to the history 
of capital punishment. In explaining the course of European his­
tory from the Middle Ages to the early twentieth century, Elias 
emphasized the interaction between processes of state formation, 
on the one hand, and psychological and behavioral transforma­
tions in the individual, on the other. As the state gradually began 
to monopolise the use of physical force and its administrative 
apparatus became increasingly centralised, there was an accom­
panying transformation in the individual towards self-restraint 
or self-discipline—in short, a “civilizing process” was apparent 
(“civilizing” being understood here not to refer to a society being 
civilised in an absolute sense but, rather, to the process by which 
a society gradually becomes more civilised over time). 
  One must be cautious in applying a theory that was developed 
to explain a specific historical circumstance to another quite 
distinct situation, yet it remains to be seen how applicable Elias’s 
theory is to areas other than western Europe. In-deed, for any 
analysis of the European “civilizing process” to be complete, the 
colonial settler states that comprised its margins should be taken 
into account.
Notes
1	 See especially: Randall McGowen, ‘Civilizing Punishment: The 
End of the Public Execution in England’, Journal of British Studies, 
vol. 33, no. 3, 1994, pp. 257–82; David D. Cooper, The Lesson of 
the Scaffold: The Public Execution Controversy in Victorian England, 
Ohio University Press, Athens, Ohio, 1974, and in his article ‘Pub­
lic Executions in Victorian England: A Reform Adrift’, in William 
B. Thesing [....] 
2	 David Garland, Punishment and Modern Society: A Study in Social 
Theory, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1990, p. 131. 
ORCHESTRATING SCHOLARLY VOICES 
119
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

120 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
3	 See especially: Masur, op. cit.; Pieter Spierenburg, The Spec­
tacle of Suffering: Executions and the Evolution of Repression: From 
a Preindustrial Metropolis to the European Experience, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, 1984; and Garland, op. cit., especially 
chaps 9 and 10.
4	 Masur, op. cit., especially pp. 103–10.
5	 Elias’s theoretical contribution is best outlined in The Civilizing 
Process, vol. 1: The History of Manners (1939), Blackwell, Oxford, 
1983 [....] 
6	 See for example [....] 
John McGuire 1998 “Judicial violence and the ‘civilizing process’: Race and transition 
from public to private executions in Colonial Australia.” Australian Historical Studies 
111: 187–209, 188–90.
In the next passage, John Pratt offers further commentary on Elias’s 
theory of the civilizing process—in another research context, which is 
referred to at the end of the passage. 
PASSAGE 2
The civilizing process 
What is it, though, that is meant by the term civilized? It carries 
with it common-sensical notions about values and practices 
which, in general, differentiate Western societies which are 
thought to make up the civilized world, from those other social 
formations which do not. Here, though, I am using it as a 
theoretical construct in the manner of Elias ([1939] (1994)). For 
him, “civilizing” was one element in a triad of controls whereby 
individuals exercised self-control (the other two being control of 
natural events and control of social forces). The intensity of this 
self-control at any given time in a particular society could thus 
be seen as an indicator of its stage of development (Elias 1970). 
Importantly, then, “civilizing” in the Eliasian sense did not mean 
“progress” nor did it invoke value judgment. Instead, it was the 
contingent outcome of long-term socio-cultural and psychic 
change from the Middle Ages onwards, that brought with it 
two major consequences. First, the modern state itself gradually 
began to assume much more centralized authority and control 
over the lives of its citizens, to the point where it came to have a 
Review Copy

monopoly regarding the use of force and the imposition of legal 
sanctions to address disputes. Second, citizens in modern societies 
came to internalize restraints, controls and inhibitions on their 
conduct, as their values and actions came to be framed around 
increased sensibility to the suffering of others and the privatiza­
tion of disturbing events (Garland 1990). In these respects, while 
Elias himself used changing attitudes to bodily functions and to 
violence to demonstrate these claims, it also seems clear that the 
development of punishment in modern society follows this route 
and provides a helpful demonstration of the Elias thesis. One of 
the most important consequences of the gradual spread of these 
sentiments was, as Pieter Spierenburg (1984) has illustrated, a 
decline and tempering of corporal and capital punishments over 
this period—to the point where, at the onset of modernity, the 
public performance of such punishments had all but disappeared 
and their administration in private was increasingly subject 
to regulations and “scientific” scrutiny. As I want to show in 
relation to English prison development, these trends have since 
continued. In the course of the development of much of modern 
society punishment became “a rather shameful societal activity, 
undertaken by specialists and professionals in enclaves (such as 
prison and reformatories) which are, by and large, removed from 
the sight of the public” (Garland 1990:224).
John Pratt 1999 “Norbert Elias and the civilized prison.” British Journal of Sociology 50 
(2): 271–96, 272–73.
6C Identifying Different Genres and Orchestrating 
Non-scholarly Voices
Section 6B involves writers who have things in common: they are 
relatively contemporaneous and they are scholars. However, there are 
occasions when older scholarship or non-scholarly writings need to be 
introduced. These writers may hold different, problematic views on cer­
tain subjects, or they may not be researchers at all—they may represent 
genres or situations not primarily focused on research. 
The next passage appears in an archaeologist’s study of the role of 
alcohol in legitimating authority in Celtic societies: chief-sponsored 
drinking and feasting in the Iron Age. Some of her data are archaeological: 
ORCHESTRATING NON-SCHOLARLY VOICES 
121
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

122 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
material artefacts recovered in physical investigation. Some of her evi­
dence, however, is documentary: written accounts of feasting in Iron Age 
societies. So you will see her bringing together speakers whose statements 
issue from radically different contexts: she cites “Classical authors” on 
Celtic societies and a modern author describing Tlingit (North American 
West Coast) society. 
You will see that to bring these two types of speakers together she 
makes special arrangements like those of Dixon and Durrheim above 
(see pp. 115–17): research in “many ethnographic contexts ... [provides] 
additional information” (emphasis added) on preindustrial societies. You 
will also see that the Classical authors are introduced with great care, 
and with attention to their peculiarities. It’s almost as if difficult writers 
wait in an anteroom while the summarizer explains and anticipates their 
odd behaviour: in this case, they fail to take account of what modern 
scholars would be interested in, and have a tendency to obsess over the 
“bizarre” and to “romanticize or demonize ‘exotic’ peoples” (which the 
Celts would have been to these Classical authors). Moreover, they can 
be rather unreliable reporters, from a modern point of view: when they 
lack data on one group of exotic people, they just repeat what has been 
said about some other group. In effect, the summarizer says, “Now, I’ve 
got some people I want you to meet. You can’t believe everything they 
say, and I’ve heard them dwell on some things that might not interest 
you. But, even though they’re kind of strange, I think they’ve got some 
valuable information. Here they are. Let’s all be polite.”
The general formula followed by most Classical authors describing 
the alien cultures on their peripheries was modelled on Herodotus 
and consisted of several categories of information: 1) population; 
2) antiquity and ancient history; 3) way of life; 4) customs (Tierney 
1960, 190). Unfortunately for modern scholars the unusual and 
bizarre aspects of the last two categories were generally recounted 
in some detail, while information considered mundane, common 
knowledge or uninteresting was less frequently recorded. Two pitfalls 
facing the modern scholar attempting to derive “facts” from these 
accounts are “Randvölkeridealisierung” (Tierney 1960, 214) and 
“ethnographische Wandermotive” (Tierney 1960, 201). The first is 
the tendency of Classical ethnographers to romanticize or demonize 
“exotic” peoples. The second refers to the borrowing of descriptions 
of customs from accounts of one culture and transposing them 
Review Copy

wholesale or only slightly modified to a completely different group 
of people, whenever hard facts were lacking or could benefit from 
being fleshed out in a more dramatic way [....] 
  Despite these potential difficulties, several significant themes 
related to Celtic drinking and feasting behaviour (both insular and 
continental) recur in Classical sources. Some of these themes, par­
ticularly those also found in the later insular Celtic texts, may result 
from similarities between geographically and temporally different 
groups of the Celts (Nash 1976, 116). One such theme is that of the 
king’s or hero’s portion at a banquet, described as early as Phylarchus 
(Tierney 1960, 197). Another is the concept of guest-friendship, 
mentioned by Diodorus Siculus (Tierney 1960, 250) and again by 
Caesar (Tierney 1960, 274); both accounts stress the Celtic emphasis 
on open-handedness and generosity as important virtues. 
  Generosity as the defining characteristic of a good chieftain or 
king is a common theme in both Classical and insular texts, but 
also in many ethnographically recorded societies at a chiefdom 
level of organization. Athenaeus’ account of Lavernius’ banquet is a 
good example (Tierney, 1960, 248). The Celtic chieftain Lavernius, 
pleased by the praise of a poet at his feast, scatters gold along the 
plain behind his chariot, and “the poet picked it up and sang another 
song saying that the very tracks made by his chariot on the earth gave 
gold and largesse to mankind” (Tierney 1960, 248). 
  Athenaeus’ verbatim transcription of four of the nine surviving 
extracts of Book 23 of Poseidonius’ History, the recognized “Bible” 
on the Celts, describes food, drink, and heroic feasting and combat, 
and bardic display at great length. In fact, the passage on food and 
drink is the longest surviving portion of Poseidonius’ Celtic ethnog­
raphy. This may reflect the special emphasis on food and drink in 
the Celtic world observed by Poseidonius. 
  The symbolic as well as functional significance of feasting is docu­
mented in many ethnographic contexts (Chapman 1980, 66); such 
sources provide additional preindustrial configurations for modelling 
prehistoric social organization. The Tlingit potlatch is a good exam­
ple of a society in which feasting acts as an institutionalized form of 
social regulation. As described by Kan, “the unity and solidarity of 
clan relatives were emphasized by the obligatory sharing of property 
and food that characterized their relationships” (1989, 65–6). The 
ORCHESTRATING NON-SCHOLARLY VOICES 
123
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

124 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
status of a Tlingit aristocrat depended on the rank and wealth of 
his parents (especially his mother), marriage to a person of equal 
or greater rank, the number and scale of potlatches sponsored by 
his parents in his honour, and accomplishments in activities which 
generated wealth and enabled him to give his own potlatch(es) or 
actively participate in those given by his matrikin (Kan 1989, 82).1
Note 
1	 Note the key role played by feasting in establishing and maintaining 
status in this society.
Bettina Arnold 1999 “‘Drinking the feast’: Alcohol and the legitimation of power in Celtic 
Europe.” Cambridge Archaeological Review 9 (1): 71–93, 72–73.
We don’t have to go so far afield to find difficult speakers. In many 
undergraduate courses, reading assignments include (or sometimes focus 
exclusively on) textbooks: academic genres composed by specialists for 
non-specialists. Rather than make new knowledge, or take another step 
along a line of inquiry, or interrogate the accumulation of knowledge in 
a field, textbooks synthesize what is known so far. 
Of course, many textbooks provide an historical view of knowledge 
in a discipline, or subfield of a discipline, and bring to light the social 
dimension of knowledge as a product of interaction amongst researchers. 
In this respect, they resemble the research genres. And many textbooks 
offer a critical overview of knowledge in a field, implying directions for 
further inquiry. In this respect too they resemble the research genres. 
But their position vis-à-vis their readers differs from that of the 
research genres. First, they construct readers as “not knowing”: if anyone 
has a question, it’s the student/reader; if anyone has the answer, it’s the 
textbook. (In the research genres, as we have seen, writers represent them­
selves as sharing questions with their readers.) Second, they construct 
readers as listeners rather than co-conversationalists (although many text­
books will provide exercises and assignments which direct their readers to 
a limited role as participants in scholarly discussion). 
The academic textbook genres and the research genres each have 
their place, and the authors of the latter often become authors of the 
former. Writers in the research genres can hear the difference between 
research article and textbook. When reading the following passage from a 
textbook, try to identify what features of the research genres are missing.
Review Copy

One of the direct benefits of the end of the 45-year cold war between 
the United States and the Soviet Union has been a substantial decline 
in foreign military and political presence in the Third World. An 
indirect cost of this withdrawal, however, has been the acceleration 
of ethnic, tribal, and religious conflict. Although ethnic and religious 
tensions and occasional violence have always existed in LDCs [Less 
Developed Countries], the waning of superpower influence triggered 
a revival of these internal conflicts and may even have accelerated the 
incidence of political and economic discrimination. Ethnicity and 
religion often play a major role in the success or failure of develop­
ment efforts. Clearly, the greater the ethnic and religious diversity 
in a country, the more likely it is that there will be internal strife 
and political instability. It is not surprising, therefore, that some of 
the most successful recent development experiences—South Korea, 
Taiwan, Singapore, and Hong Kong—have occurred in culturally 
homogeneous societies.
Michael P. Todaro 1997 Economic Development. New York: Longman, 34.
Students may learn to recognize the different styles which indicate the 
circumstances under which statements are produced in textbooks and 
research articles: the first acting to inform, the second acting to inquire. 
However, the differing purposes of the textbook and research genres can 
put students in a difficult position when gathering materials for a paper 
in an undergraduate course: they consult research articles, chapters, and 
books—but they also still hear the informative voice of the textbook 
on similar topics. If they repeat the statements of the textbook without 
attributing them, taking them as common knowledge and public truth, 
they fail to observe the scholarly requirement of providing the traces of 
statements, the footprints that statements leave in their history of use. 
Yet even if they do attribute the statements to their authors, they can 
still interrupt a scholarly conversation by bringing in a speaker who had 
prepared for a different kind of discussion. How can this speaker be 
accommodated? 
Just as Bettina Arnold made special arrangements for “Classical 
authors” (pp. 122–24), you can introduce the textbook speakers with 
an account of their origins and intentions. For example, consider this 
passage:
ORCHESTRATING NON-SCHOLARLY VOICES 
125
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

126 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
Prejudice is defined as a positive or negative attitude based on infor­
mation or knowledge which is either illogical, unrelated to reality, 
or is a distortion of fact, and which is unjustifiably generalized to all 
members of a group. Although prejudice can be either favourable 
or unfavourable, psychologists use the term most frequently in the 
negative sense. 
J.E. Alcock, D.W. Carment, and S.W. Sadava 1994 A Textbook of Social Psychology, 3rd ed. 
Scarborough, ON: Prentice Hall, 222.
Alcock et al. might be introduced to a research conversation by contex­
tualizing their discussion:
In their introductory book on social psychology, Alcock et al. (1994) 
offer a general definition of prejudice: [....] This definition suggests 
that prejudice could be corrected by referring to external reality or 
logic.
In this case, the special arrangement identifies the writing situation: an 
introductory course in social psychology. A reader might expect that 
researchers in the field of social psychology would likely test this defini­
tion. As the passages on TEK and the civilizing process in Section 6A 
indicate, different researchers often develop specific definitions that are 
applicable to what they are studying (e.g., Huntington et al. use the term 
TEK with specific reference to beluga whales) or they may even make the 
term itself part of what they are studying (e.g., Wenzel reflects directly 
on how TEK has been defined). Each of these definitions has its own 
context, one which the summarizer must represent. So too the summa­
rizer here represents the context for the definition of prejudice: a context 
addressing undergraduates rather than researchers.
Another case, popular writing, may initially seem to present an 
obvious non-research situation. Consider consumer publications like 
newspapers or magazines that are funded by advertisement or sub­
scription through mass distribution to a general audience or specific 
non-research interests (e.g., hobbies, sports, fashion). Some of these 
special interests may be extremely useful to researchers. For example, 
in their ethnographic study of RVers, Counts and Counts cite popular 
magazines, such as Trailer Life and Highways, that cater to RVers. Simi­
larly, research in education might benefit from professional publications 
read by teachers: such publications could be studied for current themes 
Review Copy

in the profession’s self-image, for example, or could provide evidence for 
changes in professional practices—ways of doing things in the classroom. 
Or a study of political rhetoric might take recourse to opinion-editorials 
published in newspapers or political magazines. In all of these cases, the 
writing situation will be relatively easy to identify, and the speaker can be 
introduced accordingly. 
However, there are situations that are more difficult to identify. The 
writers of books written for a popular audience may be researchers, but 
they are not addressing other scholars or even students. Whereas the situ­
ation of an article can be identified by looking at the publication (e.g., is 
it a consumer magazine or an academic journal?), a book can be harder to 
place, because books are published by all sorts of publishers. Here is a pas­
sage from a book on demographic trends, written by experts but addressed 
to a broad audience distributed beyond the scholarly community.
A country filled with young people is one whose retailers compete 
predominantly on price. In such a country, anything that can lower 
the average cost of production and reduce the price to the consumer 
is important. A young Canada during the 1960s and 1970s enabled 
the big retail mall to be born and thrive, making it possible for stores 
to lower costs and pass the savings on to customers. The malls won’t 
disappear but their glory days are over. In the 20 years to come, the 
demographic shift will favour a revival of neighbourhood specialty 
stores supported by local customers for whom price is no longer the 
most important factor in a purchase decision. 
  Stores that can deliver good products and good service will 
dominate this new marketplace, while stores that waste consumers’ 
time and treat them rudely will disappear. The art of customer 
service is something at which Canadian retailers are notoriously 
incompetent because, until the late 1980s, they were operating in 
a marketplace that didn’t require it. It’s no accident that countries 
such as Japan and Germany discovered quality and service before we 
did. Their populations are much older than ours, and their retailers 
had to respond to the demands of a changing marketplace a decade 
or more earlier than ours did. The Canadian retailers that prosper 
in the changing market place of the coming years will be those that 
succeed in adopting customer service as a way of life.
David K. Foot and Daniel Stoffman 1996 Boom, Bust & Echo: How to Profit from the Coming 
Demographic Shift. Toronto: Macfarlane Walter & Ross, 82–83.
ORCHESTRATING NON-SCHOLARLY VOICES 
127
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

128 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
Here is a linguist well known in scholarly circles but on this occasion 
writing for an audience as broad as that addressed by Foot and Stoffman 
above.
A similar conflict exists between [a couple I will call] Louise and 
Howie, about spending money. Louise would never buy anything 
costing more than a hundred dollars without discussing it with 
Howie, but he goes out and buys whatever he wants and feels 
they can afford, like a table saw or a new power mower. Louise is 
disturbed, not because she disapproves of the purchases, but because 
she feels he is acting as if she were not in the picture. 
  Many women feel it is natural to consult with their partners at 
every turn, while many men automatically make more decisions 
without consulting their partners. This may reflect a broad differ­
ence in conceptions of decision making. Women expect decisions 
to be discussed first and made by consensus. They appreciate the 
discussion itself as evidence of involvement and communication. But 
many men feel oppressed by lengthy discussions about what they 
see as minor decisions, and they feel hemmed in if they can just act 
without talking first. When women try to initiate a free-wheeling 
discussion by asking, “What do you think?” men often think they 
are being asked to decide. 
  Communication is a continual balancing act, juggling the conflict­
ing needs for intimacy and independence. To survive in the world, 
we have to act in concert with others, but to survive as ourselves, 
rather than simply as cogs in a wheel, we have to act alone.
Deborah Tannen 1990 You Just Don’t Understand: Women and Men in Conversation. New 
York: Ballantine Books, 27–28.
What features of scholarly style are missing from these two passages? If 
these were research publications, what would be different about them? By 
analyzing the style of the writing, you can make guesses at the situation. 
Foot and Stoffman, for example, make bold assertions and prognostica­
tions: e.g., “In the 20 years to come, the demographic shift will favour a 
revival of neighbourhood specialty stores ...” (emphasis added). Tannen 
expresses similar certainty and makes unqualified generalizations: e.g., 
“Women expect decisions to be discussed first and made by consensus” 
(emphasis added). Neither writer seems concerned with what others have 
to say or with research on their topics. At least they don’t summon other 
Review Copy

voices: there is no citation and little in the way of reporting expressions in 
these passages. Both writers are experts, but here they do not seem to be 
speaking to other experts. Will these outgoing, friendly speakers fit into 
the scholarly conversation you have arranged? Will they pay attention to 
the qualifications, abstractions, and uncertainties of the other guests? Or 
will they try to dominate? Chances are, these popular speakers won’t fit 
in. Their statements will not interact with others’—and the conversation 
will be difficult to continue. 
If you feel committed to including the popular speaker, you can 
take some measures, though, to introduce the new arrival to the other 
guests: “Writing for a general audience and addressing such-and-such, 
x simplifies ...”; “While x’s claims overlook the uncertainty of evidence 
in this area, they do represent/speak to widely held interest in/concerns 
about....” 
Watch out for books whose covers list “PhD” after the author’s name. 
This doesn’t mean that the PhD is a hoax or not a good one, but that the 
authority of the book is being recommended to a non-scholarly audience. 
In the scholarly community, advertising that one has a PhD is not likely 
to impress, since most writers participating in scholarly discussions have 
one. 
Finally, let’s consider the Internet, a special case that can make it 
difficult to identify the writing situation. The Internet is a benefit to 
researchers. At the very least, it offers efficient access to library catalogues 
and easy access to indexes that allow discipline-specific searches for publi­
cations on a topic. Increasingly, articles and whole scholarly journals and 
books are now available in electronic form, either directly through index 
searches or on their own servers. In these cases, you should be especially 
careful to note the address or Uniform Resource Locator (URL) of the 
index or article (some indexes offer permanent URLs for articles, while 
others generate temporary URLs). Because libraries subscribe to index 
licenses, a research librarian can help you understand the appropriate 
citation protocol for your library. 
There are some complications, though, mainly arising from the oper­
ation of browsers and search engines. These technologies can lead you to 
domains where research publications mingle with popular publications, 
and both of these find themselves in the company of organizations spon­
soring more or less viable points of view, and individuals promoting their 
own interests or ambitions for publicity. Recent amalgamations of online 
ORCHESTRATING NON-SCHOLARLY VOICES 
129
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

130 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
periodical indexes have, as well, tended to blur the distinction between 
peer-reviewed research publications and general-audience journalism. 
How can you tell if you are finding speakers suitable for introduction 
into scholarly conversation? Online research journals will include the 
circumstances of publication: names and affiliations of members of the 
editorial board; procedures for submission and review of articles. Look 
for these indications. Stand-alone publications may be harder to evaluate. 
But your experience in identifying the characteristic sounds of scholarly 
voices should be a reliable guide for you by now. 
Making arrangements for scholarly conversation is a challenge for 
undergraduates: as newcomers to research communities, they can find it 
hard to prepare an appropriate list of guest speakers. But it’s also a chal­
lenge for graduate students, and sometimes for professional scholars, too.
Exercise 4 
In the exercises at the end of Chapter 5, you summarized passages 
from Mary Englund’s “An Indian Remembers” and Dara Culhane 
Speck on Alert Bay. Using the techniques in Chapter 5 for generat­
ing high-level names or abstractions, orchestrate the passages from 
Englund and Speck (pp. 99–102). In doing so, keep in mind that the 
passage from Englund is a transcript of a recorded interview with 
Mary Englund in which she recalls aspects of her life at a residential 
school in Mission, BC, in the early twentieth century.
Exercise 5 
The following passage comes from an undergraduate textbook. What 
features of style distinguish it from a research publication? (This time 
the question is harder to answer, for the writer carefully accounts 
for the first appearance, later refinements, and eventual acceptance 
of current knowledge about “tribal” diets.) If you wanted to use this 
information in an inquiry into Western conceptions of health, how 
would you represent your source?
Smith correctly concluded that the lack of dental decay and tooth 
loss observed in the tribal peoples was due to increased tooth 
wear, which kept the teeth clean and polished. He attributed 
Review Copy

the increased wear to the consumption of less cooked and less 
refined food and the absence of knives and forks, which meant 
that more chewing was required, as well as the presence of grit 
or “dirt” in the food. It was later learned that the absence of 
refined carbohydrates also contributed to healthy tribal teeth. The 
reduced tooth wear of contemporary peoples who eat industri­
ally processed foods is likely related to the common problem of 
impacted molars, as Grover Krantz (1978) has observed. People 
eating coarse foods wear down the grinding surfaces of their 
teeth, which creates enough jaw space to accommodate the third 
molars when they erupt. When there is no significant wear, these 
“wisdom teeth” often must be extracted. 
  The association between traditional dietary patterns and 
healthy teeth was documented more systematically in a series of 
field studies conducted by American dentist Weston Price (1945), 
between 1931 and 1936. Price visited some of the most traditional 
peoples in Amazonia, East Africa, Australia, and throughout 
the Pacific and found that tooth decay and periodontal disease 
were virtually absent among self-sufficient peoples but steadily 
increased as they adopted the food patterns of industrial societies. 
  In 1956, shortly after Price’s dental research, T.L. Cleave, a 
doctor in the British Royal Navy, used medical data on tribal 
peoples to isolate a single feature in the diets of industrialized 
people that caused what he called the “saccharine disease,” a 
wide-ranging complex of conditions including tooth decay, 
ulcers, appendicitis, obesity, diabetes, constipation, and varicose 
veins. Like both Smith and Price before him, Cleave (1974) was 
impressed by the fact that tribal peoples did not suffer from many 
of the common ailments of civilization, and he attempted to find 
the special conditions that made the tribal peoples healthier. His 
primary finding was that the traditional foods of tribal groups 
were consistently much higher in dietary fiber than the highly 
refined complex carbohydrates consumed by industrialized 
peoples. Higher-fiber diets speed the transit time of food through 
the digestive system, thereby reducing many common diseases of 
civilization. It took many years for his findings to be incorporated 
into popular nutritional wisdom in the industrialized world, but 
ORCHESTRATING NON-SCHOLARLY VOICES 
131
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

132 
ORCHESTRATING VOICES
now high fiber, along with low fat and low salt, is widely accepted 
as an important component of a healthy diet.
John H. Bodley 1997 Cultural Anthropology: Tribes, States, and the Global System, 2nd ed. 
Mountain View, CA: Mayfield, 147–48.
Exercise 6 
Sometimes course books are not textbooks designed to introduce 
newcomers to a discipline but comprehensive and informative rep­
resentations of a point of view. The next passage comes from such a 
book. What features distinguish it from a research publication? How 
might you introduce this writer to a scholarly conversation?
It may seem incredible that anyone in the Americas should 
perceive the continents’ impoverished, largely marginalized 
indigenous peoples as a threat, but individuals and states are 
products of their history, even if they deny it. In countries where 
indigenous people form the majority or a substantial minority, 
the white, Western elite and the governments they dominate show 
the classic psychology of rich exploiters who have grown paranoid 
through fear or greed. “They know only too well what they have 
done to the Indian, and are paranoid that the Indian might one 
day do the same to them,” says one Bolivian aid worker. 
  A complex racism was part of the institutionalization of the 
conquest, providing the historic rationale for human rights abuse. 
Medieval Hispanic concepts of “purity of blood” (limpieza de 
sangre) were transferred to the Indies, and American Spaniards 
became obsessed with classifying the various permutations of race. 
Racism, including cultural discrimination, became the ideological 
framework that justified the domination of the invaders and the 
subordination of the conquered.
Phillip Wearne 1996 Return of the Indian: Conquest and Revival in the Americas. London: 
Cassell, 64. 
Review Copy

Exercise 7
You now have means of inviting different speakers into the conversa­
tion you are arranging. You are able to estimate the compatibility of 
speakers from the same discipline: speakers with similar or different 
perspectives on a topic. You can make arrangements for introduc­
ing outsiders: speakers from nearby or distant scholarly areas. With 
attention to the original context, you can invite a speaker from a 
textbook. With even greater attention to making arrangements for 
speakers, and aware of potential difficulties, you might even invite a 
popularization into the conversation. 
  All these differences among published sources are traditional to 
print media. Most of them have transferred to digital media. Online, 
you will find scholarly voices and popular ones. But online you will 
also find brand-new categories: new ways of speaking, new contexts, 
new genres. Currently, one of the most conspicuous of these is Wiki­
pedia. Knowing about the conditions for successfully orchestrating a 
scholarly conversation, how would you estimate the possibilities for 
bringing a Wikipedia entry into the conversation? Devise guidelines 
for scholarly use of Wikipedia. In doing so, consult Wikipedia’s own 
description of its editorial processes. How do these resemble or dif­
fer from those of scholarly publication?
ORCHESTRATING NON-SCHOLARLY VOICES 
133
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

Review Copy

135
Until now we have found writers taking a position in relation to other 
speakers, and this chapter continues to explore writers’ opportunities to 
take a position. 
However, it is not only the writers who occupy positions in the 
research community; readers themselves also occupy positions in it—
sometimes near the writer, sometimes further away. In this chapter we 
look at definition and apposition as means of negotiating the space 
between academic writers and their main readers, other researchers. 
Like summary, definition has a classroom history as a form of expres­
sion called for by teachers to see if students have committed something to 
memory. In research genres, however, definition serves other functions, 
some of which may be unfamiliar to the student new to university. 
Definitions bring important terms into focus. For readers who need 
some clarification, definition sharpens the picture. As we shall see in a 
moment, it helps a writer address readers who may be unfamiliar with the 
terms employed by researchers who are being cited, or with the particular 
research tradition in which they work. 
But definition is by no means only for the purpose of informing the 
uninformed. For readers already familiar with a term, definition confirms 
common ground: the writer encourages readers to identify with the spirit 
of the definition. In this case, definition has the goal of corroborating 
and engaging what the informed reader already knows, involving this 
established knowledge in developing a discussion. 
7
Definition
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

136 
DEFINITION
Before we examine these functions of definition, let’s look at a tradi­
tional source of definitions—the dictionary.
7A Dictionaries
People rely on dictionaries—either practically, by looking words up, 
or theoretically, by comforting themselves that, should any problem of 
meaning arise, a dictionary could settle it. Often associated with this reli­
ance is an idea that dictionaries are responsible for meaning: they make 
meaning, or they make words mean what they do. 
Actually, this idea is backwards. Writers of dictionaries describe what 
the meaning of the word already is. Or, better said, they describe how 
people use a word. Some language specialists don’t talk about definition 
at all. Rather, they say that the “meaning” of a word is the set of circum­
stances under which it can be efficiently used. Consider, for instance, the 
following statements:
The brain is not the only expensive organ in the body. There are 
four other expensive organs, the heart, the kidneys, the liver and 
the gastrointestinal tract.
It is hard to imagine who might consider organs “expensive”—organ traf­
fickers perhaps, but then again, it’s hard to imagine a market for brain 
transplants. This seems to be one of the circumstances where it is not effi­
cient to use the word “expensive.” A dictionary’s definition of “expensive” 
would not include these circumstances among those in which people use 
the word.
However, if we adjust our view of dictionaries, and see them as fol­
lowing rather than preceding use, we see that the community of speakers 
who use the word is the source of its meaning. These speakers (and 
writers), through their interactions and routine activities, develop and 
negotiate word meanings: the conditions under which a word can be effi­
ciently used. If we go further, along lines established by current reasoning 
about the social order, we must acknowledge that “community” should be 
“communities”: within the larger society, people get together in different 
groups, following different routines. These shared routines are sustained 
by shared interpretations of the world—and shared habits in the use of 
certain words, including the shared habits of specialist communities. No 
dictionary can report all these possible communities of speakers and the 
Review Copy

tacit agreements they have amongst themselves as to the appropriate use 
of certain words. So, while it would be difficult to find a dictionary that 
would provide a definition of “expensive” that justifies “the brain is not 
the only expensive organ,” a community of language users made up of 
evolutionary biologists, for whom “expense” is a matter of the body’s 
energy requirements rather than money, might very well find the use 
of the word “expensive” in this sentence appropriate and efficient. And 
indeed, the passage above is from a genetics journal.
Once we accept, first, that dictionaries only describe uses of words 
rather than establish definitions, and, second, that those recorded uses 
are only the most general kind, we can see that there are still defining 
opportunities—terms to be captured and refined in the account of their 
possible uses. Indeed, we may see that definition is an ongoing activity, 
part of the negotiating of agreement that occurs in any given community. 
7B Appositions
In Chapter 5, we found that sometimes—mainly in narrative—we have 
to make interpretive abstractions to build higher levels from some fairly 
concrete, lower-level foundations. 
Most passages you summarize, however, will already be built up to 
higher levels, and will present you with ready-made abstractions (which 
is not to say that you cannot then build a little higher still, or modify 
the higher levels with your own interpretive abstractions). Since these 
abstractions in themselves condense and interpret lower-level specifics, 
you will probably transfer them from the original to your summary. Con­
sider this passage from the article on the experience of undocumented 
immigrants in the southwestern US: 
Since it is imagined, a sense of community is not limited to a specific 
geographic locale (Gupta and Ferguson 1992). Immigrants are 
said to live in “binational communities” (Baca and Bryan 1980), 
“extended communities” (Whiteford 1979), “transnational com­
munities” in “hyperspace” (Rouse 1991), and “transnational families” 
(Chavez 1992). These concepts highlight the connections migrants 
maintain with life in their home communities; living dislocated 
on the other side of a political border does not necessarily mean 
withdrawing from community or membership. 
Chavez 1994: 54.
APPOSITIONS 
137
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

138 
DEFINITION
A summary might keep the abstraction transnational communities:
Chavez’s work (1994) on undocumented immigrants offers new 
perspectives on transnational communities.
But it’s possible—likely, even—that not all readers are familiar with 
Chavez’s work, or familiar enough with the term “transnational com­
munities” to be exactly sure of what the writer of the summary means to 
say that Chavez has said. So the summary can define the term, using a 
grammatical structure called an appositive or apposition:
Chavez’s work (1994) on undocumented immigrants offers new 
perspectives on transnational communities: communities, that is, 
whose members leave their homes and settle in another country but 
nevertheless maintain important connections with those original 
homes.
In effect, the summary says “transnational communities” again—in other 
words. By doing so, the summarizer recognizes the position of the read­
ers, and their possible unfamiliarity with or uncertainty about the term. 
The summary implicitly acknowledges that the term is somewhat spe­
cialized and limited in its distribution—at least for the time being—to 
certain research genres. It also demonstrates a respect for the complexity 
of the term: its capacity to capture the cumulative reasoning of people 
researching issues in human migration. At the same time, by using new 
words, the summary develops a new position on the concept—a new 
emphasis, a new version.
As instruments of definition, appositives can help the writer to 
develop a position by narrowing the application of an abstraction. Here’s 
a passage that defines through apposition:
Academic knowledge is now generally recognized to be a social 
accomplishment, the outcome of a cultural activity shaped by ideol­
ogy and constituted by agreement between a writer and a potentially 
sceptical discourse community. 
Hyland 1999: 341.
If we stop reading at the comma, we realize that “social accomplish­
ment” could mean a lot of things. What does it mean for knowledge to 
be social? What is it about knowledge that makes it an accomplishment? 
Using an appositive, the writer specifies what “social” will mean in this 
Review Copy

case, and also unpacks terms hidden in “social accomplishment”: cultural 
activity, ideology, community. Appositives are a relatively unobtrusive way 
of activating an abstraction or specialized term. While a more extensive 
definition might inappropriately suggest that the reader is ignorant, 
the appositive quickly enriches established understandings or improves 
uncertain ones. By doubling a mention, appositives intensify the atmos­
phere around an abstraction. 
In formal terms, we can say that an appositive creates a structure with 
equivalent material on each side of it, for example: 
They left a mess: empty soft-drink cans, Styrofoam cups, fast-food 
wrappers.
a mess	 	
	
empty soft-drink cans, Styrofoam cups, 
	
	
	
	
	
fast-food wrappers 
This example uses a colon; the previous example used a comma. Other 
structures can also open a sentence for an appositive definition. Paren­
theses can do this, and so can “or.” Explanatory footnotes can elaborate a 
term. Or nearly synonymous terms can accumulate to confirm the sense 
in which a term in being used. The next passage shows some of these 
techniques. Here, an historian reports his study of the controversy in 
the 1920s surrounding the unsolved murder of a young Scottish nanny 
working for a well-to-do family on the west coast of Canada, a case in 
which the racist press and political figures accused the family’s Asian 
butler. Kerwin interprets these events through a series of accumulating 
abstractions, which have been emphasized in bold.
Contemporary knowledge (or “discourses”) about racial biology, 
the effects of race-mixing, and the ability of two races to live within 
the same nation limited the vocabulary of the major players in this 
story, setting the ground rules for the debate. Scientific knowledge 
of the day, which concluded that miscegenation between Europeans 
and Asians was biologically disastrous, was common sense to people 
like Victor Odlum and Mary Ellen Smith. Dominant understand­
ings of British Columbia’s history, constructed through various 
narratives, further shaped interpretations of the Janet Smith case 
and the “problem” of miscegenation.
Scott Kerwin 1999 “The Janet Smith Bill of 1924 and the language of race and nation in 
British Columbia.” BC Studies 121: 83–114, 104.
APPOSITIONS 
139
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

140 
DEFINITION
Notice that Kerwin places the more specialist abstraction “discourses” 
in parentheses, to elaborate on “contemporary knowledge.” Doubling 
the two terms like this both (1) improves our sense of what “discourses” 
are, reminding us that a discourse is a form of knowledge and that it 
carries the signs of its historical period, and (2) attaches “contemporary 
knowledge ... about racial biology” to other research that inquires into 
the themes and preoccupations of public discussion—into “discourses,” 
that is. The doubling also selects the sense in which the term “discourses” 
is being used in this passage.
Exercise 1
This passage introduces an article on methods of decision making in 
the management of fisheries: ways of deciding, for example, when 
and for how long to permit fishing, what size of catch to allow, and 
how to control ecological factors affecting fish habitat. It acknowl­
edges the competing interests and contexts in which such decisions 
are made: while marine biologists count fish stocks, proponents of 
ecological concerns advocate certain measures, and those whose live­
lihoods depend on catching fish may advocate other measures. The 
authors of this article recommend “fisheries management science” 
as an approach to this situation, and they focus on risk as a term of 
this “science.” In a two- or three-sentence summary of this passage, 
include a definition of risk. What does risk mean in this context? 
(And why is it an important concept in this context?) 
Recent and spectacular resource crises have brought pressure 
on fisheries management agencies to change the way they do 
business. Shortcomings of current fisheries management systems 
include the inability to account for the inherent uncertainty 
of fisheries systems, and the inability to meet a multiplicity of 
fisheries objectives such as socio-economic and operational man­
agement considerations in decision-making (Hannesson, 1996). 
Future management must focus on management of integrated 
fisheries, rather than solely on fish populations (Larkin, 1988). 
This integrated emphasis will require a change in approach and 
development of modified methodologies to allow evaluation of 
options against a suite of diverse management objectives including 
Review Copy

conservation, economics, and social and operational consid­
erations within a stochastically varying system. This requires 
conceptual change towards analysis of fisheries management 
decisions characterized by an integration of traditional biological 
science methods with operational management considerations 
and a scientific approach to decision-making. In previous papers 
we coined the term “fisheries management science” to describe 
this approach (Stephenson and Lane, 1995). 
  Making decisions in fisheries management, as with all practi­
cal management decision problems, involves what in common 
parlance is termed “risk.” Specifically, the outcomes of decisions 
depend on occurrences beyond our control that may have 
undesirable consequences. Since most decision problems cannot 
be avoided, it is incumbent on decision makers to deal with all 
potential consequences of proposed actions—undesirable and 
otherwise—and to include their possibilities of occurrence in 
developing and evaluating decision alternatives. The extent to 
which decision alternatives must be considered, and undesirable 
outcomes may occur, provide a measure of the riskiness of the 
decision problem. The absence of this notion of “risk analysis” 
in decision-making is a major weakness in fisheries management 
systems. 
  From the decision analysis literature, it is generally accepted 
that “risk analysis” is comprised of two components: (i) risk 
assessment and (ii) risk management (Balson et al., 1992). Risk 
assessment is the process that evaluates possible outcomes or 
consequences and estimates their likelihood of occurrence as a 
function of a decision taken and the probabilistic realization 
of the uncontrollable state dynamics of the system. Hilborn et 
al. (1993), for example, describe the results of this risk analysis 
component through a simple two-dimensional decision table 
model. Risk management is a process whereby decision makers 
use information from risk assessment to compare and evaluate 
decision alternatives. 
D.E. Lane and R.L. Stephenson 1998 “A framework for risk analysis in fisheries decision-
making.” ICES Journal of Marine Science 55: 1–13, 1–2. 
APPOSITIONS 
141
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

142 
DEFINITION
7C Sustained Definitions
Definition can be as short as a gesture—a brief delay in the discussion as 
an abstraction is glossed and readers make contact with its complexity—
or it can command more sustained attention. In this section we approach 
sustained definition, beginning with techniques for formal definition 
first developed in classical rhetoric. 
The techniques for formal definition focus first on the thing-to-be-
defined, using the structure of a particular kind of sentence to accomplish 
this focus. Taking the thing-to-be-defined as its subject, the formal sen­
tence definition isolates the phenomenon for scrutiny. We could say that 
the focus of the formal sentence definition is ideal. 
Consider the following:
Daycare is the institutional provision of caretaking services to young 
children, including feeding, supervision, shelter, and instruction.
This passage ignores cases where it is hard to distinguish between babysit­
ting and daycare, where children are not exactly fed but feed themselves 
(or refuse to eat, or bring their own snacks), where care is provided on so 
informal a basis it might not be called “institutional” at all. It provides 
an ideal, formal definition of daycare, using the present-tense form of the 
verb “to be”—is—to establish a statement of equivalence: on one side is 
the phenomenon, daycare, and on the other side is the definition:
... the institutional provision of caretaking services to young children, 
including feeding, supervision, shelter, and instruction.
The defining side of the statement first enlarges our view by identifying 
the larger class to which daycare belongs—
... the institutional provision of caretaking services ...
—and then narrows our view again by identifying the features which 
differentiate daycare from other members of its class (from, for example, 
health care and education):
... to young children, including feeding, supervision, shelter, and 
instruction.
This is the classical pattern of formal sentence definition.
The next definition shows the same pattern of enlarging to clas­
sify and reducing to differentiate. The passage also shows one of the 
Review Copy

development options open to the writer: following formal definition, the 
writer can “double” the definition by saying what the phenomenon does.
Broadcasting is a system of social control which, through the trans­
mission of electronic signals, normalizes the diverse experiences of 
individuals. Broadcasting interprets events and life conditions in 
ways which confirm society’s ideological centre.
Here the definition first expands our focus by identifying the class to which 
broadcasting belongs (systems of social control), and then differentiates it 
from other members of the class (laws or customs, for example). Moreo­
ver, this passage shows that formal definition can be in itself a step in an 
argument. Someone else could have defined broadcasting differently—as 
a result of having interpreted data differently, or having different data to 
interpret, or having a different disciplinary perspective.
Broadcasting is a system of communication which, through the 
transmission of electronic signals, illuminates public and private life 
alike. By linking widespread communities through a shared network 
of information, broadcasting ensures that citizens in democratic 
societies recognize common and crucial features of their experience, 
and enables them to respond to those features as issues.
The two definitions of broadcasting would serve different arguments. This 
disparity won’t surprise you if you think of definition as the presentation 
of a high-level, interpretive abstraction which the writer assigns to lower-
level observations or data. So the definition is bound to be an expression 
of the reasoning and insight which have led the writer to assign the name 
in the first place. 
Whereas formal definition isolates the phenomenon for scrutiny, sus­
tained definition expands by locating the phenomenon amongst other, 
related phenomena in the world. In the next passage, an economist leads 
up to and defines revolution. The definition presents this event not in the 
usual political or historical terms but in new, economic or market ones: 
entrepreneurship, clients, employees, property transfer.
The potential revolutionary leader is an entrepreneur who recruits, 
deploys, and compensates insurgents. The potential revolutionary 
leader maximizes the expected wealth of his clientele, which is an 
alternative set of property owners and/or an alternative parasitic ruling 
class. A revolution in this theory is an attempt to depose the incumbent 
SUSTAINED DEFINITIONS 
143
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

144 
DEFINITION
ruler and his clientele in favor of the revolutionary leader and his 
clientele. In other words, a revolution attempts either to establish new 
property rights, or to enthrone a new ruling class, or both.
Herschel I. Grossman 1999 “Kleptocracy and revolutions.” Oxford Economic Papers 51: 
267– 83, 268 (emphasis added).
It is quite challenging and (to many readers) unusual to think about 
revolution in this way instead of in terms of oppression and liberation, or 
disorder and violence. Happily, Grossman doesn’t rest with just one state­
ment of the definition. He doubles the definition, and says it again—“[i]n 
other words.” In the next passage, a philosopher conducts one stage of his 
inquiry into ways to understand the debate over gun control. 
Most defenders of private gun ownership claim we do have a moral 
right [to bear arms]—as well as a constitutional one—and this right 
is not an ordinary right but a fundamental one [....] 
  If they are correct, they would have the justificatory upper hand. 
Were this a fundamental right, it would not be enough to show 
that society would benefit from controlling access to guns.1 The 
arguments for gun control would have to be overwhelming. Yet 
there is also a hefty cost in claiming that this is a fundamental right: 
the evidence for the right must meet especially rigorous standards.
  What makes a right fundamental? A fundamental right is a 
non-derivative right protecting a fundamental interest. Not every 
interest we individually cherish is fundamental. Since most interests 
are prized by someone, such a notion of “fundamental interest” 
would be anemic, serving no special justificatory role. Fundamental 
interests are special; they are integrally related to a person’s chance of 
living a good life, whatever her particular interests, desires, and beliefs 
happen to be. For example, living in a society that protects speech 
creates an environment within which each of us can pursue our 
particular interests, goals, needs, and development, whatever our 
interests happen to be. Is the purported right to bear arms like this 
paradigmatic fundamental right? 
Note 
1	 Todd C. Hughes and Lester H. Hunt, “The Liberal Basis of the Right 
to Bear Arms,” Public Affairs Quarterly (in press). 
Hugh LaFollette 2000 “Gun control.” Ethics 110: 263–81, 264. 
Review Copy

Here the definition advances the inquiry. Rather than activate readers’ 
established knowledge of the abstraction fundamental right or improve 
or clarify their understanding of the term, LaFollette stipulates the exact 
conditions that must be met for a right to be “fundamental.” This contri­
bution advances the inquiry by bringing the focus of the discussion to a 
particularly elusive and potentially controversial abstraction.
Sometimes definition works on how words are used by communities, 
rather than committing the writer (and reader) to a particular use of the 
term. Here researchers on the processes that turn occurrences into public 
events analyze how the terms parade and march are used by both lay 
people and researchers. 
Insiders may accept these forms [of public action] as natural cat­
egories of action, while detached observers can observe the ways 
in which the categories themselves are constructed and evolve over 
time. The “protest” is one such ritualized form that conveys roughly 
the same meaning to activists, police, news reporters, the general 
public, and social scientists alike. This shared meaning has blinded 
researchers to the constructed nature of “protest” and led them to 
assume an unproblematic isomorphism between form and content 
in their definitions of protest events. But, as Tilly (1978) first told 
us 20 years ago, the forms or repertoires of protest shift across time 
and space and new forms of protest are often created by adapting 
nonprotest forms to new purposes. Identical forms may carry very 
different content. “Parade” and “march” are two names for exactly 
the same form (McPhail and Wohlstein 1986), and the words can be 
used interchangeably even though in the United States in the 1990s 
the popular connotations of parade involve entertainment, while the 
word march popularly applies only to message events. Likewise, there 
are many kinds of rallies, from pep rallies to protest rallies: they share 
the form of a stationary gathering with speeches containing informa­
tional and emotional content, but vary greatly in the issue they may 
address. As protest repertoires evolve, message content is often added 
to event types created for other purposes. In the United States in the 
1990s, ceremonies, musical performances, literature distribution, and 
amateur street theater are all event types that are typically “apolitical,” 
but all have carried protest content in past times and places and can 
and do sometimes carry protest content in the 1990s.
Pamela E. Oliver and Daniel J. Myers 1999 “How events enter the public sphere.” American 
Journal of Sociology 105 (1): 38–67, 40–41. 
SUSTAINED DEFINITIONS 
145
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

146 
DEFINITION
Exercise 2 
Reread the passage by LaFollette on gun control. Write a two- or 
three-sentence definition of fundamental right: “In LaFollette’s 
discussion (2000) of the elements of debate over gun control, a fun­
damental right is....” You may want to include in your definition what 
is not a fundamental right. You might also try to come up with an 
example of a fundamental right other than the one LaFollette uses 
(freedom of speech). And you might find that his definition still leaves 
some things unclear, or uncertain. If so, you can include this uncer­
tainty in your definition: “It is unclear from this part of LaFollette’s 
discussion whether....”
Exercise 3 
In Verbal Hygiene (1995), from which the next passage is excerpted, 
Deborah Cameron, a linguist, investigates attitudes towards lan­
guage: people’s tendency to associate certain features of speech and 
writing with decency and orderliness, and other features with sloven­
liness and defiance. Her analysis of a particular historical expression 
of such attitudes makes use of an abstraction—moral panic—which 
has been at work in other disciplines: social theory, criminology, and, 
as she says, “cultural [history].” In the passage below, she provides a 
long definition of moral panic. 
  Summarize this passage by note-taking for gist, and then assemble 
these gists to compose your own definition of moral panic. Elaborate 
this definition by (1) finding, from your experience, other examples 
of moral panic; (2) explaining why moral panic is an important focus 
for inquiry; and/or (3) reflecting on the role of the media in produc­
ing moral panic. 
MORAL PANIC 
I am going to suggest that the grammar furore [controversy over 
school curriculum in Britain in the 1980s and early 1990s, accom­
panied by many claims in the press and from political figures that 
young people didn’t know grammar, and were illiterate] bears 
more than a passing resemblance to the sort of periodic hysteria 
cultural historians have labelled “moral panic” (Cohen 1987). 
Although there are differences as well as similarities, I believe 
Review Copy

the parallel is an illuminating one if we wish to understand why, 
in Simon Jenkins’s words, “the nation’s grammar stir[red] the 
political juices.” Before we consider the grammar debate itself, 
it is therefore worth looking more generally at the phenomenon 
of moral panic. 
  A moral panic can be said to occur when some social phenom­
enon or problem is suddenly foregrounded in public discourse 
and discussed in an obsessive, moralistic and alarmist manner, as 
if it betokened some imminent catastrophe. In the past hundred 
years in Europe and America we have had out-breaks of this kind 
centring on prostitution and “white slavery,” drugs, the “Jewish 
problem,” juvenile delinquency, venereal disease, immigration, 
communism, overpopulation, pornography, rock music and pit 
bull terriers. 
  These are not claimed as cases of moral panic simply because 
they inspired public anxiety: some degree of concern about many 
of them would be perfectly reasonable. But there are times when 
concern goes far beyond what is reasonable. In the words of the 
criminologist Jock Young, “moral panic” describes ‘cases where 
public reaction [is] completely disproportionate to the actual 
problem faced’ (Guardian, Letters, 9 July 1994). In a moral panic 
the scale of the problem is exaggerated, its causes are analysed 
in simplistic terms, anxiety about it climbs to intolerable levels, 
and the measures proposed to alleviate it are usually extreme and 
punitive. Analysts have suggested there are underlying sociological 
reasons why public concern gets “out of hand” in this way; and 
that vested interests are often at work encouraging it to do so. 
  Moral panic works by channelling, at least temporarily, the 
diffuse anxieties and hostilities that exist in any society towards a 
single, simple problem, such as “drugs,” “Jews” or “communism.” 
The discovery of the “problem” entails the creation of a scape­
goat—the junkie, the fifth columnist, the Zionist conspirator. 
This generic “folk devil” is usually identified with a real social 
group, whose members then bear the brunt of hostility and blame. 
Moral panic thus has the potential to lead to such extreme forms 
of repression as witch-hunts and pogroms, and in some cases may 
even be orchestrated for that purpose. 
SUSTAINED DEFINITIONS 
147
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

148 
DEFINITION
  Scholars have suggested that moral panic in the form we know 
it is a product of the modern mass media [....] The most common­
place incident or pedestrian report can be turned into an issue by 
media attention, whereas without that attention the same incident 
would go unnoticed and the report would gather dust. Having 
thus established something as an issue, the media can return to it 
under the guise of “responding to public concern”—even though 
that concern is of their own making. 
Deborah Cameron 1995 Verbal Hygiene. London: Routledge, 82–83.
7D The Social Profile of Abstractions and Their 
Different Roles in Different Disciplines
As we have seen, summarizing often entails using abstractions to marshal 
low-level details. Moreover, these abstractions—revolution, transnational 
communities, fundamental right—seem particularly likely to attract defi­
nitions. When we found abstractions in Chapter 5 to interpret the details 
of “Little Thumb,” the sky was the limit: Do you notice that the father’s 
attitude is odd? Let’s call that ambivalence! Do you notice Little Thumb 
hiding under the stool? Let’s call that circumstance concealment! 
But it is not quite right to say that the sky is the limit, for as we move from 
discipline to academic discipline we notice that some abstractions are 
more likely than others to participate in the scholarly conversation, and 
that different abstractions—what might be called prestige abstractions—
prevail in different disciplines. To put it another way, in each scholarly 
community—among sociologists, historians, chemists—some abstrac­
tions are more likely to engage current scholarly concerns and issues, and 
more likely to enter into exchange with other abstractions which are cur­
rently highly valued. For example, amongst the excerpts we have read so 
Review Copy

far, we have encountered the abstraction community at work in a number 
of research sites. Similarly, reflecting on the positions and representations 
of ethnic minorities discussed by subjects of Verkuyten et al.’s research in 
Chapter 4, we might interpret these conditions as related to marginality, 
an abstraction current in many disciplines in the humanities and social 
sciences. If in reading “Alert Bay” or the passages from Mary Englund’s 
memoirs in Chapter 5 you came up with an abstraction like colonial domi­
nation, you would have begun to participate in discussion which circulates 
amongst those engaged in post-colonial reasoning. Some abstractions 
enjoy more prestige than others: they attract scholarly interest. 
This phenomenon should come as no surprise. Genre theory predicts 
that language will reflect the shared attitudes and interests of the com­
munity that produces it. The circumstances of prestige and interest are 
described by a scholar cited earlier in this chapter. Hyland observes that 
knowledge in research communities is a “social accomplishment”—the 
outcome of people listening to one another, addressing one another, being 
in the same neighbourhood, sharing topics and questions, developing 
some issues and neglecting others, negotiating common understandings 
and priorities. 
Yet, while this kind of exchange is common to all disciplines, the 
sociality of knowledge—the ways in which knowledge is the product of 
social activities—differs somewhat in different disciplines, and the roles 
of communal abstractions differ accordingly. Roughly speaking, the dif­
ferences arrange themselves along the continuum from the so-called hard 
sciences at one end to the humanities at the other, with the social sciences 
in between. In her detailed and valuable study of writing in the humani­
ties and social sciences, focusing on literary studies, social history, and 
psychology, Susan Peck MacDonald (1994) observes that abstraction in 
literary study is much less constrained than it is in psychology. In literary 
study, interpretations of particulars can compete, and rival one another. 
Somebody might say, for example, that “Little Thumb” is not about 
ambivalence at all; rather, it is about rivalry—and there wouldn’t be any 
way of settling this contest, except perhaps to wait and see whose inter­
pretations got cited and used elsewhere, whose abstractions entered the 
conversation and got voiced by others. In psychology and the other social 
sciences, however, terms are used in ways that are methodical enough 
to “adjudicate” claims for the research community. MacDonald focuses 
especially on the abstraction attachment, which is in use in research in 
THE SOCIAL PROFILE OF ABSTRACTIONS 
149
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

150 
DEFINITION
developmental psychology. Attachment is the relationship infants or small 
children form with their caregivers. It has many complexities and many 
(measurable) aspects and dimensions, and researchers ask many ques­
tions about it. But they (more or less) agree on which behaviours and 
attitudes to call “attachment” and which ones not to call “attachment.” 
So, for example, if a literary scholar interpreted Little Thumb’s father’s 
conflicted attitude or his mother’s tearful protests as attachment, these 
researchers would not likely regard the statement as contributing to their 
conversation about children and families. On the contrary, as MacDonald 
contends, the consensus among researchers in developmental psychology 
on what constitutes attachment emerges from a “conceptual frame,” a 
means of “dismiss[ing] some kinds of interpretations and ask[ing] ques­
tions about others” (73). 
Not surprisingly, researchers in the sciences handle abstraction differ­
ently from their colleagues in the humanities. In Writing Science: Literacy 
and Discursive Power (1993), M.A.K. Halliday and J.R. Martin offer 
means of discriminating amongst the roles of abstraction in different dis­
ciplines. They distinguish between abstraction in the sciences—which, 
they say, is “technical,” and dedicated to the project of “classifying” the 
world—and abstraction in the humanities—which, they say, is not tech­
nical. For example, and borrowing the example from Martin, a physical 
Review Copy

geographer uses the abstract term abrasion as an element of a system that 
classifies forms of erosion (which is itself a technical abstraction). This 
system distinguishes abrasion from other types of erosion. If an historian, 
on the other hand, uses a term like solemnity to develop an interpretation 
of a memorial parade, solemnity does not classify the parade as technically 
distinct from, say, other forms of public gathering. 
Similarly, the historian writing on the unsolved murder of a Scot­
tish nanny used “contemporary knowledge,” “scientific knowledge of 
the day,” “common sense,” “dominant understandings,” and, especially, 
“discourses” to summarize and interpret a series of events in Western 
Canada in the 1920s. While his interpretation could invite correction 
and refinement or revision, or a suggestion of a better way to look at this 
case, it is unlikely that someone would say, “No, that cannot be classified 
as a discourse because a discourse is always and in every case x. What 
you refer to is not in fact x.” But a geographer identifying a formation 
in the landscape as the result of abrasion might be contradicted: it is not 
abrasion, it is another (possibly as yet unnamed) type of erosion. What 
the geographer has pointed to is properly situated at some other place in 
the system of classification. 
We can observe some of the classificatory work that abstractions do 
in the passage below, which is from an article that seeks to improve means 
of recognizing personality types. Among the terms that are in bold, which 
ones might you hear or utter in everyday, non-specialist talk? Of these, 
which would you estimate has a technical dimension in this context? 
Which terms seem to belong to the discipline of personality psychology 
and seem unlikely to make an everyday appearance? If we referred to 
Little Thumb’s father as prone to “hypervigilance and ruminative ration­
alization,” would personality researchers recognize our statement? 
Although members of each of the three high-distress groups are 
prone to anxiety and depression, they manifest very different per­
sonality structures. Although sensitized individuals (i.e., those with 
high distress and moderate restraint) report experiencing excessive 
negative affect, they do not seem to be especially predisposed to 
particular personality disorders (Weinberger and Schwartz, 1990). 
They are hypothesized to have moderate levels of ego development 
(conformist/conscientious) in which “neurotic” concerns about 
the inherent conflicts between the id (i.e., wishes, desires) and the 
superego (i.e., internalized prohibitions) are salient (cf. Fenichel, 
THE SOCIAL PROFILE OF ABSTRACTIONS 
151
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

152 
DEFINITION
1945). Consistent with traditional repression-sensitization literature 
(Byrne, 1961), the sensitized group is likely to cope with stress 
by employing hypervigilance and ruminative rationalization. 
Paradoxically, sensitizers tend to stew about nonessential aspects of 
their affects, often camouflaging the defensive nature of behavior 
that may often involve displacement. Their attachment model is 
hypothesized to vary within the preoccupied or fearful spectrum, 
where what is salient is a concern about their own worthiness in 
relationships (Griffin and Bartholomew, 1994; Mikulincer and 
Orbach, 1995). 
Daniel A. Weinberger 1998 “Defenses, personality structure and development: Integrating 
psychodynamic theory into a typological approach to personality.” Journal of Personality 66 
(6): 1061–77, 1074 (emphasis added).
Terms are working hard in this passage to classify behaviour, and being 
called on to improve and refine their technicality. But even in this highly 
classificatory atmosphere, we still see the signs that these terms are a “social 
accomplishment.” For one thing, we see the reporting expressions which 
trace these claims and terms to their origins in the research community:
• ... (Weinberger and Schwartz, 1990) ... 
• They are hypothesized to have ... 
• Consistent with traditional repression-sensitization literature 
(Byrne, 1961) ... 
• ... is hypothesized to vary ... 
We also see appositives: 
• moderate levels of ego development (conformist/conscientious) 
• the superego (i.e., internalized prohibitions) 
These appositive structures show the writer/researcher estimating the 
extent and stability of the terms (their social distribution), confirming 
their application for this purpose, and activating their components for 
this occasion. Even technical abstractions call for the cooperation and 
participation of readers. 
The social dimension of abstractions can also be seen in the role defi­
nition plays as a research instrument, as in the following two passages. In 
the first example, economists gather abstractions which have been used 
to analyze the economic behaviour charity or philanthropy: specifically, in 
this case, the action of making donations to colleges or universities.
Review Copy

A. A THEORY OF GIVING
In the charitable giving literature, social scientists have distinguished 
several possible motivations for donations: 1) altruism, 2) reciproc­
ity, and 3) direct benefits. Each of these will now be discussed in a 
college giving context. 
Thomas H. Bruggink and Kamran Siddiqui 1995 “An econometric model of alumni giving: 
A case study for a liberal arts college.” The American Economist 39 (2): 53–60, 53.
In the second example, physical anthropologists concentrate on the 
technical definition of blade to question longstanding assumptions of 
a connection between human evolution and the development of tech­
niques for producing these blades.
WHAT ARE BLADES AND WHAT HAVE PEOPLE SAID 
ABOUT THEM?
The standard morphological definition of a blade is any flake more 
than twice as long as it is wide, although some investigators prefer 
ratios of 2.5 or even 4 to 1. The technical definition is somewhat 
narrower, limiting use of the term to elongated blanks with parallel 
or slightly curving edges. 
Ofer Bar-Yosef and Steven L. Kuhn 1999 “The big deal about blades: Laminar technologies 
and human evolution.” American Anthropologist 101 (2): 322–38, 323.
These two instances of technical definition reveal different motivations 
for using the definitions as research instruments. In the first case, efforts 
to technicalize abstract names for giving money away could have practi­
cal applications in planning fund-raising drives. In the second case, the 
record of the discipline’s work on identifying blades will organize the 
researchers’ critical review of traditional classifications of eras of human 
development and progress (are these people Stone Age?). In order to do 
this, there has to be some social consensus amongst researchers on what 
counts as a blade. 
Researchers get so accustomed to the particular operations of 
abstractions in their field that these operations can seem “natural” to 
them—natural, that is, rather than social, and the outcome of exchange, 
cooperation, and negotiation. The way they use abstractions will seem 
to them “logical,” “accurate,” “clear,” “precise,” whereas other uses of 
abstraction will seem “illogical,” “inaccurate,” “vague,” or “fuzzy.” Stu­
dents, however, can have a different view. Taking courses in a variety of 
THE SOCIAL PROFILE OF ABSTRACTIONS 
153
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

154 
DEFINITION
disciplines, they are not so likely to see the different uses of abstractions 
as “natural.” In fact, in experiencing a range of sometimes contradic­
tory reactions to their work, they would be justified in thinking that the 
acceptability or unacceptability of uses of abstraction is arbitrary, rather 
than natural. Sometimes what they write is logical, sometimes it’s called 
illogical; sometimes what they write is clear, sometimes it is considered 
vague. Better than “natural” or “arbitrary,” let’s say “social.” Different 
groups engaged in different kinds of research-and-writing activities (or 
different discourse communities) develop, through their association and 
communal purposes, different techniques for making and representing 
knowledge. 
These differences can also affect the material conditions of learning 
in different courses. In disciplines that depend on technical abstractions, 
students spend a lot of time acquiring command of these terms and pre­
paring to have their command of these terms tested. This can be hard 
work. But it might be even harder work, for some, to acquire facility 
with the prestige abstractions of the humanities, where the operation of 
terms is more covert and tacit, and less openly recognized as a matter of 
consensus and collaboration.
Exercise 4 
Compare the presentation of definitions in two or three of your 
textbooks from different courses (if possible, choose textbooks from 
at least two different disciplinary areas, that is, from two of the areas 
named as sciences, social sciences, and humanities). Try to generalize 
about the approaches to definition preferred in each discipline. Con­
sider some of the following questions:
• Where do the definitions tend to occur? In a glossary? In the body 
of the textbook? 
• In general, do the definitions strike you as technical (i.e., stable and 
designed for classifying phenomena) or non-technical (provisional 
and open to reformulation by other writers)? 
• What kinds of definitions tend to be presented as brief appositions? 
• What kinds are presented as sustained definitions? 
• Are definitions ever attributed to specific researchers? 
• Do any terms receive more than one definition (proposed, per­
haps, by different researchers in the field)? 
Review Copy

Exercise 5 
Analyze the use of definition in a scholarly article, perhaps one that 
you are using for a research essay in one of your courses. Consider 
some of the following questions:
• Where do the definitions tend to occur? What sorts of words or 
terms tend to be defined? 
• How does the writer present definitions (i.e., apposition versus 
sustained)? 
• Are definitions attributed to other researchers? 
• What role does definition serve in the article? Does the writer 
seem to assume that the reader doesn’t know the meaning? Does 
definition establish common ground? Does definition establish a 
precise, technical meaning? 
• Are the meanings of words or terms contested or seen as having 
different possible meanings? 
Compare your findings with those of other students. 
THE SOCIAL PROFILE OF ABSTRACTIONS 
155
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

Review Copy

157
Chapter 2 put us in touch with our readers. The think-aloud protocol, an 
alternative method of giving reader feedback, put us in hearing range of 
the reading process, and revealed that readers employ a variety of strate­
gies for understanding while reading. We’ve seen that prevailing attitudes 
about language affect speakers’ judgements about usage. And the par­
ticular context or circumstance for reading affects readers’ expectations 
and reception of a written document. This chapter extends our study 
of readers by looking at various theories about reading and interpreta­
tion. Understanding readers’ social and cognitive responses will help us 
draw a more accurate portrait of our readers; in turn, we’ll become better 
predictors of their particular needs. To this end, we’ll continue practising 
think-aloud protocols, and, in this chapter, learn to analyze and convert 
reader feedback into strategies for revision.
8A Think-Aloud and Genre Theory
Writers know—or get to know—how to write in ways that will satisfy 
a situation, and readers read in ways that include their recognition of a 
situation. Genre theory begins with this tendency: the mutual recogni­
tion of and responses to recurring types of situations. It’s not rules and 
enforcements that make writing acceptable but contact with recognizable 
instances. Genre theory finds the regularities (not rules) of writing in 
readers’ and writers’ social experience. 
8
Readers Reading II
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

158 
READERS READING II
Think-aloud techniques coax out this readerly know-how. By 
focusing on readers’ experience of reading—readers’ efforts to under­
stand—think-aloud articulates what would otherwise remain unspoken. 
The focus is on what works for readers, what they expect, rather than on 
what satisfies rules. If you, as a writer, receive think-aloud protocols from 
several different readers, over time you will be able to identify occasions 
where readers typically have trouble, as well as those occasions where the 
trouble may be more or less idiosyncratic. Think-alouds also reveal both 
social and cognitive occasions for trouble. The following two examples 
of think-aloud illustrate the difference between a social response and a 
cognitive response.
The example below shows a reader stopping at an unqualified or 
unattributed claim.
TEXT
READER THINKING ALOUD
For centuries, women had no 
alternative but to marry or go 
into religious orders.
Well that might have been true in some cases but there 
were alternatives, a woman could become the housekeeper 
of a widowed father or brother for example, and different 
areas of Europe...
The think-aloud response reveals a particular reader’s position, which is 
conditioned by a particular experience in the world. This reader expects 
to find complexity, limitation, readiness for exceptions when she reads 
scholarly writing, expectations that typify writing in the research genres. 
Other readers—ones experienced in journalistic genres, for example—
might not stop at all at this statement. Other social expectations would 
condition their response in reading. 
How could the writer assist a reader who exhibits this sort of response? 
Perhaps simply acknowledging exceptions would help: e.g., “For centu­
ries, women had few alternatives but to marry or go into religious orders.” 
Or, perhaps, introducing reporting expressions and identifying the gen­
eralization as coming from a given researcher would help the reader see 
that the claim is part of a conversation. These changes would address 
scholarly readers’ social needs.
Sometimes, however, a reader might stop for reasons we could see 
as more cognitive than social—that is, a problem with understanding 
that would likely cause almost anybody to stop. The following example 
refers to an anthropological study of RVers. RVers are people who spend 
much of their year in recreational vehicles: motorhomes, truck-campers, 
Review Copy

trailers. In the original study, “boondockers,” who park their recreational 
vehicles—usually for free and unofficially—on (US) federal lands, are 
distinguished from “private-park RVers,” who stay in organized, com­
mercial facilities. In the example below, a reader looks for connections 
between statements: a reason for the second sentence to appear in the 
context of the first.
TEXT
READER THINKING ALOUD
RVers have pot-luck dinners, 
and they exchange addresses 
before they hit the road again. 
“Private-park” RVers object to 
the way “boondockers” live.
oh ... what’s the connection between these statements? 
pot-luck and addresses, that sounds like friendliness, but 
then there are objections. Maybe the boondockers don’t 
have pot-luck dinners? Is that why the private-park people 
object? Or maybe both types of RVers have rituals but they 
don’t get together? Is that the contradiction here? I don’t 
know. I need some help.
Having no guide from the writer, the reader struggles on her own. This 
could be seen as a cognitive response—a reaction which records efforts 
at reasoning. 
How could the writer of the example on RVers assist a reader with 
this sort of cognitive response? Research done in the early 1980s suggests 
that readers take cues from higher-level content in interpreting details, 
and in storing the meaning of those details (see Section 4B on levels 
of generality). The think-aloud response above indicates that a difficulty 
arises when the reader tries to understand the relation between details: 
address exchanges and pot-luck dinners seem positive, but objecting 
to how boondockers live seems negative. This cognitive need can be 
addressed by introducing abstractions which instruct the reader in how 
to use or relate the details.
RVers have pot-luck dinners, and they exchange addresses before they 
hit the road again. Yet this reciprocity occurs alongside stigmatiza­
tion. “Private-park” RVers object to the way “boondockers” live.
Now pot-luck dinners and address-exchange mean “reciprocity,” and 
reciprocity is posed as at least partly conflicting with “stigmatization.” 
The scholarly practices of abstraction we explored in earlier chapters are 
not just formalities: they have important cognitive functions as guides for 
readers, helping them relate details. 
Understanding and anticipating reader’s cognitive needs will be fur­
ther explored in Section 8B (“The Mental Desktop”) below. But first, 
THINK-ALOUD AND GENRE THEORY 
159
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

160 
READERS READING II
the social needs of readers warrant further study. In the example above 
of a social response involving the historical roles of women, the reader 
expresses concern based on the social expectation that academic writing 
will be careful about exceptions and qualifications. As we noted, this is 
not a response that all readers would have. Readers with different expec­
tations may accept this sort of generalization. In this sense, the response 
is social and not exactly cognitive. But in the example involving the 
RVers, while the response is clearly cognitive—an attempt to understand 
how details relate to one another—the suggestion to use abstractions to 
help a reader seems to rely on social expectations. For example, a reader 
accustomed to journalistic rather than academic genres might pause over 
the abstractions “reciprocity” and “stigmatization.” 
As we have seen in Chapter 7 (Section 7D, “The Social Profile of 
Abstractions and Their Different Roles in Different Disciplines”), 
abstractions have a social as well as a cognitive aspect. For instance, in the 
humanities and some social sciences, some abstractions enjoy more pres­
tige than others; these abstractions seem to have a current career in the 
life of the discipline, as meanings are challenged and changed over time. 
By contrast, in the sciences and (again) in some social sciences, tech­
nical abstractions are often the product of collaborative effort amongst 
researchers; the circumstances in which they are used are widely agreed 
upon, and their meanings remain stable over time. 
As useful as abstractions can be, not all genres call for them. We 
have seen that narrative may touch abstractions only intermittently, and 
in some cases not at all. Telephone books have high-level, generalizing 
titles—“Calgary,” “San Diego”—and then plunge into details of names 
and addresses and phone numbers. How do people manage with genres 
like telephone books, when they seem to have trouble with mention of 
pot-luck dinners? 
People using telephone books don’t read, stop, and say “I’m having 
trouble with this. What’s the connection here? What is this about?” They 
don’t need high-level abstractions to guide their understanding of the 
details of names and addresses because they bring a question of their own 
to the page (“What’s John’s phone number?”). The question provides a 
context for interpretation. Conversely, unless they are preparing for some 
RVing of their own and wondering whether to take lasagne ingredients, 
readers of “RVers have pot-luck dinners” may not have a ready-made 
context of interpretation for this statement. 
Review Copy

One way of understanding the contexts of interpretation and under­
standing is to apply relevance theory. The conditions which make a 
statement understandable are described by linguists Sperber and Wilson 
(1986) as having to do with relevance. The term “relevance,” in its eve­
ryday sense, is easy to grasp: someone might say, regarding mention of 
pot-luck dinners, “How is this relevant?” But for Sperber and Wilson, 
the term also measures degrees of relevance: a statement is relevant in 
inverse relation to the effort it takes to find the context in which it is 
meaningful. The more processing effort it takes a reader to find a context 
for interpretation, the less relevant the statement is for that reader. For 
example, in the following—
JANE: John, what’s your phone number? 
JOHN: 888-9999
—“888-9999” is highly relevant to Jane because the context—Jane’s ques­
tion—is immediately accessible. It takes very little effort for Jane to find 
this context. On the other hand, the reader who encountered mention of 
private-parkers’ criticisms of boondockers in the context of mention of 
pot-luck dinners and address-exchange has to make a much bigger effort 
to discover a larger context in which the criticism is meaningful. 
We can apply relevance theory to what we know about genre. Genres 
serve contexts which both reader and writer recognize, but this familiar­
ity doesn’t prevent apparent difficulties from arising as they did in the 
pot-luck dinner passage. Often the connection between adjacent state­
ments—the relevance of one to the other—is not clear on the surface. 
In reference genres, like encyclopaedias or computer manuals, sentences 
next to each other can seem to bear only a general relation to one another. 
Here is an entry from The Encyclopaedia of Aquarium Fish for Brachygo­
bius or “bumblebeefish”:
A native of Indian and south-east Asia. Has a yellow body with 
broad, vertical, dark brown or black bands. It is most at home and 
spends most of its time close to the bottom of the aquarium. 
David J. Coffey 1977 The Encyclopaedia of Aquarium Fishes in Color. New York: Arco, 70.
This is generally about the bumblebeefish, but what is the connection 
between the fish’s origin, its appearance, and its favourite spot? Does the 
author mean to say that, because of its dark-striped yellow body, the fish 
lurks at the bottom? What does the fish’s colour have to do with the 
THINK-ALOUD AND GENRE THEORY 
161
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

162 
READERS READING II
bottom of the aquarium? However, most readers would not ask such 
questions. The social use of encyclopaedia genres is such that readers 
bring information requirements with them (“What’s a bumblebeefish? I 
have to do a report for school”), and these requirements contribute to the 
context for interpretation of details.
So the reader’s context of understanding makes the sentence, “It is most at 
home ... close to the bottom of the aquarium,” relevant and meaningful. 
It has immediate contextual implications. 
Abstractions can also be analyzed for their relevance. Some abstrac­
tions are poised at the thresholds of many easily accessible contexts in 
certain disciplines. They can operate powerfully to make details meaning­
ful, although all abstractions, in academic contexts at any rate, probably 
contribute to relevance. In this sense, the writer responding to the reader’s 
cognitive need to understand the connection between pot-luck dinners 
and boondockers uses the abstractions “reciprocity” and “stigmatization” 
and builds a transition between two apparently contradictory details. At 
the same time, the abstractions also signal relevance by providing a con­
text in which the details are potentially meaningful.
Exercise 1 
Working with a partner, read the following three passages aloud. As 
you read, stop and offer comments about what works for you, as 
reader, and what gives you difficulty. Offer also your expectations 
of the particular passage by drawing on your background experi­
ence, or lack thereof, with the genre. Now analyze the think-aloud 
Review Copy

commentary. Are particular difficulties or successes in reading and 
understanding connected to
• prevailing rules for “correctness”? 
• relative experience with the genre? 
• cognitive needs? 
• social expectations? 
How might the writers of the respective passages revise in order to 
address your responses?
PASSAGE 1: AN ENCYCLOPAEDIA ENTRY 
KOSOVO, small south central republic in what was YUGO­
SLAVIA between MACEDONIA, SERBIA, and ALBANIA. 
Its 10,000 ha/24,700 acres of vineyards in spectacular inland 
mountain and valley settings are largely devoted to the production 
of Amselfelder branded wine for sale in Germany. Train-loads 
of light red are sent in bulk to Belgrade for STABILIZATION, 
sweetening, and shipment. The light aromatic fruit of the PINOT 
NOIR was certainly the inspiration behind this brand. CABER­
NET FRANC, MERLOT, PROKUPAC, and GAMAY are also 
part of the region’s production.
  Kosovo is a poor region and throughout the 1980s was heavily 
dependent on its exports of the Amselfelder range. This depend­
ence became a serious liability when Yugoslav turmoil made the 
German importers realize how easily other eastern European 
vineyard areas could copy the style. 
A.H.M. 
Angela Muir 1994 “Kosovo.” In The Oxford Companion to Wine, ed. Jancis Robinson. 
Oxford: Oxford UP, 542.
PASSAGE 2: THE BEGINNING OF A STUDENT ESSAY
Since time began there has been a war between the sexes. In many 
situations, there is a power struggle between men and women. 
In today’s society, social changes have given women more power, 
but research shows that they still are perceived as the “lesser” sex. 
The question is: “What effect has social change had on women’s 
status?” Is the power struggle coming to an end or is it taking 
THINK-ALOUD AND GENRE THEORY 
163
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

164 
READERS READING II
a new forms? In this paper I will look at the research done by 
Penelope Eckert (1990) and Kabeer (1994) on Bangladeshi gar­
ment workers in London.
PASSAGE 3: THE BEGINNING OF A STUDENT ESSAY
In Camerons’ article (1995) she observes that improper grammar 
can cause people to make unfair or discriminatory judgements 
about the speakers or writers who make these errors. Attitudes 
towards language are often based on social prejudice: low-class 
people are condemned by members of the elite for being lazy and 
undisciplined. As Milroy and Milroy point out (1991), prejudices 
that would be unacceptable to express in any other context are 
acceptable in talking about grammar. (Milroy and Milroy 1991) 
Nevertheless, I believe that it is important for people to have the 
skills necessary to express themselves in ways that earn them the 
social respect they deserve.
8B The Mental Desktop
We will explore one more technique for composing our portrait of the 
reader. Derived from cognitive studies, this technique pictures the reader 
organizing a mental desktop: a space on which statements arrive, one 
after the other, as the reader advances through a text. 
If your actual desktop is like many people’s, it gets covered with piles of 
paper, and you end up paying attention only to what’s on top—the most 
recently arrived material—until these pages themselves get covered by 
Review Copy

new arrivals. Reading can be like this, too, if what we are reading is very 
difficult for us: we concentrate on one sentence or a few sentences at a 
time. In the meantime, previous sentences are sometimes forgotten. 
The reader’s mental desktop is a finite area. It can’t get bigger. In 
other words, the reader’s attention span—or short-term memory—is 
inelastic. No matter how hard readers try (or how much you wish they 
would try), they can concentrate on only a relatively small number of 
things at a time. This is the way the human brain works. Writers have to 
learn to live with this inescapable condition of reading comprehension. 
This small, inelastic space for paying attention may make the reader 
seem like a limited being, hardly worth addressing with an interesting 
paper. Moreover, the limitation does not match other qualities of our 
own reading experience: we read articles, chapters, books, and we have 
a sense of remembering a lot more than the handful of items that hap­
pened to be the last ones to pass across our mental desktop. 
According to the theories behind the mental desktop image, readers 
manage their desktops—successfully under good circumstances, less suc­
cessfully under other circumstances. Up to a certain point, it’s the writer 
who is responsible for these circumstances. 
To the picture of the reader and desktop we will add a management 
device. The management device arranges and uses mental space. The 
mental space is furnished with, in addition to the desktop, a sort of side-
table for temporary storage, and filing cabinets for long-term storage. To 
manage the flow of information and make the most of it, the reader oper­
ates the management device to assign statements to these different mental 
spaces. The reader operates the device to detect the following: 1) items 
that can be combined; 2) items that can be put aside; 3) items that can be 
neglected; and 4) items that can be sent into long-term memory. 
To illustrate how readers can manage their mental desktops, let’s 
consider the following passage.
“ASIAN CORPORATIONS” 
Corporate growth—the development of multiunit firms—can 
be explained in terms of business response to the conditions of 
industrialized markets. According to Chandler (1977), when markets 
grow, businesses need to develop efficient systems of management 
to handle increased volume and coordinate multiple activities. 
Another theory also explains corporate development in industrial 
THE MENTAL DESKTOP 
165
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

166 
READERS READING II
economies in terms of the market: as the number of transactions 
increases in the process of transforming raw materials into market 
goods, uncertainty increases (Williamson 1977, 1981, 1983, 1985). 
To reduce uncertainty, businesses grow, internalizing transactions 
and thereby governing them more reliably. These explanations of 
corporate development, however, do not fully account for corporate 
growth in Japan and South Korea, where prevailing organizational 
structures predate industrialization. 
  The Japanese economy is dominated by large, powerful, and 
relatively stable enterprise groups. One type of enterprise group 
consists of horizontal linkages among a range of large firms; these 
are intermarket groups spread through different industrial sectors. 
A second type of enterprise group connects small- and medium-
sized firms to a large firm. These networks are normally groups of 
firms in unrelated businesses that are joined together by central 
banks or by trading companies. In pre-war Japan, these groups 
were linked by powerful holding companies that were each under 
the control of a family. The zaibatsu families exerted strict control 
over the individual firms in their group through a variety of fiscal 
and managerial methods. During the U.S. occupation, the largest 
of these holding companies were dissolved, with the member firms 
of each group becoming independent. After the occupation, how­
ever, firms (e.g., Mitsui, Mitsubishi, and Sumitomo) regrouped 
themselves. 
  In Japan in the Tokugawa era, from 1603 to 1867, a rising 
merchant class developed a place for itself in the feudal shogunate. 
Merchant houses did not challenge the traditional authority structure 
but subordinated themselves to whatever powers existed. Indeed, a 
few houses survived the Meiji Restoration smoothly, and one in par­
ticular (Mitsui) became a prototype for the zaibatsu. Other zaibatsu 
arose early in the Meiji era from enterprises that had been previously 
run for the benefit of the feudal overlords, the daimyo. In the Meiji 
era, the control of such han enterprises moved to the private sphere 
where, in the case of Mitsubishi, former samurai became the owners 
and managers. In all cases of the zaibatsu that began early in the Meiji 
era, the overall structure was an intermarket group. The member 
firms were legal corporations, were large multiunit enterprises, and 
could accumulate capital through corporate means. 
Review Copy

  In South Korea, the chaebol—large, hierarchically arranged sets 
of firms—are the dominant business networks. In 1980–81, the 
government recognized 26 chaebol, which controlled 456 firms. In 
1985, there were 50 chaebol that controlled 552 firms. Their rate of 
growth has been extraordinary. In 1973, the top five chaebol control­
led 8.8% of the GNP, but by 1985 the top four chaebol controlled 
45% of the GNP. In 1984, the top 50 chaebol controlled about 
80% of the GNP. The chaebol are similar to the pre-war zaibatsu 
in size and organizational structure. Their structure can be traced 
to premodern political practices and to pre-World War II Japanese 
industrial policy which directed Korean development after Japan’s 
colonization of Korea in 1910. 
Adapted from Gary G. Hamilton and Nicole Woolsey Biggart 1988 “Market, culture, and 
authority: A comparative analysis of management and organization in the Far-East.” American 
Journal of Sociology 94, 552–94. 
As mentioned above, items can be combined to form a single item, thus 
leaving room on the mental desktop for new items to be concentrated on:
“Mitsubishi ... Toshiba ... Sumitomo ...” OK, these three examples all 
show family networks associated with corporate growth ... I’ll combine 
them as such. Now there’s room for more.
Items can be put aside but kept nearby on the mental side-table as not 
centrally relevant at this point but liable to be necessary at any moment:
Hmm ... Most of this isn’t about family, but family is bound to come 
up again. I’ll just put the idea of family and corporate growth here, 
within easy reach when it’s needed.
Items can be neglected, left to fall off the desktop when other material 
arrives—
I see. The American market is just an example, not part of the main focus.
Items can be sent to long-term memory, in particular those files which 
house all we know but aren’t thinking about right now:
Ah, American markets don’t seem to be important to this discussion. I 
won’t be needing this. I’ll file it.
When there is no immediate, accessible context for interpreting details, 
the reader can’t use them for their contextual implications. Here we see 
THE MENTAL DESKTOP 
167
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

168 
READERS READING II
a cognitive outcome of a structural feature: a passage that stays low, and 
doesn’t make higher, interpretive levels accessible, can confound a reader.
Here’s Mitsubishi, here’s Toshiba, and now here’s Sumitomo ... hmm ... 
Does this mean cartel? Or some other form of market domination? Is it 
good? Is it bad? I’m not sure. I’d better keep all this material and these 
possibilities here on my desk.
Finally, when the management device is not properly directed to a clear 
context for interpretation, it may make some very inefficient decisions 
about long-term storage. Encountering a big claim early in an essay, 
and finding it neither developed nor repeated in subsequent passages, 
the device may judge that it is not important enough to keep handy. 
So the claim gets sent to the long-term memory files—that big, elas­
tic capacity that houses the person’s experience and knowledge of the 
world.
American markets haven’t come up again. I predict they won’t. I’ll send 
this to long-term storage and make room for other things.
Now the material is not exactly forgotten, but it is no longer in mind. 
And, stored in long-term files, it is relatively inaccessible compared to 
items on the desktop and on temporary side-tables. If the device has 
made a mistake, and it turns out that this material is needed, the reader 
has to go and retrieve the item from the long-term files.
Now, what’s this about? It seems to presuppose ideas about American 
markets. Do I have something on that? Maybe in my files ... where did 
I put that?
Review Copy

The retrieval takes up attention capacity. During the time the reader 
spends retrieving something from long-term storage (assuming he can 
retrieve it, and hasn’t simply forgotten it), the desktop gets untidy. When 
he returns, he finds that things have fallen off, and have to be recalled by 
re-reading.
Our earlier discussion of levels of generality (see Chapter 4B) can also 
help us analyze a reader’s experience of a passage like “Asian Corpora­
tions.” Stranded in a valley of detail, the reader has to find his own way 
out.
Exercise 2 
Read the following revised version of the “Asian Corporations” pas­
sage. The passages in bold attempt to manage a reader’s mental 
desktop. Note that some of these passages belong to the original, 
while others are new. How do these revisions succeed in addressing 
your own responses to the original passage? How do they assist a 
reader’s management device to help keep the mental desktop orga­
nized (see the four examples of uses above)?
THE MENTAL DESKTOP 
169
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

170 
READERS READING II
“ASIAN CORPORATIONS” 
Corporate growth—the development of multiunit firms—can 
be explained in terms of business response to the conditions 
of industrialized markets. According to Chandler (1977), when 
markets grow, businesses need to develop efficient systems of 
management to handle increased volume and coordinate multiple 
activities. Another theory also explains corporate development 
in industrial economies in terms of the market: as the number 
of transactions increases in the process of transforming raw 
materials into market goods, uncertainty increases (Williamson 
1977, 1981, 1983, 1985). To reduce uncertainty, businesses 
grow, internalizing transactions and thereby governing them 
more reliably. These explanations of corporate development, 
however, do not fully account for corporate growth in Japan 
and South Korea, where prevailing organizational structures 
predate industrialization. While the historical conditions 
of industrialization may explain why North American and 
European corporations operate the way they do, Japanese and 
South Korean corporate structure can be better explained as 
the result of other conditions: cultural factors which favour 
family links and which have all along adapted corporate 
management to older, pre-industrial forms of authority. 
  The Japanese economy is dominated by large, powerful, and 
relatively stable enterprise groups of business units—groups 
whose structure can be traced to traditional patterns of author­
ity and family connection. Contemporary corporate structures 
in Japan are distinguished by characteristic systems of family 
connection that have persisted throughout this century, re-
emerging powerfully in the post-war period. Today in Japan, 
one type of enterprise group consists of horizontal linkages 
among a range of large firms; there are intermarket groups spread 
through different industrial sectors. A second type of enterprise 
group connects small- and medium-sized firms to a large firm. 
The networks of large firms are the modern descendents of the 
pre-World War II zaibatsu—powerful, family-controlled hold­
ing companies. These networks are normally groups of firms in 
unrelated businesses that are joined together by central banks or 
Review Copy

by trading companies. In pre-war Japan, these groups were linked 
by powerful holding companies that were each under the control 
of a family. The zaibatsu families exerted strict control over the 
individual firms in their group through a variety of fiscal and 
managerial methods. During the U.S. occupation, the largest 
of these holding companies were dissolved, with the member 
firms of each group becoming independent. After the occupa­
tion, however, firms (e.g., Mitsui, Mitsubishi, and Sumitomo) 
regrouped themselves. While market conditions can account 
for some features of the Japanese corporate structure, these 
persistent network linkages are better explained by cultural 
frames which influenced the organization of commerce long 
before industrialization reached Japan. 
  Commercial growth in Japan arose amidst and adapted 
to traditional authority in a feudal rather than an industrial 
culture. In Japan in the Tokugawa era, from 1603 to 1867, a 
rising merchant class developed a place for itself in the feudal 
shogunate. Merchant houses did not challenge the traditional 
authority structure but subordinated themselves to whatever 
powers existed. Indeed, a few houses survived the Meiji Restora­
tion smoothly, and one in particular (Mitsui) became a prototype 
for the zaibatsu. Other zaibatsu arose early in the Meiji era from 
enterprises that had been previously run for the benefit of the 
feudal overlords, the daimyo. In the Meiji era, the control of such 
han enterprises moved to the private sphere where, in the case of 
Mitsubishi, former samurai became the owners and managers. 
In all cases of the zaibatsu that began early in the Meiji era, the 
overall structure was an intermarket group. The member firms 
were legal corporations, were large multiunit enterprises, and 
could accumulate capital through corporate means. In Japan, 
the corporate framework of industrial society preceded the 
appearance of expanded industrial markets, and that frame­
work—indigenous and culturally specific—persists today. 
  Like the Japanese economy, the South Korean economy 
depends on large groups of firms which are the descendants 
of traditional forms of authority and commercial coopera­
tion. Today in South Korea, the chaebol—large, hierarchically 
THE MENTAL DESKTOP 
171
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

172 
READERS READING II
arranged sets of firms—are the dominant business networks. In 
1980–81, the government recognized 26 chaebol, which control­
led 456 firms. In 1985, there were 50 chaebol that controlled 
552 firms. Their rate of growth has been extraordinary. In 1973, 
the top five chaebol controlled 8.8% of the GNP, but by 1985 
the top four chaebol controlled 45% of the GNP. In 1984, the 
top 50 chaebol controlled about 80% of the GNP. But this 
surge of growth—recent and unmistakable—is neverthe­
less a phenomenon related to older patterns of commercial 
affiliation. The chaebol are similar to the pre-war zaibatsu in 
size and organizational structure. Their structure can be traced to 
premodern political practices and to pre-World War II Japanese 
industrial policy which directed Korean development after Japan’s 
colonization of Korea in 1910. Intermarket linkages among 
business units coordinated by family affiliation rather than 
managerial principles are expressions of preindustrial culture 
as much as they are responses to expanding markets.
Exercise 3
This exercise resembles the activity discussed in section 5B, where 
low-level stories were interpreted by finding abstractions that 
expressed their significance. The passage below is flat: it does not 
ascend to higher levels of generality and abstraction to claim the rel­
evance of the data presented. Revise the passage by adding sentences 
with higher-level abstractions or phrasings to guide the reader’s man­
agement device. You might want to break the passage into several 
paragraphs.
  Here are a few suggestions for building higher-level abstractions to 
guide the reader’s management device:
• find general names for what the passage is about and for what the 
noted changes and practices belong to;
• identify the main characteristics of the practices and situations 
described;
• express the significance of the data: what do we learn by finding 
out about these ancient occurrences?
Review Copy

At ancient buffalo-jumps, like the one at Head-Smashed-In, 
Alberta, prehistoric hunters drove buffalo over cliffs to their 
death. From the beginnings of this practice, about 5,700 years 
ago, until about 2,000 years ago, the hunters consumed only the 
choice cuts of the slaughtered animals and left the rest to rot. 
Then practices changed. The hunters began dragging much of 
their kill at Head-Smashed-In to flat land close by. After drying 
or roasting the bison flesh on hearths, they crushed the animals’ 
long bones into splinters, boiling the fragments to render bone 
grease. To boil bones, prehistoric families first had to heat stones 
in a fire and then drop them into a hide-lined pit filled with 
water. Good boiling stones were rare at Head-Smashed-In, for 
the local sandstone crumbled during heating. So band members 
brought their own stones with them—tons of quartzite and other 
rocks from more than a mile away. The bone-boiling process was 
necessary to the production of pemmican. During prehistoric 
times, the Peigan and other members of the Blackfoot Nation 
rendered bone grease to stir into mixtures of smashed dried meat 
and Saskatoon berries, making massive 40-kilogram bags of the 
long-lasting food. The grease not only added to the usable protein 
in the meat but made the mixture extremely stable. According to 
one account from the Canadian fur trade, a bag of pemmican was 
slit open and safely consumed 20 years after it had been prepared. 
After techniques for producing pemmican developed, later bands 
began to pitch semipermanent camps in the nearby Oldman River 
Valley. Having extensive stores of pemmican for the winter, they 
no longer had to range so far afield for food.
Adapted from Heather Pringle 1988 “Boneyard enigma.” Equinox May–June: 87–104.
Exercise 4
Exchange your own writing—perhaps a draft of an essay or even an 
old essay—with a classmate and practice think-aloud protocol. Using 
this information, try to revise your writing to better assist your 
reader’s management device.
THE MENTAL DESKTOP 
173
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

Review Copy

175
Scholarly writing is often ridiculed in the popular media. Like the speech 
of people who have not internalized schoolroom rules of usage, it is 
deplored by those who believe in “good” writing. Most scholarly expres­
sion goes on out of earshot of the rest of the world—in scholarly journals 
and at scholarly conferences. But when the sounds of scholarship do leak 
into more public settings, they can come in for some criticism. In this 
chapter, we will examine some of the stylistic features that give rise to 
that criticism.
9A Common and Uncommon Sense
Criticism of scholarly expression is sometimes most vociferous where 
academic research meets public policy. For instance, when a curriculum 
document reaches the attention of the popular press, those wordings 
which are traceable to otherwise secluded research domains can leave 
people indignant or amused. The following example of such “edubabble” 
comes from a curriculum report that was presented to Ontario’s Minister 
of Education:
A certain minimum fluency is required before students are able to 
reflect critically on their own language use. Attention to language 
forms and conventions should therefore increase gradually as lan­
guage skill develops and should arise specifically out of the reading 
and writing being done. Students are more likely to achieve good 
9
Scholarly Styles I
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

176 
SCHOLARLY STYLES I
punctuation and spelling and surface correctness through extensive 
practice in reading and writing rather than conscious attempts to 
apply rules out of context.
The newspaper article that cites this passage describes it as “bureaucratic 
babble” and lines up readers who characterize it as “meaningless and 
offensive,” “pretentious,” and “arrogant.” The article then goes on to 
report that the passage (along with the 100-page report it came from) 
was rewritten in plain language:
Students are more likely to learn correct language uses, punctuation, 
and spelling by reading and writing than by learning rules in isolation. 
Ottawa Citizen, reprinted in The Vancouver Province, 5 July 1994, A14.
Whatever the defects of the original or the virtues of the rewrite, the 
rewrite gets rid of material like “a certain minimum fluency is required,” 
“attention to language forms and conventions,” and “through extensive 
practice in reading and writing rather than conscious attempts to apply 
rules out of context.” Such expressions bear the marks of scholarly activ­
ity. Events are turned into things (“x pays attention to” y = “attention to” 
y; “x attempts to apply” y to z = “attempts to apply” y to z), and so are 
attributes (“x is fluent” = “fluency”). As verbs and adjectives are turned 
into nouns, agents of actions and possessors of attributes disappear (Who 
pays attention or attempts to apply? Who is fluent? Who requires flu­
ency?). In getting rid of these features and emphasizing the agents (in this 
case the students), the rewrite might be said to restore “common sense” 
to the original. But at the same time, it seems to reduce the conceptual 
complexity of the original: for example, the emphasis on “language forms 
and conventions” to a set of “rules.” 
With genre theory in mind, we could argue that it’s not that the 
original is in itself bad, or that the reaction is mistaken. Rather, there has 
been a series of genre violations: the writers of the original transferred 
the sounds and styles of scholarly research too directly to a non-research 
document, in this case one meant to be read by government officials. And 
the ministry officials who objected and the rewriters who responded to 
these objections failed to acknowledge the fact that the original curricu­
lum document was addressed to professionals: teachers and educational 
administrators who are familiar with these uses of language. In other 
words, the situation that the original document served did not include 
Review Copy

many readers of the Ottawa Citizen or the indignant politicians whose 
consternation was reported. 
This example illuminates the conflict between what Halliday and 
Martin (1993) have called the common sense of, roughly speaking, 
our everyday experience of the world and the uncommon sense of the 
learned domains of research. 
From a distance, it seems tempting to vouch for common sense and 
to deny uncommon sense as unnatural, pretentious, or even deliberately 
deceiving. Yet common sense has also been the source of some ques­
tionable ideas—that whales are fish (to use one of Halliday and Martin’s 
examples)—or less innocent ideas, such as that women are inferior to 
men, or that children benefit from stern discipline, or that rivers are 
a good place to get rid of industrial waste. That is to say, sometimes 
“common sense” is only unexamined assumptions which perpetuate 
conditions that benefit some people and disadvantage others—or ben­
efit no one in the long run. Although these assumptions are so widely 
held—that is, so common—that they appear self-evident, they may in 
fact be wrong. 
Research activities seek to subject common-sense assumptions to 
examination, and this process of examination is represented in the dis­
tinctive language of the scholarly genres. For example, in a common-sense 
world, we all understand the word think and use it in various situations: 
[Fred and Jane are taking a car trip.]
FRED: When did we get gas?
JANE: Hmm. Let me think. 
FRED: We’re going an average of 85 
kph. When will we get to Mariposa?
JANE (looking at a map): Wait. 
I’m thinking.
FRED: What are you doing?
JANE (looking at a map): I’m 
thinking about where we should 
go next. 
But cognitive scientists who want to find out how people think would 
distinguish amongst these situations, seeing that one is a matter of 
remembering, another is a matter of calculating an answer to a particu­
lar question, and the third is a more complex procedure. For the third 
case, they might (and have) come up with a specialized term: nonspecific 
goal strategy in problem solving. Rarely would we hear this term outside 
COMMON AND UNCOMMON SENSE 
177
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

178 
SCHOLARLY STYLES I
scholarly circles—or, indeed, outside the even smaller circle of the disci­
pline of cognitive science. 
Some advocates of plain language and common sense complain 
about this kind of wording. They suggest that it is an unnecessarily 
complicated way of speaking. Why not just say “thinking”? They suggest 
that, by choosing the specialist term, research writers exclude readers who 
rely on common sense and isolate scholars in a false distinction made of 
elaborate language. And some suggest that this kind of wording is not 
only pretentious and exclusionary, but also hard to read. Let’s examine 
the grounds for these complaints. 
9B Is Scholarly Writing Unnecessarily Complicated, 
Exclusionary, or Elitist? 
Later sections of this chapter will offer broader perspectives on this ques­
tion, looking at how the structure of an expression like nonspecific goal 
strategy in problem solving cooperates with other features of scholarly 
genres to produce the discourse which typifies and maintains research 
activities. In the meantime, we could grant that, sometimes, scholars 
might be advised to say “thinking” instead of “nonspecific goal strategy 
in problem solving.” 
But we can make this concession to critics of scholarly style only 
in light of other considerations. In efforts to reorganize common-sense 
knowledge of the world into uncommon sense, researchers analyze issues 
and entities into smaller parts, differentiating those parts into segments 
which may be scarcely visible to the untrained observer. Those seg­
ments—produced by research activity—then become objects of study, 
and to report results precisely it becomes necessary to apply a different 
name to each of these objects. 
Be that as it may, our opinion of the wording nonspecific goal strategy 
in problem solving may come down to our opinion of research activity 
itself. If we believe the results of the research are useful or important, we’re 
likely to identify the inherent complexities of expression as necessary; if 
we don’t, we’re more likely to dismiss those complexities as unnecessary. 
This is a big issue, and it is further inflated by our culture’s ambivalence 
toward higher learning and “science.” On the one hand, we invest heav­
ily—materially and socially—in professional research. Tax and corporate 
dollars support scholars’ activities; experts are called in as authorities on 
Review Copy

many matters, from family life to outer space. But, on the other hand, 
we not only ridicule expert language but also question our investment in 
“pure” research that doesn’t have any immediately foreseeable use. If we 
are concerned about famines on earth, we may be skeptical of funding 
for research into particle physics. Moreover, we may be troubled about 
the applications of research in new technologies: we complain that they 
have spoiled cherished aspects of our customary ways of life or we worry 
about the ethical implications of, for example, new medical technologies. 
Our judgement about the complications of scholarly language would 
eventually have to take into account this ambivalence. For now, we might 
say that, if the activities that appear to depend on wordings like nonspe­
cific goal strategy in problem solving have good results, then the wording is 
not unnecessarily complicated—though it may still be complicated. And 
one of these results might be a clearer picture of how people reason: 
how certain kinds of schoolroom problem-questions (If A is travelling at 
50 kph and B is going 56 kph in the opposite direction ...) may trigger in 
children reasoning different from that which the teacher anticipates, or 
how a doctor’s diagnostic questioning may trigger replies that obscure 
rather than illuminate a patient’s condition. 
Often accompanying the criticism that scholarly writing is unneces­
sarily complicated is the accusation that it’s elitist. In fact, there can be 
little doubt that scholarly style excludes many readers. Even within the 
larger academic community, readers who are members of one discipline 
can be excluded from the ongoing discourses of other disciplines—
paleontologists and cognitive scientists do not tend to understand one 
another’s research very well. While researchers seem to be generally 
respectful of those working in other fields, smirks and raised eyebrows are 
not unknown when a researcher comes within earshot of the wordings of 
another discipline. The “postmodernism” of the humanities and some of 
the social sciences can inspire ridicule amongst those who do not work 
with those terms. And, equally, the classifying vocabularies of the sciences 
and some other social sciences can arouse suspicion amongst those who 
work with less technical terminologies. 
Genre theory predicts that this will be so: the more highly defined 
and particular the situations which language serves, the more distinc­
tive will that language be, and the more inscrutable to people unfamiliar 
with those situations. So we might also predict that any social group—
skateboarders or pilots or childcare workers—will develop and maintain 
UNNECESSARILY COMPLICATED, EXCLUSIONARY, OR ELITIST? 
179
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

180 
SCHOLARLY STYLES I
speech styles which serve and represent the routines which organize their 
activities. And these styles will, to a greater or lesser degree, exclude peo­
ple who don’t belong to the group and incur the risk of social reactions 
to that exclusion.
9C Nominal Style: Syntactic Density
Criticism of scholarly expression—in particular, the claim that it’s hard 
to read—has sometimes focused on what has been called its heavily 
nominal style. This characterization refers to its preference for nouns 
over verbs, and the way that preference results in long noun phrases (i.e., 
a phrase formed by a noun and all its modifiers) like the one that we have 
been using as our example: nonspecific goal strategy in problem solving is 
longer than thinking. This difference is visible to the naked eye and needs 
very little grammatical analysis to reveal it. Once nouns are preferred over 
verbs, noun phrases bear a particularly heavy load, carrying content that 
would otherwise have been distributed throughout the sentence. These 
concentrated loads appear likely to challenge readers on two fronts: (1) 
the syntactic density of noun “strings,” and (2) the potential ambiguity 
of these strings. Let’s begin by examining syntactic density, the first of 
these conditions. 
In English, the noun phrase is capable of expanding by picking 
up other sentence elements. In the following series, you will see noun 
phrases growing by absorbing material from other parts of the sentence.
(a) the noun phrase absorbs an adjective
This behaviour is criminal.
This criminal behaviour ...
(b) the noun phrase absorbs another noun
The reports record offences.
The offence reports ...
(c) the noun phrase absorbs a predicate—verb and adverb
Some strategies work forward.
Some forward-working strategies ... 
(d) the noun phrase absorbs a predicate—verb and (object) noun
Strategies solve problems.
Problem-solving strategies ... 
Review Copy

There are limits to what the noun phrase can absorb, but these examples 
don’t even approach those limits. They exemplify only some of the sim­
plest noun-phrase expansions. 
You can see that the capacity of the noun phrase to incorporate other 
sentence elements provides one of the normal economies of English. For 
example, by installing “work forward” in the noun phrase (c), the writer 
leaves the rest of the sentence free to carry other information: 
Forward-working strategies enable the problem solver to explore 
the problem space to see what moves are possible. 
Speakers of English use the capacity of the noun phrase all the time 
to achieve economies of expression. Instead of saying—
My car has broken down. It is brand new.
—the speaker can economize, presenting the same information in fewer 
words:
My brand-new car has broken down.
Yet, while this appears to be the same information, the choice between 
the two versions is not entirely free or arbitrary: it has to do with topic 
development. For instance, if the speaker were to continue reporting his 
predicament, the second version would tend to lead to development of 
the “break-down” topic—
My brand-new car has broken down. I was going along and heard 
this BUMP-BUMP.
—whereas the first version would tend to pave the way for development 
of the “brand-new” topic:
My car has broken down. It’s brand new. I just got it last month.
In reflecting on the noun phrase’s capacity to absorb material from 
other parts of the sentence in ways that are patterned rather than arbitrary, 
let us first take a cognitive approach. Consider the effect of the heavy noun 
phrase on readers’ working conditions. How does the decoding of a long 
noun phrase impose on readers’ limited resources for paying attention? 
Most theory and research in this area suggests that as readers make 
their way through sentences, they predict, on the basis of the word they 
are currently reading, the syntactic category of the following word or 
phrase. So, if readers encounter a determiner like—
NOMINAL STYLE: SYNTACTIC DENSITY 
181
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

182 
SCHOLARLY STYLES I
the ...
—they predict, as most likely but not inevitable, that a noun will come 
next:
the goal ...
If their expectations are disappointed, and they find not a noun but an 
adjective—
the nonspecific ...
—they recover easily, and now predict a noun, since adjectives following 
determiners have a high probability of being followed by a noun:
The	
nonspecific	
goal
determiner 	
modifier (adj)	
nominal head (noun)
This seems to complete the noun phrase, and readers are ready for a 
verb—the goal is something, or does something. They predict a verb. But 
what if they encounter another noun? 
the nonspecific goal strategy ...
the 	
nonspecific 	
goal 	
strategy 
determiner 	
modifier 	
modifier 	
Nominal head 
	
(adj) 	
(noun) 	
(noun)
Now they revise their hypothesis about the sentence and its structure: 
goal is not the head of the noun phrase, but only another modifier. Notice 
that we have not yet approached the structural limits of the noun phrase. 
Somebody could conceivably write “the nonspecific goal strategy research 
innovation project.” 
Analysis of the above procedure first isolates noun strings—nouns 
modified by other nouns—as a site of such failed-then-revised-hypoth­
eses sequences. Then it proposes that these recursive predictions burden 
readers’ attention capacity. (We could see this burden as a micro version 
of the larger efforts after meaning that we explored in Chapter 8, when 
we inspected the state of readers’ mental desktops as they worked to con­
struct the relevance of lower-level information to higher-level concepts.) 
So far, our evaluation of the syntactic density of noun phrases has been 
cognitive only: we have been estimating readers’ reasoning as they meet 
long noun strings. But readers also respond in ways that stem from their 
Review Copy

social experience. And research shows that, while noun strings may cause 
trouble for some readers, they are no problem for other readers. Are some 
readers dull and others brilliant? 
In fact, as we saw in Chapter 8, the difference lies in readers’ differ­
ent experience of the world. Readers’ social milieu and the background 
knowledge they have acquired play a big part in their understanding of 
what they read. It all depends on readers’ previous contact with the sub­
ject treated by the text. For example, when the primary author of this 
text was investigating stylistic features in management studies, she came 
across the term relationship marketing. Being unaccustomed to the topic, 
she didn’t know what that was—a dating service? professional match­
making? Reading on, she was able to infer—from appositives, synonyms, 
and other elements of the context—that relationship marketing is a sales 
strategy which emphasizes techniques for building an enduring relation­
ship with customers: keeping in touch after one sale had been made, 
building a context for future sales. Presumably, readers more familiar 
with these aspects of the discourse on management would not have had 
to experiment with the noun phrase relationship marketing in this way. 
Conditions people have in mind when they talk about “clarity” and 
“conciseness” in the scholarly genres may have as much to do with the 
identity and position of the reader as they do with the style of the writ­
ing. Exploring this possibility, a student in an undergraduate class in 
writing in the research genres carried out a small study of readers’ level 
of difficulty in encountering scholarly forms of expression. She selected 
introductions from three articles, one each from scholarly publications in 
biomedical science, geography, and literary studies. She asked two readers 
to evaluate the passages for “clarity.” The first subject, a physician, rated 
the biomedical passage as “most clear,” and the literary studies passage as 
“most unclear.” The second subject, a first-year student in a university-
transfer program at a college, rated the literary-studies passage as “most 
clear,” and the biomedical article as “most unclear.” 
Let’s put the reader back together as a socio-cognitive being, and 
ask the question again: is scholarly style hard to read? Yes, it is—for some 
people. Students new to a discipline, for example, may find the nominal 
style of scholarly writing difficult to read. Perhaps, then, these students 
can benefit from first seeing the scholarly noun phrase as a structure 
which absorbs other sentence parts, and then methodically unpacking 
that noun phrase, understanding why it is causing them trouble but not 
NOMINAL STYLE: SYNTACTIC DENSITY 
183
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

184 
SCHOLARLY STYLES I
letting it get the upper hand. As readers, students can overcome these 
obstacles once they understand the structure of the obstacle, and where 
the footholds and handholds are. 
As writers, students can be wary of all-purpose rules for plain writ­
ing—or computer style checkers—that call for verbs instead of nouns, 
and deplore noun “strings.” Their readers will not necessarily have trouble 
with a heavily nominal style. But writers can also keep in mind the cogni­
tive load imposed by noun strings. There may be times when unpacking a 
big noun phrase will offer cognitive relief to the reader. For example, the 
second passage below may sometimes be preferable to the first (where the 
target noun phrase is shown in bold):
A recent comparative study of multi-family housing development 
and maintenance costs based on 1986 construction experience 
showed that three-storey buildings ultimately provided cheaper 
housing than high-rises. 
A study recently compared costs of developing and maintaining 
multiple-family housing. It was based on 1986 construction experi­
ence, and it showed that three-storey buildings ultimately provided 
cheaper housing than high-rises.
Exercise 1 
The following noun phrases are taken from published articles in a 
variety of scholarly disciplines. Analyze them, following the example 
(“the nonspecific goal strategy”) above: what predictive hypotheses 
would readers first make and then revise as they navigate their way 
through these noun phrases?
delayed sleep phase syndrome
labour supply decision-making 
voluntary employee turnover 
issues management structures 
other-race face recognition 
eating pathology scores 
risk management science 
droplet size distribution measurements
sea-level maximal oxygen uptake
supramolecular structures formation
Review Copy

Exercise 2 
The following passage examines “community,” a concept whose 
scholarly sense you have become familiar with from readings in previ­
ous chapters. Using the think-aloud techniques discussed in Chapters 
2 and 8, ask two or more classmates to read and comment on the 
passage. Do the results differ according to readers’ backgrounds—
their area of study, for example? Ask someone from outside the 
class to read the passage: how does their experience of the passage 
compare with those of readers in the class?
I am less concerned with the conceptual aporia of community-
capital contradiction, than with the genealogy of the idea of 
community as itself a “minority” discourse; as the making, or 
becoming “minor,” of the idea of Society, in the practice of 
politics of culture. Community is the antagonist supplement 
of modernity: in the metropolitan space it is the territory of the 
minority, threatening the claims of civility; in the transnational 
world it becomes the border-problem of the diasporic, the 
migrant, the refugee. Binary divisions of social space neglect 
the profound temporal disjunction—the transnational time and 
space—through which minority communities negotiate their 
collective identifications.
Homi K. Bhabha 1994 “Now newness enters the world.” In The Location of Culture. 
London: Routledge, 231.
9D Nominal Style: Ambiguity
We have seen that noun phrases are hospitable to other sentence ele­
ments: they will take in just about anything. As these bits and pieces are 
accommodated in the noun phrase, other elements are left behind. How­
ever, when parts get left behind, ambiguity can result. Sometimes the 
effort required from the reader to resolve the ambiguity is so negligible 
it is scarcely measurable. The bold-faced noun phrases in the following 
passage, which appeared in a daily newspaper, make demands on readers 
that they meet almost automatically.
The body, discovered in the basement of a concrete building, was 
identified as the remains of a newspaper boy who had lived in the 
neighbourhood in the late 1960s.
NOMINAL STYLE: AMBIGUITY 
185
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

186 
SCHOLARLY STYLES I
A concrete building means that the building was made of concrete. But 
a newspaper boy doesn’t mean that the boy was made of newspaper: it 
means that the boy delivered newspapers. The noun phrases don’t make 
these distinctions: they are lost when the noun phrase absorbs other ele­
ments. So, it’s readers who make these distinctions, by consulting their 
knowledge of the world (no people are made of newspaper). And readers 
make the distinctions easily, without significant processing demands. 
Other noun phrases can be slightly more distracting. The next passage 
comes from a news report about social conditions in the United States. 
Homeless experts say that the problem will only get worse as the 
summer goes on.
What is a “homeless expert”?
A more likely interpretation soon supersedes the less likely one.
Readers resolve the ambiguity in the noun phrase by consulting their 
knowledge of the world. 
Other noun phrases can be more stubbornly ambiguous. Like the 
example relationship marketing, the following noun string cannot be 
resolved by simply consulting our knowledge of the world:
police arrest information
Does this refer to information that police use when they arrest people? 
Or information police compile when they arrest people? Or does it refer 
to information about police arresting people? Without surrounding con­
text (or maybe even with it), this noun phrase remains ambiguous. 
Finally, when style is heavily nominal—that is, when information 
is concentrated in expanding noun phrases—an accompanying feature 
Review Copy

appears which can also contribute to ambiguity. This feature, which 
we encountered at the beginning of this chapter in the document on 
Ontario’s school curriculum, we will call agentlessness. The doers of 
actions slip away when the actions are turned from verbs to nouns. So, 
while the verb attend requires (in active voice) that the doers of the action 
be identified—
Forty-five property owners and six tenants attended the meeting.
—the noun attendance allows these agents of the action to withdraw 
from the sentence:
Attendance was high.
Agentless writing has been condemned as both ambiguous and deceptive, 
an instrument of concealment. Leaving charges of deception aside for 
the moment, we must concede that long noun phrases which eliminate 
agents are liable to be ambiguous. For example, in labour supply deci­
sion-making, who is making the decision? (and about what?) Someone 
who has not read the article from which this phrase was taken might be 
surprised to learn that the decision makers were Bangladeshi women in 
London who chose to do piecework at home rather than look for jobs in 
garment factories. 
The ambiguity and syntactic density of a heavily nominal style are 
both potential troublemakers for readers and writers. Yet scholarly style 
risks these troubles. This way of writing must therefore provide some 
benefits, some important service to scholarly situations. In the next sec­
tion we will observe these benefits and services.
Exercise 3 
Look in the passage below for dense noun phrases. Rewrite by 
unpacking them, spreading their elements out into other parts of 
the sentence and other sentences. For example, “Incarceration-based 
measures are the most common in national prison-use assessment” 
could be rewritten as “Some measures are based on the frequency 
with which criminals are incarcerated. These rates are the measure 
most commonly used to assess the way nations use prisons.” (Note 
that the rewrite will not necessarily be an improvement—merely 
another version, less nominal, possibly more friendly to readers in 
certain situations.)
NOMINAL STYLE: AMBIGUITY 
187
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

188 
SCHOLARLY STYLES I
The Australian basic-wage Royal Commission of 1920, seek­
ing working-class standard-of-living criteria, was chaired by a 
widely-read and respected living-wage champion, husband of 
a controversial family-planning advocate. Despite the liberal-
reform inclinations of the Commission’s chair and its nearly 40% 
recommended basic-wage increase, one of the main legacies of 
the Commission was the unquestioned equation of the “family” 
wage with the male-provider wage. 
Adapted from Kerreen M. Reiger 1989 “‘Clean and comfortable and respectable’: 
Working-class aspirations and the Australian 1920 Royal Commission on the Basic Wage.” 
History Workshop 27: 86–105.
Exercise 4 
The advertisement below appeared in the Career Opportunities sec­
tion of a national newspaper. Other advertisements in this section 
included descriptions of positions available in engineering, private- 
and public-sector administration, personnel and sales management. 
	
Examine the advertisement for features we have identified as 
belonging to scholarly expression: that is, nouns that represent 
actions or events, and that in doing so lose agents (doers) and the 
objects acted upon. What questions might someone ask about who 
does what to whom? Evaluate this passage for its potential ambigu­
ity and syntactic density. Speculate on why these ways of speaking, 
which seem characteristic of research genres, turn up here in a busi­
ness genre.
SENIOR CONSULTANT
Automotive marketing
Blackburn/Polk Vehicle Information Services (BPVIS) is Canada’s lead­
ing supplier of motor vehicle and marketing information services to the 
automotive industry and its allied businesses. We are looking for a Senior 
Consultant to work with our clients to market our full range of products 
and services. We require an individual with the following skill set: 
• knowledge of the automotive market and its information re­quire­-
ments 
• general understanding of geo-demographics and market research 
• general knowledge of direct marketing. 
Review Copy

  Our services for the automotive industry include market performance 
evaluation and benchmarking, network planning and location analysis, 
customer profiling studies, and support services for direct communica­
tion and customer retention programs. 
  The successful candidate will have strong presentation and interper­
sonal skills and be self-motivated.
  Compensation is performance related and is commensurate with 
experience. Please apply in confidence to _________. 
9E Sentence Style and Textual Coherence
Here are three scholarly passages which can arouse questions:
The insertion of a Fourth World of indigenous populations who 
have a distinct vision of their place in a world that until recently has 
ignored them (Graburn 1976) cultivates an awareness of the political 
potential of submerged nationalities that are emerging once again 
in the postmodern world. This belated recognition of submerged 
ethnicities comes in the wake of the demise of the Second World, 
which no longer provides the paradigmatic base for analyses, as the 
structures of capitalism, socialism, and imperialism are undermined.
June Nash 1994 “Global integration and subsistence insecurity.” American Anthropologist 96 
(1): 7–30, 8.
Who inserts a Fourth World? Who is aware? Who belatedly recognizes? 
Who analyzes? What nationalities and ethnicities are these? Who or what 
submerged them?
Our study advances and tests a model incorporating both insti­
tutional and resource explanations for why firms adopt certain 
structural modifications, namely, issues management structures. The 
study ... provides a model to account for variation in the develop­
ment of issues management structures across firms. 
Daniel W. Greening and Barbara Gray 1994 “Testing a model of organizational response to 
social and political issues.” Academy of Management Journal 37 (3): 467–98, 469.
Who explains? Who modifies what? Who manages? What are the issues 
and what does it mean to manage them? Who develops structures?
This article analyses labour supply decision-making for a particular 
group of women workers in a particular segment of the London 
SENTENCE STYLE AND TEXTUAL COHERENCE 
189
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

190 
SCHOLARLY STYLES I
clothing industry. It takes as its starting point the concentration of 
Bangledeshi women in the homeworking sector of the East London 
rag trade (Mitter, 1986a).
Naila Kabeer 1994 “The Structure of ‘Revealed Preference’: Race, Community and Female 
Labour Supply in the London Clothing Industry.” Development and Change 25: 307–30.
Who makes decisions? What is supplied? Who labours? Who or what 
concentrates? What is concentrated?
These samples—all heavily nominal—seem to confirm the view that 
scholarly writing is difficult. Yet they appeared in respected journals. This 
style must in some way benefit scholarly writers and readers, and serve 
scholarly situations. 
Halliday and Martin (1993) argue that this “language of the expert” 
gives priority to taxonomy: that is, to schemes for classifying and order­
ing phenomena. Such schemes depend on names for things. So, in the 
second passage, the action modify becomes the noun modification, which 
can then take an attribute (“structural”), which will distinguish it from 
other “modifications.” The action or event stabilized as a noun can then 
be worked into an arrangement with other named phenomena, “institu­
tions” and “resources.” These arrangements, Halliday and Martin argue, 
are designed to reveal relations of cause. This is evident where the authors 
explicitly ask “why firms adopt ... structural modifications.” In this order­
ing search for causes, the grammar of research genres ends up with heavy 
nominalizations. 
We might also note tendencies in current scholarship in many dis­
ciplines to integrate—to bring together theories, conditions, analyses, 
dimensions. So, for example, in the third passage, “labour supply decision-
making” names an effort to combine—or integrate—analyses of labour 
supply (availability of workers) with analyses of how people and house­
holds make decisions about what jobs they will seek, or keep, or quit. The 
grammatical outcome of this research initiative is a big noun phrase. 
To this social analysis of nominal expressions we can add a cognitive, 
or socio-cognitive, dimension. In Chapter 8 we imagined readers working 
with passages of sentences, seeking higher-level terms in which to under­
stand stretches of detail, or to understand the relevance of statements in 
context. Not all genres instruct the reader’s efforts after meaning in the 
same way, and not all genres produce relevance in the same way. The 
scholarly genres typically maintain coherence and relevance by repeated 
references to high-level, abstract topic entities. 
Review Copy

Other genres—like internet sites, newspaper reports, or compu­
ter manuals—don’t do this, although they may use nominalization for 
the purposes of economy or to identify highly specific technical terms. 
Nominalized headlines like “Proposed film tax law a step backwards, 
Cronenberg” or “Low vitamin D heightens breast-cancer mortality rate” 
are common; some can be genuinely difficult, as in the case of a CNN 
headline—“Freed mafia acid bath killer storm”—which was used to intro­
duce a story about a public outcry that occurred when a killer who had 
used acid to dispose of the body of his victim was released from prison. 
Technical writing—in this case a manual for a scanner—routinely refers 
to things like “the Digital ICE photo retouch function” or “a built-in 
IEEE 1394 interface port.” In none of these cases, however, does nomi­
nalization serve the research functions of maintaining textual coherence 
through repeated reference to important high-level abstractions.
With these conditions in mind, we can begin to see the role of heav­
ily nominalized expressions in supporting these repeated movements 
between abstract and concrete, generalities and detail. If, over several 
paragraphs, one were to write about a number of cases where employers 
preferred to train young employees on the job and tended not to hire 
people with secondary-school diplomas, one could compress these many 
cases into skill requirements in the workplace and educational attainment 
and specify the relation between them as not synonymous. These expres­
sions eliminate the employers who hired and taught and the workers and 
students who learned or failed to learn. But they also provide an ascent to 
the high level of abstraction that will hold this section of the discussion 
together. Then, as they are repeated, they serve as tokens for—or effi­
cient reminders of—this section as the discussion develops over 10 or 20 
pages: it is almost as if these expressions assume the status of single words. 
These abstract terms—the nominal versions of actions and events—can 
be reinstated at each of those points when the academic reader’s mental 
desktop needs instructions on managing information. While the details 
on particular firms and industries and school curriculum can be filed 
away, the high-level terms should be kept handy. 
Scholarly writers seem to need a concentrated expression they can 
reinstate to bind together parts of their discussion and to manage extensive 
stretches of lower-level information. These expressions are like elevated 
platforms from which the extent of the argument can be captured in a 
glance. There is not much standing-room on these platforms, so, when 
the arguments are complex, the expression can be dense. In the article on 
SENTENCE STYLE AND TEXTUAL COHERENCE 
191
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

192 
SCHOLARLY STYLES I
Bangladeshi garment workers, “labour supply decision-making” has to 
capture at once the article’s distinctions as a contribution to the analysis 
of labour markets. The author examines labour as offered by workers 
rather than required by firms—hence “labour supply.” And she examines 
the conditions which determine the decisions people make about work 
in an immigrant community where husbands’ wishes about the wives’ 
work may not coincide with the women’s wishes, and where both sets of 
choices are hemmed in by racial attitudes in the surrounding community. 
Labour supply decision-making is the platform from which expanses of 
statistical and interview data can be viewed. 
These viewing platforms are situated throughout the scholarly arti­
cle, often working to incorporate summary of other writers’ statements. 
Below, in an article on voluntary employee turnover (people quitting their 
jobs), employee turnover is ground shared by the other writers and the 
current authors, while the expressions job alternatives (If I quit will I 
be able to get another job? Will it be a good one?) and job satisfaction 
(Am I happy in my work? Do I get along with my boss? Will I be pro­
moted?) themselves compress information. And these abstractions not 
only point back to accumulated reasoning but also can be extracted from 
the publication and indexed as key words—to signal to researchers the 
site of scholarly conversation on a topic shared in a research commu­
nity. Abstractions sum up previous research attention and the current 
episode—and they point forward, too, as reference or orientation for 
other researchers’ future work:
In a major conceptual advance from previous research directions, 
Hulin and colleagues (1985) recognized that job alternatives and 
satisfaction could have substantially different effects on employee 
turnover across various populations. For example, job alternatives 
but not job satisfaction might have a substantial and direct effect on 
turnover among marginal and temporary employees (often described 
as the secondary labor market). In contrast, both alternatives and 
job satisfaction might have significant effects on turnover among 
permanent and full-time employees.
Thomas W. Lee and Terence R. Mitchell 1994 “An alternative approach: The unfolding 
model of voluntary employee turnover.” Academy of Management Journal 19 (1): 51–89, 54.
Nominal expressions also tend to appear as writers end one section 
of argument and move on to the next stage. Here, the writer concerned 
with subsistence economies concludes a three-part account of the “world 
Review Copy

crises” affecting the “submerged ethnicities.” She uses three expressions 
which nominalize verbs (and remove their agents) to compress the 
preceding discussion and make it portable, able to be carried forward 
compactly to the next section:
These world trends of integration of economies, dependence on 
finance capital, and erosion of subsistence security have profound 
consequences for the societies we study, whether they are located 
in core industrial countries or in developing areas. I shall illustrate 
their implications in three case studies of integration into the global 
economy where I have carried out fieldwork.
Nash 1994: 13 (emphasis added).
Unlike many other genres, scholarly genres must live up to demand­
ing coherence requirements, hinged on abstraction and spread through 
deep descents to specifics and sharp ascents to generality. We could say 
that these large patterns of abstraction and specificity at text level deter­
mine smaller patterns at sentence level. 
Earlier in this chapter, we asked what benefits come from long expres­
sions which many measures would estimate as cognitively costly (hard to 
read). Now we have the answer: cognitive cost at the level of sentence and 
phrase brings a profit at the level of textual coherence. 
Yet the model of the reader’s mental desktop warns us that those 
sentence-level costs can be high—to readers who give up, and to writers 
who can’t get through to exhausted readers. So you will find academic 
writers stopping to unpack a passage and relieve some of the congestion 
on the desktop.
Pleck suggests that Afro-American women worked more as a reaction 
to their greater long-term potential for income inadequacy than to 
immediate economic deprivation. It was as if they were taking out 
insurance against future problems.
James A. Geschwender 1992 “Ethgender, women’s waged labor, and economic mobility.” 
Social Problems 39 (1): 1–16, 7.
Sensing perhaps that “immediate economic deprivation” (being poor? not 
having enough money?) and “long-term potential for income inadequacy” 
(worry about not having enough money later?) are complicated ways of 
speaking, the author rephrases these expressions in everyday language. 
In other words, while the research genres privilege the heavily 
nominal phrase—for reasons we have just examined—they also provide 
SENTENCE STYLE AND TEXTUAL COHERENCE 
193
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

194 
SCHOLARLY STYLES I
corrections to the socio-cognitive conditions produced by their own 
styles. These corrections allow the reader easier access to the viewing 
platform offered by the noun phrase. We examined one of these stylistic 
correctives in Chapter 7: the appositive expression. The appositive says it 
again, in other words, giving the reader a second chance at an important 
but difficult concept. For instance, after the writer in the passage immedi­
ately above says “long-term potential for income inadequacy,” he repeats 
the idea in simpler, if less technically precise terms: “future problems.” 
Seeded throughout research writing we find two tiny expressions 
which signal writers’ efforts to aid the reader’s understanding of difficult 
nominal phrases by saying it again: i.e. and e.g. The expression i.e. (an 
abbreviation for id est, a Latin expression meaning “that is”) signals that 
an element in the preceding statement (or statements) will be repeated; 
i.e. works laterally, putting an additional expression next to the one 
which the writer estimates as important but difficult, or important and 
complex, and deserving further attention. Synonymous with i.e. are that 
is, namely, in other words, that is to say. On the other hand, e.g. (exem­
pla gratia, another Latin term, meaning “for example”) signals that an 
element in the preceding statement will be exemplified at a lower level 
of generality; e.g. works vertically, descending from high levels to lower 
levels of specificity. Synonymous with e.g. are for example, for instance. 
Although they are not interchangeable, both i.e. and e.g. can work as 
appositives—enriching readers’ understanding of a term, inviting their 
cooperation in its use in the particular context. 
By these means, writers can reduce the cognitive costs of heavy 
nominal expressions to the reader. But what can readers do when they 
face imposing clumps of nouns? Rather than give up, they can unpack 
those clumps for themselves, finding the everyday wordings that would 
represent the ideas at stake, and trying to think of examples of what the 
writer is talking about.
Exercise 5 
Take the three passages at the beginning of this section and unpack 
them for yourself. In each case try to construct concrete examples 
of what the writers are talking about. Using i.e. and e.g., rewrite the 
passages, incorporating answers to the set of questions immediately 
following each passage.
Review Copy

195
In Chapter 9, we considered the common complaint that scholarly style 
is difficult to read. We found that readers’ previous contact with the sub­
ject and their different experiences of the world explain some of these 
reading difficulties. We also saw that the research genres are distinguished 
by nominalization and the superstructure of abstraction that it builds. 
Both nominalization and abstraction can appear in other genres, but they 
do not work in the same way they do in the research genres, where they 
consistently enforce the special coherence of scholarly writing and attach 
individual research contributions to an ongoing scholarly conversation. 
In this chapter, we will inspect two stylistic features that distinguish the 
academic genres. First, we will look at messages about the argument. 
Including self-reference, the discursive I, forecasts, and emphasis, these 
messages help readers understand the organization of academic writing. 
Second, we will look at two contrasting styles of presenting information: 
presupposition versus assertion. 
10A Messages about the Argument
The following passage, which appeared in a geography journal, exhib­
its several features we will investigate. This passage refers to itself (“This 
paper”); it refers to the author (“We” and “Our”); and it forecasts the 
argument to follow (“After a brief discussion,” “we consider,” “We then 
turn,” and “Our conclusion”).
10
Scholarly Styles II
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

196 
SCHOLARLY STYLES II
... the study of gender issues generally in rural areas remains relatively 
neglected (Little 1991). 
  This paper is an attempt to begin to redress the balance by con­
centrating on the gender divisions apparent in the material collected 
by the Rural Church Project, and aims also to highlight the need for 
further specific study of gender and the rural church. After a brief 
discussion of the history of staffing in the Church of England, we 
consider recent published studies on gender roles in the Church and 
our own material from the Rural Church Project survey on the staffing 
of parishes in five dioceses. We then turn to rural parishioners and 
consider the influence of gender on church attendance and religious 
belief, together with attitudes towards women priests. Our conclusion 
is an attempt to reconcile the very different pictures of the rural church 
which emerge from the information on staffing on the one hand and 
attendance, belief and attitudes to women priests on the other.
Susanne Seymour 1994 “Gender, church and people in rural areas.” Area 26 (1): 45–56, 45.
To sharpen your sense of these features as distinctive, call to mind 
other genres, familiar from everyday life. Would you find a newspaper 
report or a thank-you note referring to itself?
This report provides 	
This thank-you note expresses
information on 	
gratitude for two gifts
protest at the legislature. 	
received last week.
Probably not, although instances of some other genres (very formal busi­
ness letters, for example, or legal documents) can refer to themselves. 
Would you find a newspaper report or thank-you note referring to the 
author in this (limited) sense?
I/we present a series 	
I/we describe the gift in
of quotations from 	
favourable terms.
participants at the protest. 
Probably not, although the thank-you-note writer may refer to himself 
in other senses (“I have been very busy at school and look forward to 
the holidays”). Would you find a newspaper report or thank-you note 
forecasting its discussion?
These quotations will be 	
Following the description of the
followed by quotations 	
gift, brief news about the
from political figures 	
recipient’s family will be
responding to the protest.	
presented.
Review Copy

Again, probably not. And it is hard to construct a situation where either 
of these everyday genres would situate the current utterance, what is 
being said, in relation to what others have said, or not said.
Little information about 	
No one has so far
this event has been 	
expressed gratitude for
published, since it only 	
this gift in writing.
happened yesterday. 
Later we will look at this last feature, which situates the utterance in 
relation to other utterances (see state of knowledge and knowledge defi­
cit). In the meantime, we will examine the other features which distinguish 
the cited passage from—at least—newspaper reports and thank-you notes.
Exercise 1
Inspect essays you have written recently or are currently drafting: 
do you find expressions which refer to the essay itself? (Keep in 
mind that such wordings appear at points where writers make major 
claims or promises.) How do you feel about saying, “This study 
focuses on three explanations for ...”? Would you feel better saying, 
“This paper ...” or “This essay ...”?
10B The Discursive I
One feature in the above passage on gender roles in rural churches that 
sometimes surprises students is the author’s tendency to refer to herself. 
Although the first-person singular I—and the plural we—occurs in the 
scholarly genres with nowhere near the frequency that it does in daily 
conversation (where it is a favoured sentence opener), it is by no means 
absent from published scholarship (though favoured in some disciplines 
more than others). 
Sometimes students ask their teachers if they want them to use I, 
or to avoid it. This question is often accompanied by a question as to 
whether the teachers are interested in the students’ own opinions. In the 
long history of the teaching of writing, I and “opinion” have become 
connected. However, in conventional, mainstream scholarship, where I 
occurs under limited conditions, it would be hard to connect I with the 
ordinary sense of “opinion.” 
THE DISCURSIVE I 
197
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

198 
SCHOLARLY STYLES II
Let’s examine the limits or constraints on I in published scholarship. 
See if you can infer the conditions which control the use of I. (Analysis fol­
lows, but try to make this out for yourself before looking at the analysis.)
Lesbian theory and feminism, I want to suggest, are at risk of falling 
into a similar unhappy marriage in which “the one” is feminism. 
Calhoun 1994: 568.
... I shall focus upon expectations and evaluations regarding the 
participation of married women, with husband present, in the waged 
labor force. I begin with a discussion of the “cult of domesticity,” 
explore ethnic variations in commitments to the cult, examine the 
causes and consequences of its decline in influence, and evaluate 
the consequences for ethnic groups of difference in rates at which 
married women work for wages. I close with a consideration of 
policy implications.
Geschwender 1992: 1.
This article has two purposes. The first is to show that ability group­
ing in secondary schools does not always have the same effect, and 
therefore it is worth seeking ways of using it more effectively than 
commonly occurs. A brief review of earlier studies, and a reinterpre­
tation of the conclusions of an earlier synthesis, provide the support 
for this claim. The second goal is to explore instances of relatively 
successful uses of ability grouping, in the sense that high-quality 
instruction fosters significant learning among students assigned to 
low-ability classes. What characterizes such classes? To address this 
question, I draw on evidence from earlier studies by other authors, 
and I provide two new illustrations taken from a larger study of 
eighth- and ninth-grade English classes in 25 midwestern schools.
Adam Gamoran 1993 “Alternative uses of ability grouping in secondary schools: Can we bring 
high-quality instruction to low-ability classes?” American Journal of Education 102: 1–22, 1.
On the one hand, the I of the writer in these passages seems to hover on 
the vanishing point. In virtually every case, the I-construction could be 
eliminated without depleting content. It could simply disappear (“Les­
bian theory and feminist theory are at risk of ...”) or be replaced by one 
of the text-referring words like “study” (“this study focuses”), and the last 
passage mixes such words (“article,” “review”) with instances of I. 
Given the frequency with which I makes its appearance in the 
scholarly genres, we might look at the typical habitat of the first-person 
Review Copy

pronoun: what does it occur with? Then we notice that all the verbs that 
have first-person subjects refer to some discourse action, something the 
writer is doing:
I want to suggest	
I close
I begin with	
I draw on evidence
I shall focus	
I provide
I explore, examine, evaluate
Analysts who specialize in the study of the research genres would distin­
guish among these verbs, finding different categories of discourse action. 
But, for our purposes, it is enough to note their general similarity: they 
all describe the speaker in his or her capacity as a writer/researcher. Let us 
call the I of the scholarly genres the discursive I. 
As a writer in the scholarly genres, you can refer to yourself, pointing 
yourself out to your reader. But, as we have seen, your identity is limited, 
and attitudes to these limitations run to extremes. So many students 
report that their teachers and professors have instructed them not to use 
I that there must still be some I-avoidance afoot. Perhaps this can be 
explained by the limitations on I when it occurs in scholarship. Those 
who would disallow I translate the limits into a blanket prohibition. 
Taking a different view, some scholars criticize the research genres for 
the limits they put on I. Conventions which limit writers to the discur­
sive I erase elements of identity that are, in fact, relevant to research and 
its results. Such criticisms propose that who we are, as social and political 
beings, influences what we choose to study, how we gather information, 
and how we interpret that information. The discursive I obscures those 
influences and limits not only the surface expression of scholarship but 
its deeper character as well. In the next chapter we will look at instances 
in which I preserves a greater degree of the researcher’s personal identity, 
but for now we should recognize the frequency with which the discursive 
I appears in the research genres.
Exercise 2 
What do you think of the reference to the “author” in the following 
passage? Does it help you to know that this paper was written by a 
psychologist? Can you devise any other way of writing this passage—
without using the first person singular?
THE DISCURSIVE I 
199
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

200 
SCHOLARLY STYLES II
The author decided to investigate the academic achievement 
levels of the teenage mothers with whom she was working after 
being told repeatedly that their favorite subject in school was 
math—an unexpected and perplexing finding because girls are 
generally reported to feel they are not good at, and thus dislike, 
math (Parsons, Adler, and Kaczala, 1982).
Rauch-Elnekave 1994: 97.
Exercise 3 
Inspect essays you have written recently or are currently composing: 
how do you represent yourself when you write an academic paper? 
Are you happy with this representation? Would your friends and 
family recognize you? What options do you feel you have? Do the 
options vary according to the discipline you are working in?
10C Forecasts and Emphasis
Like references to the text itself, the discursive I of scholarly writing often 
occurs along with forecasts: statements about how the argument will be 
organized, what readers can expect.
First, I will summarize prior research indicating that instruction is 
typically inferior in low-ability classes. Second, I will briefly show 
that new data from a study of midwestern secondary schools mainly 
conform to this pattern. Third, I will give four examples—two 
drawn from past research, and two original cases taken from the 
study of midwestern secondary schools—that illustrate that high-
quality instruction can occur in low-ability classes. Finally, I will 
consider the limitations and implications of these illustrations.
Gamoran 1993: 4–5.
Forecasts can also show up in agentless forms—that is, without either 
the text itself or the discursive I promising a particular course of discussion. 
Before proceeding to a more precise description of the research 
methods used and a detailed discussion of sample matched 
reader-writer protocols, the relevance of this study to current theo­
retical disputes over appropriate rhetorical techniques and planning 
Review Copy

processes for appellate advocates should be put into sharper focus. 
Two basic issues will be addressed:
1)	What rhetorical techniques in briefs do current brief writing 
theories recommend appellates use, and what conflicts exist 
between these theories? 
2)	What problems has empirical research investigating these the­
ories encountered?
James F. Stratman 1994 “Investigating persuasive processes in legal discourse in real time: 
Cognitive biases and rhetorical strategy in appeal court briefs.” Discourse Processes 17: 1–57, 7.
This passage achieves its agentlessness by using the passive voice: “the 
research methods used” (who used the methods?); “the relevance ... 
should be put into sharper focus” (who should do this?); “two basic issues 
will be addressed” (who will address the issues?). 
The passive voice has been condemned by many, and defended by 
few. Despite its bad reputation amongst people who compose rules-for-
writing, however, it is very common in scholarly expression, as well as 
elsewhere. In the three passive constructions listed above, for example, 
the themes of the sentences (“the research methods,” “the relevance,” and 
“two basic issues”) are more important than who is “using,” “addressing,” 
or “putting them into sharper focus.” The passive voice enables this focus 
on sentence themes. 
While we do not run across forecasts (either with or without passive 
constructions) so often in everyday life—
MATTHEW: What have you been up to?
MARK: In addressing your question, I will first express my philoso­
phy of life. Next, I will show that philosophy operating in my recent 
activities. Finally, I will describe my plans for the future.
—they are extremely common in the scholarly genres. It seems that 
forecasts play an important role in helping readers manage the contents 
of their mental desktops (see Chapter 8B). Forecasts guide readers in 
determining when one section is finished and another is beginning—
determining, that is, when to file lower-level information, compacting its 
gist into higher-level statements that can be kept handy as the discussion 
goes on to other areas. 
Readers are also served by statements of emphasis. Here are some 
examples.
FORECASTS AND EMPHASIS 
201
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

202 
SCHOLARLY STYLES II
The crucial point for this essay is that between 1939 and 1944 the 
organization attracted popular support. 
Our main interest here is the style of the printed language—how 
did it reconcile with the everyday language of the predominantly 
oral world?
Thiathu J. Nemutanzhela 1993 “Cultural forms and literacy as resources for political mobilisa­
tion: A.M. Malivha and the Zoutpansberg Balemi Association.” African Studies 52 (1): 89–102, 
92–93 (bold emphasis added, italic emphasis in original).
The general point here is that there are instances—this [campaign 
for non-sexist language] is one—where we can locate the specific 
and concrete steps leading to an observable change in some people’s 
linguistic behaviour and in the system itself.
Deborah Cameron 1990 “Demythologizing sociolinguistics: Why language does not reflect 
society.” In Ideologies of Language, ed. John E. Joseph and Talbot J. Taylor. London: Routledge, 
91. 
What I want to highlight in Wittig’s explanation of what bars 
lesbians from the category “woman” is that it claims both too much 
and too little for lesbians as well as reads lesbianism from a peculiarly 
heterosexual viewpoint.
Calhoun 1994: 563. 
A common means of achieving emphasis is to use the cleft form 
of a sentence (i.e., a sentence that begins “It was X that ...” rather than 
“X ...”. Many guides to “good” style disallow sentences beginning with it. 
These sentences are said to be boring or “empty.” Yet it in English serves 
a built-in grammar of emphasis, known as the cleft. Notice how it works 
in these ordinary, conversational sentences to stage the importance of a 
particular part of the sentence.
Julie brought the cookies.	 It was Julie who brought the cookies.
	
	
	
	
	
	
[not anybody else]
A speaker could use intonation—“Julie brought the cookies”—to achieve 
emphasis. Writers can’t use intonation—but they can (and do) use the 
cleft form of the sentence. (Notice how, if you say the second sentence 
above, stress falls on “Julie.”) If the speaker or writer wanted to emphasize 
the contribution rather than the contributor, they could say or write:
It was the cookies that Julie brought [not the lasagne].
Review Copy

In research writing, cleft sentences beginning with it can accomplish 
emphasis, e.g.,
It was Foucault’s work that mobilized research of institutions under 
the “surveillance” theme.
And, while we are thinking about sentences beginning with it, we 
can also observe that on many occasions the tendencies of English will 
use the end-weight principle to shift heavy material to sentence-end, 
leaving the sentence beginning “empty.” Of the following pair, the first is 
more likely to be produced by English speakers and writers.
It may be argued that this neglect is due to a lack of scholarly interest 
in the rural church rather than in gender relations in the Anglican 
Church as a whole. 
That this neglect is due to a lack of scholarly interest in the rural 
church rather than in gender relations in the Anglican Church as a 
whole may be argued.
The reason that the first is usually preferred is that it obeys the “end-
weight” principle in English: a tendency for sentences to tilt, letting heavy 
material slide to the end, and producing what’s called anticipatory-it 
or it-extraposition. Like the passive voice, sentences beginning with it 
have been criticized by authorities on “good” style, but there seems to 
be little basis for these criticisms. As we can see in the following example 
from molecular biology, the it-clause prepares readers for widely accepted 
information—information that is shifted to the end of the sentence. 
Although not formally proven, it is generally accepted that the spike 
is a timer of gp120-gp41 heterodimers....
Michael B. Zwick et al. 2003 “Molecular features of the broadly neutralizing immunoglobulin 
G1 b12 required for recognition of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gp120.” Journal 
of Virology 77 (10): 5863–76, 5863.
These uses of emphasis are not, however, universal in academic 
writing. Some research articles provide neither forecasts nor emphasis 
pointers. Movements along the hierarchy of generalization—from high-
level abstraction to specifics and back again—themselves convey implicit 
messages about the argument, messages that will alert experienced read­
ers to important points in the text. Nevertheless, many do use expressions 
of emphasis, and most seem to offer some kind of forecast. 
FORECASTS AND EMPHASIS 
203
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

204 
SCHOLARLY STYLES II
Similarly, most instances of the discursive I could be removed, and 
the expression in which they occur adjusted to get across equivalent 
information. But I occurs nevertheless, with some frequency. Perhaps 
both techniques not only benefit readers’ mental desktops but also pro­
vide writers with greater control over the use that readers make of their 
texts. Perhaps forecasts and emphasis pointers would have, on some occa­
sions, controlled some of those unruly readers/instructors who missed 
your point. While we could speculate that both forecasts and emphasis 
(and the associated references to the text itself and its writer) are signs 
that scholarly genres are domineering or overpowering in their measures 
for controlling readers’ interpretive work, we can perhaps also sympathize 
with writers’ desires to overrule the hazards of misunderstanding. 
The scholarly genres can seem aloof productions, remote from the 
personal contact and proximities of more mundane genres or of everyday 
conversation. Yet the features we have looked at in this chapter all sum­
mon writer and reader to the same spot, putting the writer in close touch 
with the reader.
Exercise 4 
Imagine a reader from outside the academic community encountering 
the passage below (which is the first paragraph of an introduction). 
How could you prepare that reader for contact with this example 
of scholarly expression? How would you explain the features of the 
passage so the imagined reader would understand them as functional 
expressions of the academic community’s routines and procedures? 
(It might help to imagine a particular reader—a friend, family member, 
neighbour, co-worker, or maybe yourself at an earlier stage of your 
education.)
Recent research in the history of nineteenth century psychiatry 
has explored the expanding powers of the medical profession 
and the proliferation of the asylum, that “magic machine” for 
curing insanity. This medicalization of madness has usually 
been portrayed as a “top-down” process: “social control imposed 
from above with greater or lesser success on a population now 
the unwitting object of medical encadrement.” But as historians 
have begun to study individual asylums and the complexities of 
committal, more emphasis is being placed on the role played by 
families in the process. Asylum doctors, it has been suggested, 
Review Copy

merely confirmed a diagnosis of insanity already made by families, 
by neighbors, or by non-medical authorities. Consequently, as the 
American historian Nancy Tomes has argued, “the composition 
of a nineteenth century asylum population tells more about the 
family’s response to insanity than the incidence or definition of 
the condition itself.” Such arguments imply a more “dynamic and 
dialectical” interpretation of the process of medicalization, one 
that requires a careful assessment of family demands for medical 
services and the degree to which these demands were met, will­
ingly or unwillingly, by the emerging psychiatric profession. In 
the present stage of research on mental illness and its treatment, 
it is vital to expand the range of institutional studies.
Patricia E. Prestwich 1994 “Family strategies and medical power: ‘Voluntary’ committal 
in a Parisian asylum, 1876–1914.” Journal of Social History 27 (4): 799–818, 799.
10D Presupposing vs. Asserting
Another feature of academic writing that may pose particular difficulty 
for student writers is the way that writers sometimes provide introduc­
tory explanations and at other times seem to assume that their readers 
already know apparently obscure matters. As we noticed in Chapter 7, 
explaining a term, defining it appositionally or even more elaborately, 
does not necessarily mean that you take your reader to be uninformed. 
Instead it can be a means of negotiating or confirming common ground. 
Sometimes things should not be taken for granted but should be attrib­
uted, defined, or explained, to show that the writer respects certain ideas 
as having been painstakingly constructed by the research community. In 
such cases we detect writers asserting claims. But at other times writers 
appear to satisfy their readers by representing things as understood, and 
by not explaining—in other words, presupposing knowledge on the part 
of the reader. In these cases, terms like of course and obviously project 
the writer’s interpretation of the state of knowledge—the distribution of 
knowledge, its rarity or commonness. Of course draws boundaries around 
discourse communities: people who belong to these communities know 
the topics marked with of course and other signs of obviousness; they 
don’t need to have things explained. 
As if it were not already challenging enough for newcomers to esti­
mate the distribution and obviousness of knowledge in the disciplines, 
PRESUPPOSING VS. ASSERTING 
205
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

206 
SCHOLARLY STYLES II
we find that of course and the other signs of a statement’s obviousness are 
not the only ways of signalling that knowledge is shared. In the following 
example, the writer makes several assumptions about readers’ knowledge 
of the topic, through definite expressions—the or this phrases that are 
heavily nominalized.
Recent research in the history of nineteenth-century psychiatry 
has explored the expanding powers of the medical profession and 
the proliferation of the asylum, that “magic machine” for curing 
insanity. This medicalization of madness has been portrayed as a 
“top-down” process.... 
Prestwich 1994: 799. 
An alternative version of these sentences shows just how much the origi­
nal takes for granted and assumes as already known by the reader.
Psychiatry was practised in the nineteenth century. In the nineteenth 
century, the powers of the medical profession expanded, and asylums 
proliferated. Madness was medicalized.
Whereas the original version presupposes this knowledge, the alternative 
version asserts it. Perhaps you can hear how the first version constructs 
the reader as knowing, and the second constructs the reader as unknow­
ing, and needing to be told. 
In any social situation, the choice between presupposing and assert­
ing can be tricky, for, as we see, it conveys messages about the speaker’s 
ideas of the addressee’s state of knowledge. It can also convey messages 
about the speaker: by always asserting, the speaker can seem naïve or can 
appear to have just learned something that is in fact well known. In the 
research genres, the choice between presupposing and asserting can be 
particularly tricky in that “knowingness” is crucial to status and power. 
And it seems that students can sometimes make the mistake of starting too 
far back, explaining too much, and thereby offending their expert read­
ers. John Swales (1990) reports a case study of just this situation, where a 
PhD student’s dissertation in the biological sciences explained too much, 
presupposed too little, and excited sarcastic and impatient comments from 
her readers. At the same time, however, readers can react negatively to a 
writer’s offhand mention of a complicated concept and can appreciate an 
explanatory account of it. In the sample above, for example, what does 
it mean, exactly, for something to be “medicalized”? These days, lots of 
Review Copy

people are finding instances of “medicalization” here or there, but we may 
have been neglecting the concept itself, taking too much for granted. 
Presupposing expressions can take many forms: proper nouns, for 
example. (To say simply “Chomsky” rather than “Noam Chomsky is a 
transformational linguist” presupposes that readers know who Chomsky 
is, and can identify him for themselves. It also presupposes that we know 
what Chomsky does—what a transformational linguist is.) We will not 
go into all these forms here. Nor can we come to any conclusions about 
what kinds of knowledge students should presuppose and what kinds 
they should assert, for, at this point, we don’t know a lot about this aspect 
of the style of the research genres—or any other genres. What we do 
know, however, is that readers are sensitive to patterns of presupposition, 
and that these patterns signal information about the state of knowledge 
and its distribution.
Exercise 5
To develop your awareness of the effect of presupposing and assert­
ing expressions, rewrite each passage below to assert what the 
original presupposes. To do this, you may find yourself resorting to 
there expressions (e.g., “the three aspects of readability” becomes 
“there are three aspects of readability”). There expressions in English 
are specially designed for asserting new information. 
  The following statements are opening sentences from articles in 
a variety of disciplines. Some (but not all) presupposing expressions 
in each are shown in bold-face type. You may also notice that many 
of the bold expressions in the passages below are nominalizations: 
a stylistic feature we have become familiar with in our study of the 
research genres.
PASSAGE 1
Scholars have long noted, often with disapproval, the tardiness 
of the introduction of printing to the Muslim world, but the 
consequences of that introduction on the production, repro­
duction, and transmission of knowledge in Muslim societies 
are now only beginning to be understood.
Adeeb Khalid 1994 “Printing, publishing, and reform in Tsarist Central Asia.” Interna­
tional Journal of Middle East Studies 26: 187–200 (emphasis added).
PRESUPPOSING VS. ASSERTING 
207
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

208 
SCHOLARLY STYLES II
PASSAGE 2 
When Margaret Fuller’s Woman in the Nineteenth Century 
first appeared in the winter of 1845, few readers were prepared 
to accept her uncompromising proposition that “inward and 
outward freedom for woman as for man shall be as a right, 
not yielded as a concession.” 
Annette Kolodny 1994 “Inventing a feminist discourse: Rhetoric and resistance in 
Margaret Fuller’s Woman in the Nineteenth Century.” New Literary History 25 (2): 355–82 
(emphasis added).
PASSAGE 3
During the 1980s and 1990s a number of factors emerged in 
various countries of western Europe to raise anew questions about 
the meanings of national identity. The finally acknowledged 
presence of settled immigrant populations (as opposed to 
transient-worker populations), the arrival in western Europe of 
large numbers of asylum-seekers from southern and eastern 
Europe and from the Third World and, most recently, debates 
in the countries of the European community about some of the 
provisions of the Maastricht Treaty have been among the most 
significant factors that have fuelled controversies about national 
identity.
Christopher T. Husbands 1994 “Crisis of national identity as the ‘new moral panics’: 
Political agenda-setting about definitions of nationhood.” New Community 20 (2): 
191–206 (emphasis added).
PASSAGE 4
Within geography increasing attention has been given to the 
everyday performance of social identities within different 
types of space. The role that language plays in the perform­
ance of gendered identities and in the (re)production of 
heterosexualised space is central to Linda McDowell’s (1995, 
1997) work on merchant banking in London. But links between 
the performance of gender and sexuality in space and voices 
themselves have yet to be considered.
Tom Delph-Janiurek 1999 “Sounding gender(ed): Vocal performance in English university 
teaching spaces.” Gender, Place and Culture 6 (2): 137–51 (emphasis added). 
Review Copy

209
When research findings are reported to the public, in the broadcast media 
or the general-circulation print media, they are normally “popularized.” 
That is, specialist or technical terms are translated and replaced with eve­
ryday ones. We can expect that, thereby, some meanings are lost—careful 
distinctions produced by technicality itself. But we might also expect 
that some other meanings, equally important, are also lost in populariza­
tions since research genres not only report findings but also represent the 
knowledge-making process itself. 
In Chapters 3–6 in particular, we saw that summary and orchestra­
tion of voices are central features of scholarly writing. When academic 
writers introduce and orchestrate other voices, they indicate and make 
audible a state of knowledge: its limits, the conditions under which it 
was produced, the positions from which statements issue. Through such 
orchestration of others’ voices, academic writers can establish a position 
in the scholarly conversation that opens up possibilities for their own 
contribution to knowledge. The position they establish by citing others 
defines what hasn’t been said, what needs to be said, or even what has 
been mistakenly said. In short, it identifies what we will call a knowledge 
deficit. As we will see, knowledge deficits are about the making of knowl­
edge, about how new knowledge can be made. 
This chapter extends the study of summary and orchestration, and 
so begins to sketch ways in which the state of knowledge and knowl­
edge deficits find expression in the research genres. Chapter 12 focuses 
11
Making and Maintaining 
Knowledge I
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

210 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE I
on features which mark statements for their status as knowledge—and 
distinguish research discourse from popular genres and also from some 
forms of school writing. Chapters 13 and 14 focus explicitly on the state 
of knowledge and knowledge deficits, the most concentrated expressions 
of which often appear in introductions and conclusions.
11A Making Knowledge
Consider for a minute what it means to make knowledge. Say Matthew 
felt a need to know, on a particular summer day, if that day was warmer 
or cooler than the day before. He might consult his own sensations, and 
find that, yes, this day was hotter. Reporting his sensations, he gets some 
corroboration.
MATTHEW: Whew. It’s hot. This is the hottest day.
THOMAS: Yes. A real scorcher. This is the hottest day.
We could say that Matthew and his corroborator have in an informal 
way begun to make some knowledge of the relative temperatures of the 
season in question. (They might go on to compare this season to others, 
and generalize about climatic conditions.) 
But say both Matthew and his corroborator had, the day before, 
gone for a long swim in a mountain lake. The swim cooled their bod­
ies, and they found the air temperate, not scorching. You could say that 
their position—their point of view, their experience of the world—had 
affected their findings about relative temperature. Aware of variables like 
swimming in glacial waters, the next time Matthew constructs knowl­
edge of relative temperatures he looks for some sign outside himself and 
his closely positioned corroborator. 
MATTHEW: This is the hottest day. The butter’s melting. It didn’t 
melt yesterday. This is the hottest day.
THOMAS: Yes.
Now they could be said to have made knowledge by consulting a sign 
(butter), reading it (it’s melting), and citing this evidence. But Thomas 
might question Matthew’s evidence. 
THOMAS: Our butter melted a bit yesterday, too. Where do you 
keep your butter? How much did it melt?
Review Copy

So Matthew has made some knowledge of relative temperature (it’s hot 
enough to melt butter), but it is vulnerable to criticism. Or, to put it 
another way, this knowledge is not conclusive: it provokes further testing 
and further knowledge making. 
Finally, if Matthew wanted to make knowledge that was independ­
ent of his position—his swimming experience, his habits in storing and 
observing his butter—he might consult a widely recognized and respected 
instrument of measurement: a thermometer.
MATTHEW: This is the hottest day. It’s 33 degrees Celsius. It was 
only 31 degrees yesterday.
This may seem to put an end to knowledge making on this topic, but 
someone could go further (claiming a knowledge deficit), questioning 
Matthew’s instrument or its use.
THOMAS: Are you sure? Did you move the thermometer? I keep 
mine in the shade. Have you had your thermometer checked?
Or someone could question the use of the instrument itself and empha­
size the importance of subjective experience.
THOMAS: Yesterday was hotter for me. I was tarring a roof. I’ve 
never been so hot in my life. It’s very well to say it’s the hottest day, 
but you aren’t taking into account the experience of roofers.
In this sequence of knowledge-making actions, we have, very roughly, 
travelled through the range of methods of the research disciplines, from 
“soft” (so-called subjective interpretations of data corroborated by mem­
bers of a community occupying similar positions) to “hard” (so-called 
objective interpretation sustained by research instruments which pro­
duce quantitative readings of the world) and back to what we might call 
“critical” (sort of “reflexive-soft” interpretations which question whether 
any knowledge can ever be produced independent of the interpreter’s 
position). 
Even without the critical techniques of current theory, we can see 
that knowledge-making procedures differ from discipline to discipline. 
These differences are reflected in stylistic differences: different ways of 
representing the production of knowledge. The most conspicuous of these 
differences is that which distinguishes publications with lots of numbers 
from those with no numbers. This difference has been characterized as 
the difference between quantitative and qualitative study. 
MAKING KNOWLEDGE 
211
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

212 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE I
Quantitative method aims to approach knowledge making as 
objectively as possible: that is, it seeks to set aside biases caused by an 
individual’s beliefs or immediate experience of the world by observing 
controlled studies or experiments and quantifying results using as broad 
a sample as possible. A classic example of the success of quantitative study 
is the Copernican revolution, in which the earth-centred view of the solar 
system was gradually replaced with the sun-centred model. The invention 
of the telescope and the observations of planetary motion by Galileo pro­
vided empirical evidence that the earth revolves around the sun, despite 
deeply ingrained beliefs to the contrary and the apparently obvious evi­
dence of our senses when we observe the sun rising and setting on a 
daily basis. In another famous example of the quantitative method, James 
Watson and Francis Crick used studies showing that in DNA adenine 
was always present in the same amount as thymine, with the same hold­
ing true for guanine and cytosine. These ratios helped invalidate previous 
three-strand models of DNA and confirm Watson and Crick’s hypothesis 
that DNA is structured as a double helix. This sort of method, which 
you probably associate with the sciences, attempts to quantify empirically 
reproducible findings. In the example above, when Matthew uses a ther­
mometer to observe the temperature, he is taking the first step toward 
quantitative study. Of course, meteorologists would approach Matthew’s 
question in a more systematic and sophisticated manner, by referring to 
temperature readings in a number of established locations recorded over 
years. So a meteorologist might point out that while an average tempera­
ture of 33 degrees Celsius is the hottest day of the year where Matthew 
lives, in fact it was several degrees hotter on the same day twenty years 
ago, and it is often hotter on many days in some countries closer to the 
equator. 
A significant part of undergraduate education in the sciences and 
social sciences is devoted to learning established methods for quantitative 
study. These methods vary according to discipline and the phenomena 
studied, but the central importance of quantitative study to making 
knowledge should lead us to expect stylistic expressions that reflect it in 
the research genres (see Section 11B below, for example). However, these 
methods are not without their critics, even within disciplines that favour 
quantitative research. 
Critics of scholarly practice have suggested that research with a strictly 
quantitative emphasis produces distorted versions of people’s experience 
Review Copy

of the world. Once phenomena—events and attitudes, and the people 
who are involved in those events or harbour those attitudes—are trans­
lated into countable units, and the numbers are subjected to routines 
of statistical interpretation, they get separated from the meaningful 
complexities of real-life contexts. So a study of, for example, “learning 
outcomes” in a hundred classrooms might identify three relevant con­
ditions: the socioeconomic identity of the learners (as measured by a 
standard scale), their learning styles (as measured by a standard method 
of classifying learning styles), and their performance in a subject area (as 
measured by a standardized test). The results could lead to changes in 
curriculum or teaching strategies. Critics of this kind of research argue 
that such quantifications erase the classroom moment, the experience of 
students and teachers, the complex interactions amongst them. Research 
quantifications therefore produce a limited or possibly skewed version of 
the world, and their applications can be unrealistic. (And, as historians of 
science have pointed out, even the decision about what to measure is the 
result of the researcher’s position in a social world.) In place of or in addi­
tion to quantitative research these critics propose qualitative research. 
Qualitative research can take various forms. One way to look at it is 
to say that it distinguishes itself from quantitative research by replacing 
the many instances (open to statistical interpretation) with one instance 
or a few instances. The one instance is examined in detail. The long-dis­
tance panoramas of quantitative research are replaced by close-up views. 
So, in the qualitative version of the learning-outcomes study, researchers 
would locate themselves in one classroom and watch—for days, months, 
even years. They would record what they saw, taking notes, using video 
or audio tapes; they would collect documents and artifacts (the teacher’s 
lesson plans, tests, students’ work, and so on); they would talk to the 
teacher and to the students. Unlike quantitative researchers, who arrange 
measurable situations (controlled instruction, perhaps; tests adminis­
tered solely for the purpose of the study), qualitative researchers try to 
leave things as they are. The only change is the presence of the researchers 
themselves. Back at their desks, the qualitative researchers interpret the 
material they have gathered. Surveying their data, they look for patterns 
and regularities, and, consulting the theoretical tools available to them, 
they develop explanations for what they have observed. 
Both quantitative and qualitative techniques seek generalizations, but 
they establish the authority of their generalizations by different means. 
MAKING KNOWLEDGE 
213
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

214 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE I
Quantitative studies represent their validity by numerousness. They use 
standardized means of manipulating a large number of instances to coax 
out statistically significant results. Qualitative studies have only the one 
instance (as in a “case study”) or the one group (such as a group of young 
women who read teen romance fiction). So, while the “objective” style 
of quantitative research and the rhetorical force of that style are very 
important (consider, for a moment, the implications of our discussions 
on limits of the discursive I in Chapter 10B), qualitative research may 
actually be even more dependent on style of reporting to persuade readers 
to accept generalizations developed from limited instances. Moreover, 
as qualitative study generates an abundance of detail, the means of con­
trolling these data, and transforming them into text that readers can 
understand, are perhaps more demanding for writers than the customary 
techniques used for producing text to report quantitative research. 
Qualitative techniques show up in various disciplines, and, while 
many scholarly journals are exclusively quantitative in the submissions 
they publish, and some tend toward qualitative research, many others 
publish both quantitative and qualitative work. You will also find arti­
cles that are themselves a mix of quantitative and qualitative techniques. 
Given this variety in form and occurrence, it would be rash to list rules 
for reporting research. Nonetheless, the shared concern for the sources of 
knowledge and an interest in tracing the production of knowledge lead 
to some features common to both quantitative and qualitative research. 
The prominence of reported speech is an obvious sign of these inter­
ests and concerns (see Chapters 3 and 4), but it is not the only sign of 
them. Appearing with some regularity throughout reports of research are 
typical expressions which signify that knowledge is under construction 
and in the process of being made, and that it comes from a position in 
the research community. In Chapter 12 we will inspect some of these 
expressions and try to arrive at generalizations about their use; we will 
also consider the relation between tenses and knowledge making. First, 
though, we will glance at the research genres’ most explicit demonstra­
tion that knowledge is made. Along the lines that distinguish quantitative 
from qualitative study, research genres are also distinguished by whether 
they make provision for a “Methods” section—an explicit account of 
how the researchers produced the knowledge they are now reporting—or 
leave method implicit. 
Review Copy

Exercise 1 
Consider how knowledge is made in different disciplines. Drawing 
on your experience of different courses you have taken, reading 
you have done, and the experiences of friends, compare knowledge-
making practices or methods in the natural sciences (e.g., biology 
and physics), social sciences (e.g., psychology and sociology), and 
humanities (e.g., English and philosophy). Which would you identify 
as primarily qualitative? Which are quantitative? Which seem to 
combine both methods? In what ways do features such as individual 
observation and interpretation, quantification of data, statistical 
analysis, experiments using control groups, and so on define each 
discipline’s knowledge-making practice as qualitative or quantitative?
11B Method Sections
Method sections expose the procedures by which knowledge has been 
produced, and they are especially common in disciplines that use quan­
titative methods.
MATTHEW: I used the following method. I placed a thermometer 
on the east-facing wall of my house. I took readings from the ther­
mometer on two days in a row at noon. I compared the readings. 
The rhetoric of method sections has been much studied, for these sec­
tions show some interesting stylistic features. For one thing, they tend 
toward agentless expressions (see Chapter 9D and 10C). So you will 
find in one of the samples in the exercise below these wordings: “[t]he 
conversations to be examined here ...”; “[t]he groups were formed after 
consultation with the children’s teachers.” In these cases, the people who 
examine, form groups, and consult with teachers are missing from the 
statement. If Matthew was to explain his method in this way, it might 
look like the following:
MATTHEW: Method: A thermometer was placed on an east-facing 
wall of an average-size dwelling. Readings were taken from the 
thermometer on two successive days at midday. The readings were 
compared.
This feature of style has excited a lot of commentary, and sometimes it is 
interpreted as a way of persuading readers that the researchers’ methods 
METHOD SECTIONS 
215
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

216 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE I
were very “scientific” and “objective,” and not open to personal bias or 
interpretation. The importance of reproducing results in a quantitative 
study may also explain the emphasis on actions rather than on the agents 
of that action. 
However, while method sections tend toward agentless expressions, 
it would not be true to say that the agent is always excluded. Sometimes 
agentless expressions appear alongside statements employing what we 
might call the methodological I, as in the following passage:
The electrical resistance was measured using the four terminals with 
an applied a.c. measuring current of 1 mA. For the sample chamber 
with a diameter of 50mm, we drilled a hole in an Al2O3 layer 
which was fitted into a rhenium gasket. The Al2O3 layer electri­
cally insulates the metal gasket from both the sample and from the 
electrodes. We checked the insulation between the electrodes and 
the gasket during compression and all processes. We attached the 
diamond anvil cell and loaded the sample directly onto the mixing 
chamber of a 3He/4He dilution refrigerator. 
K. Shimizu, K. Suhara, M. Ikumo, M. Eremets, and K. Amaya 1998 “Superconductivity in 
Oxygen.” Nature 393: 767–69, 768.
We have come across research uses of the first-person pronoun before, 
in the discursive I (Chapter 10B), and we noted that in such cases the 
first-person pronoun is associated with a discourse action. In the case of 
the methodological I, the first-person pronoun is strongly associated with 
physical actions.
Another interesting feature of method sections is their unusual pat­
tern of coherence: although sentences are all, roughly, about “method,” 
sometimes the relation between sentences is obscure. So, in the second 
passage in the exercise below, you will find:
The participants in this study were educationally and socially 
advantaged, middle-class, urban children who were predominantly 
white. The children attended the day-care centre for full days, year 
round, and had known each other for 1–3 years.
If this were not a method section, a reader could very well ask, “What is 
the connection between, on the one hand, race and socioeconomic status 
and, on the other hand, full-time attendance in daycare? Why select these 
details? Is it a causal connection? And what does any of this have to do 
Review Copy

with the topic of the article?” Readers probably won’t ask these questions 
because they assume the details are relevant to the method—they are 
accustomed to encountering these sorts of apparently unrelated details 
in a method section. But it is worth asking exactly why these details are 
included. How do they relate to past studies? How might they be used 
in the future? 
Exercise 2 
Three samples of method sections appear below. (Only Passage 3 is 
complete.) Analyze these samples for agentlessness and connected­
ness. Then consider the overall function of these passages: If you 
were to generalize from these limited data, what would you identify 
as the main concerns of researchers composing an account of their 
methods? What kinds of questions are the researchers answering 
about their work? Can you detect differences in these questions in 
different disciplines? 
PASSAGE 1 
2.2 Subjects
The sample consisted of adult patients (over the age of 18 years) 
who met one of the selection criteria: (a) surgery in the past 
24–72 h and pain in the last 24 h, or (b) diagnosis of cancer, 
care in oncology units or hospice units, and pain in the last 24 
h as assessed by the research assistant. Two hundred thirty-four 
patients were recruited for this study, including 100 postopera­
tive patients, 100 oncology patients, and 34 hospice patients. 
The response rate was 94% for the surgical group, 89% for the 
oncology group, and 68% for the hospice group. The sample size 
of the hospice group is small because some hospice patients were 
too fragile or even cognitively impaired at the time this study 
was conducted. Of these 234 patients, 49% (n = 115) were male 
and 51% (n = 119) were female. The age range was from 18 to 87 
with a mean (SD) of 52.8 (15.9) years. Sixty-five percent of the 
participants (n = 152) were married. Their religious affiliations 
included Buddhist (51.7%), Taoist (12.4%), Catholic (1.0%), 
Jewish (7.7%), and none or other (27.2%). Twenty-seven of these 
patients had a high school-equivalent education and 44% had 
METHOD SECTIONS 
217
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

218 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE I
completed college education. Demographic characteristics of 
the patients in each of the study groups are presented in Table 1.
2.3 Instrument 
The outcome questionnaire of this study was adopted from the 
study by Ward and Gordon (1994). This questionnaire was trans­
lated into Chinese by using a translation and back-translation 
method to ensure correct translation. The questionnaire was based 
on the American Pain Society Standards (Max et al., 1991). This 
questionnaire included (1) patients’ assessment of pain severity 
and satisfaction with how pain was managed by physicians and 
nurses, (2) patients’ perceptions of the time between a complaint 
of pain and receipt of medication, and (3) patients’ perceptions of 
the time between a complaint of inadequate medication and the 
receipt of different or stronger medication. Patients were asked 
if their doctors or nurses discussed with them the importance of 
pain management. The specific items in the outcome question­
naire, based on the PAS standards, are listed in Table 2. Finally, 
a one-page demographic sheet covering basic information, such 
as age, gender, and education was included in the questionnaire. 
2.4 Procedure 
Patients who met the selection criteria were approached indi­
vidually by the research assistant. Patients who met criterion (b) 
(diagnosis of cancer) were approached within 72 h of admission to 
the unit. The research assistant described the study and obtained 
oral consent. Special emphasis was made that the patients’ 
confidentiality would be protected and that their care providers 
would not know any individual’s answers. Patients were asked to 
complete the questionnaire without assistance from others. If a 
patient [...] 
Chia-Chin Lin 2000 “Applying the American Pain Society’s QA standards to evaluate the 
quality of pain management among surgical, oncology, and hospice inpatients in Taiwan.” 
Pain 87: 43–49, 43–44.
Review Copy

PASSAGE 2 
The conversations to be examined here are from an extensive 
research project with 3- to 5-year-old children at a day-care center 
in a large midwestern city. The children were grouped into 12 
same-sex triads on the basis of friendship and age. The groups 
were formed after consultation with the children’s teachers. The 
participants in this study were educationally and socially advan­
taged, middle-class, urban children who were predominantly 
white. The children attended the day-care center for full days, 
year round, and had known each other for 1–3 years. 
  The triads were videotaped during the regular day-care day in 
one of the children’s usual play areas, which was separate from 
the larger group. The only children in the room were those being 
filmed. They were not supervised by an adult, although an assist­
ant and I sat somewhat out of sight in a play loft above and behind 
the children’s play area. The children knew we were there. They 
were videotaped on three separate occasions, each time playing 
at one of three types of activities. Each group was videotaped for 
a total of approximately 75 minutes (25 minutes per session).
Amy Sheldon 1990 “Pickle fights: Gendered talk in preschool disputes.” Discourse Processes 
13: 5–31, 12–13. 
PASSAGE 3 
Subjects 
The subjects were 64 girls, ranging in age from 12 to 17, who 
voluntarily enrolled in a comprehensive program for teenage 
mothers and their infants that was provided by the local public 
health department in a large city in North Carolina. Of the 64 
girls, four were white and 60 were African-American. They had 
been sexually active from a young age, the average age at first 
intercourse having been 13.3 years (range 10 to 16, median 14). 
Average age at the time of first birth was 15.5 years (range 12.5 
to 17; median 15). One girl who gave birth at the age of 12 1/2 
years had been raped by her mother’s boyfriend. Less than half of 
the girls’ mothers had been teenage mothers themselves. Although 
43% of the fathers frequently participated in the care of their 
infants, 19% maintained only minimal contact, and 38% had 
METHOD SECTIONS 
219
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

220 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE I
none. Half contributed to the support of their child. Although 
school attendance by parenting teenagers was encouraged in the 
school district, 12 of them (18%) were not attending school at 
the time of initial intake into the program. 
Procedure 
Girls were required to attend the clinic at regular intervals, 
depending upon the age of their infant (i.e., mothers of younger 
infants attended more frequently), although many appointments 
were not kept. Efforts were made to administer a structured 
interview and a measure of self-esteem (Piers-Harris Children’s 
Self-Concept Scale). In addition, the records of some of the girls’ 
performances on the California Achievement Tests (CAT) were 
obtained from local public schools (N = 39). The scores reported 
were those most recently completed by each girl. They include the 
results of testing done in the sixth (N = 9), seventh (N = 8), eighth 
(N = 20), and ninth (N = 2) grades between 1984 and 1988. 
  The Mental Scale of the Bayley Scales of Infant Development 
was administered to infants at their 9th and 18th month clinic 
visits, where possible. Because of logistical difficulties (e.g., missed 
appointments, attrition) all data are not available for every girl.
Rauch-Elnekave 1994: 93.
Exercise 3
The following passage appears in a methods section of an archaeo­
logical study. Begin by analyzing the passage for agentlessness and 
the methodological I. Then consider this: as a discipline, archaeology 
often combines quantitative and qualitative methodology. Do you 
detect any moments where a qualitative method emerges?
2.1. Field procedures
We selected three of the previously excavated 2 × 2 m sectors 
(P6, N4 and I2). The aim was to continue the excavations in at 
least one of these to bedrock, and to date the entire cultural and 
faunal sequence. For each selected sector, backfill was removed 
to expose in situ deposits. We then used timber shoring of the 
Review Copy

baulks for safety as the excavations deepened. We also plotted and 
bagged artefacts, faunal remains, seeds and charcoal found by the 
excavators; dry sieved excavated deposits with a 2 mm mesh; and 
took bulk samples of stratigraphic units for sediment, pollen and 
phytolith analyses. Westaway (2006) also took samples for lumi­
nescence and uranium-series dating of excavated materials, and 
used speleothems from other caves in the vicinity to reconstruct 
a local palaeo-climatic history spanning much of the last 100 ka.
2.2. Dating procedures
Ages of the Song Gupuh deposits were determined with the ther­
moluminescence (TL), optically stimulated luminescence (OSL), 
thermal ionisation mass spectrometry (TIMS) uranium-series and 
radiocarbon dating methods. U-series dating was applied to in situ 
flowstone deposits that were precipitated onto collapse material 
lying on the floor of the cave. The results of these samples will 
provide maximum and minimum age constraints for the timing of 
sediment deposition above and below the collapse material using 
analytical procedures described elsewhere (Zhao et al., 2001).
M.J. Morwood, T. Sutikna, E.W. Saptomo, K.E. Westaway, Jatmiko, R. Awe Due, M.W. 
Moore, Dwi Yani Yuniawati, P. Hadi, J.-x. Zhao, C.S.M. Turney, K. Fifield, H. Allen, and 
R.P. Soejono 2008 “Climate, people and faunal succession on Java, Indonesia: evidence 
from Song Gupuh.” Journal of Archaeological Science 35: 1776–89, 1778–79.
11C Qualitative Method and Subject Position
Not all disciplines use method sections. Research in disciplines in which 
scholars do not share recognized instruments and procedures do not 
explicitly expose the means by which knowledge has been made. So, in 
literary criticism, you will not find:
The novel was read and notes were taken. Annotation took place at 
each point where the annotator could detect mentions which might 
signify something.
But even in disciplines where methods are tacit—generally but silently 
understood, and not much talked about—there can still appear implicit 
traces of method. In these disciplines, theories and concepts take the 
place of instruments and procedures, producing knowledge by operating 
QUALITATIVE METHOD AND SUBJECT POSITION 
221
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

222 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE I
on a particular set of data. Sometimes the implicit method can be seen 
most clearly in the abstract, the brief summary that sometimes precedes 
an article or accompanies bibliographical information found in an index. 
For example, consider the following abstract of Gregg Hurwitz’s article 
“Freud, Jung, and Shakespeare’s Pericles”:
This essay applies a Freudian psychoanalytic and Jungian archetypal 
narrative analysis to Shakespeare’s first and oft-criticized romance. 
The author argues that key structural and thematic elements of 
Pericles are best illuminated when viewed through a psychological 
interpretative lens, and that the play is best comprehended when 
examined in the context of its associative, rather than linear, rich­
ness. Masculinity and femininity, central themes of the narrative, are 
explored both in relation to the Oedipal complex and psychological 
individuation. Pericles also provides an excellent basis to examine 
key differences between Freud’s and Jung’s approach, particularly 
Jung’s widening of the primarily sexual psychoanalytic approach to 
encompass broader archetypal meaning.
Gregg Hurwitz 2002 “A tempest, a birth and death: Freud, Jung, and Shakespeare’s Pericles.” 
Sexuality & Culture 6 (3): 3–73, 3.
In the case of this article, the method involves a way to read the play. 
Hurwitz applies a technique borrowed from psychology to look at Shake­
speare’s Pericles in terms of associations rather than plot or dramatic 
development in order to isolate certain themes. In turn, reading the play 
this way allows him to compare different psychoanalytic techniques. In 
the article proper, this method is explained, but it is not done so in such 
a compact manner. The introduction begins by introducing Pericles and 
comparing it to other works by Shakespeare, before gradually explaining 
how psychoanalytic issues can be seen in the drama. The abstract brings 
the method into focus. 
In disciplines that use qualitative method instead of quantitative 
method, an explanation of method can be more explicit, sometimes 
resembling the style of the quantitative methods section but without 
the clear demarcation of a section. Consider, for example, the following 
introduction from Sue Jackson’s article “To Be Or Not To Be? The place 
of women’s studies in the lives of its students.”
In considering the experiences of women students in higher educa­
tion, it was important to me that I enabled the women to develop 
Review Copy

their thoughts, ideas, feelings and opinions over a period of time. 
This would also enable me to consider any changes that took place 
in their experiences and perceptions during this period. I eventually 
interviewed 14 women although, because of their changing circum­
stances, I was not in the end able to interview all of the women 
through all of the three years. I interviewed the women four times 
during the period of their degrees: in the first semester; in the second 
semester; halfway through their second year; and halfway through 
their third year. Each interview lasted between 45 minutes and an 
hour. From the start, I wanted to centralize the students’ voices and 
experiences.
Sue Jackson 2000 “To Be Or Not To Be? The place of women’s studies in the lives of its 
students.” Journal of Gender Studies 9 (2): 189–97, 189.
You will notice that in explaining her method, Jackson places con­
siderable emphasis on her own role in the knowledge-making process. 
Earlier, in our examination of quantitative method sections, we noted 
that the researchers were largely missing from the explanation (and when 
they were there, they tended to appear as physical doers—handlers or 
manipulators of equipment and objects). Why does Jackson think it 
is important to include her own position and role as a researcher? She 
answers this question later in the article:
From the outset it was important to me to locate myself in my 
research. Indeed, how could I not? I did not want to pretend to 
be a disembodied researcher, nor that the research was somehow 
‘outside’ of me. I am not an unseen and unmarked voice, but a 
person situated in my own complexities and lived realities. [...] 
From the outset, then, I identified my research as feminist, taking a 
feminist standpoint which engages in political struggle and central­
izes women’s experiences.... 
Jackson 2000: 190. 
The example from Jackson provides a good illustration of how genre 
responds to changing social situations. It could be argued that it was 
feminist reasoning, at the end of the twentieth century, which most 
sincerely invited the subject—the thinking, feeling being, experienced 
in the complexities of daily life—back into scholarly writing. Feminist 
reasoning has criticized research practices for being carried out from a 
masculinist position or point of view, and then representing that position 
QUALITATIVE METHOD AND SUBJECT POSITION 
223
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

224 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE I
as universal. So feminist research would be inclined to dismantle the form 
of knowledge constructed by traditional research practices and expose 
that knowledge as not only not “objective” but also as serving the inter­
ests of those who work at it. But some tracks of feminist research would 
also do more than expose the subjectivity of established regimes of 
knowledge. They would acknowledge the impossibility of the independ­
ent “fact” (and possibly even deny its desirability), and require that the 
researcher identify himself or herself. 
Fleshed out beyond the discursive I we met in Chapter 10B, the 
“subjective” researcher would expose the relevant social and political—
personal—elements of his or her experience of the world. These elements 
would constitute the full subject position from which the researcher 
speaks. The “knowledge” which the researcher then offers would be con­
tingent on that position: not absolute or universal, but relative to that 
position. 
It is hard to say how far this project for remodelling scholarly writing 
has advanced. Publications in disciplines which deal with gender-related 
topics are still perhaps the most likely to invite the fleshed-out subject 
to the page (and even then, in the presence of gender issues—as we have 
seen from the excerpts from articles on gender-related topics in previ­
ous chapters—the traditional scholarly voice can still prevail). But, even 
among articles which are not about gender issues, we can also find writers 
stepping out from traditional styles and saying who they are, and what 
happened to them, personally, to make them think the way they do now:
In the forty years that I have been doing fieldwork in Latin America 
and the United States, my own awareness of how the events I 
recorded are related to the world around them has expanded along 
with (and sometimes belatedly to) that of my informants. This fol­
lows trends in the field as the unit of investigation has progressed 
from one of bounded cultures where the task was to recapture 
a traditional past to a multilayered, historically situated inquiry 
where the authoritative stance of a privileged observer was no longer 
condoned. In tracing my own ethnographic journey, I shall try to 
capture some of those experiences in which I was forced to encounter 
the world dimensions of everyday struggles for survival. [...] I found 
interpretation of these events [homicides in a village in the Mayan 
area of Chiapas, Mexico] difficult, given the dominant paradigm of 
structural functionalism in the field of anthropology. [...] When I 
Review Copy

completed the monograph on the Maya, I felt the need to escape the 
involuted conflicts of Mayan semisubsistence farmers and work in a 
society where the hostility was turned outward against class enemies. 
I visited the mining communities of Bolivia in the summer of 1967, 
just three weeks after the massacre of San Juan in Siglo XX-Catavi. 
[...] I borrowed some books from my informants and acquired a 
library of publications by current Latin American theorists to cope 
with the confusion of ideological currents and social movements that 
I found in the mining community. [...] Clearly, all of this turmoil 
[coup, debt crisis] exceeded the anthropological models available for 
analysis of field data. I tried to keep the life of the community at the 
center of my thinking about what was coming in, allowing it to be 
filtered through the people’s sense of what was happening. The life 
narratives that I undertook with a few of my informants provided 
the ballast that kept me from sliding into metatheories concerning 
the consciousness of workers. 
Nash 1994: 13–19. 
This article is not about gender issues, yet perhaps its style has been 
influenced by the feminist reasoning which suggests that researchers 
identify themselves. It’s interesting, too, that this researcher represents 
herself as changing—as a thinker and observer—over time. She knows 
things now that she didn’t know before; she has been influenced by oth­
ers, she has changed her mind. Just as knowledge is located in time and 
changes over time, so are knowledge makers located in time, and subject 
to its influences. It’s worth noting further that Nash is writing in the 
discipline of anthropology—for, besides feminist reasoning, the other 
radical questioning of scholarly authority in the late twentieth century 
has come from post-colonial positions. Post-colonial reasoning has 
challenged the authority of Western researchers to produce knowledge of 
other cultures, and has exposed traditional anthropological knowledge as 
saturated with colonial values.
Exercise 4 
Examine the following abstracts from scholarly articles. Note how 
the first abstract, which was written by the writer of the article, 
uses complete sentences and functions like a compact summary of 
QUALITATIVE METHOD AND SUBJECT POSITION 
225
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

226 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE I
the article, but the second is more fragmented and seems to survey 
the topics of the article in the order that they are covered. Based on 
these abstracts, describe the method by which knowledge is being 
made in each article.
ABSTRACT 1 
Although late nineteenth century and early twentieth century 
Canada, the United States, Australia, and New Zealand were all 
settler societies with a predominantly British ethnic heritage, a 
comparison reveals intriguing differences in attitudes and prac­
tices related to “racial” mixing during this period. The relation 
to land was the underpinning of the dominant discourses con­
cerning miscegenation in all four countries, and these discourses 
were grounded in an international pan-European discussion 
of social and physiological difference. However, constructions 
of sexuality, class, race, gender, and national values, as well as 
previous experiences of inter-ethnic contact, all played roles in 
determining attitudes and policies toward racial mixing in any 
particular circumstance. The actual forms of mixing that took 
place, and to a certain extent the discourses about them, were 
shaped by indigenous as well as European attitudes and agency, 
and in some instances were shaped as much by male patriarchal 
authority and male gender solidarity across cultures as by the 
interests of settler colonialism.
Victoria Freeman 2005 “Attitudes Toward ‘Miscegenation’ in Canada, the United States, 
New Zealand, and Australia, 1860–1914.” Native Studies Review 16 (1): 41–70, 41. 
ABSTRACT 2 
Studies the parallelism of the English play ‘Mary Magdalen’ 
preserved in the Bodleian Library MS Digby 133 and William 
Shakespeare’s ‘Pericles.’ Summary outline of ‘Pericles’; Narrative 
source of relevant parts of ‘Mary Magdalen’; Possible gests that 
make up saints’ legends—conversion, martyrdom, miracle and 
withdrawal from the world.
Peter Womack 1999 “Shakespeare and the sea of stories.” Journal of Medieval & Early 
Modern Studies 29 (1): 169–88, 169.
Review Copy

Exercise 5 
Examine the two excerpts from scholarly articles below to deter­
mine how each writer steps beyond the traditional role of the 
discursive I. (Passage 2 comes from a co-authored article innovatively 
structured as a dialogue.)
PASSAGE 1 
About 2 years ago, I conversed with an American business-man 
in Mexico about how difficult replacement parts were to come 
by in that country. Over the next several months, he formed 
an alliance with Mexican and American partners and investors 
and formed a company, one with a more specific business goal, 
namely, to provide rebuilt engine parts from the U.S. to com­
mercial transportation fleets in Mexico. 
  During meetings over the following year, the American and 
Mexican partners saw me in action, doing what linguistic anthro­
pologists naturally do—mediating worlds—sometimes in English, 
sometimes in rusty Spanish, sometimes in both. We mutually 
decided that I would spend the summer in Mexico City to help 
start up the company. I dealt with Mexican and American partners, 
government offices, lawyers, and customers. I worked in the cracks 
between two different “cultures,” cracks described in recent books 
on Mexican-American relations, books whose titles foreshadow the 
examples to come: Distant Neighbors (Riding, 1985) and Limits to 
Friendship (Pastor and Castaneda, 1988). Kismet turned me into 
something I had never been before—an “intercultural communi­
cator.” The rest of this article is dedicated to figuring out what, in 
light of that experience, the phrase might mean. 
Intercultural communicator 
After my baptism by fire, I returned to the university in the 
autumn and approached the library with a naive question in mind: 
“What is the field of intercultural communication all about?” The 
question was naive because the literature is huge, diverse, without 
agreement on any particular unifying focus (see Hinnenkamp, 
1990, for a related concern with the fundamentals of the field). 
Michael Agar 1994 “The intercultural frame.” International Journal of Intercultural Relations 
18 (2): 221–37, 221–22. 
QUALITATIVE METHOD AND SUBJECT POSITION 
227
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

228 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE I
PASSAGE 2 
I. Introduction: Multiple openings with(in) a dialogue 
What, then, are the limitations of our practice? How is our 
practice complicit with certain established societal structures?
Ming-Yeung Lu
MING-YUEN S. MA: This quote brings up many of the ques­
tions that keep coming up in my mind as I work on this project, 
and I think that they point out the uncertainties in my motives: 
who am I, a first generation Chinese gay man, who was born but 
did not grow up in the United States, whose higher education 
was enabled by my privileged, upper-middle-class background, to 
write about Asian lesbian and gay writers? What is my placement 
in the text? What does it mean for us to be writing about works 
by persons of Asian and Pacific Islander descent in a language that 
is not our own—though most of us communicate by it? 
  ALICE Y. HOM: As a second-generation Chinese American, 
raised in a working-class immigrant family but educated in an 
Ivy League college, I think there are some complexities to the 
language issue. Many second-, third-, and fourth-generation Asian 
Americans do not feel their native language is an Asian language. 
When talking about Asian Pacific Islander lesbian and gay writing, 
we have to address the definition of “Asian Pacific Islander.” In 
this case we are speaking of Asian and Pacific Islander immigrants 
and those born in the United States. The diaspora is limited to 
the United States although some of the Asian Pacific Islander 
lesbian writings are coming from Canada. For the most part, we 
will concentrate in this United States-centred context because 
most of our research and experiences are from here. 
Alice Y. Hom and Ming-Yuen S. Ma 1993 “Premature gestures: A speculative dialogue 
on Asian Pacific lesbian and gay writing.” Journal of Homosexuality 26 (2/3): 21–31, 22.
Review Copy

229
In Chapter 10 we met the discursive I: the intellectual being who arranged 
and forecasted the discussion, who pointed to parts of the text, summing 
up and emphasizing. In Chapter 11 we met the methodological I: the 
researcher in her capacity as a physical agent who conducted research, 
manipulating equipment or excavating sites. We also met a more radi­
cally personal subject position (discussed in Chapter 11C) which makes 
appearances when researchers feel compelled to emphasize their personal 
role in the knowledge-making process. As we noted, this need may be 
due to the discipline (for example, women’s studies or ethnographic dis­
ciplines like anthropology) or it may arise from a general questioning of 
the knowledge-making process itself. Below we meet a variant of the dis­
cursive I—the knowledge-making I—that is pervasive, albeit more shy 
than the arranger and forecaster of discussion. This “I” is not as personal 
as the expression of subject position, but it is similar insofar as it marks 
the presence or role of the researcher in the knowledge-making process. 
It is perhaps most distinguished by the awareness it exhibits of the limits 
of its own certainty.
Later in the chapter we will also consider how researchers use tense 
to trace the development of knowledge over time.
12
Making and Maintaining 
Knowledge II
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

230 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE II
12A Modality
Consider the use of the knowledge-making I in the example below. In 
summarizing the views of another writer (Wittig), the writer (Calhoun) 
appears in the text as a reasoning being, evaluating the statements of 
others. 
Because lesbians and heterosexual resisters must have, on [Wittig’s] 
account, the same relation to the category “woman,” there can be no 
interesting differences between the two. This, I think, is a mistake, 
and I will argue in a moment that lesbians are in a quite special 
sense not-women.
Calhoun 1994: 564 (emphasis added).
You will note that the second appearance of the “I” in this passage is the 
discursive, forecasting “I” organizing the argument: “I will argue....” But 
the first appearance—“I think”—asserts Calhoun’s own judgement on 
the issue under discussion. Since the scholarly genres impose so many 
restrictions on the presentation of the writing “self,” we might well scruti­
nize this special appearance of the writing self to find out what conditions 
permit it. 
What we will find is that the “I think” in the passage above is by no 
means an isolated case. Rather, it is a variation on a set of expressions 
that are in fact abundant in the research genres and that tend to occur 
in just such situations as the passage above exemplifies: situations where 
the writer is taking a step beyond established knowledge, moving to offer 
new statements to the research community. To develop some perspective 
on this set of expressions and their range of occurrence, we will first see 
how the grammar of “I think” is related to the grammar of some other 
expressions which are akin to it in function. 
Let’s say Matthew is inside on a dark night. He hears a sound on the 
roof. He reports to Thomas:
It’s raining.
Since he is inside, where it is dry, he is inferring that it is raining. Mat­
thew could report his finding as a product of his own reasoning—an 
estimate from a position of limited knowledge.
I think it’s raining.
Review Copy

Matthew doesn’t know if it is raining for sure, so he emphasizes that the 
statement is based on his own perception. He could include such an 
estimate in his statement by other means. He could say:
It seems to be raining. It must be raining.
Or, if the speaker and his companion are new to the area, and less certain 
about local night sounds, he could express his estimate with less certainty:
THOMAS: What’s that noise?
MATTHEW: It could be rain. It might be rain. Maybe it’s rain.
“Seems,” “must,” “could,” “might,” “maybe” are all expressions 
embedded in the statement that identify it as the product of inference 
from a position of limited knowledge. Along with other expressions like 
“evidently,” “apparently,” “perhaps,” “possibly,” “appears,” these expres­
sions modalize statements. Roughly, they are equivalent to “I think.” 
Although modality erases “I” from the surface of the expression, it nev­
ertheless maintains the sense of the statement in which it occurs as being 
knowledge under construction from a certain location: the speaker’s or 
writer’s position in the world. 
These traces of reasoning from positions of limited knowledge are 
typical of scholarly expression. They signify the research community’s 
persistent interest in the production of knowledge. On the one hand, they 
permit the individual researcher to move into unconfirmed territory—a 
lone explorer, estimating and reckoning (“I will argue ...”)—and, on the 
other hand, they signal respect for the community’s cooperative work of 
corroborating and recognizing established positions (“This, I think, is a 
mistake ...”). 
So strong is this tradition of respect for properly established positions 
that even when the current researchers are evidently impatient with the 
dominance of accepted views, and when their own research defies those 
views, they still identify knowledge deficits through modalized state­
ments. Consider the way in which modalized statements, in the following 
passages, produce a knowledge deficit. Two researchers (Tiratasoo and 
Tomlinson) report extensive evidence to overturn the standing idea that 
trade-union activities have a lot to do with Britain’s post-war economic 
circumstances. They nevertheless approach the standing view with signs of 
respect, expressed through modality. Here they respond to the work of a 
distinguished and widely cited scholar:
MODALITY 
231
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

232 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE II
Olson’s work demands to be taken seriously, yet it, too, seems to be 
flawed. Olson has attracted considerable support from economists 
and economic historians because his methodology conforms to the 
tenets of individual rational action theory inherent in neo-classical 
economics. However, this choice of approach can be criticised 
because it encourages a misleadingly simplified view of reality.
* * *
It may be right to conclude about Olson, therefore, that what he 
has produced is not an explanation, but merely an historical set of 
abstractions. His theory seems to provide little more satisfaction 
than the offerings of far less sophisticated analysts. 
  At this point, it appears wise to turn from the current literature 
and reexamine the contemporary evidence. Many recent authorities 
have argued, as we have shown, that restrictionism was strongly 
evident on Britain’s shopfloor after 1945, but not much of what has 
been written, it seems fair to conclude, is very persuasive. 
Nick Tiratsoo and Jim Tomlinson 1994 “Restrictive practices on the shopfloor in Britain, 
1945–1960: Myth and reality.” Business History 36 (2): 65–84, 67, 69 (emphasis added).
Using modalized expressions allows Tiratsoo and Tomlinson to question 
established positions on the topic and to politely suggest an alternate 
approach, in this case to return to the “evidence.” 
You will notice that in the example about rain above, Matthew 
follows the observation that it “seems” to be raining by saying that it 
“must” be raining. This confident assertion may seem to contradict the 
expression of uncertainty conveyed by “might.” And yet, while “must” 
can seem like an expression of certainty, it is in fact a sign of strong but 
not infallible conviction attending an inference. For example, “It must 
be nearly 4 o’clock” suggests that the speaker does not have a watch and 
so can’t say for sure what time it is. Along with “must,” “obviously” can 
seem like an expression of certainty, but the next example shows that 
speakers can use “obviously” (like “must”) in the presence of doubt, or 
uncertainty:
... obviously you grew up, although this might not be the case, in a 
family that encouraged this interest [in music].
Rex Murphy, Cross-Country Check-up, CBC, 23 April 2000, talking to a constitutional expert 
about music.
Review Copy

From a distance, we might think that the research genres would be the 
ones that would use expressions of certainty, rather than uncertainty, 
limitation, and possibility. If we think of research and the sciences—
particularly the “hard” sciences—as sources of authority and ultimate 
fact, we would expect certainty, not indeterminacy. But in fact tentative 
expressions are very common in the research genres. They indicate the 
writer’s reasoning, inference, speculation, and even subjectivity.
Perhaps we would not be surprised at this indeterminacy in the 
research genres if we recall the research genres’ distinctive dependence on 
reported speech. In a way, the expressions which make a statement inde­
terminate by showing that it is the speaker’s inference from incomplete 
evidence are something like the statements which are reported as coming 
from someone other than the writer. So, to return to our rain example, 
the speaker could also make a claim about the weather by reporting the 
speech of someone else.
MATTHEW: Mike says it’s raining.
THOMAS: Oh.
If Thomas knows that Mike has just come in from outside, then he is likely 
to credit the statement as valid. It seems to come from a reliable position. 
On the other hand, if Mike has not been out, and is only speculating, and 
tends to interpret all noises as rain, Thomas might not be convinced. The 
context in which the reported statement was produced—the speaker’s 
identity and situation, the timing of the statement—helps the listener to 
evaluate the statement. Similarly, reporting expressions, documentation, 
characterization of the source—all these features of scholarly citation 
help readers evaluate reported statements.
Exercise 1 
Identify the modalizing expressions in the following passages. How do 
they limit the speakers’ claims for the knowledge they will produce?
PASSAGE 1 
Human representations offer archaeologists the possibility of 
investigating ancient social categorization and differentiation 
from within. Of course, we are given only a very partial view. 
Figurines do not provide maps to complete social systems. 
MODALITY 
233
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

234 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE II
Instead, they encode only very selected themes. The anthropo­
morphic figurines of Early Formative Paso de la Amada [Mexico] 
appear to be stylized human images depicting idealized social 
categories or roles (Lesure 1997). Their specific uses are unknown. 
Most were deployed, broken, discarded in household contexts. 
They were probably grouped into sets or scenes in which not only 
the individual representations but comparisons between them 
became important (Flannery and Marcus 1976, 382; Marcus 
1989, 1996). It therefore seems likely that the message conveyed 
by the use of figurines involved statements not only about social 
categories, but about relationships between categories.
Lesure 1999: 209. 
PASSAGE 2 
An objective way to determine the current nature of the field 
of personality psychology is to examine what gets published in 
various journals over a fixed period of time. This is not a foolproof 
system, since more papers are rejected for publication than are 
accepted. The ones that do get accepted might thus represent a 
biased sample. Journal editors serve as “gatekeepers” and therefore 
what is accepted might not necessarily be the best but rather may 
reflect the biases of journal editors and referees or the zeitgeist 
of psychology. 
  Nevertheless, what is published in personality journals is 
probably the closest approximation of the true nature of research 
in the area, and is certainly a good indicator of what is currently 
being disseminated.
Norman S. Endler and Rachel L. Speer 1998 “Personality psychology: Research trends 
for 1993–1995.” Journal of Personality 66 (5): 621–69, 621.
12B Other Markers of the Status of Knowledge
As we have seen, modality and reporting expressions both indicate that 
statements come from a position of limited knowledge. In this section 
we will look at other expressions that indicate the status of statements as 
knowledge. First, we will examine limiting expressions. While modality 
indicates a lack of certainty on the part of the writer, limiting expressions 
Review Copy

qualify or place other limits on statements (even statements about which 
writers are not concerned to indicate certainty or uncertainty), especially 
generalizations. Second, we will look at agentless expressions, with spe­
cific attention to how they indicate consensus about whether a statement 
is obvious or not. The functions of these different expressions may some­
times seem to overlap, and generally speaking we can regard them as 
establishing writers’ attitudes toward or opinions of the statement they 
are offering. (Amongst those who study these speech occurrences, the dif­
ferent forms—reported speech, modality, limiting expressions—are often 
grouped under the category “evidentials.”)
By definition, generalizations may seem to defy limits. The opening 
generalization of the passage below appears at first to ignore the modal­
izing and reporting tendencies we have been observing in the last section:
During the course of the twentieth century relationships between 
minorities and dominant societies have fundamentally altered in 
wartime....
However, on closer inspection we will see that it in fact conforms to 
traditions of marking statements for their status as knowledge:
During the course of the twentieth century relationships between 
minorities and dominant societies have fundamentally altered in 
wartime, an assertion which applies to all states. The position of 
minorities usually deteriorates, particularly if they represent a group 
which has acted as the traditional scapegoat for the dominant society, 
or if they are identified with the state facing their land of settlement 
in war. In such a situation the minorities almost invariably face 
persecution, varying from controls on movement and expression to 
internment and even genocide. The response of the dominant group 
varies according to the political traditions upon which it is grounded. 
A liberal democracy will usually retain traces of tolerations, while 
an autocratic state will exercise more arbitrary anti-minority policies 
(Panayi 1990b). Few exceptions exist to this state of affairs, although 
in some cases opportunities may arise that allow a minority to make 
some socio-economic progress. The experience of Afro-Americans 
and American Indians in the first world war provides an example 
(Dippie 1982, p. 194; Grossman 1989).
Mark Ellis and Panikos Panayi 1994 “German minorities in World War I: A comparative 
study of Britain and the U.S.A.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 17(2): 238–59.
OTHER MARKERS OF THE STATUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
235
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

236 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE II
The writers seem to be aware of the risk they take in offering a generaliza­
tion that is neither reported nor modalized, for they quickly move to 
characterize it and insist on its generality:
... an assertion which applies to all states.
Then, as they develop this generality, they gradually and slightly reduce 
the application of its parts: “all” gives way to “usually,” “almost invari­
ably,” “usually,” “[f]ew exceptions exist,” and “some cases.” Each of these 
expressions limit the statement in some way. That is, the writers do not 
commit themselves to saying that any given statement is universally true. 
That would be too much. 
The following statement is from an article reporting results of an 
experimental study of the ability to remember and learn a written style:
[T]he subjects demonstrated a trend toward mentioning more rules 
for the marked forms than for the unmarked forms for all three style 
characteristics.
Jennifer Zervakis and David C. Rubin 1998 “Memory and learning for a novel written style.” 
Memory and Cognition 26 (4): 754–67, 764 (emphasis added).
How would this statement sound without the limiting expression? 
In effect, expressions like these control the extent of a statement’s 
application. They reduce and monitor how the generalization is applied 
to cases or instances. They place limits on knowledge by conditioning 
where and under what circumstances it is valid. While by no means 
exhaustive, the following list gives a good sense of the range of limiting 
expressions:
	
usually	 	
in part
	
most	
	
at least
	
some	
	
partly
	
many	
	
often
	
generally	
sometimes
	
roughly		
typically
Notice the effect that the insertion of appropriate limiting expressions 
can have in conditioning a broad statement for use in a research setting. 
Consider this statement: 
Family-wage campaigns supported both patriarchal and corporate 
interests.
Review Copy

Compare it with this statement:
Generally, family-wage campaigns supported patriarchal and 
corporate interests.
Given the scholarly genres’ preoccupation with the status and pro­
duction of knowledge, we could expect limiting expressions to cooperate 
with reporting and modality to sketch the limits of knowledge. In the 
following example, a writer offers an interpretation of evidence she has 
presented as to the conditions of labour after the abolition of slavery in 
Brazil. Note the reporting, modalizing, and limiting expressions in the 
passage:
It was this process that Peter Isenberg called “modernization 
without change” and that has generally been interpreted as 
implying a crushing continuity of dependence and poverty for 
former slaves. While this is in one sense quite accurate—indeed, 
rural northeasterners may have been even more malnourished after 
emancipation than before—an overemphasis on continuity may 
obscure the importance of the access to land that many former 
slaves did achieve.... 
  Even though the physical work performed by labor tenants might 
differ little from that performed by slaves, the orbits of their lives 
now had a somewhat different shape. While slaves had lived in 
a centralized set of quarters under direct supervision, moradores 
usually built their huts “at scattered points on the estates.” An even 
more general dispersion of the population was probably prevented 
by the development of central mills, but the small-scale dispersion 
within estates could be of crucial importance to the development 
of a life oriented toward family and neighbors rather than employer. 
And, to the extent that freedom of movement could be maintained, 
it provided some constraint on the exactions that could be imposed 
on rural dwellers.
Rebecca J. Scott 1994 “Defining the boundaries of freedom in the world of cane: Cuba, 
Brazil, and Louisiana after emancipation.” American Historical Review February: 70–102, 96 
(emphasis added).
Reporting expressions include the citation of Isenberg (“called”) and the 
obscured reference “generally interpreted.” Note that Scott continues by 
calling the reported statements into question. She does so by first using 
OTHER MARKERS OF THE STATUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
237
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

238 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE II
limiting expressions (“in one sense” and “quite”) and allowing for the 
validity of this “one sense” with the modal expression “may.” As she pro­
ceeds, note how modality is used again (“may,” “may,” “might,” “could,” 
“could”) and coupled with different limiting expressions: “many former 
slaves,” “somewhat different shape,” “usually built,” “some constraint.” 
All these expressions limit the scope of the statement. In that respect, 
they are pointers to the statements’ status as knowledge, and to the writ­
ers’ limited position: they are not in a position to say such-and-such is 
true for all cases. 
In addition to limiting statements, we also find scholarly writers 
expressing attitudes about the obviousness of statements. Alongside 
words like “possibly,” “may,” “might,” or “could,” we see them saying 
things like the following:
Certainly, x 
It is evident that x 
Surely x 
Apparently x 
Undoubtedly x
They can even combine apparent confidence with seeming reservation. 
For example, summarizing the research of “social investigator Ferdinand 
Zweig,” these writers say:
He concentrated on five main sectors (building and civil engineer­
ing, cotton, engineering, iron and steel, and printing) and found 
that restrictive practices of various kinds were certainly sometimes 
evident.
Tiratsoo and Tomlinson 1994: 70 (emphasis added).
They don’t say:
He ... found restrictive practices of various kinds.
This complex trace of reasoning—the phenomenon is “evident” (to an 
observer/interpreter), but only “sometimes,” but then “certainly”—indi­
cates the status of this statement as knowledge. 
To say that something is evident—or apparent, or observable, or rec­
ognizable—is to say that it is so to someone. Remembering that scholarly 
writing makes big efforts to attach statements to their sources, we might 
confront wordings like these and ask, well, who finds something evident 
Review Copy

or apparent, or who observes it or recognizes it? At first, these wordings 
might seem vague, and at odds with other features we have been looking 
at. But we can account for these typical wordings by noticing how they 
resemble some other forms we have seen. Observable, identifiable, and 
evident are agentless: they omit the agent—the person—who observes, 
identifies, or finds something evident. So they are like other agentless 
forms we have seen, for example:
it is known that x ...
x is acknowledged as ...
In the following passage, which expressions are agentless?
The problem of deep oceanic convection induced by localized surface 
cooling has received considerable attention in the last years. Results 
from field observations (e.g., in the Greenland Sea or the Gulf of 
Lions), laboratory experiments, and numerical simulations have 
led to some theoretical predictions concerning the structure of the 
convective region like plume scale, chimney scale, and rim current 
by, for example, Klinger and Marshall (1995), Send and Marshall 
(1995), and Viseck et al. (1996). The comparison of these scaling 
arguments with real ocean data on deep connection is somewhat 
restricted due to the lack of detailed measurements of convective 
plumes and chimneys, although field experiments have provided 
very impressive cases of deep ocean convection (e.g., Morawitz et 
al. 1996; Schott et al. 1996).
S. Raasch and D. Etling 1998 “Modeling deep ocean convection: Large eddy simulation in 
comparison with laboratory experiments.” American Meteorological Society 21: 1786–1802, 
1786. 
Who attends? Who observes? Who experiments? Who designs simula­
tions? Who predicts? Who produces results? Who compares? The answers 
to these questions are not given. In the passage, “attention” and “observa­
tions” are agentless. They take away the person who attended and the 
person who observed. Notably, if we ask who uses theory to predict, 
examples are given: Klinger and Marshall (1995), Send and Marshall 
(1995), and Viseck et al. (1996). Why are Raasch and Etling so imprecise 
about some things and so precise about others? Apparently they assume 
that readers are generally familiar with the earlier findings that led to the 
work of Marshall and others. 
OTHER MARKERS OF THE STATUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
239
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

240 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE II
Expressions like “it is known that ...” seem to distribute knowledge: 
it is not just the present speaker who sees this or knows it. Similarly, in 
the case of expressions like “evident” or “observable,” the commentary 
on the status of knowledge includes not so much an estimate of its prob­
ability (as “possibly” or “may,” for example, would provide), or not only 
a trace of its source (something someone reported), but a measure of the 
position from which x is known. As—
it is known that x ...
x is acknowledged as ...
—suggest that more than one person knows this, so—
evident
apparent
observable
identifiable
—suggest that, from any reasonable position, people would see this. 
“Reasonable position,” however, by now should occur to us as a social 
rather than purely cognitive (and universal) measure. And we can now 
recognize the role of presupposition in such expressions (see Chapter 
10D). In scholarly circles, reasoning goes on in social contexts, among 
people of similar experience. 
These markers of obviousness can take the form of “evident,” “appar­
ent,” “recognized/recognizable,” or “observed/observable,” or the more 
pronounced forms of “surely,” “certainly,” “clearly,” which insist that the 
statement should be acceptable to reasonable readers. Most compelling, 
perhaps, of these forms is “of course.” “Of course” signals that the state­
ment is so evident that readers are only being reminded of what they 
already know:
It is now well-established, of course, that the majority of British 
employers looked to the apprenticeship system rather than formal 
education in the classroom as the appropriate training for the bulk 
of their employees.
Keith Burgess 1994 “British employers and education policy, 1935–45: A decade of ‘missed 
opportunities’?” Business History 36 (3): 29–61 (emphasis added). 
Here “of course” signals that the writer takes his readers (business histori­
ans) as already knowing that it is known that British employers favoured 
Review Copy

apprenticeship training. “Of course” describes the status of this knowl­
edge as widely distributed in the community which forms the audience 
for this article. 
In a way, “of course” is an expression of politeness: it constructs read­
ers as knowledgeable, as not needing to be told something they already 
know. But what if you didn’t know that apprenticeship was the preferred 
form of training? In this case, “of course” would inform you that the 
topic is common ground for the intended audience, a well-known con­
sensus in that community. 
Yet, while “of course,” “certainly,” “to be sure,” or “clearly” can cre­
ate the impression of consensus, these expressions of obviousness can 
also suddenly alienate a reader. On the one hand, we should be aware 
of the power of certain expressions to appear to distribute knowledge: 
we use them to signal to readers that we know we are not delivering 
brand-new ideas, but, rather, ideas that are broadly entertained in the 
community. On the other hand, these expressions incur some risk that 
our reader may not find something as clear, evident, or matter-of-course 
as we suggest. 
MATTHEW: Clearly, Dickens’ verbal art is a precursor of cinematic 
art. 
THOMAS: Wait a minute. That’s not clear at all.
While “of course” and related expressions say “This statement is in 
keeping with what you and I (and others like us) know about the world,” 
words like “surprisingly” say “This statement is not in keeping with what 
you and I (and others like us) know about the world.” 
Most analyses of the various proposals to date (including the 
so-called Flat Tax, a national sales tax, the “USATax,” etc.) have 
concentrated on the distributional impact of the plans, along familiar 
lines of progressivity and regressivity. Surprisingly little critical 
attention has been paid to the macroeconomic implications of these 
tax reform plans, particularly to the claims about saving. 
Neil H. Buchanan 1999 “Taxes, saving, and macroeconomics.” Journal of Economic Issues 33 
(1): 59–75, 60 (emphasis added). 
“Of course,” “obviously,” and “surprisingly” signify a solidarity 
amongst those convened by what we called writer’s orchestration (see 
Chapter 6). They reflect a kind of identification on the part of the writer 
OTHER MARKERS OF THE STATUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
241
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

242 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE II
with the scholarly community: shared attitudes and experiences in 
research disciplines. 
We could also see expressions like “of course,” “obviously,” and “sur­
prisingly” as expanding the identity of the discursive I, for they emphasize 
a position—from which something is well known (“of course”) or clearly 
to be seen (“obviously”) or never seen before (“surprisingly”). Although 
academic writing is often considered impersonal, or neutral, or anony­
mous, in fact there are many signals of subjectivity in scholarly style: 
expressions of attitude—and even feeling (of a sort). Here two econo­
mists are “astonish[ed]” by something which might not stir such feeling 
in people who do not share their position in the world: 
From 1929 to 1932, Argentina imported severe deflationary pres­
sures and adverse terms-of-trade shocks from the international 
economy: the external terms of trade declined by 24 percent and 
the foreign (U.S.) price level fell by 26 percent. 
  In this context it is astonishing that the Argentine Great Depres­
sion was so mild and short-lived by international standards. 
Gerardo della Paolera and Alan M. Taylor 1999 “Economic recovery from the Argentine Great 
Depression: Institutions, expectations, and the change of macroeconomic regime.” Journal of 
Economic History 59 (3): 567–98, 569 (emphasis added). 
Exercise 2 
In the passage below, the writers begin to reinterpret evidence. 
Identify the modal and limiting expressions they use as they begin to 
evaluate available knowledge. 
Taken together, these various accounts appear to constitute a 
formidable indictment, yet closer inspection once again exposes 
flaws. Some industrial correspondents did, of course, have good 
contacts in business and may have accurately reported what they 
were told. Nevertheless, it is not certain what employers’ com­
plaints really added up to: grumbles from the boardroom were, of 
course, nothing new. Moreover, some of the press accounts have 
a formulatory ring and may well have been shaped more by the 
pressure to grab the reader’s attention than the desire to present 
accurate facts. 
Tiratsoo and Tomlinson 1994: 69–70. 
Review Copy

Exercise 3 
Inspect essays you have recently written or are currently drafting. 
Do you find the modalizing and limiting expressions that we have 
been examining in published scholarship? If they are missing, can you 
explain their absence? Does your writing situation differ from that of 
professional scholars in ways that lead you away from expressions of 
position and limitation? If it doesn’t, and you find modalizing and lim­
iting expressions missing from your academic writing, try introducing 
them at appropriate points, and observe the effect. 
Exercise 4 
Identify in the following passages signs of attitude (something is good, 
or bad) and feeling (something has taken the writers by surprise). 
PASSAGE 1 
In many less developed countries the government resorts to 
minimum wage laws in a bid to raise the living standards of 
the workers. In India, for example, the Minimum Wages Act 
of 1948 laid down standards of minimum wage. The objective 
was “not merely ... the bare sustenance of life but ... for some 
measure of education, medical requirements and amenities.”1 In 
other countries also, such laws and regulations were motivated 
by similar concerns. 
  Unfortunately, however, there is little concern about the pos­
sible detrimental effects of such laws on the level of employment, 
as these laws may induce the firms to cut down on the number 
of workers employed. 
Note 
1	 Committee for Fair Wages appointed by government of India, 
1948. 
Saikat Datta and Prabal Roy Chowdhury 1998 “Management union bargaining under 
minimum wage regulation in less developed countries.” Indian Economic Review 33 (2): 
169–84, 169–70. 
PASSAGE 2 
The complex and often fitful transition from central planning to 
the market in China and the Warsaw Pact countries has been a 
OTHER MARKERS OF THE STATUS OF KNOWLEDGE 
243
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

244 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE II
hot topic during the past decade. Notably, the United States made 
a similar transition after World War II. Indeed, the reconversion 
from a wartime command economy to a market-oriented postwar 
economy, a transition accomplished with astonishing speed and 
little apparent difficulty, constitutes one of the most remarkable 
events in U.S. economic history. Nevertheless, economists and 
economic historians have devoted little attention to that episode, 
and their explanations of it are, on close inspection, extremely 
problematic. 
Robert Higgs 1999 “From central planning to the market: The American transition, 
1945–1947.” The Journal of Economic History 59: 600–23, 623. 
PASSAGE 3 
Unfortunately, this methodological assumption treats the media 
as passive “channels” of communication or neutral and objective 
observers and recorders of events, a view that for some time now 
has been rejected by scholars of the media (e.g., Gans 1981; Her­
man and Chomsky 1988; Shoemaker and Resse 1991), as well 
as refuted by studies of the media coverage of collective events 
(Danzger 1975; Franzosi 1987; McCarthy, McPhail, and Smith 
1996; Meuller 1997a; Snyder and Kelly 1977). 
Oliver and Myers 1999: 39. 
12C Tense and the Story of Research
Students are often told to “be consistent” in tense, and they are gen­
erally advised to use present tense. It is true that the simple present is 
the most common form for reporting expressions in the research genres, 
but it is often joined by other forms of the present tense, as well as the 
past tense. With this array of tenses, scholarly writers tell the story of 
statements occurring, staging or dramatizing the making of knowledge. 
In this story, knowledge is not timeless and immutable, but historical, 
located in time. 
Most of the reporting verbs we have been looking at seem to prefer 
the simple present form in the research genres.
Review Copy

Rouse presents a novel challenge to spatial images, highlighting 
the nature of postmodern space. He points out that members of a 
“transnational migration” circuit can be parts of two communities 
simultaneously. However, he argues.... 
Chavez 1994: 55 (emphasis added).
Although, clearly, the speech actions of arguing or pointing out occurred 
in past time (before Chavez wrote the above), they are presented in 
present tense. 
In a sample summary in Chapter 4, we followed the trend and used 
the simple present too:
To explain the means by which heterosexual society produces 
heterosexuality as “natural,” and produces “negative social reality” 
for lesbians and gay men, Calhoun (1994) catalogues the social 
practices (e.g., dating, sex education, erotica) which construct sex/
gender dimorphism, and the social conventions (e.g., joint gifts 
and invitations to husband-and-wife) and legal and economic 
structures (e.g., adoption procedures, spousal health benefits) 
which produce the “single unit” of intimately bonded man and 
woman.
Consider how this would sound if we changed the verb from simple 
present to simple past:
To explain the means by which heterosexual society produces 
heterosexuality as “natural,” and produces “negative social reality” 
for lesbians and gay men, Calhoun (1994) catalogued the social 
practices.... 
An academic reader could stop, or misstep, noting the past tense. Later, 
we will consider how such a reader might interpret this way of talking 
about Calhoun’s research. What is important for the moment is that the 
simple present tense appears to be an important way to bring scholarly 
conversations to life. Why is this so? 
Consider the role of the simple present in this example of everyday 
conversation: 
So this guy comes over and says is that your car and I’m like yeah 
and he goes you gonna leave it there and I’m like—what?
TENSE AND THE STORY OF RESEARCH 
245
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

246 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE II
Studies of simple present (e.g., Chafe 1994) in conversational citation 
suggest that it coincides with speakers’ evaluation of what they are say­
ing as particularly impressive: they dramatize their report of important 
moments by switching to simple present, creating an effect of immediacy. 
Scholarly “conversation” may be borrowing some of this immediacy in its 
preference for the simple present. 
However, this is not the whole story of tense and citation. Simple 
present can be, in some instances, overtaken by present progressive 
(“-ing” forms of the verb): 
Here Rouse is questioning the.... 
This verb form may be likely to occur with direct-speech citation—where 
the cited speaker is quoted in their own words. The present progressive 
intensifies this moment of the conversation, improving even on the 
immediacy provided by the simple present. It is as though the current 
writer is interacting directly with the cited author, initiating a new stage 
in the conversation. Present progressive occurs in other situations too, 
like this one: 
... the latent structure of childhood negative emotions is only 
beginning to be conceptualized in detail (e.g., Joiner, Catanzaro, 
and Laurent, 1996).
Bruce F. Chorpita, Anne Marie Albano, and David H. Barlow 1998 “The structure of negative 
emotions in a clinical sample of children and adolescents.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 107 
(1): 74–85, 74 (emphasis added).
More common than present progressive is present perfect. Consider 
its effect in this passage:
The bulk of the empirical work on migration determinants has 
studied how wage and unemployment differentials affect migration 
flows under the Harris-Todaro (1970) hypothesis of risk neutrality 
of an individual migrant. [...] The role of other factors than expected 
wages has been emphasized in the new migration literature.
Francesco Daveri and Ricardo Faini 1999 “Where do migrants go?” Oxford Economic Papers 
51: 595–622, 596 (emphasis added). 
Present perfect is a sensitive form in English—second nature to speakers 
of English as a first language, perhaps, but difficult to explain—and called 
on to execute speakers’ perception of what is close or distant in time. In 
Review Copy

conversation, it says something is done (notice the past action in present 
perfect—has studied, has been emphasized), but only just done—recent 
enough to be still an aspect of the present situation (and often occurs 
with “just”). Writers in the research genres sometimes select the present 
perfect, as we see above and in the next example:
Premack and Woodruff (1978) asked “Does the chimpanzee have 
a theory of mind?” Since it was posed 20 years ago, Premack and 
Woodruff ’s question has dominated the study of both social 
behavior in nonhuman primates [...] and cognitive development 
in children, but progress in the two fields has been markedly dif­
ferent. Developmentalists have established empirical methods to 
investigate children’s understanding of mentality, and forging links 
with philosophy of mind and philosophy of science, they have 
mustered the conceptual resources for disciplined dispute about 
the origins [...], on-line control [...], and epistemic stance [...] of 
human folk psychology (e.g., Goldman 1993; Gopnik 1993; Gopnik 
and Wellman 1994). In contrast, those working with primates 
have continued to struggle with the basic question of whether any 
primate has any capacity to conceive of mental states. 
C.M. Heyes 1998 “Theory of mind in nonhuman primates.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
21: 101–48, 101 (emphasis added). 
The first sentence of the example above also shows that writers in 
the research genres can also pick the simple past for reporting verbs: 
“Premack and Woodruff (1978) asked ‘Does the chimpanzee have a 
theory of mind?’” In the next example, the writers begin their article on 
a new model of social interaction by citing a prominent contributor to 
such study, and use the simple past in conjunction with a positive evalu­
ation (“celebrated”) of the work’s reception: 
In his celebrated essay on “The Architecture of Complexity,” Herbert 
Simon ([1962] 1969) developed the argument that all complex 
systems shared certain structural features. These features emerged, 
he showed, by virtue of what appeared to be a universal partitioning 
principle—the tendency for strongly interacting entities to group 
together into subsystems.
Thomas S. Smith and Gregory T. Stevens 1999 “The architecture of small networks: Strong 
interaction and dynamic organization in small social systems.” American Sociological Review 
64: 403–20, 403 (emphasis added). 
TENSE AND THE STORY OF RESEARCH 
247
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

248 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE II
Similarly, writing about undocumented immigrants in the US, Leo R. 
Chavez uses the simple past as he cites the ancestral, founding statements 
of social theorists: 
Classical theorists wrestled with the notion of community, par­
ticularly the forces that held together complex societies. For Marx 
(1967 [1867]), the community or society was the arena within which 
interest groups defined by their relation to the means of production, 
competed.... Early anthropological work on tribal societies, the “clas­
sic” ethnographies of Malinowski (1961 [1922]), Evans-Pritchard 
(1972 (1940]), and others were concerned with issues of social 
solidarity and village life, social structure, and organization. It was 
Redfield (1956) who ... brought the notion of the “little commu­
nity” into full anthropological gaze.
Chavez 1994: 53 (emphasis added).
Eventually, the record emerges from history and touches the present (in 
the perfect aspect):
The subfield of human anthropology, drawing on both Redfield and 
the Chicago School, has produced a wealth of interesting research 
on communities around the world (Hannerz 1980).
Chavez 1994: 52 (emphasis added). 
But when does the present begin? In 1980? Or in 1950, as in this 
article from meteorology? 
By combining surface observations, cloud-motion winds, and 
upper-air observations from kites and balloons, Bjerknes (1919) and 
Bjerknes and Solberg (1922) set forth the conceptual framework for 
understanding three-dimensional air-flows and associated weather 
within cyclones and about fronts by establishing the “Norwegian 
frontal-cyclone model.” Inspection of even earlier observational 
analyses over North America (e.g., Bjerknes 1910; Rossby and 
Weightman 1926; Palmn and Newton 1951; Sanders 1955), 
however, reveals that frontal-cyclone evolutions over the central 
United States do not always mirror the conceptual model developed 
in Northern Europe. Recognition of the differences in topography 
and land-water distribution between northern Europe (where the 
Norwegian cyclone model originated) and the central United States 
Review Copy

has subsequently led to more complex conceptual models of surface 
frontal-cyclone evolutions and their attendant precipitation systems 
(e.g., Newton 1950, 1963; Carlson 1980; Hobbs et al. 1996).
Paul J. Neiman et al. 1998 “An observational study of fronts and frontal mergers over the 
Continental United States.” Monthly Weather Review 126: 2521–52, 2521 (emphasis added).
Inspecting the example below, we might notice that the simple present 
emerges with the research question—when the current writer replies to 
the reported statements, and initiates a new stage in the conversation. 
The subfield of human anthropology, drawing on both Redfield and 
the Chicago School, has produced a wealth of interesting research 
on communities around the world (Hannerz 1980).... 
  Suffice it to say that despite all the work that has been carried 
out on communities, the question still remains: What underlies a 
sense of community? Anderson (1983) examined this question and 
suggested that communities are “imagined.” Members of modern 
nations.... 
  Such a view allows for a redefinition of community. Since it is 
imagined, a sense of community is not limited to a specific geo­
graphic locale (Gupta and Ferguson 1992). Immigrants are said to 
live in “binational communities” (Baca and Bryan 1980), “extended 
communities” (Whiteford 1979), “transnational communities” in 
“hyperspace” (Rouse 1991), and “transnational families” (Chavez 
1992). These concepts highlight the connections migrants maintain 
with life in their home communities....
Chavez 1994: 54 (emphasis added). 
What can we learn from the example above? Past tenses seem to 
occur in reporting expressions as a writer represents founding statements 
which led to other statements: so, after reaching the present in 1980 
(and the chance to ask a question), we are back in the past with “Ander­
son (1983) examined.” With this in mind, let’s reconsider our question 
concerning the use of the past tense in the summary of Calhoun above 
(“Calhoun (1994) catalogued the social practices ...”). A reader might 
interpret Calhoun’s cataloguing as preliminary or foundational work, 
rather than the immediate motivation of the present research. Reporting 
expressions in scholarly writing may favour the present tenses, because 
these tenses signal an essential motivation for scholarly work: the scholar 
TENSE AND THE STORY OF RESEARCH 
249
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

250 
MAKING AND MAINTAINING KNOWLEDGE II
listens to what is being said; then, from his or her position, has a question 
to ask, and takes a turn in the conversation. The present tenses cue the 
writer’s motivation.
Sometimes, markers write in the margins of student papers—
Watch your tenses! 
Tense! 
Be consistent in tense.
—suggesting that academic readers are sensitive to these signals which 
indicate the story of knowledge being made. Staging the construction of 
knowledge, the verb forms writers use also indicate their version of this 
story: their sense of the sequence of knowledge, its contexts of produc­
tion, the remoteness in time of some statements (remote but still audible, 
and enduring or echoing despite the passage of time) and the proximity of 
others (some so nearby in time that they are re-spoken as if in the present 
moment). On the one hand, the staging of statements in time is a dimen­
sion of a writer’s particular perspective on the scholarly conversation. On 
the other hand, it displays the writer’s familiarity with the progress of 
knowledge in the discipline. This perhaps explains readers’ sensitivity 
to tenses, and to (what may seem to them) misrepresentations of the 
progress of knowledge, and may also explain the difficulty that newcom­
ers to the disciplines can have in locating statements in time—choosing 
among present and past tenses, simple and perfect aspects—in ways that 
make sense to readers very familiar with the scholarly conversation. 
Exercise 5
Examine the passage below and identify verb tense in reporting 
expressions. (This passage should be familiar to you, as it was pre­
sented in Chapter 1A). What do the shifts in tense imply about how 
knowledge is located in time? 
Eugenics theory powerfully influenced late nineteenth- and early 
twentieth-century U.S. policies concerning the groups then 
known as “the dependent, defective, and delinquent classes” 
(Henderson 1901, U.S. Department of the Interior 1883). In 
essence, eugenics held that the “fit” should be encouraged to 
reproduce (“positive” eugenics) and the “unfit” prevented from 
Review Copy

doing so (“negative” eugenics). Historians generally agree that 
between 1900 and 1920 this doctrine formed the basis for a 
full-fledged social movement with research centers, propaganda 
vehicles, and strong middle-class support (Haller 1963, Kevles 
1985, Ludmerer 1972, Pickens 1968). Less commonly acknowl­
edged is the fact that eugenics theory affected public policy for 
decades before becoming the social movement’s foundation and 
that eugenic ideas outlived the movement itself, in ways that a 
new generation of historians is just starting to explore (Dann 
1991, Noll 1990, Reilly 1991). Even today, eugenics arguments 
occasionally make their way into debates about such matters as 
population growth and crime control (e.g., Wattenberg 1987, 
Wilson 1989; for a recent analysis see Duster 1990).
Rafter 1992: 17. 
Exercise 6
Inspect a research essay you have recently written or are currently 
drafting. What tense(s) do you use for reporting verbs? What does 
your use of tense imply about how knowledge is—or has been—con­
structed? Could you rework your essay by employing a combination 
of tenses to emphasize changes to the state of knowledge over time?
TENSE AND THE STORY OF RESEARCH 
251
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

Review Copy

253
In the schoolroom essay, introductions are often determined by models 
relating to a number of elements of the social situation, including the 
need for students to do well on standardized, provincial essay-writing 
exams. For example, think of the advice high school students are rou­
tinely given for writing introductions for five-paragraph essays: begin 
with a generalization, narrow the topic, and end the paragraph with a 
thesis statement identifying the three main points of the essay. But genre 
theory tells us that introductions (and conclusions, for that matter) are 
likely to serve quite different purposes in research writing, and so it is 
particularly important to consider how the scholarly context shapes the 
beginnings and ends of research essays. Obviously, in both schoolroom 
and research writing, introductions share the need to begin—to present 
a topic and establish grounds for discussion—and this need will bring 
some similarities. However, there are crucial differences that arise because 
of the knowledge-making demands of the research genres that we studied 
in the last two chapters. This chapter will focus on generalization, cita­
tion, and documentation practices in order to identify some of these 
differences. In particular, it applies our knowledge of summary and the 
orchestration of voices, discussed in Chapters 3–6, to introductions in 
research writing. We’ll consider how citation leads to estimates of the state 
of knowledge and knowledge deficits, features of academic writing that 
make an appearance in both introductions and conclusions. We’ll also 
take a close look at reporting style and the accompanying conventions 
of documentation. But first, let’s consider the role of generalization and 
13
Introductions 
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

254 
INTRODUCTIONS
citation in establishing how a topic has been discussed before, and what 
this implies in terms of what we have called common and uncommon 
sense (see Chapter 9A). 
13A Generalization and Citation
Most people would probably agree that introductions typically begin at 
and sustain a relatively high level of generality. For the schoolroom essay, 
generality itself is often enough to get the essay under way.
Throughout history, humans have sought to understand who they 
are. 
Or: 
Imagination is a powerful force in our daily lives. 
But if we transfer this habit of generality directly to the academic essay, 
we might find that academic readers’ expectations are not entirely satis­
fied by generalities like these. Academic readers are used to beginnings 
like the following passage, taken from an article: 
In the last 20 years, business organizations have been increasingly 
held accountable for their corporate social performance in a variety 
of areas (Wood, 1991). Firms have been confronted by an organized, 
activist, and concerned set of stakeholders (Ansoff, 1975; Freeman, 
1984) clamoring for improved corporate performance on a wide 
range of social and political issues, from clean air and nutritional 
labeling to equal employment opportunities.
Greening and Gray 1994: 467. 
It seems likely that most people—including the writers—already know 
that public consciousness of business and industry has changed, and cor­
porate spokespersons appear on TV, and are often quoted in the print 
media to answer complaints about their products and practices. But, 
even though these circumstances seem to be part of common knowledge, 
the academic writer attributes their mention to particular sources. Why 
are statements that could easily be justified as belonging to the present 
writer attributed to other writers? 
Recent research into academic discourse has shown that one of the 
moves writers typically make is to confirm that they are carrying on a 
Review Copy

tradition of inquiry. Parenthetical citations show that a particular topic 
has been discussed in published research, which attests to its relevance 
and importance. In the academic community to which an article is 
addressed, people recognize this topic as something to be studied. So 
we could say that Greening and Gray include these citations in order to 
show that other scholars have discussed the issue. The citation shows that 
the claim attached to it is verifiable by measures valued in research com­
munities rather than simply coming from “common knowledge,” which 
can turn out to be in some way mistaken (see Chapter 9A). This practice 
might be called secured generalization.
As well as putting a check on common sense—on unexamined 
though widely held views—attributing generalizations to others can 
also put a check on personal perceptions. We may notice, in our daily 
life, that the servers at fast-food outlets are elderly people. So we con­
struct a generalization: “The fast-food franchise industries hire elderly 
people.” But what if it is only the one or two outlets that serve the 
fried chicken we like that actually do hire elderly people? What if, in 
the next district or province, most servers are adolescents? Our limited 
experience—our particular position in the world—has distorted our 
knowledge of the situation. And what if our experience is limited in 
some other way, for example, by our attitudes and interests? Maybe we 
have a grudge against elderly people, and feel the world is overrun with 
them. We see them everywhere. Our unchecked personal perception 
would produce an unwarranted generalization, a stereotype, one which 
reflected our point of view but might not stand up to rigorous scrutiny. 
So, in academic writing, we find generalizations that typify sections of 
the population secured with citation to demonstrate that these catego­
ries are products of research and not stereotypes or untested personal 
perception:
Some investigators have attributed ... low rates of delinquency and 
other behavior disorders [among “people of Asian descent in North 
America, particularly those of Chinese heritage”] to culture-related 
factors. That is, Asian culture emphasizes conformity, family solidar­
ity, harmonious relationships, and respect for authority, especially the 
unconditional respect for parents, or filial piety (Fong, 1973; Hsu, 
1981). The North American culture, on the other hand, emphasizes 
freedom and individualism. Consistent with this notion of cultural 
differences, Kelley and Tsang (1992) reported that Chinese parents 
GENERALIZATION AND CITATION 
255
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

256 
INTRODUCTIONS
in North America used more physical control over their children and 
more restrictive child-rearing practices than did their non-Chinese 
counter-parts.
Siu Kwong Wong 1999 “Acculturation, peer relations, and delinquent behavior of Chinese-
Canadian youth.” Adolescence 34 (133): 107–19, 107–08. 
As suggested by the terms of this example—“people of Asian descent in 
North America, particularly those of Chinese heritage”—the generaliza­
tion has been produced in a context of scholarly research and exchange 
and is therefore less susceptible to the criticisms that can be levelled 
against untested “common knowledge.”
Exercise 1 
Here are two examples of generalization occurring in opening sec­
tions of research articles. What would be the “common-sense” 
versions of these generalizations? 
PASSAGE 1 
To combat racism effectively it is necessary to understand its 
complex features and underlying themes. In Britain it has recently 
been argued that such understanding is lacking in many anti-
racism strategies (see Gilroy 1990; Rattansi 1992). Anti-racist 
understanding of racist thinking and arguing is not very sophis­
ticated. Cohen (1992), for instance, typifies anti-racism as the 
disavowal of complexity for the sake of pursuing moral certainties. 
Anti-racism appears to be lacking in effectiveness because of its 
doctrinaire form and its lack of powerful arguments.
Verkuyten et al. 1994: 253.
PASSAGE 2 
Gender is one of the most important categories—if not the 
most important category—in human social life. The dichotomy 
between female and male is of crucial relevance to virtually every 
domain of human experience (Bem, 1981; Huston, 1983; Ruble 
and Ruble, 1982). All known cultures specify that female-male 
is a fundamental distinction. They provide terms to distinguish 
boys from girls and men from women. More importantly, they 
Review Copy

associate men and women with different sets of characteristic 
features and with different sets of behavioral expectations (see 
Williams and Best, 1990). 
Thomas Eckes 1994 “Features of men, features of women: Assessing stereotypic beliefs 
about gender subtypes.” British Journal of Social Psychology 33: 107–23, 107.
13B Reported Speech
As we have observed, introductions in the schoolroom-essay genre and in 
the research genres share a tendency for high-level—i.e., general—begin­
nings. Both genres, it seems, strive thereby to establish a common ground 
of understanding with readers. The difference between them is that “com­
mon understanding” extends in different directions. In the schoolroom 
essay, introductory generalities seem to cast such a wide net as to grab any 
reader in sight. The research genres, on the other hand, compose intro­
ductory generalities to cast a narrower net in order to initiate a scholarly 
conversation—to resume the collaborative consideration of topics that 
research communities are working on. Accordingly, reported speech is 
an important (and very common) way to start a scholarly conversation. 
As we saw in Chapter 3, reported speech is so crucial a feature in 
scholarly discourse that the research genres have developed their own 
distinctive ways of incorporating the speech of others. Intricate systems 
direct writers to quote a lot, or not much, or quote directly, or to para­
phrase, or to put other writers’ names in the reporting sentence, or to 
put them in parentheses, or even to leave some speakers unidentified. 
As we proceed to examine the roles played by reported speech, we may 
find some guides to this system, but we will not find the kind of rules that 
govern, for example, the preparation of a “Works Cited” or “References” 
page or the punctuation of a parenthetical citation in a certain discipline. 
Instead, we will find patterns that indicate the preferences and habits of 
academic communities. 
First, let’s think about how we incorporate the speech of others in 
everyday conversation. We can use direct speech, the exact words the 
other person used:
JANE to FRED: I’m so sorry. I forgot your birthday. 
FRED to CATHERINE: And then Jane said, “I’m so sorry. I forgot 
your birthday.”
REPORTED SPEECH 
257
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

258 
INTRODUCTIONS
While in writing, direct speech is supposed to be verbatim, in talk­
ing, as some research has shown, people are often not accurate in their 
repetition of others’ words. Instead of direct speech, we often substitute 
our own words—indirect speech—which can be more or less close to 
the original:
JANE to FRED: I’m so sorry. I forgot your birthday.
FRED to CATHERINE: And then Jane said she regretted it. She 
was sorry she had forgotten my birthday.
When we are summarizing, we often find ourselves using indirect speech: 
that is, we transform the exact words of another speaker/writer to fit into 
a smaller space, and a different context. 
Like everyday speakers, academic writers make decisions about 
what they will quote directly and what they will incorporate indirectly. 
It appears that there are tendencies in how much direct versus indirect 
speech is used, and they reflect the writer’s academic discipline: biologists, 
for example, quote much less frequently than do historians. Both direct 
and indirect speech, however, follow the function of the summary: to 
confirm what has been said, to dispute it, to go further. Moreover, there is 
a fairly good chance that indirect speech in scholarly writing will appear 
in a nominalized form (see Chapter 9C). To continue with the example 
above, the writer might change “regretted” into the noun “regrets” (Jane 
said she had regrets). Reported speech, mostly in indirect form, can take 
a step toward nominal style by transforming the reporting verb itself into 
a noun. This pattern is very common. For example,
	
	
	
	
suggests 
she	 	
	
assumes		
that ...
	
	
	
	
argues
—can become:
	
	
	
	
suggestion
her	 	
	
assumption	
that ...
	
	
	
	
argument
So, “Jane expressed regret ...” could become “Jane’s expression of regret....” 
Based on our observations about nominal style in Chapter 9, we might 
predict that reporting expressions will tend to appear as nouns when a 
writer is compressing or classifying statements. 
Review Copy

Let’s consider some of the most common patterns of reported speech 
in academic writing. The simplest, baseline case of reported speech—
both direct and indirect—is “x said y.” Or “x said” can be replaced by a 
characterization of the original speech, and followed by the gist, some­
times with a bit of direct speech retained. 
FRED to CATHERINE: Jane expressed regret about forgetting my 
birthday, saying she was “sorry.” 
Research writing can often depart from these baseline cases. Com­
monly, the reported speaker can leave the sentence itself and relocate in 
parentheses. 
Heartfelt regret is an important element in ongoing relationships 
(Short 1996). 
This form can eliminate the speech verb (say and its many substitutes, 
such as report, suggest, etc.) as above, or retain it:
It has been reported that the expression of regret is a key factor in 
ongoing relationships (Short 1996; Gross 2000).
Sometimes the speaker or speakers can disappear entirely: the act of 
speech is represented as agentless:
It has been reported that the expression of regret is essential, and 
should be done regularly.
This way of speaking seems to defy the research community’s practice 
of attributing statements. On non-scholarly occasions, agentless reports 
of statements may tend to make the statement seem more valid—coming 
from not just one person (who may or may not be reliable) but from 
more widely distributed sources.
It is widely known that the expression of regret is essential in ongoing 
relationships. 
So the agentless report of speech can suggest some consensus. Inspecting 
the samples of reported speech below, you will have a chance to see if this 
is the case in scholarly publications.
In a variation on the agentless report of speech, statements can some­
times be attributed to a typified group—“informants,” “researchers,” 
“eugenicists,” for example, in the scholarly genres; “experts,” “officials,” or 
REPORTED SPEECH 
259
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

260 
INTRODUCTIONS
“business leaders” in other genres. So our example, in a “group-speaker” 
form, could be rewritten: 
Interviewees report that the expression of regret is a key factor in 
friendships. 
When statements are presented as reported speech in any of these 
forms, their quality as knowledge is indicated: the statement has been 
produced—somewhere. At first it may appear that, in the scholarly gen­
res, to present a statement as coming from a position other than that 
of the present speaker may implicitly affirm that the statement is true: 
“this is not just my idea.” But, as we saw in Chapter 6 (“Orchestrating 
Voices”), things are more complicated than this. Statements are reported 
not simply to ensure that only true things get down on paper. Writers 
also report statements to establish common ground, to sketch a com­
munity of speakers producing knowledge in a particular area. Reported 
statements produce a map of that knowledge domain. And a main con­
cern of scholarly writers, as we will see, is to locate themselves on that 
map—maybe close to some speakers, or far away from others, maybe 
starting in densely populated locales where a lot has been said, but head­
ing out into sparsely settled regions from which few statements have been 
transmitted so far. 
We have called the baseline case of reported speech “x says y.” In 
one of the variations on our example, we picked up the verb “expressed” 
(which we turned into a noun). Although “express” can be used in report­
ing the speech of our friends, it is by no means the most effective verb 
for reporting the speech of academic writers. In Chapter 3, we noted the 
importance of choosing verbs that characterize the action of the original, 
such as state, propose, suggest, maintain, claim. Associated with verbs of 
speech are a set of verbs we could call “knowledge-making.” Among the 
knowledge-making verbs, we find words like analyze, investigate, exam­
ine, discover, find, identify, observe.
Analyzing shopping opportunities, Smith (2000) found that 
bargains were available.
Like the verbs of speech, these verbs can be turned into nouns, as in
Analysis of shopping opportunities has led to the identification of 
bargains (Smith 2000).
Review Copy

Where a range of wordings presents choices, the different choices tend 
to be associated with different functions. So, in everyday speech, to use 
claim as a reporting verb may in some situations have the effect of dis­
crediting the statement, or at least suggesting that it needs review.
THOMAS to MARK: Well, Matthew claims to have found bargains. 
It is not clear whether claim—as just one example—works the same way 
to express doubt in scholarly writing. But research has found some corre­
lation between the choice of reporting verb and the position of the writer 
vis-à-vis the sources reported. 
Choice of reporting verb can also be influenced by the discipline in 
which the writer is working. In his study of citation practices in eight 
disciplines (molecular biology, magnetic physics, marketing, applied lin­
guistics, philosophy, sociology, mechanical engineering, and electronic 
engineering), Ken Hyland (1999) found diversity in reporting expres­
sions used. For example, marketing is distinctive for its “particularly high 
degree of author tentative verbs, with suggest accounting for over half of 
all instances” (350); philosophy and marketing are more likely than the 
other disciplines in the sample to name the cited author outside paren­
thetical references (358–59); physics favours the reporting verbs develop, 
report, study, while sociology prefers argue, suggest, describe, note, analyze, 
discuss. In the sample, none of the science papers used direct quotation 
(348). Hyland suggests that part of what people learn when they become 
part of a research community is a discipline-specific understanding of 
how scholarly work is organized, and how knowledge is made. Tech­
niques for reporting the speech of others display this understanding.
Exercise 2 
Examine the following samples of scholarly writing which report 
the statements of others. Identify the extent to which the samples 
illustrate the range of expression and function described above: the 
summoning of the voices of others to gesture to an important issue 
or established line of research; the variation between direct and indi­
rect speech; the naming, obscuring, or typifying of other speakers; 
the characterization of the production of statements with various 
words for speaking and/or making knowledge. 
REPORTED SPEECH 
261
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

262 
INTRODUCTIONS
  From these limited data, can you generalize your results? What do 
you notice about the reporting of statements in scholarly prose? Can 
you see any correlation between the features you identify and the 
disciplines in which the writers are working?
PASSAGE 1 
In the second paradigm, gender is construed as a global per­
sonality construct. The concepts of masculinity, femininity and 
androgyny exemplify this approach (see, e.g., Archer, 1989; Cook, 
1985; Morawski, 1987). In reviewing the literature concerning 
the sex-differences and the gender-as-a-personality-construct 
approaches, Deaux and Kite (1987) come to the following conclu­
sion: “The scientific record on questions of sex differences, based 
on either biological or psychological distinctions, is shaky at best 
[...]. Yet despite evidence of considerable overlap and situational 
specificity of gender-related behaviors, beliefs in sex differences 
are held tenaciously” (p. 97). 
  Researchers adopting the third and most recent approach con­
ceive of gender as a social category, that is, as a category on which 
perceivers base judgements, inferences and social actions. The cen­
tral research issue here is not “how men and women actually differ, 
but how people think that they differ” (Deaux, 1984, p. 110). 
Eckes 1994: 107–08. 
PASSAGE 2 
Many commentators on post-war Britain have suggested that 
the workforce and its unions must accept a large part of the 
responsibility for the country’s continuing economic ills. Brit­
ish workers may or may not have been unusually strike prone, 
but they have certainly long colluded, it is believed, in a range 
of restrictive practices on the shopfloor, thus increasing costs, 
curtailing output and drastically limiting the scope for necessary 
industrial modernisation. As the distinguished Anglo-German 
academic Ralf Dahrendorf has recently put it, working people 
in Britain have tended to “stretch their work so that it begins to 
look like leisure.”1 In this situation, the inevitable consequence 
has been economic stagnation. 
Review Copy

  Over the following pages we aim to challenge this view and 
demonstrate that restrictive practices of this type have been 
nowhere near as common or serious as some have argued.
Note 
1	 R. Dahrendorf, On Britain (1982) p. 46. 
Tiratsoo and Tomlinson 1994: 65. 
Exercise 3 
The distinctive appearance of the following is characteristic of 
publications in history. Describe the ways in which it departs from 
what we have come to regard as typical of scholarly introductions. 
Describe the distinct ways this writer establishes the generalities 
that frame research contributions.
In October 1888 the Colonial Office expressed deep disquiet 
at news that an officer of the Gold Coast Constabulary, Inspec­
tor Akers, while involved on an expedition to subdue Krepi, 
had inflicted harsh sentences of flogging upon men under his 
command who were accused of attempting to strike an NCO, 
drunkenness and cowardice. The nine accused Hausa constables 
were flogged publicly before the whole force, the worst offender 
receiving 72 lashes. Both the method of flogging and the number 
of lashes given were extremely severe and contrary to the stand­
ing orders of the Constabulary. In an enquiry that consumed 
a considerable amount of Colonial Office time and paper, the 
matter was thoroughly investigated and Akers, an officer with 
“many good qualities” but “having a violent and hasty temper,” 
was invalided home.1 
  European use of physical violence, even excessive violence, 
against African subordinates was not particularly unusual in 
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. However, the 
Akers case, coming less than ten years after flogging had been 
abolished in the British Army, marks an approximate point at 
which the Colonial Office began to exercise concern, and seek to 
regulate, the extent and severity of officially sanctioned corporal 
REPORTED SPEECH 
263
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

264 
INTRODUCTIONS
punishment inflicted on African soldiers and also labour. A 
discussion of official and colonial attitudes to the use of corporal 
punishment in British Africa is a large subject and beyond the 
compass of a brief article. What is attempted here is much more 
manageable: a discussion of the attempts by the Colonial Office, 
over a period of more than sixty years, first to regulate more 
closely and then to bring to an end corporal punishment in the 
African Colonial Forces. Colonial Office officials were agreed 
on the need to regulate corporal punishment; those advocating 
abolition steadily increased with the progress of the century. 
Both regulators and reformers in London had to contend with 
military officers and colonial administrators who argued that 
corporal punishment was necessary for the control and discipline 
of African troops, especially when on active service, and the steady 
pressure from various humanitarian lobbies in Britain denouncing 
severe practices in the colonies.
Note 
1	 Public Record Office, Kew [PRO], CO96/197/3064, 31 Dec. 
1888; and CO96/197/3080, Griffith to Knutsford, conf., 30 Nov. 
1888. 
David Killingray 1994 “The ‘rod of empire’: The debate over corporal punishment in the 
British African colonial forces, 1888–1946.” Journal of African History 35: 201–16, 201.
13C Documentation
Reporting expressions—direct and indirectly reported speech of other 
speakers, and the echoes of reporting in the nominalized style we have 
been considering—summon a community of voices and position the 
present writer amongst them. But as we know, these expressions are only 
part of the system that situates research amidst other research. These 
reporting expressions are secured by systems of documentation—foot­
notes, endnotes, lists of “References” and “Works Cited.” 
It is also well known that styles of documentation differ from dis­
cipline to discipline. Genre theory tells us that differing documentation 
practices relate to differences in the particular communities that produce 
them—divergent beliefs about what kinds of reported speech are most 
useful and what kinds of information need to be emphasized. Most 
Review Copy

disciplines use some variation on a system of parenthetical expressions 
in the body of the text which are keyed to an alphabetical list at the end. 
For example, the name of each writer (each source) listed at the end of 
this sentence—
The idea of using assessment as a lever for school change is not a 
new one: many accountability tools in the 1970s and 1980s tried 
to link policy decisions to test scores (Linn, 1987; Madaus, 1985; 
Wise, 1979).
—signals an entry in a list called “References” at the end of the text:
Linn, R.L. (1987). Accountability: The comparison of education 
systems and the quality of test results. Educational policy 1 (2), 
181–198. 
Madaus, G., West, M.M., Harmon, M.C., Lomax, R.G., and 
Viator, K.A. (1992). The influence of testing on teaching math and 
science in grades 4–12. Chestnut Hill, MA: Boston College Cen­
ter for the Study of Testing, Evaluation, and Educational Policy. 
Madaus, G.F. (1985). “Can we help dropouts? Thinking about the 
undoable.” In G. Natriello (Ed.), School dropouts: Patterns and 
policies (pp. 3–19). New York: Teachers College Press.
The parenthetical “(Linn, 1987)” sends the reader to the first entry above, 
while “(Madaus, 1985)” sends the reader to the third rather than the sec­
ond entry under “Madaus.” (If Madaus had two entries, both by himself 
only and both from 1985, the writer could have distinguished them as 
“1985a” and “1985b.”) 
While documentation systems vary in detail, they all operate to 
achieve one principal effect: the reader’s easy movement from the body of 
the text to the full documentation in the “References” or “Works Cited” 
pages. Let’s compare the above example from a journal in education to 
the following passage from an anthropology journal: 
Although many examples exist, a recent example was presented 
by Rouse (1991), who carried out ethnographic research among 
immigrants from the Mexican community of Aguililla living in 
Redwood City, California. In developing the notion of “transnational 
communities,” Rouse presents a novel challenge to spatial images, 
highlighting the social nature of postmodern space. 
Chavez 1994: 56. 
DOCUMENTATION 
265
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

266 
INTRODUCTIONS
Although it looks a little different—instead of a parenthetical cluster of 
names and dates, we find the name of the writer and date of publication 
incorporated into the sentence—it nevertheless operates in the same way. 
If the reader is interested, he or she can find relevant information about 
the source (Rouse 1991) in the “Reference” list:
Rouse, Roger 1991 Mexican Migration and the Social Space of Post­
modernism. Diaspora 1: 8–23.
Variation in systems of documentation can be found both in styles 
of reporting, in the body of texts, and styles of listing, at the end of texts. 
Yet, despite differences in the ordering of information, documentation 
provides three important items of information: the name of writer, the 
title of the work, and publishing information necessary to distinguish the 
publication from all other publications. Making arrangements for the 
readers’ easy movement from the body of the text to the full documenta­
tion is part of the writer’s larger orchestration of the scholarly conversation. 
Most obviously, it enables readers—if they choose—to find the source in 
a library or elsewhere, read it, and join the conversation themselves. 
Less obviously but equally important, the full documentation pro­
vides more information about the circumstances under which the cited 
statement was produced. A reader who may not in fact get the original and 
read it can still find relevant information about the conditions of the state­
ment’s production: Did the cited statement appear in a book or an article? 
If it was in a book, was it a chapter in a collected edition? Who edited the 
book? If it was an article, in what journal did it appear? What was the title 
of the book or chapter or article (i.e., how did it announce what it was 
about)? And, most important, when was the statement produced?
Exercise 4
The following passages are taken from introductions of research 
articles in various disciplines. In each case, examine the format of the 
in-text references to see what they suggest about how the discipline 
constructs knowledge. For instance, are different forms of in-text ref­
erence associated with different patterns of reported speech? Why 
do you think one passage uses page numbers, while two of the oth­
ers use dates? Why does one passage use numbered references only, 
eliminating all other bibliographic detail?
Review Copy

From a medical study of Alzheimer’s by Ute Dreses-Werringloer et 
al., published in Cell: 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative 
disorder characterized by a massive loss of neurons in several brain 
regions and by the presence of cerebral senile plaques comprised 
of aggregated amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides (Mattson, 2004, Selkoe, 
2001). The first atrophy observed in the AD brain occurs in the 
medial temporal lobe, which includes the hippocampus, and is 
the result of a massive synaptic degeneration and neuronal death 
(Braak et al., 1991, de Leon et al., 2007).
From a study of language instruction by Margaret Early and Sondra 
Marshall, in The Canadian Modern Language Review: 
As is commonly known, for two decades now there have been 
rapidly growing numbers of students from ethnically, culturally, 
and linguistically diverse backgrounds flowing into classrooms 
in English-speaking countries around the world (Mohan, Leung, 
& Davison, 2001). Their presence creates both educational 
opportunities and challenges for students and educators alike. 
However, tracking studies conducted in Canada (Eddy, 1999; 
Derwing, DeCorby, Ichikawa, & Jamieson, 1999; Gunderson, 
2004, 2007; Watt & Roessingh, 1994, 2001) all conclude that 
educational institutions need to do more to seize the opportuni­
ties and overcome the challenges created by the presence of these 
students, since currently, high school graduation remains an 
elusive goal for an unacceptably high percentage of students for 
whom English is a second language (ESL).
From a study of climate change by Michiel M. Helsen et al., published 
in Science: 
The Antarctic Ice Sheet is constantly adjusting its mass in 
response to changes in the accumulation of snow on its surface, 
which occur on centennial to millennial time scales (1), with a 
concomitant effect on global sea level. Although most coupled 
general circulation models predict the mass of the interior of the 
Antarctic Ice Sheet to grow in a warmer climate (2, 3), no clear 
trend has been found there over the past half century (3, 4).
DOCUMENTATION 
267
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

268 
INTRODUCTIONS
From an essay on historical fiction by Kim Wilson, in Children’s Litera­
ture Association Quarterly:
While many authors of historical fiction will admit they have 
evoked the power of imagination to write their story, they will 
also claim the work’s reliance on and fidelity to historical facts. 
Ann Rinaldi claims she writes about real life (McGlinn), Nadia 
Wheatley confidently asserts the history recounted in her books is 
real (“History Alive”), William Durbin is doing his “best to depict 
the past as authentically as [he] can” (“William Durbin” 25) and 
Goldie Alexander—like all of the preceding authors—identifies 
sources of information to establish the authenticity of her tale 
(“Fictionalising History” 20). While the diaries are certainly 
understood to be fictional accounts of historical events, they are 
also declared as legitimate and “truthful” because they are based 
on real events. By connecting events of the diaries to real events 
or people outside the story, the ideas and values expressed by the 
author will accordingly be imbued with that prized epithet—
“truth.” Perry Nodelman writes in “History as Fiction” that 
by “denying its fictionality” history is “particularly effective as 
propaganda: acceptance of its truthfulness allows readers to absorb 
the meanings and values it contains” (72).
Exercise 5 
Below are four samples of entries from reference pages at the end 
of articles in scholarly journals. Inspect these samples to determine 
the points at which they are similar and at which they vary (e.g., 
punctuation, use of capitals, order of information, and so on). How 
do scholars document a source that is (a) an article in a journal? (b) a 
book? (c) a chapter in a book? (d) an article in a book? What correla­
tions do you see between the features you identify and the disciplines 
in which the writers are working?
From a “Works Cited” list in PMLA (a literary-critical journal, Publica­
tions of the Modern Language Association of America):
Baudrillard, Jean. For a Critique of the Political Economy of the 
Sign. Trans. Charles Levin. Saint Louis: Telos, 1981. 
Eisenstein, Sergei. “Dickens, Griffith, and the Film Today.” Film 
Form. New York: Harcourt, 1949. 195–255. 
Review Copy

Geertz, Clifford. The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic, 
1973. 
Gilbert, Elliot. “The Ceremony of Innocence: Charles Dickens’s 
A Christmas Carol.” PMLA 90 (1975): 22–31. 
From a “References” list in Language and Communication: 
AUDEN, W.H. 1962 Dingley Dell and the fleet. In The Dyer’s 
Hand and Other Essays, pp. 407–428. Random House, New 
York. 
JAYNES, J. 1976 The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of 
the Bicameral Mind. Houghton Mifflin, Boston. 
JAYNES, J. 1986 Consciousness and the voices of the mind. 
Canadian Psychology 27, 128–137. 
LAWSON, L. 1989 Walker Percy’s prodigal son. In Crowley, 
J.D. (Ed.), Critical Essays on Walker Percy, pp. 243–258. G.K. 
Hall, Boston.
From a “References” list in Genetic, Social, and General Psychology 
Monographs: 
Eisenstadt, S. (1989). Israeli society (2nd ed.). New York: 
Stockten. 
El-Sarrag, A. (1968). Psychiatry in northern Sudan: A study 
in comparative psychiatry. British Journal of Psychiatry, 114, 
946–948. 
Spiro, M.E. (1983). Introduction: Thirty years of kibbutz 
research. In E. Krause (Ed.), The sociology of the kibbutz: Stud­
ies in Israeli society II. New Brunwick, NJ: Transaction Books.
From a “References” list in Neurology:
1. Wood-Kaczmar A, Gandhi S, Wood NW: Understanding the 
molecular causes of Parkinson’s disease. Trends Mol Med 2006, 
12:521–528. 
2. Kamel F, Tanner C, Umbach D, Hoppin J, Alavanja M, 
Blair A, Comyns K, Goldman S, Korell M, Langston J, Ross G, 
Sandler D: Pesticide exposure and self-reported Parkinson’s 
disease in the agricultural health study. Am J Epidemiol 2007, 
165:364–374. 
DOCUMENTATION 
269
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

270 
INTRODUCTIONS
3. Frigerio R, Sanft KR, Grossardt BR, Peterson BJ, Elbaz A, 
Bower JH, Ahlskog JE, De Andrade M, Maraganore DM, Rocca 
WA: Chemical exposures and Parkinson’s disease: a popula­
tion-based case-control study. Mov Disord 2006, 21:1688–1692. 
4. Ascherio A, Chen H, Weisskopf MG, O’Reilly E, McCullough 
ML, Calle EE, Schwarzchild MA, Thun MJ: Pesticide exposure 
and risk for Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol 2006, 60:197–203. 
5. Baldi I, Lebailly P, Mohammed-Brahim B, Letenneur L, Dar­
tigues JF, Brochard P: Neurodegenerative disease and exposure 
to pesticides in the elderly. Am J Epidemiol 2003, 157:409–414. 
13D State of Knowledge and the Knowledge Deficit
Investigating the role of reported speech in getting the scholarly discus­
sion under way, we observed that, when statements are presented as 
issuing not from the present writer but from other writers, they include 
an implicit comment on their status as knowledge. They were produced 
by someone; they came from a site in the research community. If we 
take this perspective on scholarly statements, we can see reported speech 
as mapping a set of positions in the territory of knowledge producers. 
We have used the term state of knowledge to name this mapping activ­
ity: the ways a writer indicates the limits of knowledge, the conditions 
under which it was produced, and the positions from which statements 
issue. And we used the term knowledge deficit to talk about how writers 
can define what hasn’t been said, what needs to be said. These indica­
tors occur throughout a given piece of scholarly writing, but they often 
appear in a compressed form in introductions. 
The state of knowledge in compressed form should be familiar because 
we have examined several examples already. Here is another example: 
There have been several well-conducted efforts to understand child­
hood disorders of emotion in terms of distinct and meaningful com­
ponents (e.g., Fox and Houston, 1983; Ollendick and Yule, 1990; 
Papy, Costello, Hedl, and Spielberger, 1975). In particular, several 
investigators have found considerable overlap between the constructs 
of anxiety and depression (e.g., Lonigan, Carey, and Finch, 1994; 
Norvell, Brophy, and Finch, 1985; Tannenbaum, Forehand, and 
McCombs-Thomas, 1992; Wolfe et al., 1987) and have suggested a 
Review Copy

higher order construct of negative affect (Watson and Clark, 1984). 
Although the evidence for this relation is compelling, the latent 
structure of childhood negative emotions is only beginning to be 
conceptualized in detail (e.g., Joiner, Catanzaro, and Laurent, 1996). 
Bruce F. Chorpita, Anne Marie Albano, and David H. Barlow 1998 “The structure of negative 
emotions in a clinical sample of children and adolescents.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 
107 (1): 74–85, 74.
In this passage, Chorpita et al. provide a summary of certain research 
activities. You will notice that the overall pattern begins by identifying 
the area of study (“childhood disorders” in terms of “components”). It 
then focuses on a type of finding (“overlap” of “anxiety and depression”) 
and how it has been interpreted (“higher order construct”). Following 
this, some caution is exerted (“only beginning to be conceptualized”). 
At each step, these research activities are located by way of parenthetical 
citation that usually names more than one research publication. Without 
advancing an explicit position or comment of their own, Chorpita et al. 
have told the story of the research that precedes their own. They have 
created a map on which we might expect they will locate their own work. 
One way researchers can locate themselves on the map is by claim­
ing to add to existing knowledge: a space that has been recognized as 
unoccupied or only tentatively claimed gets filled up with new data and 
further reasoning. Sometimes the space has not yet been recognized: it 
has gone unnoticed by others. Another way scholars get title to a position 
on the map is to evict the current occupant: they show that previously 
established knowledge cannot hold that ground because it is faulty or 
incomplete in some way. 
In making moves on the knowledge map, the writer identifies a 
knowledge deficit. There is something we don’t know, some space on 
the map where there is a gap, a spot where no one has so far settled to 
take careful account of the place. Or there can be some error in what is 
held to be true. The only way such a deficit can be identified is through 
a review of what is known, or taken to be known. Reported speech—the 
whole practice of citation and summary—constructs the deficit. On the 
one hand, reported speech provides a positive rationale for the current 
writer to speak, because it shows that the research community is already 
talking about an issue. On the other hand, by allowing the current writer 
to respond to a deficit, reported speech provides a negative rationale by 
indicating why the discussion so far is not complete. 
STATE OF KNOWLEDGE AND THE KNOWLEDGE DEFICIT 
271
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

272 
INTRODUCTIONS
When the current writer responds to a knowledge deficit, we can 
expect to find a distinct change in style of expression. Modal expres­
sions emerge, overtaking reporting expressions, and the discursive I often 
appears alongside. We’ve observed that the modalized statement is an 
inference or estimate of knowledge (see Chapter 12A). 
One such estimate of knowledge can be found in writers’ formal 
statements of their hypothesis: the statement which is deemed plausible, 
but which is, so far, untested and will be shown to be tested in the course 
of the article. Modalized expressions, without the discursive I, show up 
in statements such as this one:
Two main hypotheses are addressed in this study: (1) that unidenti­
fied and untreated learning difficulties may be related to teenage 
girls becoming pregnant, deciding to raise their children, and 
dropping out of school, and (2) that teenage pregnancies may not 
be characteristically “unintended.” 
Rauch-Elnekave 1994: 92 (italic emphasis in original, bold emphasis added).
But many research publications do not specify the hypothesis in this way, 
and still make use of modal expressions and the discursive I. So rather 
than attach these features simply to the hypothesis, it may be better to 
locate them in the larger process of constructing a knowledge deficit. 
Here we spot it showing up as a writer poses his research question about 
“low ability” classes where “high quality instruction fosters significant 
learning among students”: 
What characterizes such phrases? To address this question, I draw 
on evidence from earlier studies by other authors, and I provide 
two new illustrations taken from a larger study of eighth- and 
ninth-grade English classes in 25 midwestern schools. Although 
these examples are far from conclusive, common elements emerge 
that, taken together, may help to characterize effective instruction 
in low ability classes in secondary schools.
Gamoran 1993: 2 (emphasis added).
The question identifies an as yet unoccupied location on the knowledge 
map: we don’t know what goes on in these classes. Plotting his approach 
to this space, the writer moves speculatively. Conceding the limits of 
the evidence available to him, he says his work “may help” to make this 
unknown area known. Compare the unmodalized, unqualified version of 
the same statement:
Review Copy

Common elements emerge that characterize effective instruction in 
low ability classes in secondary schools.
The unmodalized version may actually be more in keeping with the tradi­
tions of the schoolroom essay. Students are often advised to take a stand, 
state their opinion, be decisive in their writing. As readers of newspapers, 
we expect editorialist and columnists to take a decisive stand. Yet in schol­
arly writing, where knowledge is laboriously constructed, the modalized 
version is more typical. Scholarly statements leave traces of their sources 
and their status. To identify the knowledge deficit, the writer of the above 
example must show that the current state of knowledge (called “this 
view,” below) is inadequate.
According to this view, observed differences among studies in the 
effects of grouping are due to chance; taken together, the studies 
indicate that no real effects on achievement exist. Another interpreta­
tion seems equally plausible. The inconsistent findings may have 
resulted from uncontrolled differences in the way ability grouping 
was implemented in the various school systems under investigation. 
Gamoran 1993: 3–4 (emphasis added). 
In moving to show that a published view from a respected source comes 
up short, and leaves the state of knowledge in this area unfinished, the 
writer does not simply deny the view (“This interpretation is wrong”). 
He doesn’t even say that “another interpretation is equally plausible,” or 
“more plausible.” It only “seems equally plausible.” And the reinterpreta­
tion is itself modalized: “inconsistent findings may have resulted from 
uncontrolled differences” rather than “inconsistent findings resulted 
from uncontrolled differences.” 
Exercise 6
The samples in the exercise below show two distinct ways that writ­
ers identify knowledge deficits. Inspect these passages and identify 
the ways in which each one establishes the writer’s (or writers’) 
right to speak positively (i.e., by connecting the present work with 
established concerns) and negatively (i.e., by identifying a knowledge 
deficit). 
STATE OF KNOWLEDGE AND THE KNOWLEDGE DEFICIT 
273
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

274 
INTRODUCTIONS
PASSAGE 1 
In this article, we examine the cultural categories and the con­
ceptual logic that underlie the orthography debates about kreyòl 
that have taken place over the last 50 years. In Haiti, as in many 
countries concerned with nation building, the development 
of an orthography for vernacular literacy has been neither a 
neutral activity nor simply about how to mechanically reduce a 
spoken language to written form. The processes of transforming 
a spoken language to written form have often been viewed as 
scientific, arbitrary, or unproblematic. However, the creation of 
supposedly arbitrary sound-sign (signified/signifier) relationships 
that constitute an orthography always involves choices based on 
someone’s idea of what is important. This process of representing 
the sounds of language in written form is thus an activity deeply 
grounded in frameworks of value.
Shieffelin and Doucet 1994: 176. 
PASSAGE 2 
In many ways, the influenza pandemic of 1918–19 is the “forgot­
ten” epidemic; forgotten, at least, by scholars studying British 
Columbia’s First Nations. Much attention has been paid to the 
timing and severity of late eighteenth- and early nineteenth-
century epidemics for what they tell us about the proto-historic 
and early contact culture and population change. Scholars have 
argued the significance of these epidemics in softening up indig­
enous societies for the onslaught of colonization. Few, however, 
have examined later disease patterns for what they tell us about the 
nature of cross-cultural relations in the early twentieth century.
Mary-Ellen Kelm 1999 “British Columbia First Nations and the influenza pandemic of 
1918–19.” BC Studies 122 (Summer): 23–47, 23–24.
13E Student Versions of the Knowledge Deficit 
As a student writer, you may be reluctant to say that nobody has ever 
studied this before, or that everybody has got it wrong so far. But, with 
some adjustments, you can still replicate the move which identifies 
a knowledge deficit. Consider the following example from a scholarly 
article: 
Review Copy

There are several studies which have analyzed the discourse functions 
of quotation. Some researchers have analyzed languages other than 
English (e.g., Larson 1978; Besnier 1986; Glock 1986). Others 
have analyzed English, but most did not examine discourse samples 
to determine if their analyses are actually supported by data (e.g., 
Wierzbicka 1974; Halliday 1985; Li 1986; Haiman 1989). Addition­
ally, these studies have not addressed the question of whether direct 
quotations are really quotations. In other words, how authentic are 
direct quotes? Do they represent actual previous utterances, or are 
they inventions of the speaker? This paper focuses on these questions 
as well as on the functions of quotation in informal spoken English. 
Unlike these other studies, my analysis is based on discourse samples.
Patricia Mayes 1990 “Quotation in spoken English.” Studies in Language 14 (2): 325–63, 326.
A student writer could recast this knowledge deficit to show that there is 
something interesting to be found out:
Although speakers often resort to sayings which they attribute to 
other speakers, and listeners accept these sayings as appropriate 
elements of conversation and other speech genres, we might still ask 
what role such quotations play in these speech acts. What conditions 
motivate speakers to repeat others’ claims? Is the repetition exact 
or approximate? authentic or fictionalized? In short, how and why 
do we represent our own speech as originating with someone else?
Or it could be recast to mark the writer’s position in relation to one other 
speaker (instead of seven): 
Halliday (1985) provides a useful account of the functional gram­
mar of reported speech, but his analyses do not explain the role of 
quotation in conversation and other speech acts. What conditions 
motivate speakers to repeat others’ claims? 
That is, where a professional version of the statement of the knowledge 
deficit would summarize many (if not all) published claims about a 
research entity, the student version can summarize one or two. 
In some situations, student projects may cite no other speaker. In 
those cases, the introduction can instead propose plausible ideas about 
the object of inquiry and then show that these ideas, reasonable as they 
seem, are problematic: they leave some questions unanswered. The 
STUDENT VERSIONS OF THE KNOWLEDGE DEFICIT 
275
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

276 
INTRODUCTIONS
example below in effect invokes possible statements about the object of 
inquiry, bringing these statements into a kind of conversation with one 
another, and allowing a question to emerge from this conversation. 
As For Me and My House can be read as a system of concealment: 
Mrs. Bentley skips days at a time, shifts her focus suddenly to the 
weather, offers little information about her own background while 
she relentlessly exposes her husband’s personal history. Yet the idea 
of concealment suggests an audience—and As For Me and My House 
is represented as a diary, a genre which assumes no audience but the 
writer herself. If the narrative is indeed a pattern of withholdings, 
how can we reconcile this condition with the book’s generic presup­
positions about audience? From whom is the missing information 
being concealed? Perhaps by revising the idea of concealment, and 
recasting it as a system of attention to painful matters, we can 
understand Mrs. Bentley’s diary on its own terms, as a diligent, 
deliberate—and sometimes desperate—personal inquiry into the 
circumstances of her life.
You will see from these examples that a question tends to follow the 
problematizing activity, or the identification of a knowledge deficit. 
For student writers and professional scholars alike, arrangements for 
speakers—those schemes of scholarly conversation we investigated in 
Chapter 6—can take the writer to the verge of a knowledge deficit, and 
incite questions. Engaging speaker x to speaker y, and summarizing the 
statements of each one, the writer arranges for a new exchange between 
these positions, and introduces the reader to a new scholarly contribution. 
Review Copy

277
This chapter will look at some of the ways in which the knowledge-mak­
ing demands of research writing shape conclusions. These demands make 
the conclusion more complex than you might be accustomed to if you are 
used to writing essays in high school. But this complexity can be glimpsed 
in another high-school genre—the lab report, where conclusions usu­
ally interpret results. Unlike a conclusion written for an essay-exam or 
the conventional five-paragraph essay, where you might be expected to 
summarize what you have already said, but not to introduce new ideas, 
conclusions for lab reports require you to draw inferences based on exper­
imental results. Rather than simply repeating and summarizing the earlier 
parts of the report, the lab-report conclusion may interpret the data and 
evaluate the hypothesis. Similarly, conclusions in research writing in the 
disciplines often engage in a distinct mode of address, as if the reader of 
the conclusion were different from the reader of the introduction. 
This chapter will also look at how some of the features we have exam­
ined in past chapters—modality and limiting expressions, the state of 
knowledge, and abstractions—play key roles in conclusions to academic 
writing. 
Finally, we will examine the types of moral statements that 
sometimes appear in the conclusions of research writing. These moral 
statements will lead to a more in-depth consideration of the values and 
beliefs that characterize different academic disciplines—the moral com­
pass of the disciplines.
14
Conclusions and the Moral 
Compass of the Disciplines
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

278 
CONCLUSIONS & THE MORAL COMPASS OF THE DISCIPLINES
14A Conclusions
How do conclusions contribute to the reader’s understanding of research 
writing? Certainly, the conclusion is the writer’s last chance to make sure 
that connections between parts of the discussion are secure in readers’ 
minds; it is the last chance to invoke the complex, high-level abstrac­
tions which motivated the discussion, made sense of its specifics, and 
contributed to the ongoing scholarly conversation. It is therefore best to 
think of conclusions as not concluding so much as confirming what has 
gone before. 
While conclusions which merely restate the introduction are a com­
mon feature in the high-school classroom essay, they can be troubling 
for readers of the research genres. This isn’t to say that repetition does 
not occur in scholarly writing in general or conclusions in particular. 
As we saw in Chapter 10, reinstating abstractions can help readers man­
age their mental desktops by interpreting detail and bringing material 
back to attention. However, exact repetition in a conclusion can sound 
strange, because the reader who is addressed at the end of an essay is not 
exactly the same reader who is addressed at the beginning. At the end, the 
reader is familiar with the details and course of the argument: he or she 
has just been through it. To simply repeat the introduction suggests that 
the reader hasn’t heard what the writer said. 
So conclusions in research writing tend to address the reader as a dif­
ferent reader from the one who read the introduction. In the intervening 
pages, the reader has encountered detailed analysis and illustration, the 
claims and supporting evidence. The reader at the end of the paper needs 
reminders of key abstractions and important findings to confirm the 
results and significance of the essay. The conclusion essentially advances 
the writer’s claim in its final—rather than preliminary—form. 
But scholarly writers also go beyond confirming claims in conclu­
sions. They indicate the limits of new knowledge. In our discussion of 
introductions in Chapter 13, we noted that signs of limited knowledge 
come with modality and limiting expressions. In conclusions, where 
writers locate new knowledge deficits, we might expect to find modality 
and other signs of limits. This concluding section from an article on plain 
language shows the researchers still speculating and inferring: 
As in the case of consultation between health-care professionals 
and consumers, it is possible that legal concepts are difficult to 
Review Copy

understand because, even when explained in plain language, they 
are complex or because they are in conflict with folk theories of 
the law. The subjects in this study (and lay people in general), may 
have been relying on inaccurate prior knowledge of the law or on 
their own intuition about justice, which frequently does not reflect 
the legal reality. These results suggest that plain language drafting 
alone will take us only part way to the goal of making the law more 
broadly understood. It must be supported by other measures such 
as public legal education and individual counselling of persons faced 
with legal obligations. 
Michael E.J. Masson and Mary Anne Waldron 1994 “Comprehension of legal contracts 
by non-experts: Effectiveness of plain language redrafting.” Applied Cognitive Psychology 8: 
67– 85, 79 (emphasis added). 
As well as using modality, writers can point to a new knowledge 
deficit by explicitly remarking on what we don’t know. In the following 
example, the writer confirms the main point of the essay and the knowl­
edge deficit it addressed, then directly refers to the study’s “limitations” 
and indicates what remains to be done: 
Through his association of writing with speech, Malivha immersed 
Inkululeko in the pre-existing forms of communication, and thus 
ensured the paper’s accessibility to its audience. As Inkululeko was 
read some fifty years ago, we are at a disadvantage in getting a clearer 
picture of how readers interacted with the newspaper. Questions 
about how the paper was distributed, read and discussed among 
the people would undoubtedly enrich our understanding of the 
role played by Inkululeko in mobilising for the ZBA, but what is left 
of these today will certainly be general impressions and memories. 
  In spite of these limitations, it is hoped that this essay has 
highlighted issues otherwise largely overlooked by existing social-his­
torical studies seeking to understand questions of popular responses 
to political mobilisation in the countryside. The processes of forced 
removal, dispossession, and community destruction undoubtedly 
generated political consciousness which varied with region and time. 
But a focus on these processes alone, this essay argued, ignores a host 
of other factors which can also help explain questions of popular 
responses to political mobilisation in the countryside. Using the ZBA 
as a case study, the essay focused on how ideas about these processes 
were communicated to the Zoutpansberg people by looking at the 
CONCLUSIONS 
279
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

280 
CONCLUSIONS & THE MORAL COMPASS OF THE DISCIPLINES
language and style of mobilisation, and the methods as well as the 
media of communication the organisation used. We believe that 
more detailed and thorough research in this direction will enrich our 
understanding of how some organisations are able to attract popular 
following in the countryside. 
Nemutanzhela 1993: 100–01. 
As well as confirming the main point of the essay, and the knowledge 
deficit it addressed, this conclusion directly refers to its own “limitations” 
by mentioning them, and indirectly refers to limitations by saying, in the 
last sentence of the passage, what still has to be done. Did you notice the 
use of self-reference (“this essay”) and the use of knowledge-making verbs 
in the past tense (“argued,” “focused”)? As the example also shows, con­
clusions not only gesture toward the future, making a promise for greater 
knowledge still, they also tend to return the reader to the highest level of 
abstraction: here, such terms as “dispossession” and “political conscious­
ness.” This move makes sense because these prestige abstractions are the 
high-status terms that gave the introduction rhetorical force—the Big 
Issues which warrant claims on readers’ attention and identify the writer 
as someone in touch with established concerns. 
Accordingly, conclusions are one place where we see the otherwise 
relatively rare kind of expression we could call moral statements. While 
the research genres are generally relatively free of statements of moral 
obligation like this—
People should learn to respect the environment. 
We must preserve our neighbourhoods.
Sports celebrities ought to be role models.
—there are nevertheless some occasions when obligation is expressed. 
Sometimes these obligations are about research itself. Something needs to 
be examined more closely; something should be explained in relation to 
something else. We can see an example of such an expression of obligation 
here, in the last sentence of an article on the experience of German minorities 
in Britain and the US in World War I (notice as well the major abstrac­
tions—xenophobia, control, intolerance—that are invoked by this ending):
In each case, the experience of the German minority needs to be 
placed within traditions of xenophobia in the two countries, but, 
more especially, the war atmosphere which led to increasing control 
Review Copy

of all citizens towards and a growth of more general intolerance 
towards all perceived outgroups. 
Ellis and Panayi 1994: 255–56 (emphasis added). 
Sometimes the expression of obligation extends to the application of 
the research, as the passage by Masson and Waldron at the beginning of 
this chapter shows. Plain language redrafting, the authors conclude, is 
not enough to make legal documents understandable: 
It must be supported by other measures such as public legal 
education and individual counselling of persons faced with legal 
obligations. 
Masson and Waldron 1994: 79 (emphasis added). 
And, sometimes, researchers can conclude with statements that 
resemble the calls to specific action or attitude we find in other genres, 
such as newspaper editorials or partisan political briefs. This is from a 
conclusion the writer has labelled “Policy implications”: 
Human capital differences may be addressed by establishing pro­
grams to help women complete their education. We should offer 
scholarships and financial aid for women at both the high school 
and college levels. We must also establish programs to allow women 
who were forced to drop out of school to return and complete their 
education. These educational programs must be supplemented 
by others that provide job training and retraining. Many women 
worked prior to leaving the waged labor force to bear and/or rear 
children. Their occupational skills often became outdated during 
their absence and must be brought up to date. [...] 
  My own analysis has revealed that young children in the home are 
a major barrier to married women’s participation in the waged labor 
force. It is possible that this reflects a negative evaluation of mothers 
with young children working outside the home, but it could also 
reflect the absence of safe, affordable day care. We cannot or perhaps 
should not do anything about the former possibility, but we can 
certainly address the latter. We must establish federally funded and 
federally supervised day care centers. It would be especially desirable 
if these day care centers could combine custodial with educational 
functions to provide a “head start” where needed.
Geschwender 1992: 12 (emphasis added). 
CONCLUSIONS 
281
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

282 
CONCLUSIONS & THE MORAL COMPASS OF THE DISCIPLINES
In this article, “conclusion” and “action-to-be-taken” seem almost equiv­
alent. This conclusion goes further toward real-world action/application 
than many research genres would permit. As we will see in the final 
section of this chapter, these calls for government action are themselves 
limited by some powerful constraints: even though, out of context, these 
moral statements may sound like those coming from editorials or cam­
paigns, they have a different force and a different authority.
The preceding (and following) examples show that “moral” statements 
are not entirely missing from the scholarly genres—although they may 
occur in different degrees and with different focus in different disciplines. 
Different disciplines have different kinds of connections with the 
world beyond the research domain—and the variations in “moral” state­
ments (what should be done) that we have observed in the samples in 
this section are signals of these different connections. In the conclusion 
to an article from the journal Estuaries, for example, “marsh creation” is 
a positive goal—a good—and conditions which “retard” advance towards 
this goal are ills. 
The recent decline in fur demand has depressed the industry so that 
nutria [an aquatic rodent]-trapping in Louisiana’s coastal marshes is 
no longer economical, yet control of nutria populations is essential 
to maximize growth of newly created marshes. Marsh creation is a 
major policy objective of the state of Louisiana and of the Federal 
government. Dealing with the population size of an introduced 
mammalian species is a part of that policy issue. 
  We have shown that an introduced species—the nutria—alone or 
in combination with native migrating waterfowl can seriously retard 
marsh development in the deltaic environment. This demonstration 
of the importance of herbivory in the Atchafayala Delta has practical 
applications for the northern Gulf of Mexico coast where coastal 
wetland loss rates are the highest in North America (65 km2 year, 
Britsch and Dunbar 1993).
Elaine D. Evers, Charles Sasser, James Gosselink, Deborah Fuller, and Jenneke Visser 1998 
“The impact of vertebrate herbivores on wetland vegetation in Atchafayala Bay, Louisiana.” 
Estuaries 21 (1): 1–13, 12. 
As the passage indicates, nutria population is an obstacle, so “control 
of nutria populations is essential to maximize growth of newly created 
marshlands”: nutria should be reduced in numbers. (Nutria themselves 
or their advocates may look on things differently.) Did you notice that 
the arguments recommending marshland as good are presupposed rather 
Review Copy

than reviewed? This presupposed positive understanding is captured in 
the claim that “[m]arsh creation is a major policy objective of the state of 
Louisiana and of the Federal Government.” 
As this example shows, research interests in some disciplines or 
sub-disciplines involve a direct connection with interests in the public 
domain. The next section will help you analyze your discipline’s internal 
way of thinking about what is desirable or undesirable. 
Exercise 1 
The passage below comes from the conclusion of the article on 
the effects of “low-ability” grouping by Gamoran (1993) that you 
encountered in Chapters 9 and 13. In this passage, “Mrs. Turner” 
and “Mrs. Grant” were two of the successful teachers of low-ability 
classes observed by the writer. Identify the expressions that limit the 
researcher’s findings.
Yet another limitation of this study, also a form of narrowness, 
is that it relied on higher-than-expected achievement as a sign of 
effectiveness without considering other sorts of outcomes. Critics 
of ability grouping, however, maintain that low-track assignment 
is stigmatizing, producing harmful social outcomes apart from 
effects on achievement (see, e.g., Schwartz 1981; Oakes 1985). 
Cases studied by Valli (1986) and by Camarena (1990) seemed 
to open the possibility of counteracting this problem. However, 
in this study, Mrs. Turner commented in the year-end interview 
that assigning students to a remedial class stigmatizes them and 
depresses their motivation, and she views this as reason to avoid 
assigning them to a separate class. In fact, both Mrs. Turner and 
Mrs. Grant told us that, although they see the ability-grouping 
question as complex and multisided, on balance they both 
prefer mixing low-track students with other students. Thus, our 
examples of teachers who succeeded with low tracks—at least 
with respect to instruction and achievement—would actually 
prefer to end that arrangement. Perhaps, then, these are simply 
examples of good teachers, who would be effective regardless of 
how students were assigned. In any case, given the likelihood that 
ability grouping will continue to be used, we need to know much 
more about how to use it well. 
Gamoran 1993: 18–19. 
CONCLUSIONS 
283
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

284 
CONCLUSIONS & THE MORAL COMPASS OF THE DISCIPLINES
Exercise 2
Examine the calls for action in the passages below. What should be 
done? What is good or bad? What kinds of outcome are in sight? 
PASSAGE 1 
There are at least four reasons why studying gaze aversion and 
disengaging from the environment may be of more than passing 
interest. First, the behavior is so frequent as to be characterized 
as “commonplace” (Kundera, 1996). Second, the results bear a 
family resemblance to the irrelevant speech effect (LeCompte, 
1994) and to the analysis of attentional demands on retrieval 
(Craik, Govoni, Naveh-Benjamin, and Anderson, 1996). Third, 
this sort of behavior has been noted as relevant by investigators in 
at least two other domains: social behavior (Argyle and Kendon, 
1967), and law enforcement. In the latter context, Fisher and 
Geiselman (1992) recommend closing the eyes as a component 
of the cognitive interview designed to facilitate accurate recall of 
information from eyewitnesses to crimes. 
  Finally, Glenberg (1997) has proposed that disengaging from 
the environment may be a significant source of individual differ­
ences in cognition. That is, planning, recollective memory, and 
language all seem to require some ability to disengage from the 
current environment. If there is reliable variability in the capacity 
or skill needed to disengage (see Ehrlichman and Weinberger, 
1978, for data on this), this variability ought to be systemati­
cally related to the execution of a wide variety of cognitive and 
behavioral skills.
Arthur M. Glenberg, Jennifer L. Schroeder, and David A. Robertson 1998 “Averting the 
gaze disengages the environment and facilitates remembering.” Memory and Cognition 
26 (4): 651–58, 657. 
PASSAGE 2 
The rewards of working with TEK are commonly expressed using 
the future tense. While improvements are certainly possible, avail­
able methods of documenting TEK, such as the one used in this 
study, are effective. What remain to be developed are better means 
of integrating TEK approaches with those of Western science, 
Review Copy

better ways of using TEK in resource management, and a better 
understanding of how TEK can help conservation, including 
sustainable use of living resources.
  This research shows that an effective methodology used in a col­
laborative research process with elders and hunters can document 
a wide range of useful land detailed information. The benefits of 
such research include a better understanding of the ecology of 
a region or a species, as well as cooperation in research, which 
aids the cooperative management strategies that are increasingly 
common in Alaska and elsewhere in the Arctic. Effective processes 
for applying documented indigenous knowledge to management, 
conservation, and biological research, however, remain elusive, 
and require additional investigation.
Huntington et al. 1999: 59. 
PASSAGE 3
Finally, we must bear in mind that preservation of ecosystems is a 
primary goal of preventing global warming, and the destruction 
of ecosystems to prevent global warming would be a counterpro­
ductive and perverse strategy. Therefore, the cooling that could 
potentially arise from deforestation outside the tropics should not 
necessarily be viewed as a strategy for mitigating climate change 
because, apart from their potential climatic role, forests are valu­
able in many aspects. They provide natural habitat to plants and 
animals, preserve the biodiversity of natural ecosystems, produce 
economically valuable timber and firewood, protect watersheds 
through prevention of soil erosion, and indirectly prevent ocean 
acidification by reducing atmospheric CO2. In planning responses 
to global challenges, therefore, it is important to pursue broad 
goals and to avoid narrow criteria that may lead to environmen­
tally harmful consequences.
G. Bala, K. Caldeira, M. Wickett, T.J. Phillips, D.B. Lobell, C. Delire, and A. Mirin 2007 
“Combined climate and carbon-cycle effects of large-scale deforestation.” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 104 (16): 6550–55, 6554.
CONCLUSIONS 
285
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

286 
CONCLUSIONS & THE MORAL COMPASS OF THE DISCIPLINES
14B The Moral Compass of the Disciplines: Research 
Ethics
If research is a truth-seeking pursuit, who could object to it? The fact that 
reasonable people do raise or anticipate objections suggests that research 
is not so strictly neutral a pursuit, that it has some interests of its own, 
and that these may conflict with other valid interests. 
Universities themselves watch for such conflicts. They establish com­
mittees to scrutinize the ethics of research carried on by their faculty. 
These committees guard the interests of those who participate in research 
projects. Some of these participants are animals whose welfare must be 
protected as far as possible. Others are people taking part in clinical trials 
of pharmaceuticals and other therapies. We can imagine the risk to both 
animals and people in research which, in the process of seeking knowl­
edge, may expose its participants to harm. But other participants, who 
are not so obviously at risk, still attract the attention of research-ethics 
committees. These others are people who agree to be interviewed, answer 
questionnaires, or, in an experimental situation, express their thoughts 
or manipulate objects. Other kinds of participants might be those who 
agree to a researcher’s presence in a real-life situation: a classroom or a 
workplace or a family dinnertime, for example. Less personally, others 
might agree to have their life information—on health, income, place of 
residence, family situation, for example—combined with information 
from thousands of other people and made available to researchers. To get 
permission to conduct research which includes in its methodology inter­
views, surveys, questionnaires, on-site observation, social-psychological 
experimentation, or data banks, researchers must present to ethics com­
mittees detailed accounts of their procedures. Most important, they 
must explain how they will get from participants their informed con­
sent. That is, researchers must tell potential participants the purpose of 
the research, and how the results will be used, including assurances that 
individual participants’ identities will not be exposed. Researchers must 
explain to participants what they will be asked to do, and how long it 
will take. Researchers must identify their own affiliations, including in 
some cases the sources of funds for conducting their study. Researchers 
must make sure that participants understand all this information as they 
decide whether or not to take part. 
Informed consent can be a controversial issue. Sometimes potential 
participants might be willing to take part, but they find the consent 
Review Copy

process tedious and not to be taken seriously. They don’t want to listen 
to the explanation or read the consent form. Other times, full disclosure 
of research premises could distort participants’ responses. For example, if 
researchers want to compare the responses of younger and older people 
to female political leaders, those with reservations about women lead­
ers might adjust their responses if they know what researchers will be 
watching for. Information on the gendering of politics could be useful 
to democratic reform, but to get accurate information, researchers may 
look for ways to inform participants only generally or partially. Where is 
the line between full information and reasonable consent? How are the 
interests of knowledge-making to be reconciled with those of research 
subjects? If some people sincerely believe that male leaders are more 
capable, do they have a right to disguise these beliefs, or to withhold 
them from research which would reveal them?
It is possible that in some cases an ethics committee’s concerns may 
be exaggerated. But history warns us of a tendency of research inquiries 
to corroborate what privileged groups want to know about groups they 
dominate. Early in the twentieth century, women were found, by a lin­
guist of great reputation, to be incapable of producing logical sentences, 
a disability warranting their guidance by men. Historically, people of 
profound disadvantage—the poor, the afflicted, the incarcerated, the 
vagrant—were found to have deviant characteristics which warranted not 
only their disadvantage but also the intervention of the privileged in their 
lives. Even today, so pronounced has been the inclination of middle-
class researchers to study underclass groups that some have called for a 
moratorium on research focussed on disadvantaged people. Such calls 
may be issued more as a matter of principle than practice. Nevertheless, 
in Canada, national policy statements, while setting out the broad prin­
ciples for protecting research subjects from potential harm, make special 
comment on “research involving aboriginal people”:
There are historical reasons why Indigenous or Aboriginal Peoples 
may legitimately feel apprehensive about the activities of researchers. 
In many cases, research has been conducted in respectful ways and 
has contributed to the well-being of Aboriginal communities. In 
others, Aboriginal Peoples have not been treated with a high degree 
of respect by researchers. Inaccurate or insensitive research has caused 
stigmatization. On occasion, the cultural property and human 
remains of Indigenous Peoples have been expropriated by researchers 
RESEARCH ETHICS 
287
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

288 
CONCLUSIONS & THE MORAL COMPASS OF THE DISCIPLINES
for permanent exhibition or storage in institutes, or offered for sale. 
Researchers have sometimes treated groups merely as sources of data, 
and have occasionally endangered dissident Indigenous Peoples by 
unwittingly acting as information-gatherers for repressive regimes. 
Such conduct has harmed the participant communities and spoiled 
future research opportunities. 
Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council 
of Canada, Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada Tri-Council Policy 
Statement: Ethical Conduct for Research Involving Humans 1998 (with 2000, 2002, and 2005 
amendments) www.pre-ethics.gc.ca/english/policystatement/introduction.cfm
We may think that today’s research activities are cleansed of the class, 
gender, and racialist interests of earlier generations, but the guidelines 
which follow the statements cited above suggest that we cannot take for 
granted the purity of knowledge making. And it may be that some degree 
of bias, or some form of social involvement, is inherent to research. We 
explore this possibility in the next and final section of this book. 
Exercise 3
As a student of academic writing and a new member of a research 
community, you are in a position to reflect seriously on ethical ques­
tions posed by different research scenarios. The following scenarios 
ask you to consider the potential clash of interest between those 
who make knowledge and research subjects—those from whose 
lives data are extracted. Imagine the possibilities of harm—embar­
rassment, injury to life chances, or even physical danger—to research 
participants.
1.	 A researcher is investigating a site in a rural village far from home. 
The people the researcher has got to know want to talk, and they 
invite her into their confidence. But they have no time for the 
consent form. They find it irrelevant or incomprehensible: it’s a 
nuisance to listen to the lengthy explanation of the project. They 
put their trust in their personal relationship with the researcher. 
Should the researcher be given permission to conduct her 
research? What more would you want to know about the project 
to make your decision?
2. At mammography clinics, data relevant to the incidence of breast 
cancer have been collected from 100,000 women. Participants 
Review Copy

have been informed of the purpose of data collection, and they 
have given their consent. Another research project now proposes 
to review the data for a purpose other than studying incidence of 
breast cancer. What would you have to know to approve the new 
study?
3.	 What harm could come to participants in a study of diet and dia­
betes? Of workplace bullying? Of religious conviction? Of spousal 
assault? Of Internet shopping habits? Of political coalitions in 
opposition to land development? What would you need to know 
about the studies in question to estimate whether the potential 
for harm could be reduced? Can you think of situations where 
the harm could not be mitigated, and the research should not be 
undertaken, despite benefits?
Exercise 4
In the 1960s, psychologist Stanley Milgram conducted a series of 
controversial studies on obedience and authority. Research subjects 
were told that they were participating as “teachers” in a study on 
the relation between electric shock and learning. These “teachers” 
asked questions of “learners,” and they applied an increasing amount 
of electric shock when the “learners” answered incorrectly. If a 
“teacher” asked the researcher to stop because the electric shock 
was too high or the “learner” was in pain, the researcher instructed 
the “teacher” to continue. The majority of subjects obeyed the 
authority of the researcher, even when the shock appeared to be 
almost lethal and the “learner” appeared to be unconscious. In fact, 
the “learners” were actors who pretended to experience electric 
shock. The “teachers” were the actual focus of the study: Milgram 
wanted to see if they would obey an authority even when the action 
went against their own sense of right and wrong. This study has 
been criticized by those who believe that the stress of the deceptive 
experiment could have caused permanent damage to the research 
subjects. Others argue that such deception is necessary because the 
“teachers” would not have obeyed if they knew that they were the 
ones being observed. Discuss the merits of each position. Should 
Milgram have been allowed to conduct this type of experiment? Was 
it ethical? (For the original study, see Milgram 1963.)
RESEARCH ETHICS 
289
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

290 
CONCLUSIONS & THE MORAL COMPASS OF THE DISCIPLINES
14C The Moral Compass of the Disciplines: Moral 
Statements 
In the first section of this chapter (14A), we observed that moral state­
ments in the form of expressions of obligations are not common in research 
writing, but they do appear. When can you, as a student researcher, make 
explicit recommendations for action? Are such statements at odds with 
your role as a researcher? Aren’t the research genres neutral and imper­
sonal? Even those who study the research genres consider them to be 
so, saying that experts in an academic field avoid language “commonly 
employed to place somebody under an obligation.... Their mastery, 
instead, is shown by the adoption of a more neutral tone ...” (Gotti & 
Dossena, 2001: 14, emphasis added). 
But are these expressions of moral obligation impersonal or neutral?
• Corporations should live up to the commitments they have 
made to retired workers.
• Consumers should cut back on their use of plastic credit.
• People ought to take responsibility for their own health.
• You need to be more assertive.
The first three of these obligations are less imposing than the last one: 
addressees would have to identify themselves as credit-voracious or 
health-irresponsible or corporate-complicit to feel the imposition. (Yet 
even if they didn’t so identify, they would still be hearing others imposed 
on, in a moral tone.) But all of these statements of obligation participate 
in the force of the last one. These statements get personal. At the same 
time, each expression of obligation implicitly estimates what is good and 
bad: it’s good to be assertive; bad to indulge in fatty foods, to buy things 
you can’t afford, to enhance profits by going back on promises. Since 
the research genres are taken to be impersonal and neutral, we might 
think that these moral wordings—should, must, have to, ought to—will 
not appear. But they do, as we have seen:
The experience of the German minority needs to be placed within 
traditions of xenophobia in the two countries ...
Ellis and Panayi 1994: 255–56 (emphasis added).
[Plain language redrafting] must be supported by other measures 
such as public legal education and individual counselling of persons 
faced with legal obligations.
Masson and Waldron 1994: 79 (emphasis added).
Review Copy

To be sure, the modals of moral obligation are not so frequent in 
research writing as the modals which limit the status of knowledge. But 
because the moral expressions carry such a social charge—personal and 
value-laden—they are high-profile features. They can stop readers in their 
tracks. And because their appearance may remind students of expressions 
of obligation well regarded in high-school essays (e.g., “We must protect 
the environment”), it is worthwhile to look into the incentives to and 
constraints on moral expression in academic writing. We will learn more 
about the moral compass of research, and more about the student writer’s 
position. 
The principal author of this book was curious about the apparent 
contradiction between the research genres’ reputation for impersonal 
neutrality and their tolerance of certain moral expressions. Her curiosity 
was sparked by her familiarity with research into scholarly genres them­
selves and her observation of expressions of moral obligation in research 
articles. She had also noticed how students could sometimes hit the wrong 
note in their writing when they took a moral stand and called for action: 
e.g., if a student wrote, “We must learn to respect other people’s cul­
tures.” Selecting three disciplines—forestry, social psychology, and urban 
geography—she assembled a one-million-word sample of academic writ­
ing, searched electronically for expressions of moral obligation, and then 
analysed the results to discover the settings which permitted or called for 
these expressions. Roughly, these expressions were found in two settings. 
The first setting involved researchers themselves and their knowl­
edge-making activities: We must find this out, and we must do it this way. 
Examples were found in all three disciplines. In forestry, researchers tell 
other researchers that “the structural and functional components of resist­
ance and resilience must be distinguished” and “one should remember 
the necessity to take account of the species identity for the definition 
of any appropriate silvicultural system.” In urban geography, researchers 
argue to other researchers that “race should be understood as socially 
constructed” and “inferences must be model-based.” In social psychology, 
researchers tell each other that “we should ask why people are pessimis­
tic” and “future research should examine these possible contingencies 
and assess the effects of these factors more systematically.” Although these 
are “moral” statements, they can still be explained within the “neutral” 
and “impersonal” stance of the research genres. The obligations around 
method speak to the value of reliable (and therefore “neutral” rather than 
“subjective”) means of making knowledge. These obligations focus on 
MORAL STATEMENTS 
291
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

292 
CONCLUSIONS & THE MORAL COMPASS OF THE DISCIPLINES
the object of inquiry, and in doing so they confirm research goals already 
agreed on in the discipline: shared and scholarly rather than “personal.” 
While all three disciplines showed these patterns around the method and 
object of inquiry, they displayed them differently, suggesting that differ­
ent disciplines use these resources for establishing methods and goals in 
different ways.
The second setting for expression of moral obligation involved calls 
for action by people who were not involved in knowledge making: in 
other words, real-world applications of the results of research. These calls 
to action are issued through narrow channels. Urban geographers advise 
city planners or health officials, or traffic-flow managers—in other words, 
designated professionals. Forestry researchers address managers of timber 
industries and decision makers who compose the many regulations gov­
erning timber harvest. So urban geographers tell professionals in the field 
that “intervention strategies should focus on old and poor neighbour­
hoods and minority neighbourhoods, without undue emphasis on the 
latter” and that “land use and transport planners must work with the 
reality of the two-car family.” Forestry researchers tell professionals in the 
field and decision makers that “cooperation must be maintained” and 
that “the harvesting or tree selection method used should be appropriate 
to the time species’ regeneration requirements.”
We can now begin to specify how these two disciplines put a limit on 
calls for action in the world. First, these calls are only issued on the basis 
of research-attested findings—rather than on some other basis, such as 
sympathy, religious conviction, or respect for authority, or love of coun­
try. Statements of obligation in these research genres are a way of saying 
that the results of research are valid and significant. So, if a student wrote 
that “We must learn to respect other people’s cultures,” an academic 
reader would ask about the research basis for such an obligation: by 
what research methods has this been found out? Second, the obligation 
is imposed on a social group—professionals working in a field—rather 
than broadly, on everybody. You can see how these moral statements dif­
fer from those which, in a high-school essay, take a stand for spirituality, 
vegetarian diet, or an end to schoolyard bullying or cruelty to animals.
You may also see, in conjunction with the type of neutrality main­
tained by the first condition (that actions are only prescribed from 
research-attested findings), that the research disciplines are involved in 
the world. They instruct professional and social groups whose activities 
can impinge on our everyday lives: our experience of woodlands and our 
Review Copy

use of watersheds; our experience of traffic and neighbourhoods. Here 
we will not go into the results of more detailed analysis of the moral 
style of research writing in these two disciplines. We will just say that 
such analysis showed forestry’s complex involvement not only with the 
economics and biology of timber harvest but also with government regu­
lation and the interests of people who don’t want trees cut down at all. 
Further analysis showed, in some sectors of urban geography, an involve­
ment with the interests of people who were liable to be dispossessed by 
middle-class uses of the city. These more complicated patterns of conflicts 
and collusions confirm the importance of ethics committees’ scrutiny of 
research projects. So does the more general finding that expressions of 
moral obligation are intended for particular social sectors, which may 
have their own interests to advance or protect.
In explaining this overall pattern, we haven’t mentioned social psych­
ology. Even though social psychology studies things most people would 
be interested in and might want advice about—memory, judgement, 
creativity, optimism, stereotyping, for example—it seems that social 
psychologists do not tell people what to do. Beyond knowledge mak­
ing, statements of obligation by means of the “moral” wordings we have 
inspected do not seem to play as big a role in social psychology as they do 
in some other disciplines. It is notable that different disciplines have such 
different ways of articulating moral obligation, and that these differences 
can’t necessarily be predicted based on common sense. 
Just as the million-word sample of research writing contained state­
ments of moral obligation, so can the study of the sample issue some of 
its own obligations. As knowledge makers, we should investigate the puz­
zle presented by social psychology, and we should inquire further into the 
social involvement of research activities. These are knowledge-making 
obligations. For those of you who will be pursuing your own research and 
joining research cultures as writers, the “should” statements could take 
the form of the following advice: moral statements carry a social charge 
in any context. In academic contexts, the social charge flows to attested 
research findings and out into the world through designated profession­
als. Students should consider whether their findings warrant the emphasis 
of moral statements and whether the findings warrant being transmit­
ted—even figuratively—to people in the field. (Are you in a position to 
instruct designated professionals?) Students should also be aware of the 
different ways these high-charged expressions are used in different disci­
plines. And then, more generally, and in keeping with the spirit of this 
MORAL STATEMENTS 
293
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

294 
CONCLUSIONS & THE MORAL COMPASS OF THE DISCIPLINES
book, which invites students to join the activities of the disciplines, these 
findings suggest that students should be aware that research is not separate 
from real life, but rich with the complexities of its interests and values.
Exercise 5
a)	 The case of social psychology remains a puzzle for us. What is 
it about the discipline which makes researchers withhold rather 
than deliver recommendations? Can the following episode suggest 
where we might look for missing pieces of the puzzle?
In a radio interview, a social psychologist reports findings from 
a recent study. He and his colleagues found that, when people 
contemplate a “relationship change,” they overestimate the dis­
tress they will feel. In other words, breaking up is not as hard as 
people expect. The interviewer asks, “So people should go ahead 
anyway, even though they are afraid of what they will feel?” The 
researcher repeats his findings and also qualifies them: not every 
single subject found breaking up easier than expected and there 
was a range of difference between expectation and eventuality. 
(CBC August 2008)
b) Corporations should live up to commitments they have made to 
retired workers: this was one of the examples, offered above, of a 
statement of moral obligation. Can you think of a writing situation 
where such a statement would be warranted—that is, a situation 
where it was attested by research findings? What disciplines would 
offer the methodologies capable of producing such findings?
c) We have some (limited) information on the appearance of 
expressions of moral obligation in research writing. Knowing the 
restrictions on their appearance, what role do you think they 
might play in your own academic writing? We also know that dif­
ferent disciplines use these expressions differently. Amongst the 
disciplines in which you have studied or are now studying, can you 
anticipate differences in the use of statements of moral obligation?
Review Copy

295
Coe, Richard, Lorelei Lingard, and Tatiana Teslenko, eds. 2002. The 
Rhetoric and Ideology of Genre: Strategies for Stability and Change. Cres­
skill, NJ: Hampton. 
Devitt, Amy. 1993. “Generalizing about genre: New concepts of an old 
concept.” College Composition and Communication 44: 357–86. 
Emigh, William, and Susan C. Herring. 2005. “Collaborative Authoring 
on the Web: A Genre Analysis of Online Encyclopedias.” Proceedings 
of the Thirty-Eighth Hawai’i International Conference on System Sciences 
(HICSS-38). Los Alamitos: IEEE Press.
Freedman, Aviva, and Peter Medway. 1994. “Locating genre studies: 
Antecedents and prospects.” In Genre and the New Rhetoric, ed. A. 
Freedman and P. Medway. London: Taylor & Francis. 
Heath, Shirley Brice. 1983. “Chapter six: Literate traditions.” In Ways 
with Words: Language, Life, and Work in Communities and Classrooms. 
Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 
Keller-Cohen, Deborah. 1987. “Literate practices in a modern credit 
union.” Language in Society 16: 7–24. 
MacDonald, Susan Peck. 1994. “Chapter two: Patterns in disciplinary 
variation.” In Professional Academic Writing in the Humanities and 
Social Sciences. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP. 
Miller, Carolyn. 1984. “Genre as social action.” Quarterly Journal of 
Speech 70: 151–67. 
Myers, Greg. 1989. “The pragmatics of politeness in scientific articles.” 
Applied Linguistics 10: 1–35. 
Further Readings
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

296 
FURTHER READINGS
Swales, John. 1990. “Chapter two: The concept of discourse commun­
ity.” In Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings. 
Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 
Swales, John. 1990. “Chapter three: The concept of genre.” In Genre 
Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings. Cambridge: Cam­
bridge UP. 
Swales, John. 1990. “Chapter seven: Research articles in English.” In 
Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings. Cambridge: 
Cambridge UP. 
Review Copy

297
abstract the brief SUMMARY that sometimes precedes an article or 
accompanies bibliographical information found in an index (CH. 
11C). 
abstractions, abstract words concepts, ideas, and entities which could 
be said to have essentially mental existence, for example, “power” 
or “racial antagonism.” We develop abstractions from concrete data 
and GENERALIZATIONS. Abstractions occupy the highest levels 
of generality and perform a cognitive function: that is, they play an 
important role in reasoning. PRESTIGE ABSTRACTIONS also per­
form important social functions: high-value abstractions attract the 
attention of members of a particular academic community; display the 
writer’s allegiance to the interests and knowledge-making methods of 
that community; and establish the writer’s right to speak as a member 
of the community. For example, “voluntary employee turnover” or 
“relationship marketing” can establish a speaker’s position as a mem­
ber of the management-studies community (CH. 2C, 4, 7B, 8A, 9A). 
agentlessness/agentless expressions expressions that highlight the activ­
ity rather than the actor, by eliminating the person (or “agent”) doing 
the activity (CH. 9D, 10C, 12B, 13B). See also PASSIVE CON­
STRUCTIONS and FORECASTS. 
ambiguity the capacity for a word or phrase to be interpreted in two 
or more ways. Ambiguity is associated particularly with NOUN 
PHRASES containing two or more nouns, for example, “huge pot 
sale” (CH. 9C–D).
Glossary
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

298 
GLOSSARY
anticipatory-it, it-extraposition the use of “it” at the beginning of a 
sentence as a means of deferring important material to the end of the 
sentence (CH. 10). See also END-WEIGHT PRINCIPLE. 
apposition/appositive a grammatical structure, signalled by commas, 
dashes, colon, parentheses, “or”, and “i.e.” (id est), that puts an equiva­
lent expression next to a term which the writer estimates as important 
but difficult for a reader. The appositive may define and narrow the 
meaning and application of an important word or it may expand and 
amplify the sense of the term (CH. 7B, 9E). 
assertion the speech action of making a statement for the new informa­
tion of the reader—as if the reader did not know this information 
(CH. 10D). See also PRESUPPOSITION. 
citation the customary practice of attributing words, phrases, or state­
ments to another speaker (CH. 3, 13A). 
cleft sentence, cleft construction a syntactic construction commonly 
used for EMPHASIS. Cleft constructions take the form “It was X that 
did such-and-such” rather than “X did such-and-such” (e.g., “It was 
geological evidence that supported the Alvarez hypothesis” rather than 
“geological evidence supported the Alvarez hypothesis”) (CH. 10C). 
cognitive response vs. social response the response of a reader based on 
understanding or reasoning vs. the response based on social expecta­
tions, though the distinction is blurred in actuality. Social expectations 
come from shared habits of reasoning and preferred procedures for 
constructing knowledge in particular research communities (CH. 2, 
8, 12). See also MUTUAL KNOWLEDGE. 
common sense vs. uncommon sense (expertise) unexamined but widely 
accepted assumptions arising out of everyday experience and popular 
discourse vs. assumptions arising out of the domains of research (CH. 
9A). See also PLAIN LANGUAGE. 
complaint tradition the cultural practice of publicly deploring the state 
of the language, announcing its decline from an earlier notion of per­
fection (CH. 2B). 
cultural situation circumstances that define the relationship between 
writer and reader; a distinct occasion in a culture. Looking for work 
and the job interview are examples of cultural situations (CH. 1). 
definite expressions a noun phrase beginning with “the” or “this,” 
marking the entity as familiar to both writer and reader (e.g., the 
recipe on the spaghetti box). When used in academic discourse, the 
Review Copy

GLOSSARY 
299
definite expression (e.g., the choice-theoretic paradigm) encodes a 
community of researchers (writers and readers) (CH. 10D). See also 
PRESUPPOSITION. 
definition a statement clarifying how a term is to be used in a par­
ticular context. Definition is a remarkably complex phenomenon, 
and statements can be clarified by a variety of means. Moreover, the 
approaches to definition vary from DISCIPLINE to discipline, with 
some disciplines preferring definitions based on TAXONOMY and 
others allowing definitions to be derived for the immediate purposes 
of the argument at hand (CH. 7). See also APPOSITION, FORMAL 
DEFINITION, and SUSTAINED DEFINITION. 
direct speech reported speech that represents the exact words used by 
someone else in another context. The simplest form of reported speech 
is quotation (x said “y”), a verbatim record of another’s speech (CH. 
12C, 13B). 
discipline a particular branch of academic study. A discipline can be 
construed broadly (history, biology) or narrowly (cognitive psychol­
ogy, medical entomology). 
discourse action an action which can be represented by a reporting verb 
(x describes, x observes, x proposes) or reporting noun (x’s description, 
x’s observation, x’s proposal). Discourse actions are associated both 
with CITATION and the DISCURSIVE I and the choice of the verb 
can be influenced by the discipline in which a writer is working (CH. 
11B). 
discourse community a group of people identifiable (or recognizable) 
not only by their shared values, beliefs, and specialized knowledge 
about the world but also by the way they talk, or write: their talk 
embodies the shared values and special knowledge. For example, 
mountain bikers and developmental psychologists constitute distinct 
discourse communities because each group exhibits characteristic 
patterns of communication that its members find meaningful and effi­
cient (“vegetable tunnel” and “yard sale” being useful and economical 
expressions of experience for the first group, but incomprehensible 
and irrelevant to the experiences and interests of the second) (CH. 
10). 
discursive I the use of “I” to refer to the writer in his or her capacity as a 
researcher/writer. The discursive I may also appear in the plural form, 
as “we” (CH. 10B, 13D). 
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

300 
GLOSSARY
documentation a two-part tracking system that aids the reader’s move­
ment from REPORTED SPEECH in the body of the text to the full 
documentation of sources in footnotes, endnotes, and the “Refer­
ences” or “Works Cited” pages (CH. 13C). 
emphasis expressions drawing attention to key points, as in, for example, 
“of particular importance here” or “the point I want to stress here ...” 
(CH. 10C). 
end-weight principle the tendency to shift important material to the 
end of the sentence (e.g., “It has been routinely argued that the advan­
ces in obstetrical knowledge in the eighteenth century undermined 
the traditional role of the midwife”) (CH. 10C). 
estimate from a position of limited knowledge modality and modaliz­
ing expressions such as “I think” and “seems” indicate that a statement 
issues from the writer as knowledge maker (CH. 12). See also KNOW­
LEDGE-MAKING I. 
ethics, research ethics norms or rules for deciding whether an action, in 
this case research, is acceptable or not. Research ethics are especially 
important when the people or animals being studied may be harmed 
by the research or are otherwise vulnerable (CH. 14B). See also ETH­
ICS COMMITTEES and INFORMED CONSENT. 
ethics committees groups that provide oversight and guidance for 
researchers working with vulnerable research subjects (CH. 14B). See 
also ETHICS.
expert vs. non-expert generally speaking, the distinction between those 
who are members of a research community and those who are not. 
However, the boundaries between the two categories can be contested 
(CH. 4F). 
failed-then-revised hypothesis the revisions to one’s understanding of a 
NOUN PHRASE as one works through it. For example, as a reader 
works through the noun phrase “the letter-carrier union representative 
meeting” it becomes necessary to revise one’s understanding of the 
noun phrase with each successive word (CH. 9C). 
feminist reasoning related to ways of thinking following women’s rights 
movements in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, feminism 
sometimes critiques the historically masculinist basis of knowledge 
making, and has often insisted on emphasizing the role of the subject 
in the knowledge-making process (CH. 11C). 
forecasts statements about how the argument will be organized, what 
readers can expect (CH. 10C). 
Review Copy

GLOSSARY 
301
form used by many people to refer to something like the overall structure 
of a piece of writing: someone might say that a statute has a preamble, 
a series of clauses, and a proclamation—and that is its “form”; or that 
an essay has a “five-paragraph form”—introduction, one paragraph 
on each of three points, and a conclusion. “Form” can also be used 
to refer to words that are repeated. When we hear once again “we are 
gathered here today” or “let me be perfectly clear,” the features we 
recognize could be called formal (or even formalities). In this book, 
“form” refers to what we have in mind when we sense both an overall 
shape and a recognizable wording. But, in this book, “form” points 
mainly to the dimension of genre which is linguistic (made of lan­
guage). This definition of form does not permit form to be separated 
from “content”; instead, it urges us to see form and content as fused 
(CH. 1B–C). 
formal definition the classical form of a DEFINITION consisting of a 
single sentence in which the term being defined is the subject, which 
is followed by a form of the verb “to be” and a subject complement 
that identifies the general class the term belongs to and then provides 
characteristics distinguishing the term from all other members of that 
class. A version of the classical example of the formal definition is “A 
human is a rational animal” (human = the term to be defined, animal 
= the general class humans belong to, rational = the distinctive feature 
that distinguishes humans from other animals) (CH. 7C). 
generalization a statement that typifies large numbers of instances 
(intermediate level of generality), as in “Through the 1980s, the baby-
boomers were the most relentless consumers the marketplace has ever 
seen.” A typified or generalized action or event can itself become an 
ABSTRACTION (higher level of generality), such as “materialism,” 
and further specified through details (lowest levels of generality), such 
as “cars, condos, electronic appliances.” Both generalizations and 
abstractions are products of reasoning (CH. 8A, 9A, 11A, 12B, 13A). 
See also LEVELS OF GENERALITY. 
genre traditionally defined in terms of form and used for categoriza­
tion, genre has been reconceptualized as involving SITUATION and 
FORM (situation + form = genre) and, thus, involves not only the 
type of communication but also the situation that the communication 
serves (CH. 1, 2). See also FORM and CULTURAL SITUATION. 
genre-specific expectations readers’ often unconscious expectations of 
specific genres’ stylistic conventions, which, among academic ­readers, 
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

302 
GLOSSARY
reflect disciplinary values and preferred methods for constructing 
knowledge (CH. 2). A reader of an English paper, for example, expects 
to see quotations from a literary text that demonstrate or illustrate 
a writer’s statements about meaning. Traditional marking comments, 
such as the request for more “evidence,” often obscure the specificity 
of these tacit expectations (CH. 2C). See also UNITARY VIEWS OF 
LANGUAGE and GENRE VIOLATION. 
genre theory dating to Aristotle, genre theory attempts to explain and 
categorize communication into types based on formal similarities. 
Recent genre theory rethinks the emphasis on FORM and sees TYPE 
as developing from the situational needs and habits of communication 
(CH. 1B, 7D, 8A, 9A). 
genre violation the misapplication of the norms, expectations, or 
needs regarding communication in one situation to those of another 
situation. This can occur in writing (e.g., a scholar uses technical ter­
minology when addressing an audience of laypeople) or in reading 
(e.g., a lay reader criticizes the lack of “clarity” in a research publica­
tion) (CH. 9A). 
gist the target of a method of noting, while reading, that avoids copying 
and instead aims to capture and transport information nuggets for 
other uses (CH. 4A, 4C). 
hypothesis a statement which is deemed plausible but which is, so far, 
untested and will be shown to be tested in the course of the article or 
research study (CH. 13D).
imprint the mark left on language by salient features of a CULTURAL 
SITUATION. Recent GENRE THEORY predicts that formal fea­
tures of language develop from and serve recurring situations. When 
language is used in a way that becomes typical of situation, it is 
imprinted by that situation (CH. 1). See also TYPE, TYPIFICATION. 
indeterminacy See UNCERTAINTY.
indirect speech REPORTED SPEECH that represents the words of 
another speaker by using new words: paraphrase or SUMMARY. 
Indirect speech, unlike DIRECT SPEECH, involves changes in the 
wording to fit a new and different context. In academic writing espe­
cially, it often leads to NOMINALIZATION (CH. 13B). 
informed consent permission received from research subjects to par­
ticipate in a study. Researchers need to inform potential participants 
about the purpose and use of the research; participants need to decide 
Review Copy

GLOSSARY 
303
to take part in the research (CH. 14B). See ETHICS and ETHICS 
COMMITTEES. 
knowledge deficit the gap in established knowledge—what hasn’t been 
said, what needs to be said, some error in what is held to be true. The 
knowledge deficit is what justifies the present research project. The 
location of knowledge deficits often comes with MODALITY and 
LIMITING EXPRESSIONS (CH. 3C, 11A, 12A, 13E, 14A). 
knowledge-making I See DISCURSIVE I and MODALITY, METH­
ODOLOGICAL I, MODAL EXPRESSIONS (CH. 12).
levels of generality the structure of information in a given passage, mov­
ing from the highest, most abstract concepts through general concepts 
down to specific details. Levels of generality can be represented in 
diagram form, with abstractions appearing at the top, generalized or 
contextualized at midpoints, and specific details at the lowest levels. 
The levels diagram reveals relationships among ideas and specific 
details; it also sketches our experience of reading as we negotiate the 
big issues, the writer’s general claims, and the specific references used 
to illustrate and demonstrate those claims (CH. 4B–C, 5, 13A). See 
also ABSTRACTIONS and GENERALIZATION. 
limiting expressions terms that place limits on a GENERALIZATION 
(“in most cases,” “a majority of interviewees”) (CH. 12B). 
listeners’ centre of attention an estimate of the responses of a reader 
that is based on a writer’s own social and cultural expectations and 
experiences with forms of expression (CH. 2A). 
management device a metaphor for how a reader manages information 
while reading: a device which detects, organizes, and assigns priority 
or RELEVANCE (CH. 8B). See also MENTAL DESKTOP. 
mental desktop a metaphor for how a reader processes information 
while reading: a space on which statements arrive, one after the other, 
as the reader advances through a text (CH. 8B). See also MANAGE­
MENT DEVICE. 
messages about the argument features including the DISCURSIVE 
I, SELF-REFERENCE, FORECAST, and EMPHASIS that help a 
reader understand the organization of academic writing (CH. 10A). 
methodological I the use of “I,” usually in the METHOD SEC­
TION to refer to the writer in his or her capacity as a practitioner of 
research methods. The methodological I is often associated with verbs 
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

304 
GLOSSARY
­expressing physical actions (e.g., “we drilled” or “we excavated”) and 
may also appear in the plural form (CH. 11B). 
methods procedures by which knowledge has been produced. See also 
QUANTITATIVE and QUALITATIVE (CH. 11). 
method section an explicit account of how the researchers produced the 
knowledge they are now reporting. In the sciences and social sciences, 
such accounts are often accompanied by the heading “methods” (CH. 
11B). 
modality, modal expressions expressions such as “I think” or “seems” 
that indicate that a statement is an inference from a position of limited 
knowledge (CH. 12A, 13D). 
modalize the marking of statements as being knowledge under construc­
tion—usually with the recognition that the knowledge is limited in 
some way—from a certain location: the speaker’s or writer’s position 
in the world (CH. 12). 
modals of moral obligation wording like “should” or “must” that 
expresses the moral need for an action or change based on research 
findings (CH. 14C). See also MODALITY, MODAL EXPRES­
SIONS, and MODALIZE.
moral compass of the disciplines the values and beliefs that characterize 
different academic disciplines (CH. 14C).
moral statement a statement, sometimes occurring in conclusions, that 
expresses research imperatives or obligations—what actions “must” be 
taken, what “should” be done. Moral statements may presuppose their 
disciplines’ beliefs about what is good and bad, and they often con­
nect the interests and activities of research to concerns in the public 
domain. The presence or lack of moral statements and the types of 
imperatives and obligations they propose are discipline specific (CH. 
14). See also SUBJECT POSITION. 
mutual knowledge an estimate of what can be safely assumed as shared 
background knowledge (CH. 2A). 
narrative a sequence of events organized chronologically—a story. Nar­
ratives are especially difficult to summarize because they tend not to 
contain LEVELS OF GENERALITY which explain the details and 
conditions in the story (CH. 5C). 
nominalization the process of word transformation when verbs (actions) 
and qualities are converted into nouns: “observe,” for example, 
becomes “observation” (CH. 9C–E). See also NOMINAL STYLE, 
NOUN PHRASE, SYNTACTIC DENSITY. 
Review Copy

GLOSSARY 
305
nominal style noun heavy style; phrasing characterized by nominaliza­
tion or noun phrases (CH. 9C–E). See also NOMINALIZATION, 
NOUN PHRASE, and SYNTACTIC DENSITY.
noun phrase a phrase consisting of a noun or pronoun along with its 
modifiers (e.g., “the research,” “researchers,” “he,” “they,” “sample-size 
considerations”). Often in academic writing, noun phrases may consist 
of strings of nouns that modify subsequent nouns or noun-groupings 
(CH. 9C–E). See also NOMINALIZATION, NOMINAL STYLE, 
and SYNTACTIC DENSITY. 
objectivity the attempt to avoid personal bias or the limits of personal 
perspective and experience in the production of knowledge (CH. 11). 
Contrast SUBJECTIVITY. 
obviousness an expression of attitude regarding a statement (e.g., “of 
course”) in a given DISCIPLINE or field of research that indicates 
there is some consensus or common ground with regard to it (CH. 
10D, 12B). 
orchestration a dialogue of two or more speakers (often of other research 
publications) arranged by a writer by way of direct and/or indirect 
reported speech (CH. 6). 
passive construction, passive voice the grammatical construction 
whereby the object that a transitive verb acts upon is moved from after 
the verb to before. For example, “I ate all your Easter chocolate” (the 
active voice) becomes “All your Easter chocolate was eaten by me” or 
“All your Easter chocolate was eaten.” The second form of the passive 
construction is also an example of an AGENTLESS EXPRESSION 
(CH. 10C). 
plain language the use of language designed to be understood by a 
general readership. When standards of plain language are invoked to 
criticize the complexities of other kinds of discourse—for example, 
academic or legal writing—a UNITARY VIEW OF LANGUAGE is 
in evidence (CH. 9A). 
position, positioning a relational stance or perspective negotiated 
through REPORTED SPEECH and the place from which a writer 
speaks. REPORTING EXPRESSIONS identify writers’ proximity 
to and distance from statements made by others. The development 
of interpretive abstractions from concrete data positions writers both 
cognitively and socially as members of a community of writers (CH. 
2, 3, 4, 6, 12, 13B). See also COGNITIVE RESPONSE vs. SOCIAL 
RESPONSE.
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

306 
GLOSSARY
post-colonial reasoning a critical tendency which emerges in twentieth-
century discourse to challenge the authority of Western researchers to 
produce knowledge of other cultures, and which exposes traditional 
anthropological knowledge as saturated with colonial values (CH. 
11C). 
prestige abstraction ABSTRACTIONS that have particular social 
value for a given academic community. Prestige abstractions attract 
the attention of others in the community, and they signal the writer’s 
contribution to existing research (CH. 7D, 14A).
presupposition the phenomenon of some propositions being assumed 
rather than asserted (see ASSERTION). Presupposing expressions 
are those which construct the reader as knowing—as sharing a set of 
inferences about the world. They include social, political, and cultural 
assumptions, as well as assumptions about the physical world and the 
relationship between things and between people. Whereas here certain 
information is asserted—“Babur had an influence on South Asian life 
writing”—here the same information is presupposed: “The influence of 
Babur on South Asian life writing ...” (CH. 10D, 12B). 
qualitative a METHOD of study that focuses on a case study or direct 
observation of a small sample or group over a prolonged period of 
time (CH. 11). 
quantitative a METHOD of study that seeks to set aside biases caused 
by an individual’s beliefs or immediate experience of the world by 
observing and numerically measuring controlled studies or experi­
ments using as broad a sample as possible (CH. 11). 
relevance the condition that makes a statement understandable. The 
relevance of a statement is a function of the context in which it is 
meaningful. The harder it is to find this context, the less relevant a 
statement will seem to be (CH. 8A). See also RELEVANCE THEORY.
relevance theory the branch of linguistics concerned with studying the 
contexts which condition readers’ understanding and interpretation of 
language (CH. 8A). 
reported speech a projected representation of another’s words, directly 
or indirectly; we use reported speech whenever we convey what some­
one else has said. Reporting the statements made by other speakers, 
the writer positions himself or herself in relation to those statements. 
Reported speech is an important component in POSITIONING 
(CH. 3, 12A, 13B). 
Review Copy

GLOSSARY 
307
reporting expressions, reporting reporting expressions that report 
sources of information: the writer’s name, the title of the work, the 
date of publication, and the reporting verb. Reporting reporting or 
“double” reporting occurs when summarizers report information used 
by their source, that is, account for the source’s summarizing activity 
(CH. 3, 4D–E, 13B). 
reporting verb the verb, in a REPORTING EXPRESSION, that names 
or characterizes the action of another work, and describes the develop­
ment of the discussion. Summarizers can develop a POSITION in 
relation to another work in their choice of reporting verbs (CH. 3, 
12C, 13B). 
research genres genres (e.g., published peer-reviewed articles, article 
reviews, and poster presentations) that appear in scholarly journals 
and other scholarly venues (e.g., academic conferences); distinguish­
ing features of the research genres reflect discipline-specific research 
activities (CH. 1D, 2C, 9E)
research subject(s) human participants of a study; those who are the 
focus of research (CH. 11, 14). See also INFORMED CONSENT. 
secured generalization the generalization that has been cited to indicate 
that it is the product of a tradition of inquiry (CH. 13A). 
self-reference a MESSAGE ABOUT THE ARGUMENT in which a 
work (e.g., article or essay) or a part of a work (e.g., a conclusion) 
is referred to directly. For example: “In this essay ...” or “By way of 
concluding ...” (CH. 10, 14A). 
situation See CULTURAL SITUATION and GENRE (CH. 1, 8A). 
sociality of knowledge the ways in which knowledge is the product of 
social activities (CH. 7D).
social response See COGNITIVE RESPONSE vs. SOCIAL RESPONSE.
socio-cognitive needs See COGNITIVE RESPONSE vs. SOCIAL 
RESPONSE (CH. 9C).
state of knowledge a writer’s estimate of the degree of stability in a desig­
nated area of knowledge: established knowledge, limits of knowledge, 
the conditions under which it was produced, and the positions from 
which statements issue (CH. 3C, 6A, 13D). 
subjectivity the personal (social and cognitive) point of view or experi­
ence of the world (CH. 11C, 12B). Contrast OBJECTIVITY. 
subject position relevant personal (social and political) elements of a 
researcher’s experience of the world that may influence or be relevant 
to the knowledge he or she produces (CH. 11C). 
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

308 
GLOSSARY
summarizer’s position the POSITION or perspective developed by a 
summarizer in relation to reported statements, evident in the way the 
summarized material is characterized (in the REPORTING VERB) 
and in the ABSTRACTIONS used to interpret details in the ori­
ginal (CH. 3, 4, 5, 6). See also POSITION, POSITIONING, and 
REPORTED SPEECH. 
summary REPORTED SPEECH that compresses and may rearrange 
what another speaker has said or written (CH. 3, 4, 5). 
sustained definition a strategy whereby a writer locates a phenomenon 
among other, related phenomena in the world. The sustained atten­
tion paid to the phenomenon serves to extend or advance the inquiry 
(CH. 7C). See also APPOSITION/APPOSITIVE and FORMAL 
DEFINITION. 
symbolic domination domination which operates not through physical 
coercion but through psychological/social processes (CH. 2B). 
syntactic density the effect resulting from the capacity of NOUN 
PHRASES to expand by incorporating other sentence elements 
(adjectives, verbs, adverbs, other nouns) and creating noun “strings” 
(CH. 9C). See also NOUN PHRASE, NOMINAL STYLE, and 
NOMINALIZATION. 
taxonomy schemes for classifying and ordering phenomena, schemes 
that depend on naming (using nouns) for things (CH. 9E).
think-aloud protocol a tool for professional writers and a technique for 
researching the reader’s experience of using a text. The readers read 
and report out loud what’s going on in their mind while reading; the 
writer gets a chance to watch someone making meaning from what he 
or she has written. Think-aloud protocols help writers understand the 
reading process by learning to anticipate and predict readers’ responses 
to their text; their subsequent adjustments follow the reader’s experi­
ence of the text rather than unitary rules about language usage (CH. 
2, 8A). 
tradition of inquiry a scholarly practice, including topics considered 
relevant and worthy of ongoing inquiry, the preferred methods of 
inquiry, and the research community’s style of CITATION (CH. 
13A). 
tree diagram a graphic representation of the structure of reasoning, with 
branches connecting lowest levels of detail to higher levels of abstrac­
tion (CH. 4C). See also LEVELS OF GENERALITY. 
Review Copy

GLOSSARY 
309
typified group a term that generalizes and categorizes large numbers of 
individual speakers or writers as members of an identifiable commun­
ity (e.g., interviewees, psychoanalytic critics); when used in reporting 
and framing, the names of particular members are eliminated (CH. 
13B). See also AGENTLESS EXPRESSIONS. 
uncertainty/indeterminacy expressions which indicate doubt about 
statements, place limits on GENERALIZATIONS, identify gaps 
or inadequacies in existing research, and otherwise emphasize that 
knowledge is under construction. These expressions and tendencies 
can create a sense of uncertainty or a lack of determinate knowledge 
about a subject. MODALITY, LIMITING EXPRESSIONS, and 
REPORTING EXPRESSIONS are all associated with uncertainty 
(CH. 12A). See also KNOWLEDGE DEFICIT. 
unitary views of language the idea that a single set of standards can be 
applied to all forms of writing or speech. Unitary views of language 
often manifest themselves in set rules (e.g., never begin a sentence 
with “and,” always place a thesis statement at the end of the first para­
graph, never end a paragraph with a quotation) (CH. 2C). 
unpack to analyze a passage or a statement by examining its components 
in detail (CH. 9). 
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

Review Copy

311
Agar, Michael. 1994. “The intercultural frame.” International Journal of 
Intercultural Relations 18 (2): 221–37. 
Alcock, J.E., D.W. Carment, and S.W. Sadava. 1994. A Textbook of Social 
Psychology, 3rd ed. Scarborough, ON: Prentice Hall. 
Allen, Ann Taylor. 1999. “Feminism, social science, and the meanings of 
modernity: The debate on the origin of the family in Europe and the 
United States, 1860–1914.” The American Historical Review 104 (4): 
1085–113.
Amit-Talai, Vered. 1995. “The waltz of sociability: Intimacy, dislocation 
and friendship in a Quebec high school.” In Youth Cultures: A Cross-
Cultural Perspective, ed. Vered Amit-Talai and Helena Wulff. London: 
Routledge. 
Anselment, Raymond A. 1989. “Small pox in seventeenth-century Eng­
lish literature: Reality and the metamorphosis of wit.” Medical History 
33 (1): 72–95. 
Arnold, Bettina. 1999. “‘Drinking the feast’: Alcohol and the legitima­
tion of power in Celtic Europe.” Cambridge Archaeological Review 9 
(1): 71–93. 
Bala, G., K. Caldeira, M. Wickett, T.J. Phillips, D.B. Lobell, C. Delire, 
and A. Mirin. 2007. “Combined climate and carbon-cycle effects of 
large-scale deforestation.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci­
ences 104 (16): 6550–55.
References
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

312 
REFERENCES
Bar-Yosef, Ofer, and Steven L. Kuhn. 1999. “The big deal about blades: 
Laminar technologies and human evolution.” American Anthropologist 
101 (2): 322–38. 
Bhabha, Homi K. 1994. “Now newness enters the world.” In The Loca­
tion of Culture. London: Routledge. 
Bodley, John H. 1997. Cultural Anthropology: Tribes, States, and the 
Global System, 2nd ed. Mountain View, CA: Mayfield. 
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1991. Language and Symbolic Power. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard UP. 
Bruggink, Thomas H., and Kamran Siddiqui. 1995. “An econometric 
model of alumni giving: A case study for a liberal arts college.” Amer­
ican Economist 39 (2): 53–60. 
Buchanan, Neil H. 1999. “Taxes, saving, and macroeconomics.” Journal 
of Economic Issues 33 (1): 59–75. 
Burgess, Keith. 1994. “British employers and education policy, 1935–45: 
A decade of ‘missed opportunities’?” Business History 36 (3): 29–61. 
Calhoun, Cheshire. 1994. “Separating lesbian theory from feminist 
theory.” Ethics 104: 558–82. 
Cameron, Deborah. 1990. “Demythologizing sociolinguistics: Why lan­
guage does not reflect society.” In Ideologies of Language, ed. John E. 
Joseph and Talbot J. Taylor. London: Routledge. 
Cameron, Deborah. 1995. Verbal Hygiene. London: Routledge. 
Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Natural Sciences and Engineer­
ing Research Council of Canada, Social Sciences and Humanities 
Research Council of Canada. Tri-Council Policy Statement: Ethical 
Conduct for Research Involving Humans 1998 (with 2000, 2002, and 
2005 amendments). www.pre-ethics.gc.ca/english/policystatement/
introduction.cfm 
Chafe, Wallace. 1994. Discourse, Consciousness, and Time. Chicago: U of 
Chicago P. 
Chavez, Leo R. 1994. “The power of the imagined community: The 
settlement of undocumented Mexicans and Central Americans in the 
United States.” American Anthropologist 96 (1): 52–73. 
Chorpita, Bruce F., Anne Marie Albano, and David H. Barlow. 1998. 
“The structure of negative emotions in a clinical sample of children 
and adolescents.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 107 (1): 74–85. 
Clark, Herbert. 1992. Arenas of Language Use. Chicago: U of Chicago P. 
Clifford, James. 1997. Routes: Travel and Translation in the Late Twentieth 
Century. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP. 
Review Copy

REFERENCES 
313
Coates, Jennifer. 1996. Women Talk: Conversation between Women Friends. 
Cambridge: Blackwell. 
Coffey, David J. 1977. The Encyclopedia of Aquarium Fishes in Color. New 
York: Arco.
Cohen, Sheldon, Denise Janicki-Deverts, and Gregory E. Miller. 2007. 
“Psychological stress and disease.” JAMA 298: 1685–87.
Corrigan, Patrick W. 2007. “How clinical diagnosis might exacerbate the 
stigma of mental illness.” Social Work 52 (1): 31–39. 
Counts, Dorothy Ayers, and David R. Counts. 1992. “‘They’re my family 
now’: The creation of community among RVers.” Anthropologica 34: 
153–82. 
Cowan, Ann, Janet Giltrow, Sharon Josephson, and Michele Valiquette. 
1998. “Feedback: Its uses, reliability, and design.” Paper presented 
at annual meeting of Canadian Association of Teachers of Technical 
Writing, Ottawa. 
Dasenbrock, Reed Way. 1987. “Intelligibility and meaningfulness in 
multicultural literature in English.” PMLA 102: 10–19. 
Datta, Saikat, and Prabal Roy Chowdhury. 1998. “Management union 
bargaining under minimum wage regulation in less developed coun­
tries.” Indian Economic Review 33 (2): 169–84. 
Daveri, Francesco, and Ricardo Faini. 1999. “Where do migrants go?” 
Oxford Economic Papers 51: 595–622. 
Delph-Janiurek, Tom. 1999. “Sounding gender(ed): vocal performance 
in English university teaching spaces.” Gender, Place and Culture 6 (2): 
137–51. 
della Paolera, Gerardo, and Alan M. Taylor. 1999. “Economic recovery 
from the Argentine Great Depression: Institutions, expectations, and 
the change of macroeconomic regime.” Journal of Economic History 59 
(3): 567–98. 
Dixon, John, and Kevin Durrheim. 2000. “Displacing place-identity: A 
discursive approach to locating self and other.” British Journal of Social 
Psychology 39: 27–44. 
Douglas, Mary. 1996. “The choice between gross and spiritual: Some 
medical preferences.” In Thought Styles. London: Sage. 
Dreses-Werringloer, Ute, Jean-Charles Lambert, Valérie Vingtdeux, 
Haitian Zhao, Horia Vais, Adam Siebert, Ankit Jain, Jeremy Koppel, 
Anne Rovelet-Lecrux, Didier Hannequin, Florence Pasquier, Daniela 
Galimberti, Elio Scarpini, David Mann, Corinne Lendon, Dominique 
Campion, Philippe Amouyel, Peter Davies, J. Kevin Foskett, Fabien 
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

314 
REFERENCES
Campagne, and Philippe Marambaud. 2008. “A polymorphism in 
CALHM1 influences Ca2+ homeostatis, Ab levels, and Alzheimer’s 
disease risk.” Cell 133 (7): 1149–61.
Early, Margaret, and Sondra Marshall. 2008. “Adolescent ESL students’ 
interpretation and appreciation of literary texts: A case study of multi­
modality.” Canadian Modern Language Review 64 (3): 377–97.
Eckes, Thomas. 1994. “Features of men, features of women: Assessing 
stereotypic beliefs about gender subtypes.” British Journal of Social 
Psychology 33: 107–23. 
Ellis, Mark, and Panikos Panayi. 1994. “German minorities in World 
War I: A comparative study of Britain and the U.S.A.” Ethnic and 
Racial Studies 17 (2): 238–59. 
Endler, Norman S., and Rachel L. Speer. 1998. “Personality psychology: 
Research trends for 1993–1995.” Journal of Personality 66 (5): 621–69. 
Englund, Mary. 1981. “An Indian remembers.” In Now You Are My 
Brother, ed. Margaret Whitehead. Victoria, BC: Provincial Archives. 
Evers, D. Elaine, Charles Sasser, James Gosselink, Deborah Fuller, and 
Jenneke Visser. 1998. “The impact of vertebrate herbivores on wetland 
vegetation in Atchafayala Bay, Louisiana.” Estuaries 21 (1): 1–13. 
Foot, David K., and Daniel Stoffman. 1996. Boom, Bust & Echo: How to 
Profit from the Coming Demographic Shift. Toronto: Macfarlane Walter 
& Ross. 
Freeman, Victoria. 2005. “Attitudes toward ‘miscegenation’ in Canada, 
the United States, New Zealand, and Australia, 1860–1914.” Native 
Studies Review 16 (1): 41–70. 
Gamoran, Adam. 1993. “Alternative uses of ability grouping in secondary 
schools: Can we bring high-quality instruction to low-ability classes?” 
American Journal of Education 102: 1–22. 
Geschwender, James A. 1992. “Ethgender, women’s waged labor, and 
economic mobility.” Social Problems 39 (1): 1–16. 
Giddens, Anthony. 1990. The Consequences of Modernity. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford UP. 
Giltrow, Janet. 2000. “‘Argument’ as a term in talk about student writ­
ing.” In Learning to Argue in Higher Education, ed. S. Mitchell and R. 
Andrews. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton Cook/Heinemann. 
Glenberg, Arthur M., Jennifer L. Schroeder, and David A. Robertson. 
1998. “Averting the gaze disengages the environment and facilitates 
remembering.” Memory and Cognition 26 (4): 651–58. 
Review Copy

REFERENCES 
315
Gotti, Maurizio, and Marina Dossena, eds. 2001. Modality in Specialized 
Texts: Selected Papers of the 1st Cerlus Conference. Bonn.
Gravina, Brad, Paul Mellars, and Christopher Mellars. 2005. “Radio­
carbon dating of interstratified Neanderthal and early modern 
human occupations at the Chatelperronian type-site.” Nature 438 
(3): 51–56.
Greening, Daniel W., and Barbara Gray. 1994. “Testing a model of 
organizational response to social and political issues.” Academy of 
Management Journal 37 (3): 467–98. 
Grossman, Herschel I. 1999. “Kleptocracy and revolutions.” Oxford Eco­
nomic Papers 51: 267–83. 
Halliday, M.A.K., and J.R. Martin. 1993. Writing Science: Literary and 
Discursive Power. Pittsburgh: U of Pittsburgh P. 
Hamilton, Gary G., and Nicole Woolsey Biggart. 1988. “Market, culture, 
and authority: A comparative analysis of management and organiza­
tion in the Far-East.” American Journal of Sociology 94: 552–94.
Hawkins, Ronnie Zoe. 2002. “Seeing ourselves as primates.” Ethics & the 
Environment 7 (2): 60–103. 
Helsen, Michiel M., Michiel R. van den Broeke, Roderik S.W. van de 
Wal, Willem Jan van de Berg, Erik van Meijgaard, Curt H. Davis, 
Yonghong Li, and Ian Goodwin. 2008. “Elevation changes in Ant­
arctica mainly determined by accumulation variability.” Science 320 
(5883): 1626–29.
Heyes, C.M. 1998. “Theory of mind in nonhuman primates.” Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences 21: 101–48. 
Higgs, Robert. 1999. “From central planning to the market: The Amer­
ican transition, 1945–1947.” Journal of Economic History 59: 600–23. 
Holden, Anthony. 2000. “Why Harry Potter doesn’t cast a spell over me.” 
The Guardian 25 June.
Hom, Alice Y., and Ming-Yuen S. Ma. 1993. “Premature gestures: A 
speculative dialogue on Asian Pacific lesbian and gay writing.” Journal 
of Homosexuality 26 (2/3): 21–31. 
Huntington, Henry, and the Communities of Buckland, Elim, Koyuk, 
Point Lay, and Shaktoolik. 1999. “Traditional knowledge of the ecol­
ogy of beluga whales (Delphinapterus leucas) in the Eastern Chukchi 
and Northern Bering Seas, Alaska.” Arctic 52 (1): 49–61. 
Hurwitz, Gregg. 2002. “A tempest, a birth and death: Freud, Jung, and 
Shakespeare’s Pericles.” Sexuality & Culture 6 (3): 3–73. 
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

316 
REFERENCES
Husbands, Christopher T. 1994. “Crisis of national identity as the ‘new 
moral panics’: Political agenda-setting about definitions of nation­
hood.” New Community 20 (2): 191–206. 
Hyland, Ken. 1999. “Academic attribution: Citation and the construc­
tion of disciplinary knowledge.” Applied Linguistics 20 (3): 341–67. 
Jackson, Sue. 2002. “To Be Or Not To Be? The place of women’s studies 
in the lives of its students.” Journal of Gender Studies 9 (2): 189–97. 
Kabeer, Naila. 1994. “The structure of ‘revealed’ preference: Race, com­
munity and female labour supply in the London clothing industry.” 
Development and Change 25: 307–31. 
Kelm, Mary-Ellen. 1999. “British Columbia First Nations and the influ­
enza pandemic of 1918–19.” BC Studies 122 (Summer): 23–47. 
Kerwin, Scott. 1999. “The Janet Smith Bill of 1924 and the language of 
race and nation in British Columbia.” BC Studies 121: 83–114. 
Khalid, Adeeb. 1994. “Printing, publishing, and reform in Tsarist Cen­
tral Asia.” International Journal of Middle East Studies 26: 187–200. 
Killingray, David. 1994. “The ‘rod of empire’: The debate over corporal 
punishment in the British African colonial forces, 1888–1946.” Jour­
nal of African History 35: 210–16. 
Kolodny, Annette. 1994. “Inventing a feminist discourse: Rhetoric and 
resistance in Margaret Fuller’s Woman in the Nineteenth Century.” New 
Literary History 25 (2): 355–82. 
LaFollette, Hugh. 2000. “Gun control.” Ethics 110: 263–81. 
Lane, D.E., and R.L. Stephenson. 1998. “A framework for risk analysis in 
fisheries decision-making.” ICES Journal of Marine Science 55: 1–13. 
Lee, Thomas W., and Terence R. Mitchell. 1994. “An alternative approach: 
The un-folding model of voluntary employee turnover.” Academy of 
Management Journal 19 (1): 51–89. 
Lesure, Richard. 1999. “Figurines as representations and products at 
Paso de la Amada, Mexico.” Cambridge Archaeological Journal 9 (2): 
209–20. 
Lin, Chia-Chin. 2000. “Applying the American Pain Society’s QA stan­
dards to evaluate the quality of pain management among surgical, 
oncology, and hospice inpatients in Taiwan.” Pain 87: 43–49. 
Lu, Min-Zhan. 1992. “Conflict and struggle: The enemies or precondi­
tions of basic writing?” College English (December): 891–913. 
Lupton, Deborah, and John Tulloch. 1999. “Theorizing fear of crime: 
Beyond the rational/irrational oppositions.” British Journal of Sociology 
50 (3): 507–23. 
Review Copy

REFERENCES 
317
MacDonald, Susan Peck. 1994. Professional Academic Writing in the 
Humanities and Social Sciences. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP. 
Masson, Michael E.J., and Mary Anne Waldron. 1994. “Comprehen­
sion of legal contracts by non-experts: Effectiveness of plain language 
redrafting.” Applied Cognitive Psychology 8: 67–85. 
Mayes, Patricia. 1990. “Quotation in spoken English.” Studies in Lan­
guage 14 (2): 325–63. 
McGuire, John. 1998. “Judicial violence and the ‘civilizing process’: Race 
and transition from public to private executions in Colonial Australia.” 
Australian Historical Studies 111: 187–209. 
Middleton, Joyce Irene. 1993. “Orality, literacy, and memory in Toni 
Morrison’s Song of Solomon.” College English 55 (1): 64–65.
Milgram, Stanley. 1963. “Behavioural study of obedience.” Journal of 
Abnormal and Social Psychology. 67 (4): 371–78.
Milroy, James, and Lesley Milroy. 1991 [1985]. Authority in Language: 
Investigating Language Prescription and Standardisation, 2nd ed. Lon­
don: Routledge. 
Mistry, Rohinton. 1995. “Prologue: 1975.” A Fine Balance. Toronto: 
McClelland & Stewart. 
Morwood, M.J., T. Sutikna, E.W. Saptomo, K.E. Westaway, Jatmiko, 
R. Awe Due, M.W. Moore, Dwi Yani Yuniawati, P. Hadi, J.-x. Zhao, 
C.S.M. Turney, K. Fifield, H. Allen, and R.P. Soejono. 2008. “Cli­
mate, people and faunal succession on Java, Indonesia: Evidence from 
Song Gupuh.” Journal of Archaeological Science 35: 1776–89.
Muir, Angela. “Kosovo.” In The Oxford Companion to Wine, ed. Jancis 
Robinson. Oxford: Oxford UP. 
Murphy, Rex. 2000, April 23. Cross-Country Check-up, CBC Radio. 
Myers, Greg. 1999. “Functions of reported speech in group discussions.” 
Applied Linguistics 20 (5): 376–401. 
Nash, June. 1994. “Global integration and subsistence insecurity.” Amer­
ican Anthropologist 96 (1): 7–30. 
Neiman, Paul J., F. Martin  Ralph, M.A.  Shapiro, B.F.  Smull, and 
D.  Johnson. 1998. “An observational study of fronts and frontal 
mergers over the Continental United States.” Monthly Weather Review 
126: 2521–52. 
Nemutanzhela, Thiathu J. 1993. “Cultural forms and literacy as resour­
ces for political mobilisation: A.M. Malivha and the Zoutpansberg 
Balemi Association.” African Studies 52 (1): 89–102. 
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

318 
REFERENCES
O’Connor, Denis. 1987. “Glue sniffers with special needs.” British Jour­
nal of Education 14 (3): 94–97. 
Olick, Jeffrey K. 1999. “Genre memories and memory genres: A dialogical 
analysis of May 8, 1945 commemorations in the Federal Republic of 
Germany.” American Sociological Review 64: 381–402. 
Oliver, Pamela E., and Daniel J. Myers. 1999. “How events enter the 
public sphere.” American Journal of Sociology 105 (1): 38–67. 
Perrault, Charles. 1969. “Little Thumb.” In The Blue Fairy Book, ed. 
Andrew Lang. New York: Airmont. 
Pratt, John. 1999. “Norbert Elias and the civilized prison.” British Journal 
of Sociology 50 (2): 271–96. 
Prestwich, Patricia E. 1994. “Family strategies and medical power: ‘Vol­
untary’ committal in a Parisian asylum, 1876–1914.” Journal of Social 
History 27 (4): 799–818.
Pringle, Heather. 1988. “Boneyard enigma.” Equinox May–June: 87–104.
Quillian, Lincoln. 1999. “Migration patterns and the growth of high-
poverty neighborhoods, 1970–1990.” American Journal of Sociology 
105 (1): 1–37. 
Quintero, Gilbert A., and Antonio L. Estrada. 1998. “Cultural models of 
masculinity and drug use: ‘Machismo,’ heroin, and street survival on 
the U.S.-Mexican border.” Contemporary Drug Problems 25: 147–65. 
Raasch, S., and D. Etling. 1998. “Modeling deep ocean convection: 
Large eddy simulation in comparison with laboratory experiments.” 
American Meteorological Society 21: 1786–802. 
Rafter, Nicole H. 1992. “Claims-making and socio-cultural context in 
the first U.S. eugenics campaign.” Social Problems 39 (1): 17. 
Rauch-Elnekave, Helen. 1994. “Teenage motherhood: Its relationship to 
undetected learning problems.” Adolescence 29: 91–103. 
Reiger, Kerreen M. 1989. “‘Clean and comfortable and respectable’: 
Working-class aspirations and the Australian 1920 Royal Commission 
on the Basic Wage.” History Workshop 27: 86–105.
Sawicki, Gregory S., and Mont Hubbard. 2003. “How to hit home runs: 
Optimum baseball bat swing parameters for maximum range trajec­
tories.” American Journal of Physics 71 (11): 1152–62.
Schnabel, Jim. 1994. “Puck in the laboratory: The construction and 
deconstruction of hoaxlike deception in science.” Science, Technology, 
& Human Values 19 (4): 459–92. 
Schriver, Karen. 1994 [1992]. “What document designers can learn from 
usability testing.” Technostyle 19 (3/4). 
Review Copy

REFERENCES 
319
Scott, Rebecca J. 1994. “Defining the boundaries of freedom in the world 
of cane: Cuba, Brazil, and Louisiana after emancipation.” American 
Historical Review (February): 70–102. 
Seymour, Susanne. 1994. “Gender, church and people in rural areas.” 
Area 26 (1): 45–56. 
Sheldon, Amy. 1990. “Pickle fights: Gendered talk in preschool disputes.” 
Discourse Processes 13: 5–31. 
Shieffelin, Bambi B., and Rachelle Charlier Doucet. 1994. “The ‘real’ 
Haitian creole: Ideology, metalinguistics, and orthographic choice.” 
American Ethnologist 21(1): 176–200. 
Shimizu, K., K. Suhara, M. Ikumo, M. Eremets, and K. Amaya. 1998. 
“Superconductivity in Oxygen.” Nature 393: 767–69.
Smith, Thomas S., and Gregory T. Stevens. 1999. “The architecture of 
small networks: Strong interaction and dynamic organization in small 
social systems.” American Sociological Review 64: 403–20. 
South, Scott J., and Kyle D. Crowder. 1999. “Neighborhood effects 
on family formation: Concentrated poverty and beyond.” American 
Sociological Review 64: 113–32. 
Speck, Dara Culhane. 1987. An Error in Judgement: The Politics of Med­
ical Care in an Indian/White Community. Vancouver, BC: Talonbooks. 
Sperber, Dan, and Deirdre Wilson. 1986. Relevance: Communication and 
Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP. 
Stockton, S. 1995. “Writing in history: Narrating the subject of time.” 
Written Communication 12 (1): 47–73. 
Stratman, James F. 1994. “Investigating persuasive processes in legal dis­
course in real time: Cognitive biases and rhetorical strategy in appeal 
court briefs.” Discourse Processes 17: 1–57. 
Swales, John. 1990. Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Set­
tings. Cambridge: Cambridge UP. 
Tannen, Deborah. 1990. You Just Don’t Understand: Women and Men in 
Conversation. New York: Ballantine Books. 
Tiratsoo, Nick, and Jim Tomlinson. 1994. “Restrictive practices on the 
shopfloor in Britain, 1946–60: Myth and reality.” Business History 36 
(2): 65–84. 
Todaro, Michael P. 1997. Economic Development. New York: Longman. 
Tuffin, Keith, and Jo Danks. 1999. “Community care and mental dis­
order: An analysis of discursive resources.” British Journal of Social 
Psychology 38: 289–302.
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

320 
REFERENCES
Valentine, Gill, and Sarah Holloway. 2001. “On-line dangers?: Geog­
raphies of parents’ fears for children’s safety in cyberspace.” Professional 
Geographer 53 (1): 71–83. 
Verkuyten, Maykel, Wiebe de Jong, and Kees Masson. 1994. “Similar­
ities in anti-racist and racist discourse: Dutch local residents talking 
about ethnic minorities.” New Community 20 (2): 253–67. 
Waern, Yvonne. 1988. “Thoughts on texts in context: Applying the 
think-aloud method to text processing.” Text 8 (4): 317–50. 
Wassink, Alicia Beckford. 1999. “Historic low prestige and seeds of 
change: Attitudes toward Jamaican Creole.” Language in Society 28: 
57–92. 
Wearne, Phillip. 1996. Return of the Indian: Conquest and Revival in the 
Americas. London: Cassell. 
Weinberger, Daniel A. 1998. “Defenses, personality structure and 
development: Integrating psychodynamic theory into a typological 
approach to personality.” Journal of Personality 66 (6): 1061–77. 
Wenzel, George W. 1999. “Traditional ecological knowledge and Inuit: 
Reflections on TEK research and ethics.” Arctic 52 (2): 113–24. 
Willott, Sara, and Chris Griffin. 1999. “Building your own lifeboat: 
Working-class male offenders talk about economic class.” British Jour­
nal of Social Psychology 38: 445–60.
Womack, Peter. 1999. “Shakespeare and the sea of stories.” Journal of 
Medieval & Early Modern Studies 29 (1): 169–88 
Wong, Siu Kwong. 1999. “Acculturation, peer relations, and delinquent 
behavior of Chinese-Canadian youth.” Adolescence 34 (133): 107–19.
Zervakis, Jennifer, and David C. Rubin. 1998. “Memory and learning 
for a novel written style.” Memory and Cognition 26 (4): 754–67. 
Zwick, Michael B., Paul W.H.I. Parren, Erica O. Saphire, Sarah Church, 
Meng Wang, Jamie K. Scott, Philip E. Dawson, Ian A. Wilson, and 
Dennis R. Burton. 2003. “Molecular features of the broadly neutral­
izing immunoglobulin G1 b12 required for recognition of human 
immunodeficiency virus type 1 gp120.” Journal of Virology 77 (10): 
5863–76.
Review Copy

321
Index
abstract, 222
abstractions
appositions, 137–41
classification, 150–53
in conclusions, 278, 280
definition, 148–55
detail, 65, 67, 159
in different disciplines, 
148–55, 160
generalizations, 64, 203
high-level passages, 
87–91, 92
in literary study, 149
low-level passages, 92–94
in marking commentary, 
20
in narrative, 97–98
nominalizations, 190–94
prestige abstractions, 148
recording levels, 62–63
and relevance, 162
social profile and role of, 
148–55
See also generality, 
generalizations
academic textbooks, 
124–26
agentless expressions, 187, 
200–01, 215–16, 239, 
259
ambiguity, 185–89
anticipatory-it, 203
appositions, appositives, 
137–41
See also definition
argument, 19, 195–97
assertion, 205–08
audience, 13–37
authority, 54
See also citation
Big Issues, 280
calls to action, 281–82, 
292
cause, 190
citation, 39–56
and authority, 52–56
in conversation, 45–49
in different disciplines, 
40–45
direct-speech citation, 
246
and the Internet, 129
introductions, 254–57
literary criticism, 43–44
news genres, 47, 49–51
See also reported speech
clarity, 183
classification, 150–53, 190
class interests, 287–88
cleft sentence, cleft 
construction, 202–03
cognitive responses, 
164–73
coherence, 189–94
commentary on student 
writing, 18–21
common knowledge, 
254–56
common sense vs. 
uncommon sense, 
175–78
complaint tradition, 17–19
complexity, 178
conceptual summary, 
97–98
conclusions, 277–94
abstractions in, 278
knowledge deficit, 
278–80
modality in, 278–79
moral statements, 280–
82, 290–94
context of understanding, 
162
conversation
citation in, 45–49
scholarly conversations, 
58–59, 245–50, 257
writing as, 103–11
See also reported speech
cultural situation, 1, 4–8, 
139
definite expressions, 206
definition, 135–55
appositions, 137–41
defined, 135
dictionaries, 136–37
doubling, 139, 140
formal definition, 
142–43
sustained definition, 
142–48
use of abstractions, 
148–55
details
and abstractions, 65, 67, 
159
and recording levels, 62
and writing summaries, 
65
dictionaries, 136–37
direct speech, 246
See also reported speech
disciplines, academic
citation in, 40–45
connections with the 
world, 282
moral compass of, 
286–94
roles of abstractions, 
148–55, 160
writing styles in, 8–9
discourse action, 199
discourse communities, 
154, 179, 205
discursive I, 197–200, 
201–04, 272
documentation, 264–70
domination, symbolic, 16
e.g., 194
emphasis, 83–84, 200–05
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

322 
INDEX
encyclopedias, 161–62
end-weight principle, 203
essay. See schoolroom essay
ethics, 286-89
ethics committees, 286
See also research
evidence, 19–20
experts, 78–86
failed-then-revised-
hypothesis, 182-84
feminist reasoning, 223–25
forecasts, 200–05
form, 5
formal definition, 142–43. 
See definition
gender interests, 286–88
generality, generalizations
high-level passages, 
87–91
and introductions, 
254–57
levels of, 63–71, 81–83
limiting expressions, 
234–38
low-level passages, 91–95
and marking statements, 
235–36
secured generalization, 
255
tree diagram, 63
See also abstractions
genre
academic textbooks, 
124–26
and audience, 14
genre-specific 
expectations, 20
genre theory, 6–7, 157–
63, 179–80, 264
genre violations, 176
identification of, 121–33
introduction to, 1–11
literary criticism, 43–44
news genres, 49–51
nominalization, 190–94
popular writing, 126–29
relevance theory, 161–62
research genre, 10–11, 
20, 124–26, 230–42
gist, 26, 59–61, 63–71
grammar, 26–27, 190, 
202, 230–31
high-level passages, 87–91, 
92
high school writing. See 
schoolroom essay
history, 42–43, 151
hypothesis, 272
I
discursive, 272
knowledge-making, 
229–30
methodological, 216
uses of, 197–200, 
201–04
i.e., 194
imprint, 4
indeterminacy, 232, 233
indirect speech, 258
See also reported speech
informed consent, 286–87
inquiry, tradition of, 255
integration, 190
Internet, 129
introductions, 253–76
citation, 254–57
documentation, 264–70
generalization, 254–57
knowledge deficit, 270–
74, 274–76
reported speech, 257–64
state of knowledge, 
270–74
it-extraposition, 203
knowledge
common knowledge, 
254–56
knowledge deficit, 
54, 209, 270–74, 
278–80
knowledge domain, 260
knowledge-making I, 
229–30
knowledge-making 
verbs, 260
making and maintaining, 
209–51
mutual knowledge, 14
sociality of, 149
state of, 53, 206–07, 
270–74
status of, 234–42
See also research
language
attitudes toward, 16–18
genre theory and, 
179–80
and situation, 5
unitary views of, 18–19
word usage, 136–37, 
145
levels of generality, 81–83
See also generality, 
generalizations
limiting expressions, 
234–38
listeners’ centre of 
attention, 14
literacy, 17
low-level passages, 91–95
See also abstractions
management device, 
165–72
mental desktop, 164–73
messages about the 
argument, 195-204
method
methodological I, 216
method sections, 215–21
qualitative method, 
213–14, 221–28
quantitative method, 
212–13, 214
See also research
modality, modal 
expressions, modalize, 
230–34, 272–73, 
278–79, 291
modals of moral 
obligation, 291-94
Review Copy

INDEX 
323
moral compass of the 
	
disciplines, 277, 286-94
moral statements, 280–82, 
290–94
mutual knowledge, 14
narratives, summarizing, 
95–102
neutrality, 290, 291
news genres, 49–51
nominal style
ambiguity, 185–89
nominalizations, 190
and reported speech, 258
syntactic density, 180–85
non-experts, 78–86
noun phrases, 180–84, 
185–89
objectivity, 211–16, 224
obligation, 280–81, 
290–93
obviousness, 205, 238–42
“of course,” 240–42
online research journals, 
129–30
opinion, 197–200
orchestration
of non-scholarly voices, 
121–33
obviousness markers, 241
of scholarly voices, 
111–21
use of, 103, 106–08
and voices, 104
page-to-page dialogue, 
111–13
passive voice, 201
See also agentless 
expressions
perception, 255–56
plain language, 176–78
plot summary, 98–99
popular literature, 17, 
126–29, 209
position, positioning
and citation, 47–48, 
52–55
and documentation, 264
on knowledge map, 271
of limited knowledge, 
230–34, 230–43
and orchestration of 
voices, 105–07
and readers, 124, 135, 
138, 184
reported speech, 257–
64, 270
of students, 10, 14–15
subject position, 221–28
and summary, 39, 65–
67, 71–79, 90–92
and think-aloud 
protocol, 36, 158–59
in world, 6–7, 210–11, 
255
of writer, 65–67
post-colonial reasoning, 
225
prestige abstractions, 148
See also abstractions
presupposition, 205–08
qualitative method, 213–
14, 221–28
quantitative method, 
212–13, 214
readers and reading
and academic textbooks, 
124
attitudes toward 
language, 16–18
audience, 13–37
on behalf of others, 
34–36
clarity and, 183
cognitive responses of, 
164–73
and conclusions, 278
gist of, 26
guidelines for, 25–26
and noun phrases, 
181–83
reading comprehension, 
21
reliability of, 36
social responses of, 
157–64
recording levels, 62–63
relevance theory, 161–62
reported speech
direct speech, 246
and indeterminancy, 233
indirect speech, 258
and introductions, 
257–64
and knowledge deficit, 
271
and nominalization, 
258–59
and positioning, 270
See also citation; 
position, positioning; 
summary
reporting expressions, 
reporting expressions, 
42, 71, 237–38
reporting reporting, 
77–78
reporting verbs, 244–50, 
260–61
tense in, 249
research
ethics, 286–89
informed consent, 
286–87
and language, 178–79
method sections, 215–21
moral obligation of, 
291–92
qualitative method, 
213–14, 221–28
quantitative method, 
212–13, 214
research genres, 10–11, 
20, 124–26, 230–42
research questions, 99, 
104, 249, 272
scholarly research, 212–13
subjects, 287
and tense, 244–51
See also knowledge
scholarly conversations, 
58–59, 103
Review Copy
www.ebook3000.com

324 
INDEX
scholarly language, 
178–80
See also scholarly styles
scholarly styles, 175–208
argument, 195–97
the discursive I, 197–200
and elitism, 178–80
forecasts and emphasis, 
200–05
and general public, 
175–78
nominal style, 180–85, 
185–89
presupposing vs. 
asserting, 205–08
sentence style, 189–94
schoolroom essay, 8–9, 10, 
253–54, 277, 278
sciences, 150–51, 212
secured generalization, 255
self-reference, 195–97, 280
sentences
cleft form of, 202–03
end-weight principle, 
203
sentence style, 189–94
situation, 4–5, 157
sociality of knowledge, 
149
social responses, 13-20, 
158-60, 240
social sciences, 149–50, 
212
speakers, 103–11, 111–21
specifics, 20
statements, limits of, 73
state of knowledge, 
53, 206–07, 
270–74
student writing
commentary on, 18–21
complaint tradition, 
17–18, 18–19
disciplinary differences, 
8–9
knowledge deficit, 
274–76
and research genres, 
10–11
think-aloud protocol, 
13, 34–37
See also schoolroom essay
subjectivity, 224
subject position, 221–28
summary, 57–86
challenges for, 87–102
and citation, 39–56, 
57–58
conceptual, 97–98
experts and non-experts, 
78–86
high-level passages, 
87–91
importance of, 39
low-level passages, 91–95
of narratives, 95–102
position of, 71–77, 90
and reporting reporting, 
77–78
and scholarly 
conversations, 58–59
See also reported speech
sustained definition, 
142–48
symbolic domination, 16
syntactic density, 180–85
taxonomy, 190
tense, 244–51
present perfect, 246–47, 
248
present progressive, 246
simple past, 245, 247–
48, 249, 280
simple present, 142, 
244–46, 249–50
textbooks, 124–26
textual coherence, 189–94
think-aloud protocol, 
21–33
and genre theory, 
157–63
and other readers, 34–36
and position, 36, 
158–59
and student writing, 13
subject knowledge, 36
tradition of inquiry, 255
tree diagram, 63
See also generality, 
generalizations
typified group, 259–60
See also agentless 
expressions
uncertainty, 232, 233
uncommon sense (vs. 
common sense), 
175–78
undergraduate writing. See 
student writing
understanding, context 
of, 162
unitary views of language, 
18–19
See also language
usability testing, 22
voices, 1–4, 103–33
orchestrating non-
scholarly voices, 
121–33
orchestrating scholarly 
voices, 111–21
writing as conversation, 
103–11
writing instruction. See 
student writing
Review Copy

