
,ttt9DPt
)IttPPP99P9
l*,29D99
la.2P
?
| :?)22
?
la?D?
Advanced Govert Hypnosis
The Mind Bending LanguageSystem
How To Influence Other People With The Way
You Behave And The Things You Do And Say
@ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishine. All rights reserved.

Table of Contents
Advanced Covert Hypnosis 
..... 1
The Mind Bending Language System 
............... 1
How To lnfluence Other People With The Way You Behave And The Things You Do And Say.. 1
DVD 1 
........ 5
Introduction......... 
........... 5
What Kinds of Things Can We lnfluence?............. 
....... 5
DVD 2 
...... 10
What Has To Occur to Make Mind-Bending Language Work? 
................ 10
The Simple sySTEM 
....... 11
The Simple sySTEM Plus 'NOT 
.... L4
DVD 3 
...... 16
Mind Bending Language and Confusion 
..... 16
Doubling or Tripling the Effect of Mind-Bending Language 
..... L9
Down the Rabbit Hole 
.................20
DVD 4.... 
.................2L
The Fundamental Formula for Doing Hypnosis A8S........ 
.............21
DVD 5 
......29
Creating Context And The Hypnotic Gaze 
.................29
The Outer Edge of lnner Space..... 
.............. 31
DVD 6 
...... 35
Neuroplasticity and Changing Your Brain...... 
............ 35
sySTEMs Language 
........ 35
Using Hypnosis to Handle Sales Objections ............ 
................. 40
2
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
UlcccccccccccccCCCCCCCC
erCCCCelCCCCCCCCCCelCCCC

)3333333333I333aaaaaaaaaaaaaattttatttt
,22
,?
DVD 7 
......42
Targeting Specific Resources, Skills and Abilities ........ 
.............42
Making the Hypnotic Process More Freestyle 
...........44
Predicates............. 
........ 47
The sySTEM Predicates...... 
..........48
DVD 8.... 
................. 51
Power Words for Mind Bending Language 
................ 51
How To Be More lnfluential and Persuasive ln Your 1ife........ 
................ 56
DVD 9 
...... 58
Reframing............ 
......... 58
DVD 10.. 
................. 64
PCAT...... 
.........64
DVD 11 
....67
DVD 12 
.... 68
lgo/s Short Review Of The Past Two Days 
................ 68
Power Loops 
.................70
Changing The End Point...... 
.........72
Making A Decision............ 
...........73
How To Stick Something Together And Make lt More Rea|....... 
.............73
How To Separate and lntegrate Experiences Using Predicates ............ 
.................74
DVD 13 
....78
Sales And The Covert Hypnotherapy Process 
...........78
PCAT Sales Process 
.......79
DVD 14.. 
................. 92
Therapy and the PCAT Formula 
...92
3
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfieet Hlpnosis Publishing

lgor's Closing Comments........... 
............... 106
Advanced Covert Hypnosis Appendix 
............... 109
Exercises
Green Chickens are Best. 
......6
The Simple syStem 
....11
Navigating Through Time.... 
.....L7
Writing Versions of Words About the Five Senses.... 
...........23
Awareness Spins and Resources or Direction.......... 
..............32
Cross Spins on Resources......... 
................42
Using Predicates to Create Spin.... 
...........50
Asking sySTEM Questions Using Predicates.............. 
.............51
Using Space and Time Predicates.............. 
..............52
Using Energy Predicates.............. 
.............53
Using Matter Predicates.............. 
.............54
Using Spin to Give People Greater Perspective............ 
.......51
Handling Objections Using a Bigger Picture.... 
.......53
How to Explore Someone's Thinking......... 
.............55
Using PCAT in Sales and Therapy.......... 
..................76
'My Friend John'Technique.............. 
.....105
4
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaai.aIf
DvD {
lntroduction
This is a covert hypnosis seminar which will be taught overtly. What we'll be
covering here is the idea of covert direct hypnosis, so we have the speed and
power of direct hypnosis but we have the smoothness of a covert approach.
The secret to mind-bending language is to think like someone who's on drugs,
and your language just follows naturally. lt's all about influence. We don't want
to scare people off by literally acting like we're on drugs, but to create a
comfortable, trusting space for them to change.
Wlrat Kinds of Things Gan We lnfluence?
7.. We can influence how people think.
2. We can influence how they feel.
3. We can influence how they behave
4. We can influence what they do involuntarily, like
dreaming, their physiology, biology etc.
These are different levels of influence that hypnotists have. We have to stimulate
the five senses as a way of getting a message across which will end up influencing
someone.
Our sixth sense is awareness. lt takes awareness to make sense of the other five
senses. What we're here to do is influence people's awareness in order to
influence the way they think, feel and behave. We can use mind-bending
language and mind-bending activities to accomplish this.
Force vs. lnfluenoe
. ln trying to persuade, all we're doing is forcing our opinion on someone.
. Telling someone they're wrong is force, not influence.
5
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

DGROSE - GREEN CHICilGNSi ARE T}IE BEST:
1. Partner #L; tell your partner that all chickens should be green. Partner #2
tells them "No, because you know red chickens are best, and they're
wrong", then sit back, cross your arms and say "See, ltold you".Then
reverse. Notice what that feels like to tell someone they're wrong, and
what it feels like when someone tells you you're wrong.
Force = You're wrong, buddy!
Partner #L, you know all chickens should be red, but for the sake of
harmony, sit and nod politely and go "Yes, lagree all chickens should be
green" and notice how that inner conflict works for you. Then switch
partners. When you ignore what you actually believe and agree for the
sake of it, do you enjoy that? Are you being particularly influential? Does
force work particularly well?
Surrender = You're so right! I'll agree to
whatever you want!
Partner #L, take a little bit of both and mix them together. For example, if
someone says all chickens are green and you smile politely and say "You
are so right; there are so many ways of looking at chickens beyond color".
Notice how that's very different than saying "you know, there are so many
different ways of looking at chickens beyond color".
Do you feel the difference? Switch. What's happening is we're allowing
part of the message to settle in, so we're mollifying the beast inside and
then, as they feel 'yeah, this is good', you add a little bit more and they go
"Oh, l'm curious", then you reverse it. lt's called an agreement reversal.
You're agreeing with them just enough for their mind to open, for you to
change the position on them.
6
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
EEaa
!
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-a
-
=JeJJee
j
!!
2.
3.

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
-
-)
)
)
)aaaaaaaLI.
Iob
ftO
IrOf'f
!O!ff.
Does it always work? No. But the principle is what we're working on right
now. Play with different types of timing. Sometimes race all the way
through and see how it works. Sometimes pause for your own sake and
see how that works. Other times pause, and wait for them to settle down
with each idea and then add the next piece so that just when they think
you're coming to a stop, ooh, here comes the next piece, just before you
lose momentum.
Agreement Reversal = You're so right...
that... there's even more things than
that !
Igor's Comments
Completing this exercise, would it be fair to say that your ability to influence
people has increased slightly, and that getting some form of agreement is going
to be a useful part of the influencing process? When you agree with someone to
a certain extent, that whole influencing process starts taking place more naturally
and smoothly. lt's not about pure agreement, agreeing with everything they s€tv,
because there's no influencing going on, other than on you.
4. Next let's do what I call the 'explorers gambit', something we don't really
do. Most people do this by an indirect application of force. Partner #L says
to partner #2 "1 think all chickens should be green". This time, partner #2
asks "Sir/miss, l'm curious, what makes you say that"?
You have to explore a little about the mindset, so make up whatever
answeryou want, but it has to have some sort of logic. For example, "l had
a bunch of tasty green chickens recently, and that leads me to believe all
chickens should be green." lt's not about the color is it? lt's about the
taste, but they're telling you about color and what they're really
concerned about is taste.
This is how most problems occur. People will give you a conclusion rather
than what they really want or need, then you go off and paint all the red
chickens green and they go'no, these are not good enough'because they
don't taste the same. Practice this going back and forth from the friendly
7
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

explorer to the abusive explorer, let some anger come out and see how
that feels.
The Explorer's Gambit = What makes you
say that? (NB: Avoid Negative Tonalityll
lgor's Comments
Did you notice the difference when your attitude comes into what you're doing?
You might get some interesting information just with the explorer's gambit.
Would it be fair to say that if you are respectful vs. more aggressive or blaming
that's going to increase your ability to influence others? The mind opens up
instead of closing down. You want the person you're working with to feel
amazing, and you feel great and you both get what you want.
Being very precise about being respectful rather than letting some hint of blame,
aggression or attack come into your work is very important. The starting point
with anyone will always be where they are, rather than where you want them to
be.
5. The next exercise will be what I like to call 'the exaggerated openingl. ln
essence, you're going to misunderstand what someone says to such an
extreme it just becomes ridiculous. One of two things will happen:
a) The ridiculousness will taint the position they're taking so they can't
quite stick to the whole green chicken thing, or
b) They'll actually have to give you more information, things they
wouldn't normally tell you because you basically goaded them into
giving you more. We must find a 'hot topic' because if they don't care
about it, then this opening won't work. Let's say you really cared about
chickens and their color, in particular the green chickens because they
are delicious. So you tell me how delicious they are and I turn around
and go
"You know what, the whole world should be green and we should shoot
people that have anything other than green on"!
I
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
J.l.l.ld.lIIrl
OI.'f
OI.l
CIdIeic
-
-!
!3
!
!
!t;r!ItIt!tIt
;
;
;
;
;
;
;!!
;

ttttttttttttIItIIIIt
)2P9999999999999PP22?2?
Notice what happens. lf you really believe in this whole green chicken idea, what
do you feel like doing? You change to the position that only some chickens need
to be green, or some foods, and what that does is force you to go back the other
way.
Where the momentum goes this way, rather than that, you can start riding it
further forwards. Therefore, rather than saying all chickens are green now, you
might say it's enough that some chickens are green, so you've moved their idea a
little bit by going way too far one way.
By trying to rein you in and make you more moderate, they're opening the door
for a more moderate opinion for themselves, which gives you the first step
toward influence.
Play with this, each partner taking turns, and do your best to respond genuinely.
This is something really important to you. When someone goes way over the top,
put them in their place and say "No, ldon't really understand", and see what
comes of it, and what positions start developing.
The Exaggerated Opening = All food should be
green... in fact everything should be green.
lgor's Comments
It's much easier to change someone's position rather than attacking it. What
we're using is called'the contrast principle'. When you contrast green chickens
to red, there might be a fight. But when you contrast green chickens to this
ridiculous world where anything that's not green gets shot...its'like'hang on a
second, that's a little extreme, l'm not the green chicken Nazi'!
6. Now let's do an exercise where we start playing with the language a little
bit, just so that it sounds like you're agreeing without actually agreeing.
For example, someone tells you "All chickens should be green". You say
"You really think all chickens should be green, don't you? You really think
that, all chickens should be green". Notice how, if you believeit, it's
validating because he's heard what I have to sEy, and if you attach
9
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. O 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

something onto it then you can begin to open up an opportunity for
ch a nge.
Take it further "so you really think all chickens should be green, tell me,
what makes you say that"? See how that begins to combine some of the
principles we've been working with, the respect, agreement, consistency,
but we start combining them a little bit to create an opening.
Practice this with each other taking it this additional step. The challenge is
that all chickens should be green, and one partner comes back with the
response we just discussed. Can you feel a sense that something is
opening up inside your mind?
This is important. This is what we're looking for. We want to create that
opportunity inside people's minds to just consider another way of being,
and that's where the mind-bending language plugs in.
The Echo Explor€r = You think X...
how do you figure that?
CCCCCCCCCCCCCCC
qF
erGGGCCCC
€
€eeeeeeeeeeeeee
€eC
DVD2
Wrat Has To Occur to Make Mind-Bending Language Wod€
Mind-bending language as a sequence works to create a special kind of covert
trance, but only when you create the context, the space in the mind in which
they can sit. To do this:
1. The shields have to come down.
2. They have to actually take your ideas seriously enough to consider them.
3. lf you want to change someone's mind, you've got to change their mood
first. A shift in mood allows the mind to follow. The mood has to be
accepting, open to ideas.
{o
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

3aa33a3ItIt3333333
)aa333
)
)
)3
)33
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
4. The hypnotist must have an intense desire for the other person to
experience trance, coupled with an intense desire for them to have a very
positive experience.
The Simple SIETEM
The Simple SySTEM
Who are you?
Where are you?
When are you?
How are you?
What are you?
The Flve Magic Questions
L. Who?
2. Where?
3. When?
4. How?
5. What?
EXERCF|ES - TTIE SII'IPLE SYSTEM
1. lf I said to you, "Who are you?" and you gave me your name, l'd say, "l
know your name, what I want to know is 'who are you"'?
Do you see what's happening here? Can you sense it, a little bit of
pressure? Your mind is kind of spinning into a loose gear, shall we say, and
you're not quite sure how to answer that yet.
o Partner #t, I want you to ask these five questions, the first time round,
very quickly, so you get a sense of what their usual answers are. lt will
take you 30 seconds. Then reverse.
11
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

Once you've asked in the normal wdy, start sounding like you're the
guru with your big yellow sash, shaved head, you've got funny marks
on your head, and you're really interested in something other than
their trivial answers. ln other words, if they answer off the top of their
head, make them pay attention and answer in a different way.
When you're the subject, your job is to try and answer the question the
best you can. However, you might not be able to. You may have an
experience that you can't put into words. You may find your mental
wheels spinning for a while. lt doesn't matter. lt's the act of trying to
answer the question that matters. The kind of trying we're talking
about here is the one that actually makes your brain do something,
hence it will alter what's happening inside your brain.
o lwant you to ask these questions blandly, and get a bland response.
Then lwant you to use your H+, really look at them meaningfully, use
your tonality, like this is the most important question in the world. You
might even repeat it a few times. Who are you? Who are you really?
Do you see what l'm doing? lf someone gives me a bland answer, when
l'm actually asking a'deeper'question, or a question that's designed to get
them to consider it more deeply, I acknowledge it, and then l'll say I want
another answer that's not this. So where does that send them? lt sends
them anywhere but what they know, that's where we need them to be. So
just play with this, five or six minutes apiece.
lgor's Comments
There really isn't a right answer. lt's exactly the point where they stop being able
to answer your question that you know you're hitting some interesting territory.
Did anyone have a sensation where your mind just went blank, but it was kind of
like you felt stuff happening? You felt stuff happening, but you had no idea what
it was. Your mind is trying to figure out what you're sensing on these boundaries
because there's no language attached to it. We make meaning through language.
l'll give you a 10 second version of this. ln order for you to know this is a chair,
you have to be able to label it and you have to be able to limit it to say all the
12
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

things that it's not. lt's not a couch, it's not a bed, its'not part of the carpet. So by
elevating it in terms of purpose by putting a label on it, you're actually limiting its
pu rpose also.
We're taking it to a place where you've not had the chance to put labels on things
y€t, which means you haven't had a chance to limit those things y€t, which is why
you're sitting there going, "what the hell is that?". That's when you open - I call
this a trance of infinite possibilities (TlP). From there, your journey can go in any
direction. Anything is possible.
De-labeling can be scary for some people, it can take away parts of their identity
that they're not ready to let go of. Again, use it with respect, not aggressively,
and don't violate social boundaries with someone who may not want to go that
deep with you, especially on a casual basis. Used responsibly, this can be a very
powerful tool for change.
Do you see why we began with this? Do you see how easy it is to slip from being
respectful, doing the explorer thing, to being aggressive and attacking? Who are
you! lf nothing else, it's annoying, isn't it?
It's about creating the right amount of tension. Too much, and you lose them.
You become disrespectful, you become aggressive. Too little, and there's no real
impetus, they just start running around in a circle.
2. This exercise is a very simple way of getting them right to the edge
straightaway. lt's a very quick maneuver, but again, it's all about having
this in place. lf this is not in place, they will not follow.
o Do this with a different partner to get a different reaction. Ask the
same five questions, not the light version, but where you are taking
them to the edge of the boundary and watch them going into these
altered states that are unusual types of covert trances.
o When you're doing that, I want you to create a contrast so you can
actually see how different ways of phrasing the same ideas come
through. lf you ask them,for example, who are you, or where are voU,
they give you a particular answer or they start spinning.
{3
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

Then ask them:
a. Where are you not?
b. Who are you not?
c. How are you not?
The Simple SIISTEM Plus 'NOT'
Who are you not?
Where are you not?
When are you not?
How are you not?
What are you not?
lgor's Comments
Can you already feel your brains kind of starting to spin a little bit more than
before? We're just slightly starting to bring in something more. The negation, the
'not', basically says, whatever you think it is, go somewhere else.
We're going to have a contrast to the positive question, "who are you?" and
"who are you not?" You contrast one against the other so you can see what the
impact is when you add a negation. lf you start to go to places you're not ready
to go yet, just stop and say 'no'.
Do you see how powerful this stuff can already be? This is just the warm-up act.
So far, we've been opening stuff up. We've been preparing the ground so that
when you present hypnotic ideas, they have somewhere to go. You open the
cupboard up and go "oh, this one's empty, let's put some stuff in here".
So wouldn't it be useful to have some stuff to put in there, seeing as you're
opening the cupboard up anyway? Let's put in some happiness, learning and joy.
14
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

attttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttattttt
)
)tt
3. Now do the exercise the same way, using the positive or the negation.
o Mix and match them. Play with any of the questions, and then do all
the questions in a row. You can mix and match them as your instincts
guide you.
Notice how each of these questions send you to different parts of your
mind. They send you to different kinds of experiences. Allow your
instincts to guide you a little bit in terms of what questions you ask.
o The only thing we're going to add now is a positive suggestion, a
positive experience, For a moment, just consider if you would, and
really consider this. When are you not, right now, that happy?
o Can you feel the machinery working? Stay with one suggestion, just
happiness. Play with different versions of your timing. For example,
"Who are you not right now, that's happy?"
Igor's Comments
With the language we have up to this point, we're opening up a doorway. We're
sending someone outside this little house that they've been used to and they see
it, but they don't know what to make of it. We're telling them, in all this vast
expanse of nature that they're seeing for the first time maybe or never really
appreciated, to search out one thing. Look for the deer, or the bluebird.
Now that their filters are a little clearer, we're saying, search out the experiences
that make you happy. They may or may not come down on that yet. Why?
Because they're kicking a search into process rather than getting a result, for the
moment. All you care about is that the random search begins to be targeted
toward something useful, toward happiness, as opposed to anything else. All you
had to do was add a simple suggestion.
Did you notice how timing is everything? When you have all these complex
language patterns, you don't want to waste it. lt's like putting seasoning on a
meal; you do it at just the right time.
Has everyone been on a swing? What happens when you kick your legs out too
soon? Do you go faster or slower? So in order to operate a swing you have to be
{5
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

able to find exactly the right spot, the sweet spot that will accelerate you, rather
than slow you down.
The same is true of hypnotic language, especially advanced covert hypnosis, the
mind-bending language we're getting into. The most important thing to me is, are
you beginning to sense how your own mind is being shifted into different
directions and experiences? This is important, because you need to have
experiences before you can take other people to those experiences.
DvI'3
Mind Bending Language and Gonfusion
How confusing is it to use mind-bending language? Do you confuse yourself? ln
order not to be random or confuse yourself with stuff you're doing or saying, you
need to expand your mind to different places, so you know this is this kind of
place, and that is that kind of place.
Let's look at this language. What kind of experiences are we shaping that look for
identity, what people identify with? 'Who are you?' and 'What are you?' are very
similar, but still a little different, right? lf I ask you "When are you?" that is again
a different type of question, more about time. This is more about identity or
identifying something like, which chair or what chair.
How is about equality, isn't it? You're looking at equality in terms of how
someone is running, not talking about the activity of running, but the quality of it.
Where is a location in space, so you're already moving through people's minds in
different ways, and this is at a very subtle level.
Why as a rule cements things in and makes them more concrete because it
demands a rationalization, a reason for something, even an excuse. This has to be
used very carefully, it can go both ways.
For example, you come home after a hard day or maybe make a mistake and
something doesn't work out right and you ask "Why did I do that?" Or someone
else asks you why you did that. How useful is that? You sit there knowing you
made a mistake and now they're drilling you into that mistake even further.
{6
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeCecCCcccCCcCC
e|CC
EF

How hard is it to get out of your depression when someone is asking you why
you're such a sad little soldier? They're asking you to justify a sensation of
sadness and it's keeping you in this state. This is why the question 'Why?' is not
on the list.
l'm not saying to never use 'why', just make sure you know what the impact will
be if you do.
EGRCF|ES - ]\IAVIGATITIG THROI.'GH TTT'IE
1. We're going to do the questions and negations like before, let them come
in and out, but don't get stuck on making everything negated. What we
will add to this now is to start navigating people through time.
o We have about 50 variations already, so rather than sitting down for an
hour and working through every single variation (although I
recommend you do it at some point) we'll select a starting point at
random.
o To do this exercise we are going to change the tense, the time
sequence. For example, you use questions like 'are you?"were you?'
'how have you been?'This is the starting point, the direction in space,
forward or backward in time.
o Just remember to make sure it takes on a spin, a direction to go in so
that you're moving your partner somewhere positive. So 10 minutes
each, then find another partner.
lgor's Comments
At the moment we're not even interested in how much you're influencing
people, we're interested in you getting reference experiences inside your mind
that we can use to create more, so it's a trippy mind-bending language.
All we're doing is asking a reasonable question, even though it may sound a little
wonky. lf you're not trying to persuade someone, just asking a question, then
17
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfieet Hlpnosis Publishing

surely you don't care about the outcome, do you? Wherever they land will be the
right place, isn't it?
We're not trying to get the magic bullet, the one thing that will get everything
done, it's a process. You ask a question, they have a result. You ask another
question, there is a different result, then another and another and each time it
begins shaping itself.
Overall, over a period of time, notice how each time you do this exercise you
tend to be a little happier. Your mind starts putting more focus on those
experiences and they come out, even though you don't necessarily know where
they're coming from or what they are.
Hypnosis is not something you do, it's something you become.
2. Make up two randomly constructed sentences from the last exercise and
write them down. lt doesn't matter what they are, just randomly construct
them. They may have'not's'in them, some time elements, just take two
different starting points, two different times, maybe one with a negation
and one without.
o The reason I want you to write them down is so you can do this
exercise emphasizing every single word separately each time you
repeat it.
o When I say "Who are you not, that's happy?" it's different than if I say
"Who are you, not, that's happy?" or "Who are you, not that's happy?"
. The places you leave your pauses, totally transform the meaning
people take from what you're saying. I want you to get very sensitive
to what you're emphasizing, where your pauses are and how that
affects other people.
o What we care about is; where does it send your mind when you're
hearing these things emphasized differently, said differently,
pronounced differently and paused differently?
{8
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
C
€eCCcCCGcGcCCCCaaC

Take L0 minutes and then change partners. Be sure to watch your
partner for the effects of different emphasis on words and pauses.
3. Now do the same exercise again, only this time you'll only have one
sentences that l'll give yoU, either
o "Where have you been that's happy?" or "How will you be that's
happy?"
o The difference now is that rather than randomly constructing
sentences as you did before, you're going to use the same sentence
repeatedly, but emphasizing different words.
o These are formally to get you used to speaking and doing things in
different ways.
Igor's Comments
This exercise forces your mind to go places, even though you can't do it if you're
the subject. You're trying to figure it out, but you're spinning your wheels, so
you're discovering new territory.
Even as the hypnotist asking the questions, you're going there yourself a little bit,
aren't you? That's very useful. That's part of how you prevent yourself from
being confused with what's confusing them. Confusion isn't the operative
element. We're not using confusion to get the result we're looking for.
Confusion is a side effect of the places we're taking them, which is to open their
minds to allowing new information to come in.
Pauses offer your neurology time to process, to actually have the experience. lf
you rush through, how can they have the experience? lt's like saying "Let's go to
the best restaurant in town.Quick, you have two minutes to finish up". lt ruins
the whole point of the exercise.
Doubling or Tripling the Effect of Mind-Bending l^anguage
We can double and even triple the impact you've had to this point by adding one
thing. What's a way of expressing the idea of 'not'other than saying'not'? By
adding a very small word, with a very big impact.
'19
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

Adding the word 'but' negates whatever you just went through. lf we say "l like
you, but...." what we're saying is that whatever came before 'but' is not that.
So we're starting with some power words, to sensitize you to how every single
word you've used your entire life has a specific effect on other people. As you
start becoming more aware of these words, your ability to use them for influence
starts skyrocketing.
Down the Rabbit Hole
Let's start talking about some location anywhere but here, because we don't
want them here. Of course, if they're somewhere else you can just add 'there',
instead. For example, when you consider all the things you've done that make
you unhappy and go anywhere but there, where does that leave you?
With 'time', we have the same thing. We have 'now' and we have 'then'. What do
we have with qualities? We need to do a little variation, at least in the English
language, 'like this' or 'like that' does this make sense?
How are you being happy in any way 'but' like this, now? How much more is
that? What will you have been that makes you happy anywhere but now? Do you
feel it? Do you feel yourself tripping down that little rabbit hole? Wave bye-bye
to Alice; she hasn't come this far yet.
Then there's this one, which is simply 'this' and 'that'. You have much more
variation if you add these things together. You have a starting point. You have a
transition through time. You have a direction or heading, like a suggestion. You
give them pause and time to process. Then you add extra velocity.
You know the nitro cars with the tanks? You put the tanks on so that when you're
driving the car at maximum speed, you go "Let's lift this baby up!" and it just
takes off. But before you take off, you have to have the direction it goes in, do
you not?
DGROSE-LSilNG',zur
1. What will you have been thinking that's good about his exercise any time
but then? And beyond that, how will you be, feeling great that is, having
done this exercise anywhere but here?
20
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing
aeeece
Cr:eee

Yes. We're going into these little worm hole thingy's and we don't know
where we're coming out. But wherever it is it will be fun!
o Do this exercise just like before, adding variables and using'but'to add
the final spin and speed. You know where to start, where to send
them. You have an idea of direction, and now we have a little hyper
drive that spins them into space. Ten minutes apiece.
lgor's Comments
Have you noticed that at this level, although it's relatively mechanical still, it's
very powerful stuff and we've not even turned it to any practical purposes yet?
Right now, we're doing training wheels, so I expect you to lose the thread a little,
then come back, then lose the thread a little bit, but this is interactive. You can't
do covert hypnosis if you don't have a normal interaction because most people
don't just stand there and have you lecture them.
When we start getting into the freestyle version, we do want to make this sound
totally natural and normal. The key is that we're not trying to persuade anyone of
anything. lt's a question of getting so many options presented, that at least one
of them will make you and them both happy at the same time.
DvD4
The FundamentalFormula for Doing Hypnosis ABS
We started by asking about the different senses, the five senses first. The key
sense as far as l'm concerned is the sixth sense, awareness. lt's not what you see,
hear, feel, touch and taste, although that's part of it. lt's the awareness that
allows you to make sense of all that. This is what we've been playing with so far.
So why don't we just go after the awareness directly? Let's look at the
fundamental formula, ABS, for doing hypnosis as far as what we're doing in this
school, or tradition.
1. [ = Attention You have to have a person's attention. You need their
awareness of things so that you can shift their attention through
21
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfieet Hypnosis Publishing

experiences so they end up having the experiences that you want or need
them to have, be it therapeutic or whatever.
B = ByPass You're going to bypass their critical factor. This is the part of
the mind that automatically rejects information, including information that
might be useful for them. Like that little piece of advice you normally like
to give people, and they throw it right back in your face because they can't
handle it for whatever reason. Their walls are up.
5 = Stimulate You've got to stimulate the unconscious mind. You're getting
unconscious response.
Attention
What kind of things can you use to focus people's attention, or hijack their
awareness and move it around?
o H+ is definitely going to set the context for it
o Body sensations
. Memories
o Anything that their awareness can turn on
We're talking about the language of awareness. lf lask you to recall a happy
moment, l'm navigating your memories, aren't l? lf I s?y, "whatever you do,
don't recall the happiest moment in your life. Just don't think about how good it
made you feel." What are they going to remember and feel?
We have language that navigates your awareness:
o Feel
o Hear
o Touch
o Taste
We also want to have things like:
o Think
o Consider
o Recall
These are more neutral. They're not attached to one of your five senses. This is
not a finite list, there are many versions, but you get a sense of what we're
coming through with this.
22
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
2.
3.

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
You can move people's awareness simply by using language that refers to
awareness.
Example: Whatever happens, please don't pay attention to your left foot now
because if you were to pay attention to your left foot, you might actually
compare it to your right, and notice it feels different.
It's very easy and straight forward to move people's experience just with the
language because they have to pay attention to what you ask them to pay
attention to whether they want to or not, to decide whether they want to do it.
DGRSSiES-WRilNNG VERSiIONSi OF T'IORDS ABOI'T THE FTVE SENS|ES
1. Write down a dozen different versions of words about the five senses,
such as feeling, hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting, but also write down
words about this pure sixth sense, such as recall, remember, think,
consider, observe (although that can be visual words as well).
o You can have single words or little phrases like 'become aware of' or
'pay attention to'. You can use simple vocabulary to grab someone's
attention and move it onto something, that's easy to do.
o Six minutes to do this in pairs. Spend a couple of minutes designing a
list with your partner, then use the list to make them pay attention to
some part of their experience, either a personal experience like a part
of their body, or an external experience, like the lights in the room, the
sound of other people and so on.
. We're not concerned where the experience goes as long as you're
moving the experience around.
2. Add a little twist.
Example: Please become aware of your left foot for a moment and notice
that you can be not aware of that left foot, as well as being aware of
what's not a left foot.
23
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

Do you see that just by placing my 'not' in different places it starts to
change the meaning quite dramatically?
o I want you to use this apposition of opposites. For example, scan your
body until you find a good feeling and realize what it's not.
o Do you see what it's doing to you? This is hypnosis, isn't it? lt's very
simple. Remember the H+, the attitude you're creating.
o I don't get anything vaguely hypnotic in terms of context if I say'Think
about what's wrong with your left foot! Yeah. Think about what's
wrong with your right foot!"
o Make sure you do all the other normal pieces as well.
,/ Make eye contact.
,/ Smile friendly.
'/ Have an intense desire for them to have a positive experience.
Then you say, "Notice the sounds in the room. Notice what aren't the
sounds in the room, and don't notice the sounds that are in the room."
Your experience continues to shift each time. Play with all the
different types of awareness language, including negations of different
elements in the equation, just so you notice how it spins your
awareness in different directions. Six minutes. Make sure you and your
partner have a turn.
lgor's Comments
This is important because you don't want to just throw 'not' in randomly and
hope for the best. You want to know what the effect of it will be. The best way to
do that is to do it with people and have it done on you to get a sense of it.
3. Now we're going to add on to this exercise to use it more purposefully in
terms of hypnosis. We are going to do pacing and leading.
24
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

This is a simple induction. Make three statements about their
awareness that are true. For example:
Those are three statements about your experience. You're aware of all
those three things.
Once you've made three statements about something you
experience, add one statement about something that you would
them to experience, but they may or may not be.
Example: "You can hear the sound of the buzzing lights and the sound of
someone sneezing. You can think certain thoughts and begin to relax."
"You're looking at something, carefully considering what it is we're doing
here and having sensations inside your body which means, you can relax
even further now because you have a lifetime of experiences that you can
recall, and you're not aware of sensations like your feet until I mention
them. You can hear sounds that help you to relax even further."
What we're doing now is beginning to lead their attention toward some
simple suggestions. For the moment let's stick to simple things like 'relax',
'calm','trance','focus'. These are called trance themes, so you're going to
talk about themes, ideas that are relatively hypnotic, and as you do so, an
experience comes to life inside the other person and they tend to become
more hypnotized.
You're using the current experience as a stepping stone to the experience
you want them to have. lt's a much milder form of creating the same spin
that we've been talking about. lt's still a spin, but it's much milder, almost
imperceptible.
o Work with your partner, and just repeat the same loop over and over,
with different themes that you absolutely know are going to be in their
awareness. I just want you to get used to the formula because we're
about to put octane gas into this, but not yet.Ten minutes total. Really
create that hypnotic atmosphere, a more classical trance.
25
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sffeet Hypnosis Publishing
can
like

lgor's Comments
We're interested in using this whole process to navigate through spins a bit more.
The spin happens inside the mind, or it doesn't. lf it doesn't, then you do it again.
lf it does, you do it again. Either way is better, isn't it?
4. Now we're going to develop this into a very simple mechanism for solving
problems. Whether you solve a problem is irrelevant, it's what we're
training your mind to in the process.
o To the extent that you're willing to not overcome the problem, are you
going to try and make it happen? The less the problem is there, the
more it's actually working, so the language is actually doing its job.
o Each partner have a turn.
lnduction
Consider a problem you have for a moment. Just something nagging, not
the biggest life issue you have. lf your favorite monkey got hit by a truck
and now you're traumatized, don't choose that one. Choose something
small, like someone cut you offon the way to work the other day.
Think about the problem, and as you think about the problem, I want you
to realize that there are, so many other ways you can do this. For example,
you're aware of the sounds around you. Of course, my voice is one of
those sound and you're having certain feelings. Beyond all the thing's
you're experiencing inside that wasn't the problem, notice that you can
begin to get a sense of this thing resolving.
So, go ahead and notice what you see. Feel some sensation in your body.
Listen to the sound of the humming lights as you just close your eyes, and
begin to go beyond the problem into a solution beyond now.
Feel the sensations of a trance developing. Continue to listen to my voice,
and sense the temperature in the air. As you experience everything but
right now inside this, and begin to resolve the problem further.
26
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
1;
1;
1;
1;
1;
1;
1;
lF
1;
1;
1;
1;C
€G
€
G,
1;
as
1;CCC
1;C
€CCaC
€d
€
€
€cccIdccc
I

Feel that transformation continuing. Notice your thoughts reflecting
things, recall all those moments that aren't now, beyond the problem, as it
continues to resolve, as you consider anything but this and enjoy it.
Igor's Comments
How has that thing that was a problem changed? Reality hasn't changed, has it?
As your perception chang€s, two things are important, firstly that you no longer
have to feel annoyed or frustrated by the reality of something, and secondly,
more importantly, is that the consequence of those feelings about the problem
have changed.
5. Now we're going to add a little bit more to what I just did, and l'm going to
simplify it to make it easy for you.
o We're going to start in exactly the same way as you did a moment ago
by giving three pacing statements. ln other words, things they can
verify in their awareness.
1. Things they're feeling.
2. Things they're thinking.
3. Things they're hearing.
o Now, we're going to add one awareness spin. ln other words, you've
got three things they're aware of here in the pace already. You ask
them a question that they can easily answer so they engage with you
more fully.
o Then, you're going to attach on to it one more statement that sounds
like it should be the same kind of thing, but it's not.
Exomple - Notice everything that you weren't thinking until now.
It sounds like it's exactly one of these three things, but you're putting
more spin on it, which sends the mind out to one of these little open-
ended trances a bit more. When you add a suggestion, it has that much
27
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfreet Hlpnosis Publishing

more room to grow in. lt's like you're getting all the weeds out of the wdy,
you're putting suggestions in the ground and letting that start to grow up.
o Then add a trance theme like:
1. relax
2. go deeper
3. calm
4. focus
Do you remember the trance themes you did in the previous exercise? All
we've done is inserted the awareness spin between the two steps of the
previous exercise. You're putting a little bit more torque on what you're
doing before you present a trance suggestion.
o Then, at the end of it all, you're
problem to make it resolve.
instruction along the lines of:
5. as that problem resolves
going to add another thing about the
So, you're just attaching a simPle
Example - "You're all sitting there feeling the sensations of the chair
against your back, and you can notice everything that isn't this moment as
you go into a trance, and that problem begins to resolve itself."
o Do you see how we're adding extra loops and then we're going into a
solution? We're telling the unconscious mind to solve the problem.
o Of course, it will not solve the problem in here. You're sending them
out here first and saying, hey look around maybe some of this will
work.
o No? Well, then, do another cycle. Go over here and check around. ls
there anything over here that will work? No? Let's do another cycle.
28
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfieet Hlpnosis Publishing

-aaaaaaaaaaaa3aaa3aaaa3
)
)
)
)3
)33
)333
)2???t-??
I
Eventually, you're going to end up somewhere that has something of
positive value in relation to whatever that problem is, aren't you? lt's
just a question of time, isn't it?
o Ten minutes each per person. lf you want, let's make it very easy
because l'm not interested in getting very technical with the language
yet.Just use any of the awareness language, like these:
Notice
Recall
Exomple - "So, you can hear me. You're thinking about this exercise. You,
of course, can sense your shoes. You do now. Which means you can recall
doing things anyhow but like this, as you go into a trance and begin to
resolve that problem."
This is just a spin on it. We add some kind of awareness language ahead of
this just to be able to introduce the spin, and we just carry on.
Get some kind of induction, some kind of trance process going, and then
reel out of that into a problem solution. Then, cycle through over and over
again, as often as those five minutes allow you, just to notice what
ha ppens.
Igor's Comments
We're not interested in destroying the
much creativity; the problem can no
Something's going to work.
problem. What we're doing is creating so
long exist. Something's going to give.
DVI'5
Greating Gontext Ard The Hylpnotic Gaze
It's not so much language we're interested in, although that's very important. lf
you don't have context, it starts taking away from the actual language in terms of
where people go, because they'll just answer your questions either haphazardly,
or they won't take them seriously.
29
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

EGRSSiE - THE I.IY"I{ONG GN,5.,
L. This exercise is very important in helping you be able to create context a
little more. To create a sense where people go "Wow! Something
important is happening here and l'd better really concentrate or think
about this question properly."
o This exercise is to develop a hypnotic gaze. lt sounds simple, you just
look at someone, but actually, it's surprisingly not easy. Five minutes.
Sit comfortably and look into your partner's eyes, one or the other in
silence.
o lf you have difficulty looking at their eyes, look at the center of the
bridge of their nose. That makes it easy in terms of the emotional
impact it has on you. Remember the H+; focusing in the terms that
something positive is going to happen, some hypnotic intent.
o Notice as you get into the exercise how the total immersion of the
experience changes as someone looks at you for five minutes.
lgor's Comments
lf you can preserve that attitude, looking into their eyes, while you're doing all
this mind-bending language, don't you think that might be a little bit more
powerful? Did you notice after a few minutes of doing this your mind settles
down and you're into this sort of steady rhythm and you feel connected?
2. This time, once you've hit that rhythm, and not before - this is very
important - to the extent you can maintain that sort of feeling that you
have, start saying some of the things from previous exercises. I don't care
which one it is.
o You can choose one ahead of time and write it down if you want to, or
choose one in the moment spontaneously. You can make one up.
o Once you've gotten to that point where the rhythm is going, without
breaking the rhythm, start slowly adding one or two of these things in
and then watch their reaction, then do it again, watch the reaction, and
so on.
30
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
eeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
€C
C,

o Each person do it for about a minute or two.
Igor's Comments
Did you find it easier for your mind to go to these other places, rather than just
being spun out? lt's a gentler way of spinning people through things but it takes
them much further.
The thing to recognize is that language without the mindset is useless.
You'll struggle finding the language in the first place.
lf you do find the language, it's just because you memorized it.
It won't have the impact.
So we want to start from this base, which will help you get the language more
naturally, and it will help the impact be much more profound. Any exercises we
do from now on, only do to the extent that you can carry on doing what you've
been doing here and surfing from doing it conversationally, but with the same
attitude, which is a little trickier.
Then do it more hypnotically, with the same attitude, which is a little easier
because that allows your mannerisms to become more hypnotic. Either w?v,
though, your language will come out smoothly and fit the context at that point if
you go there first.
The Outer Edge of Inner Space
We're going to follow the sequences we've already learned, but we'll start taking
it to the outer edge of inner space. To get there we're going to use a formula, so
you don't have to think about it too much.
We have our awareness language, 'notice', 'sense' , 'hear', 'feel' and so on. Then
we want to add more spin, so we'll have something like 'everything' and
'anything'.
Then you have the resource. We've been working with 'happiness'. This could
be anything, more confidence, love, or safety for examples.
Then you add the spinning like we did before.
3{
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

We're now going to add more resources at
used to moving awareness through this.
everything that is (x) anywhere but here."
you've done to that point.
this point, and we're going to get
Here's what NOT to do: "Notice
You will have undone everything
DGRCFiES - AWARENtriS SPINSi AIID RHiOTJRGES OR DIREGT|oTI
L. Spend a minute or two getting into the state, and then take them through
awareness spins constantly for three or four minutes with a specific
resource in mind, or a specific direction. lf they have a problem they want
to solve, a small one, feel free to do that as well. Then swap roles.
o Use what you have already done, plus the mindset and spin and add
resources. This may be a bit tricky at first because you'll have to try to
keep track of both your state and the language at the same time. You
have to connect the two together because if you don't, you'll never
actually be able to use this in the real world.
. You can touch them if you want to create that tension. You can lock
eye contact. lf their attention drifts, you can kind of give them a little
nudge and make sure they're paying attention again. All those things,
by all means, do so.
o The key for doing this is that you don't pop out. You can't make the
whole connection, then go "Okay, great!" and break it and proceed.
You'll lose everything you've built up.
o The momentum begins with you, and
sub-communicating how they should
presenting.
o Five minutes with each partner.
Igor's Comments
you create the context. You're
interact with the ideas you're
What's important is that you're taking them from where they are out to the
edge.
32
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

)33
)3
)3
)
)3
)
)
)33
)
)
)
)3
-3
)
)
)
)
)
)33333333333
)
)33
2. Now we're going to add a few layers at the same time. The spin has been
doubled up to give you more momentum as you're going through this.
Example - "Pav attention to everything that makes you feel happy
everywhere but here, anytime but now."
Do you notice how that adds a natural extra layer of spin right at the end?
The key is, don't repeat the same phrase twice, there's very little extra
spin there.
Example - "Pay attention to everything feeling resourceful, only here, only
here."
Do you see how there's no more spin? lt's redundant. You add more spin
by adding more tag phrases, which are essentially the same spin layer, just
putting more spin on what's already going on.
Content under awareness will change according to what you need to
achieve. Do 3 levels of awareness (X) all in the same process. Start with
one and move through to the final one.
Follow this sequence:
L. The first (X) should just be something that's in their experience, part of
their awareness. For example "Pay attention to anything that's
comfortable inside your body, everywhere but here, only now". We're
looking for a physical sensation, some part of their physical experience.
Or, "See everything in this room, anytime but now, only like this".
You'll cycle two or three of these just to see where the spin begins.
Once you've done a few of the experience ones, and you've been
spinning them out in terms of what they're experiencing in the room
right now: seeing, hearing, feeling and so on, you're going to move
them on to a resource.
2. The resource can be something they give you, something they want
more of in their life such as:
{ Confidence
'/ Happiness
,/ safety
33
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

,/ Love
./ Enthusiasm
3. Then add some general language around the idea that they can solve
the problem. lf you have a specific problem in mind, feel free to
mention it to your partner, vou do not have to give any details, or you
can. lf you want to keep it private, feel free to keep it private. Either
way is fine.
lf you can't think of a specific problem that might be useful, just let
your unconscious mind come up with something, and it will. Your
partner, the hypnotist, will just talk about resolving a problem in
general and then just let your unconscious mind select something
appropriate for you to resolve.
Do this process two, three or four times, just so you see how easy it is.
Fifteen minutes, then switch partners. You may suggest they just close
their eyes and drift at the end of the exercise, so hypnotis! you keep
track of the time.
lgor's Comments
The key to influence, as far as l'm concerned, is not to. lf you're trying to
persuade someone of one thing, it's because you're stuck at a level of ideas
where that's the only possible thing that could work for you, or for them really in
that case.
We now have so many choices that we're no longer stuck at the level where 'it
has to be this'. Why would you try to force your opinion someone when there are
so many other ways of being? lt's just a question of selecting the one that
matches that person, at that point in time.
You can win and they can win, both at the same time. Your mind stretches
beyond that. You have to be 'bigger than the client's problem'. lf you're in a
negotiation, you're stuck, and you're stuck at the same level as wherever the
other person it. lt's very difficult to make headway.
lf you're bigger than their problem, you can go "oh, it's that", that's not even a
problem. Look here, and here, and here. Suddenly it dissolves and disappears.
34
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

A3
)
)
)3
)
)
)
)Aa
You need to be able to stretch your own mind before you can stretch someone
else's.
How would you like to know how to do that in your negotiations, in your
conversations, in your hypnotherapy practice, with your kids, with your students
or with whatever way you want to be using this. We're going to learn this.
DVIT6
Neuroplasticity and Ghanging Your Brain
Neuroplasticity basically means that your brain is one of the most flexible
organisms, like a muscle, it will grow and get stronger and more powerful the
more you use it. Neuroplasticity is the brains ability to hook and unhook
dendrites on the neurons to form new meanings and expand ideas. Children's
brains are completely neuroplastic, forming new associations and growing neural
nets constantly.
There are two basic secrets to neuroplasticity:
1. You have to repeat things.
2. Stimulation - intensity of emotion and variety.
You have to repeat things to create neural pathways. When you have variety and
repetition, your brain learns so quickly, it's unreal. When you have intensity,
meaning a powerful experience and repetition, it picks up things quickly and
makes all the connections.
When you repeat things and get stimulated by them you either enjoy it intensely,
and have a strong experience, or you change or vary the exercises enough that
you make the pathways. Do you see how we're building lots of exercises that
repeat the same idea in different ways to build those pathways?
slr($TEMs l^anguage
This is a simple way to remember all the extra little pieces like:
Who are you?
What are you?
35
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

This is called the SySTEM or Systems Language.
s}lsTEM
Space
Time
Energy
Matter
Just think about space, time
combine? You have lots of
combining them:
ways of
You can talk about awareness in
relation to these.
You can add spins in relation to
these.
o You can add these in relation to a
problem or a suggestion, a
resource or an idea.
What we're doing is deconstructing how
another person experiences what is real
for them, so that we can reconstruct it
These are labels that will help you think in terms
coordinates that people build realities on.
How do you know something is real? Because it's located
somewhere, even if it's inside vou, it's located somewhere
in space.
of
eeeCeeCCCeeeCeCCCCeC
€
€Ce
€
€
€
€
€
€
€
€
€
€
€
€
€d
ea
€
€
€e
Usually it's located somewhere in time. lt either happened,
is happening, or will happen. lf something is outside of
time, if it's all the time, then it's now, it will be, and never
has been. That's where we're heading.
ln terms of energy, energy just adds to the question how.
What's the quality of it? lf someone's running
lethargically, quickly or slowly, there's a different level of energy in it. When
someone is thinking furiously or calmly, there's a different level of energy in that.
Matter identifies things like....chair, house, an individual etc...and it separates it
from the rest of the universe.
and energy. Which of these do you want to
The s!6TEM SPIN
who, what, when, where, how are
you...
+Not
,..anywhere but here/there
...anytime but now/then
...anyway but like this/that
...that's anything but this
36
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfieet Hlpnosis Publishing

slightly differently, which will include your bit of influence.
EXERCF|E-CROSSSPIN
We're going to start bringing the sySTEM back into the awareness exercises we
were doing, with cross-spins added.
Awareness Gross Spins
VAK +Not
Remember, the cross-spins happen at the point where the other person starts
reacting to a spin; they'll go off and drift for a while and as they start coming off
that drifting cycle, you add another one to re-intensify the drift. Each time they
drift further and further from where their normal state of consciousness is.
With some people you'll have to be much slower, where you work up to this after
a few days because the tiniest amount of spin already takes them way out of
their normal comfort zone, and that's more than enough.
37
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
Awareness X
Spin
Spin
See, hear, feel, sense,
consider, notice, listen to,
think about, remember,
look ?t, find, experience,
recall, check, discover,
appreciate, focus oh,
concentrate oh, pay
attention to... X...
only here/there...
everywhere
here/there...
only now/then...
but
anytime but now/then...
like this/that (in every
way)...
anyway but like this/that...
and only this/that...
and anything but this/that...
only here/there...
everywhere 
but
here/there...
only now/then...
anytime but now/then...
like this/that (in every
way)...
anyway but like this/that...
and only this/that...
and anything but this/that...
Keep adding as many layers of the sySTEM spins as you like

The first one is the cross-spin. You'll start with awareness, when you
notice (X).
Example: Fear of Cats
Someone comes in with a fear of cats. You ask the person something along
the lines of, when you experience the problem, when you experience cats,
when you think about cats, when you feel cats, when you see cats,
whatever. lt doesn't really matter, any kind of awareness language.
when you are awore of cats,then you go into your systems cycles.
. so, you ask a question, who are you, when are you, where are you, etc.
Of course, you can change the tense, if you want to, but that's coming
in another layer. So, who hove you been? Then, yoU add some spins.
Only here any time but now.
o You're doing cross-spins so you're adding bits onto each other again,
and you're combining everything you know.
1. Awareness
2. The systems questions
3. The two different types of spins
o With individuals though, you can work it at their pace. lf they're
refusing to consider even the first idea, is there any point going on with
any of the spins? Hence, our starting point has to be all this, because
without this, they're not even going to start considering your ideas.
And, if they're not considering your ideas, you have nothing to work
with, have you?
o What I want you to do is ask your partner to think of a problem. lf they
can't think of a problem, do you know what you do? Allow your mind
to consider a problem for you. Make is something easy to resolve,
some problem that's been bugging you for some time.
o Step one, when you think about the problem, recall the problem, think
about the problem, that bit's easy isn't it?
38
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing
eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeCeeeaedcd'
d,
d,ddeeeeeeeedq
L.

)333
-3
)
)333333333333
)33333333
)
)
)33
)3
)
)33333
Then you choose any of the system questions, Who are you? Where
are you? When are you? How are you? What are you?
lf you want to put some spin on that already, you change the
tense...who have you been? Who will you be? Who will you have been?
Who might you have been? Who could you have been? Who might you
be becoming?
By the w?v, these are all correct English grammar, although more
unusual forms of them.
Then you start spinning. You can put some solution ideas into it if you
want.
This is a little more involved, so we'll give you a little longer, because
now it's not just reading the language out in different cycles, now
you're waiting for a reaction before you add the spins.
Once you've done a whole cycle you'll come right back to the beginning
again and do the same thing on the same problem, with a different set
of spins, only this time of course, they'll be experiencing the problems
completely differently because of what you did a moment before.
l'll give you 20 minutes, that's 10 minutes apiece to do this so you can
really go to town on it.
lgor's Comments
We're going to start going a little further now and de-constructing language
which is actually softening the spins, because you don't have to go anywhere
near as hard core as this to get the results you want. We can start getting
practical with it.
Believe it or not some problems that to the extent you ignore them go away.
Other problems, if you ignore them escalate and grow, but there are a whole
class of problems that we torture ourselves with that will go away when you stop
thinking about them.
39
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

ln terms of neuro science, there's something called a'xeno effect', which is, as
the old saying says'where attention goes, energy flows', it actually alters the
brain. People create obsessive/compulsive disorder by thinking about their
problem a lot.
It's true. lt's literally to the point where pathways in their brain, like super
highways, get created leading to their problem, so that any idea leads back to
that, everything goes back to that.
Now, a caveat here, do not think that just because we're saying this, that you can
ignore all your problems and they'll go away, they will not. The tax man will still
come knocking on your door if you don't pay your taxes. And, you'll probably go
to jail at some point if you haven't paid your taxes in a long time.
So there are a certain class of problems that you have to actually resolve,
whereas, there's another class of problems that people just put way too much
attention on and by not doing so, they resolve themselves virtually automatically.
This will be important when we get into the more practical side of things. lf
you're having trouble solving a particular problem with a person in front of you,
sometimes the easiest way to resolve it is to actually resolve a different problem
that's similar in nature, but they're not attached to. Then, in resolving that, it
creates a pattern that makes the other one easier to resolve.
Using Hypnosis to Handle Sales Obiections
Do we have any sale people here? I know you never get any objections in terms
of what you're selling, I understand that, but let's suppose some random person
came in that really had a messed up life and they had one tiny little objection.
Those of you who are great sales people would realize that some objections you
do not even address. They just say them, and just like a token thing you can hear
it in the sound of their voice that it's not that big a deal, and by addressing it you
get into a whole bucket of trouble you don't want to get into.
By ignoring it, as all the other stuff that's going on, then they go "Yeah l'll buy
this, no problem."
Of course, there's another class of objection where if you do not handle them
there'll be no sale. Do you know how to tell the difference? Ultimately, it comes
down to state.
40
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

)aaa
)
)
)
)t
)
)
)
)
-)
-)
)
)
)a
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)u,23
lf they're really attached to something whether or not it's the actual thing they're
saying, they'll lock into it and you can feel it.
Have you ever really focused on something and you notice your whole body
changes? This happens when you're driving down the road, you see something
like an accident, what do you do? You join the accident, because where your
attention goes your whole car starts steering towards it.
It's the same thing when people get into a problem, they tend to get more tense,
more excited, they tend to lean forward a little bit and all these sort of things,
and of course, the opposite is true too. So, you're looking for their emotional
attachment to what they're saying.
lf the emotional attachment isn't quite there, l've done this myself and have seen
a lot of people that start addressing something there's no need to address, and
they make a problem of something that has nothing to do with anything, just
because they're putting more and more attention on it.
So, you're lighting up a circuit that is redundant, it's irrelevant. Does that make
sense?
One of the things you do right now, is figure out ways of taking the energy off the
problem and onto something else. You're essentially de-stabilizing the problem.
You can make things more concrete, or you can make things more fluid and
unstable, which gives you more chance to change.
The things that are positive, like resources, happiness, decisions and so on, you
can make more concrete so they lock in. Things that are more problematic like
objections, you can make more fluid, you de-stabilize them which gives you an
opportunity to change them if you need to.
I want you to pay attention to intentionality because it makes a big difference.
Most of you have experienced it.
41
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

DvT' 7
Targeting Specific Resourcesn Skills and Abilities
What if we could navigate through this trance of infinite possibilities and
specifically target certain resources, skills, abilities and so on?
lmaging that Merlin the Wizard really did, or does exist. lf you could go back in
time and visit him, and he could take you to some other magical realm, where
whatever you wanted was possible, what would that be?
l'm sure most of you can think about something that would be useful to have
more of in life, like competent hypnosis, elegance, excitement, intuition, power,
flexibility or happiness, whatever it is you want.
Start thinking about some of these things, because we're about to go through a
process that's not necessarily going to give it to you right now, but any time other
than now, when you come back and look onto it, you'll be able to experience that
this was the point it started. Wouldn't that be worth looking back on?
So think about a wish list of seeds you want to plant, somewhere other than
where your conscious mind normally is. Do you know why we want to put it
somewhere where the conscious mind isn't normally? Because your conscious
mind didn't make this happen in the first place! So, clearly, your conscious mind
is the wrong place to look for this.
DGRCFiE-CROSS SPINSi o].l RESpt RCES
We're about to have a little exploration, we're going somewhere your conscious
mind normally isn't. That means the whole idea, the resource; these seeds of
suggestions will be implanted in a place where your conscious mind won't
interfere. You might as well go there, plant the seed and let it go.
1. The process is very simple. lt's the same thing you did last exercise, only
we'll be focusing now on the resource. We put the systems and cross spins
on resources.
42
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfieet Hypnosis Publishing
ecCCCcCCCCCcCCCCCCCCCCcCCCCCcCcceeeeeeeeeee

-aaa
-
-)
-
-)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-)
-
-)
-
-
-
-)
)
)?nFnttr
II.FFtl-l'
s!6TEMs Gross SPins
+Not
Resource
o Start the same way, some awareness, who you are, where you are and
all that sort of stuff, but the key is to start directionalizing the mind
toward the resources, the excitement, competency of mastering
hypnosis, or the love of music, etc.
. Would a love of music help in mastering music? I would think so.
Ceaseless tenacity, whatever resource you want but remember that
everything else you've learned to date still counts. Don't just throw out
a random statement.
. Begin with something and you watch them bubble up, and if it doesn't
quite bubble up, you re-emphasize it repeatedly until you spin them
and they start considering it fully.
o Then you talk about whatever the resource is. Then you start spinning
some more things, each step waiting until they're responding to some
extent. When you're done once cycle, look at them, floating on a high
and start again. Drill it into that place.
43
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing
Resource Y
Spin
Spin
Who are you
Where are you
When are you
How are you
What are you
(that is... Y...)
only here...
everywhere but here...
only now...
anytime but now...
like this (in every way)..
anyway but like this...
and only that...
and anything but that...
only here...
everywhere but here...
only now...
anytime but now...
like this (in every way)..
anyway but like this...
and only that...
and anything but that...
Keep adding as many layers of the sySTEM spins as you like.

There will be a special space inside their mind, a space that's not
normally used in which this seed, idea or suggestion exists and gets to
grow outside of consciousness. By the time it bleeds into
consciousness, not only do they have that, but their whole world
becomes larger because it's coming from the outside. lt's coming like
aliens bearing gifts, only the alien is part of you.
. Begin, L0 minutes apiece then switch.
Igor's Comments
I want to make it official - you have a starting point, like a problem, then you do
something and it shifts. From this point your aim is to shift it some more, shift it
some more and so on. You're not trying to get all the way there on the first go,
are you?
Each nudge gets a little more extreme than the last one. How can you possibly
know where you're nudging them, if you don't know what's happening in
between? So part of the influence process is to get feedback, to find out where
they are so you're not completely going down a blind alley or down a wrong
path.
Making the Hypnotic Process More FreesQile
Let's take this whole process and become a little more freestyle with it.
Essentially, you want to start with awareness, probably around a problem the
person is having. Then you'll make them more aware of whatever that is in the
way you've been doing already.
Then add some type of spin around that. Then go through some of the system
questions of who, what, where and so on. Feel free to change time scale on that
also.
You want to attach some kind of resource, how they want to be different, then
put another spin on them. This is one sequence.
Now, if you notice something significant happen during one of these spins, do
you know what to do? No, not yet?
44
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
eeeeeeeee
/Cce

)3
)
)
)333
)333333333333a
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)aaa
)
)
)
)
)
Ask what's happening now? What just happened? You want to have a little
feedback as to what's going on inside them. Up to this point you've been happy
to notice that something has happened and you spin it again.
Now we want to know what's happening for two reasons:
1,. We want to know where they are, so you can send them on more than
one direction.
2. You want to get a sense of how different kinds of spinning language send
people in different directions.
So you're gathering feedback at a different level now. By the time you've gone
through a whole cycle of awareness questions, plus the problem, a spin, a system
question, plus the resource and another spin, when you're done the second spin
you'll smile at them hypnotically and ask them 'what's happening now', 'what
just happened' or 'how they're doing now', any of those variations.
Whatever they say will be your starting point for the next spin. Each cycle
through, you keep deepening that, always starting at whatever they've fed back
to you.
EXERCIE-ECT{O EFFEGT
1. Let's add the Freestyle questions into what we've already been doing.
Who's familiar with the echo effect? That basically means, when someone
says something to you, if you reflect it right back, it intensifies it.
Example - lf someone says to you "How are you feeling?" and you go "l
feel great", then you turn to them and say "That's right, you feel great, you
really do feel great". That validates the experience they're having and
makes it much more powerful.
. You can do this in regular conversations as well. Just like you're
amusing on something, like you're talking about some toaster oven
they're thinking of buying, you do your little spiel and say "How do you
feel about the toast oven?" and they go "Fine." Then you say, "Oh, so
you feel fine about this, that's interesting. You feel fine, that's a fine
oven, isn't it?" They say "Yeah".
45
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

Then you can go into mind-bending language or whatever. The echo
effect is simply reflecting the same words back to them in a way that
will help them intensify the experience, or at the very least, validate it.
o The only things you don't want to echo as firmly are the negatives. You
want to put a little spin on those in order to take away from the
experience a little bit.
Example - Something negative someone might s?y, when you say "How
are you doing?" is that they're tired. So you say "So you're tired right now.
So at this moment you're tired."
o Can you feel the tiniest little bit of spin going on there? You're saying
it's temporary so it won't be there forever vs. "You're tired now, aren't
you? You're really tired aren't you?"
o So you say "Oh, right now you're tired, just a little tired right now, for
the moment anyway. Beyond the moment, what else awaits you that
isn't that?" Then they'll go "What?" Then you go "Just think about it, if
you're tired right now, you know for a fact it can't last forever, don't
you? Yes, so whenever the moment comes that you're no longer tired,
as soon as it comes you'll like it, won't you?"
o Can you hear the mind-bending spins subtly moving inside of it? lt
sounds totally rational doesn't it? Let's learn how to do that.
. Let's do the exercise, one partner, then switch.
lgor's Comments
Who's noticing that you're like a pendulum? You're going to get it, no you don't.
You get it, you don't. ls that a relatively common phenomenon?
Trust me you're in the right place. lt took me eight years of not getting it to get it,
and another two years to get how to teach it, so l've got it, and not got it so many
times lcan't even count. l'm trying to pump you through the same experience
more quickly to the extent I can in the four days we have together.
46
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
eeeeeCeeeeeeeeee
€
€ee
€eeeeCeeeeeeeeeeCeeeeee

lf you get in and out, in and out, you'll be just fine. Trust me; at the end of it,
you'll have a solid grasp of it. When you go home more importantly, you'll know
how to develop it.
Remember, this is training. You need practice to develop things. Training gets you
ready to do it, but then you have to keep going with it to ingrain it. You'll have
fun. This is fun isn't it?
Predicates
Have you ever been a child? Have you listened to a child as they learn a language
while growing up from not speaking very much? First they get simple words like
mom, dad, bottle, basically nouns.
Then they start having a few verbs to put it together and make simple sentences
like 'dog makes sad' or something like that with not much in between.
Then a very interesting stage develops, where they start filling the gaps between
the words with very short words called predicates that add nuance. By the time a
child is five or six years old, it's pretty eloquent. ln fact, most of the vocabulary
they'll need has been formed at that point. On top of that becomes layers of
nuances, as they grow older.
47
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

The s36TEM Predicates
Space
Time
Energy
Matter
Anywhere
Above
Beyond
Aside (from)
Here
There
lnside
On top of
U nderneath
Next to
Beneath
Deep Down
At
On
ln
Between
from...to...
within
Across
Against
Alongside
Amid
Among
Behind
Below
Far from
ln place of
Nea r
Next to
Opposite
Over
Past
Through
Anytime
Before
After
Earlier
Later
Yet
Already
Now
Soon
During
While
Until
for (3 Days)
Since (thursday)
by (sunday)
ago
Between
from...to...
up to
/s
Was
Has been
Had been
Would hove been
Could have been
Will be
Will have been
Anyhow
Totally
Completely
Only
Absolutely
To the extent
Enough
Less than
More than
Exclusively
Partially
Against
ln addition to
Anything
Any
Ail
Same
Every
Each
A part of
Other
What else
Once
Only
Except
Save for
eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
48
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

So these predicates are words that allow us to orient things. For example,'the
dog wags his tail' vs. 'the tail wags his dog'. They allow us to make certain
distinctions that are very important in terms of how language works.
These predicates are words like "Where is the can?" it's above the fridge, it's next
to the fridge, to the left, to the right or inside. "When do you do that?" before,
earlier or later. "How are you doing?" All these things have certain predicates,
certain kinds of filler words that allow us to form relationships between two
ideas, two nouns or two things, so we understand how to locate it in reality.
Where is it?
When is it?
How is it?
What is it?
lf you talk about a person, you can say "How is that person?" "Where is that
person?" "Who is that person?" Which is a... what..., and when is that person?
This is how we construct reality.
ln other words, the language element of reality, of experience, the thing that gets
us locked into those little circles, works by putting relationships between two
things. You switch the relationship around, you switch the meaning, ?s in 'the dog
wags the tail', and 'the tail wags the dog'.
We primarily locate things through space. The largest part of our brain is given up
to processing visual information. Even a blind person still uses their visual cortex
to process information. lt is also the fastest information processor. Vision works
in space, doesn't it? lt locates something'next to', 'inside'and so on.
The reason we want to focus on this language is because it's hardwired into us by
this stage. We've been using it for so long that all our relationships, including our
internal ones are based on that.
lf you want to compare this to that, notice we have predicates 'anywhere', that's
about the location isn't it, 'here' and 'there'. Notice how by playing with location
'anywhere but here' it sends your mind in one direction and locks it down again.
"Who are you, instead of anywhere but here?" You might say above and beyond
what's near. "Who are you above and beyond what's near?" "When are you
49
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

within that experience until now?" l'm going random AWOL to show you that
you can randomly pick words and they start adding spin already.
However, we're not going to be randoffi, we're going to be very strategic. For the
moment, just recognize how this is being constructed.
DGR(ISiE - T'SilTIG PRENCATES rc CREAIE SPIN
1. We're going to do the exercise the same as last time, only adding more
freestyle with predicates to create spin where and when you want to. I
want you to have some kind of exercise where you're using the staple
routine and adding in the predicates.
o With each phrase, notice how we're parting this up.....When you
consider this problem.. who are you being.. like this in every way.. and
only that? So there are four pauses in that small construction.
o So now, in each of those little sub-phrases like when you consider (X),
you're going to introduce one of these extra little words, and for the
moment it doesn't matter which one it is, just randomly choose a
predicate.
o You may sound like you're on drugs, or you may sound more
intelligent. We're just getting used to this language by fitting into
something you already know.
o Take 20 minutes each for this exercise.
Igor's Comments
You can't help but make meaning provided you're engaged in genuine
conversation. lf you have a joking conversation, you'll just be playing with it, but
when you actually try and make sense of it, like this is really important, that's
when it kicks in. This is one of the reasons we've been doing all the H+, setup,
eye gazing etc.
What you don't want to have happen is that you present an atmosphere, a vibe if
you like, that says "l am about to fool you". lf people are on their guard, they'll
50
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sffeet Hypnosis Publishing
e
€
€
€
€ccCacCecGa
;
;
€
€
€

-)
)
-
-
-
-)
)
)
)
)
)
-)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)33
-)3
)
-
-
-
-
-
-)
)
)
-3333
start analyzing, thinking "What's he saying; this doesn't even make sense, so l'm
not going there." The reason is because in the back of their heads they're afraid
someone is going to make fun of them in some way, or give them an unpleasant
experience.
You have to have your integrity in place, your H+ in place and make sure the
whole thing sounds like a real conversation to make sure they actually treat it like
one. When they do, they will consider the ideas fully.
DVIDS
PowerWolds for Mind Bending Language
Now we'll get ready for a set of power words for mind-bending language to be
ingrained into you so that they're there for you without having to think about it.
We'll start by ingraining some of the core, the more important, shall we s?y,
prepositions that I like to use so they're there naturally, instinctively, whenever
you need to use them. We'll put them at a conscious level.
Here's a warning. To the extent that this makes no sense to you at all, it will
work. lf it starts having meaning, you'll actually find it harder. Switch your
conscious mind off for a little bit, and know it will be there for you at the
unconscious level when you need it.
We've got the four basic sySTEM categories, space, time, energy and matter.
Three predicates I like to use for Space:
a) Beyond
b) Aside
c) lnside
EGRCFiESi - ASl{IlG SYSIEM QuESIlOllSi tf;ill.lc PREDICATES
1. Quickly, walk around the room and ask one of the five sySTEM questions:
a) Who are you?
b) Where are you?
c) When are you?
d) How are you?
5'l
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

e) What are you?
o The only answer I want you to give for the first round is one of those 3
words in any order you want. That's it. Go and do it with as many
people as possible.
2. Now let's start filling in some content. Don't make the content anything
particularly meaningful or interesting, or even sensible.
Example- How are you?
Beyond the question, inside what I feel is aside from anything else.
o Just use the 3 predicates randomly letting your mind fill in content in
between.
lgor's Commenb
lf you're finding your brains are almost tripping over themselves a little bit, trying
to come up with stuff, that's exactly where you want to be!
Three predicates I like to use for Time:
a) Before
b) Yet
c) Now
DGRGS|ES - t SilllG SPACE Al.lD TIME PREDGATES
t. When someone asks you how you're doing this time, use 'before' , 'yet',
and 'now'. Only this time, when you're finished, you will go right back to
'beyond', 'aside' and 'inside' with content.
Example - When are you?
Before, yet now.
Besides what we're saying, inside I feel aside from everything
else.
o Off you go, change partners as often as you can
52
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing
eeeeeeeeeeeecceeeCCcCe
€aaGaGaCGGGGGGGGG
atG
C,d,
l

2. Do the same thing again only this time, we're going to fill in the content
between the time predicates as well as the space predicates.
Example - How are you?
Before I tell you that, anything I say yet isn't now. Beyond
whatever's going on inside. Who knows aside from that?
o lt needs to make no sense whatsoever, just have fun with it. Go ahead
then switch.
Three predicates I like to use for Energy:
a) Totally
b) only
c) To the extent
No we're going to do the next layer.
EXERCEEi - tffil\G ENERGY PREDGATES
1. lgnore the first two sets of predicates for Space and Time elements. Just
answer your questions with the three Energy predicates.
Example - How will you have been?
Totally, only, to the extent.
. Go crazy if you want and mix them up.
2. Now you're going to do exactly the same thing, don't fill in the content for
the Energy predicates, but I want you to add the Space and Time
predicates as well, with content.
Example - How will you have been?
Totally, only to the extent before this moment that's yet, not
now, aside from everything else inside, I feel beyond.
53
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

o Feel the brain melting again? Just when you thought you were getting
it, right? Off you go.
3. Now use all nine predicates with content.
Example - When had you been?
Totally to the extent that l'm only before yet now, aside from anything
else, beyond inside, I feel things.
o Okay, off you go.
Three predicates I like to use for Matter:
a) All
b) Other
c) Each
DGRqSE - IJSilIIG MATTER PREDICATES
1. Just like before, just answer with those 3 predicates for Matter. Forget the
other nine for the moment.
Example How are you?
All
Other
Each
o Off you go.
2. Let's take all of them together now. All 12 in one big, glorious sentence.
Example: How will you have been?
All the time
Other than now
Each time to the extent
Only that l'm totally this not yet
But before I tell you
Beyond all other things aside from inside
I feel good
54
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeCeeCCcCc
C,

Igor's Comments
Hopefully these basic 12 mind-bending language type how words are ingrained,
so you can use them without having to think much about them, you're just
throwing them in, it's easy.
lwant you to be able to continue to do all the other stuff, eye contact, the gentle
gaze, the attitude of agreement, but reversing things if you need to, and so on.
That's part of what you're going to use in real life.
3. Find a partner and have a conversation. Choose who's going to be the
hypnotist for the first 5 minutes, and who will be for the last 5 minutes.
Pick any topic, such as:
o Why are you here?
o How are you enjoying the course?
o What do you do for fun?
o Do you have any family?
. As the hypnotist, while having your regular conversation, start weaving
any of these 12 words in casually. The operative word is casually.You
might want to do some extra things, like staring, a friendly touch
contact. You might want to introduce that a little casually, and then
break it off. Casually, then break it off.
o You're only saying those things to the extent that people are actually
following along with yoU, don't go beyond that level. Five minutes per
person. Refrain from being the hypnotist when you're not, it might be
harder than you think, but try it anyway.
lgor's Comments
The unconscious mind reasons with two types of logic:
1. The Law of Associations - Either two things happen at the same time to
the same thing, or one thing causes the other.
2. Symbolism - lf you look at any of the old type magic or more primitive
cultures, they would burn a figure of something as a symbolic thing for
something else. When you have dreams, and you dream about a ball that
55
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

actually represents something you played with as a child, it may symbolize
lost youth. You can feel all that by just having one ball in the dream.
One of the things we're doing is taking you way out of your conscious focus, so
that it makes it a lot easier for you to reflect back on normal reality with that
mindset. lt's no good just being able to perceive it this way if you can't express it,
because then you're just as stuck.
How To Be More lnfluential and Percuasive ln Your Life
lpresume you would like to be more influential and persuasive in a particular
aspect of your life.
Whether you're a hypnotist trying to sell your practice , or get clients more
enthused about the hypnosis that's going to happen, whether you're salespeople
trying to sell a product, whether you're parents trying to parent children,
whether you're teachers trying to education, whether you're writers or public
speakers and so on, you all have areas in which you'd like to be more influential.
So, when you think about these particular areas, there is some information that you want to
communicate. Some ideas, some attitudes or some principles, which, if the other
person understood properly, would make your job a lot easier.
ln other words, you have some values as a parent that you want your children to
have.
As a salesperson, you want your customers to know things about the product
that, if they had it, would make their life somehow better or their business
somehow better.
As a public speaker, there are some attitudes that, if your audience had them,
they would get what they came for. They think they come for the information,
but really, it's the other stuff behind the information that they're more interested
in.
As an author, nurse or hypnotherapist, there are always some ideas, some
attitudes, and some concepts that if people really understood the heart of it,
would make your life easier and actually their life easier too.
56
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. O 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

ETRCF|E - CRFAIINIG INFLUEI.ICE
1. For about 5 minutes, think about one of these topics so that you can speak
to someone about this. Get into partners, and talk about your topic to
your partner for 5 minutes on this topic.
o Hypnotists might talk about the power of hypnosis, or about how
hypnosis can help people, or about what hypnosis is and what it isn't.
. A salesperson might talk about their particular product and all the
advantages it has, and you, of course, as the subject will pretend to be
interested in it in terms of whatever that product happens to be.
o lf you're more interested in parenting or teaching, then of course, you
adopt that position.
o Here's the thing.As you're presenting your lecture, your information, I
want you to go out here as you're talking to your audience. Watch
them like a hawk. Do you remember how yesterday we spent a lot of
time waiting for them to react before you put more spin on things?
This is what l'd like you to do.
. Present an idea, and then you wait to see their reaction while they're
kind of processing it. lf they're not processing it correctly, you might
say something like, "Let me give an example, because above all the
things you've been thinking about, the experience you haven't had yet
won't allow you to understand this."
o You see what happens is the mind opens up, and then you go off and
expand the same idea again. Then, you just watch how they absorb
that. lf from time to time, you add a little bit of spin here and little bit
of spin there, just in your normal conversation, that's great. The key
thing you're looking for, though, is how they're absorbing what you're
saying.
o lf their mind is starting to glaze over a little bit, capture their attention
again. Throw a bit of spin in, and just as they're going, "Oh, yeah, that
makes sense. Ooh, my brain is hurting, but l'm almost getting it." Then
57
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

you just make it very clear for them. You pause. You let the idea settle
in.
Once you can sense that it's settling in - in other words, you'll see
them react in a certain way, then you carry on. Again, with some light
spin here and there. Then again, when an important idea comes, or an
idea you think they might resist, put a bit of spin, and then present the
idea again. Then you pause. Let it settle it in.
There are many different things you can do in terms of where you
pause, how you pause, and when you spin and so on. We're just
getting used to this a little bit as a starting block. ls that easy to do?
So, we'll have 5 minutes apiece. Ten minutes in total. Find a different
partner. I want you to give them a mini lecture on your topic, whatever
reason you came here for. Assume they're interested in your ideas, and
just notice where you pause and where you spin.
)2eecccc
;eeeeeeeCeee
€44,
€,cceeeeIeeeeeIeceecc
Igor's Comments
I don't expect you to be fluent,
lf not in this course, when you
situations. You will get there.
easy and natural at this stuff yet. You'll get there.
practice at home and start applying it in practical
DVI'9
Reftaming
What I want to do now is start exploring how to think as a covert hypnotist,
especially with this mind-bending language. How do we start using this a bit more
strategically, shall we say? This is where your conscious minds are actually a bit of
use. Feel free to bring them back.
Reframing is taking an idea that a person thinks of in one way, and switching
their view so that they go "Oh, actually maybe it's a little bit different. Oh yeah, I
get it. lt's probably more valuable this way."
58
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sheet Hlpnosis Publishing

?
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
Example - Reframing The Objection Of Having No Time
Let's take a simple scenario, and you can adapt this in many different ways. l'm
using a very typical scenario that's easy to understand. Let's say you're selling
something: a product, a service, a seminar, DVD set, hypnotherapy practice, or
whatever.
What are some of the more typical objections people give? One might be, for
example, I have no time for that sort of thing. Or, l'd love to do that, but I don't
think I have time for that. l've got all these crazv things going on.
Another thing might be I don't have enough money. I have no cash for that. l'm
sure many of you do sales. lf you have your own business, you're doing sales.
Aren't these amongst the highest, most frequent objections you end up getting?
I know there are others, but I want to look at these just because it's going to be a
useful way of deconstructing how people think so that you know at what point to
start strategically leveraging your mind-bending language.
When someone says they have no time, what are they really saying? ln terms of
what we're doing here, what they're really saying is, "This is my reality, and inside
here the bit that allows me to buy this product is so small that I have no time
allocated for it". The fact is they have plenty of time because that's how lives
work.
There are very few people who generally run out of time for things because they
have more important things going on. They're comparing how much time they
have left at the end of the day, spare, for this activity. What aren't they thinking
about? They're not even thinking about the rest of their lives; the places, for
example, where they're wasting time that they don't need.
So, when someone says to you "l have no time", doesn't that make you a little
curious? What do they spend their time on? l'm sure there are some very
important things, like sleeping. That's important. But how much do they sleep? ls
it 10 hours a day? Or is it six?
lf they spend their time watching TV, watching soap operas and so on, -- for
example, let's say you're doing a hypnotherapy practice, just because that's kind
of my background. lf they say they have no time to come to the clinic, they're
telling you that they'd rather watch Oprah than overcome a life-long phobia.
59
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

They'd rather watch Jerry Springer and all the crazy people on that - I have to
admit, that's kind of nuts. I mean talk about mind-bending moments, right?
They'd rather watch that than actually be happy in their life. They'd rather sit
there and be miserable watching that than do something about whatever's
making them miserable and change it.
Do you see where we're going with this? Now, of course, they don't realize this. lf
you point it out, they might go, "Oh, wow". lt's a mind-bending moment.
The reason they don't realize it is because they're so stuck in the tiny little dot
that says, 'this is what spare time I have, and it's not enough for that'. They don't
realize that they can find time somewhere else, other than where they're looking
for it.
By the w?v, can you already hear the mind-bending language starting to develop
from this place? The kinds of things l'm interested in are, first of all, what are
they wasting their time on? Let's say it's a soap opera. Great. "So, what do you
value more, the soap opera or being happy? Which is more valuable to you?"
So, let me ask you this. "Do you value your happiness enough to skip two
episodes of your favorite soap opera in order to be happy? Wouldn't that be
something?" Can you hear the tiny amount of spin put into that? That's enough
usually, isn't it?
Now, we're adding our understanding of how people think into the whole mix,
and it becomes a little more persuasive. Do you see where we're going with this?
Now, for some people, it may not be enough. Do you know what you do at that
point? More spin. All you're doing is taking them beyond the place where they're
locked in. An addiction is this little circle that's so tight, they can't get out of it.
The walls are so high they can't jump out of it.
So, it's a just a question of getting them out of that cycle long enough to have
choice again. Then, when they have genuine choice, what are they going to
choose? The addiction of watching a soap opera, which doesn't really add any
value to life, or doing something for an hour or two that will totally transfer their
lives so they'll be happier, healthier and stronger and lead a more fulfilling life?
60
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

When presented like that, and there is actually genuine choice going on, it's a no-
brainer, isn't it? lt only isn't a no-brainer when something else is interfering. Do
you see how this works?
You are all salespeople. You're selling ideas and concepts as much as you're
selling products and services.So, the point of putting the spin in, is to loosen
people up from being stuck in just one little way of being, so they can actually
have a bigger perspective and say "ln my whole of my life, how does this fit in
that can be positive?" lf it does, they'll go for it. lf it doesn't, why should they go
for it? lf you haven't got a good enough offer, that's all that happens.
PGRCFiE - t'SilI.IG SPIN TO GIVE PEOPLE GREATER PETPESilI'E
L. You get the idea of what we're doing with someone saying they have no
time. We're going behind the scenes to figure out how their life is
organized so they can come to this conclusion and where the flaw is in
their reasoning. Where's the mistake they're making? ln the sense of no
time, it's that they're wasting time on the wrong things and they just don't
know that.
o The example we're using here
may just be an inefficient use
then switch.
is a soap opera, it doesn't have to be, it
of time. Explore this with your partner,
Igor's Comments
lf someone got a phone call, you hear your house is on fire and your kids are still
inside, what do you do? You find time, don't you? You make time, so time exists.
It's just the question of either they value all of these frivolous activities more
than what you have, in which case either you haven't presented your idea clearly
enough in terms of the value of iU or it's no good as an idea for that individual, in
which case let it go.
Example - Reframing The Objection of Having No Money
Let's do this same idea if someone's objection is they have no cash, I don't have
enough money. Oh, l'm a poor little bugger. I can't do this. Please give it to me
for free. Please. This has happened to you, hasn't it? lt does happen.
6{
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

As a rule, when someone says they have no cash, what are they saying? They're
not saying that they don't have any cash. They just don't want to spend it on
what you have to offer.
Have you ever bought something completely idiotic, put it on your shelf and then
look at it and go, "Why the hell did I buy thaf?" lt's still sitting on that shelf, isn't
it? Probably still in the box it was bought in, sealed, unopened, taking up space.
And, if I can hazard a guess here, some of those things weren't even cheap, were
they? How do you spend S1OO or 5200, maybe S1,OOO or 52,000 on some item
that brings you no value whatsoever because it's still in a box?
But if you think of that one little item that could actually transform your life, you
think you can't afford that.
Ladies, how many shoes do you have? I know l'm in risky territory here, but what
do you value more? Those shoes or your whole life? Exactly. Risky territory.
Even then, it's just a question of figuring out what it is about shoes they value. lt's
not the shoes; it's how you feel when you're wearing them. lt's how you look. lt's
how you think others will perceive you.
How about spending time learning to look, feel and move that w?y, whether or
not you're wearing shoes, so it's you that they're looking at and not your shoes?
Wouldn't that be worthwhile? How many shoes would you give up for that? All of
them, right? I hope you have a lot because l'm expensive!
Do you see how when people present you with an objection of any sort - and
we're just using a sales objection right now, it could just as easily be a therapeutic
objection, like "Oh, my life is miserable. I can't move on. lf only so and so
changed,I'd be okay", it's because they have some kind of flawed logic. This has
kept them stuck in too small a circle. So we reframe the problem.
ln so doing, their logic is flawless in the expression of it. Like if that person did
change, they would be much better. No doubt about it. Maybe. Or they don't
have the cash. No doubt about it. Maybe.
Our job, now when we start getting more strategic about this is not just to add
spin before you throw in the ideas, it's to realize that people get stuck in very
62
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfieet Hypnosis Publishing
eeeeeCeCCCCeeCeeCCCCCCCCCaCCC
€C
€
€e
€
€
€cce'ccc
-t

-
-
-
-)
)
-)
)
)
)
-)333
-)
)
)333333333
)33
)33
)3
)33
)33
small dots of their experience, not realizing that when they look at the larger
picture, more is possible.
The Principle Of Using Mind Bending Language With Reftaming
For the moment, do you get the principle of how you use mind-bending language
coupled with the reframe?
You have an idea.
Someone presents an objection.
You run some spins around it.
You present them the idea again and it has somewhere fresh to go.
lf you understand the mindset that allowed them to conclude the objection -
because this is not really the objection, it's all their thinking, then this is the
conclusion behind all the thinking that got them to this place.
lf you can understand that thinking, and you use your mind-bending language
around that thinking, the conclusion disappears, doesn't it? Which means the
objection disappears. Do you see how that works?
EXEffiiES - MNDul.lG OBJEgnONSi utill.lc A BIGGER HCruRE
1. Pick a particular topic you want to influence people on. Get into groups of
three or four people and spend about half an hour doing the following:
o Write down 2 or 3 of the most common objections to your product,
service, idea, concept or whatever it is you're selling. Be that an early
bed time for your kids, that you can be more productive at work for
your work colleagues, or that your product or service is the thing this
person or company needs to buy.
o Start thinking about what happens behind the line they give you about
the objection that is not actually the objection, it's the conclusion
they've come to as a result of thinking certain thoughts and not
thin king others.
63
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

ln your group throw out different ideas of how someone could possible
come to this conclusion in terms of what they need to think to get
there, and what they need to avoid thinking to get there.
Create some random mind-bending language spins that includes all
those things they're not thinking about, so that they are, and all the
things that you do think about in a bigger picture so they're not
thinking about them in the same way.
That can be a therapeutic thing too, "l have a problem (X), and am still
thinking in a certain way to have that problem". Just keep it simple, so
we have some simple reframes, we'll make it more sophisticated as we
go along.
Igor's Commenb
This is the key secret to being great at mind-bending language and an amazing
covert hypnotist. You're not dealing with things at face value anymore. You're
going behind the scenes where the real stuff happens.
DV[r {O
PGAT
Now we'll develop a simple drill that you can do yourself - a little mental exercise
eeeCeCeCCCCeeCeCCCCa
€aCa
€aC
€
€
€c
€
€
€
€ccccdccd
t
which will allow you to develop the
ability to get to the thinking behind
people's thinking, and develop instant
mind-bending language that fits those
scenes so you can reframe, change
objections, dissolve problems before they
can even arise.
'Pt stands for Parameters
We're looking at what the problem is, and
what's the goal, or outcome that they
want. lt's asking, where are you now and
PGAT
P = Parameters
f, = Critical Factor Bypass
[ = Access Resources
T = Transform
64
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

where do you want to be? This is true in a therapeutic context as well as in a
sales context.
Example - Problem - I have no car and I need one.
Where do you want to be? What are your parameters? - I want a car that does
these things. lt's cheap, runs well, etc.
So you have your context which defines the nature of the entire interaction.
'Gt stands for Critical Factor Bypass
You want to get past the conscious mind, past the rationalization, past the
excuses and past the objections that will keep them stuck where they are.
Past the procrastination and why it's justifiable, past their being late and why
that's justifiable, past the anger and why they're reasonable to be angry, past the
'it's too expensive' and past their 'no time objection'.
This is essentially what mind-bending language excels at, because it does this and
the next step at the same time.
rAt stands for Access Resources
This is all about putting the person into a state of mind where they have choice
again, including the choice you want to offer to them.
lf we were going to be ethical influences, that choice may include not buying or
doing whatever you want them to buy or do.
lf you believe in your product and your ability to match up something they need
to something you have to offer, then great, you're a winner.
lf, on the other hand, what you have is of no value whatsoever to that person,
then you have no business selling to them and do not ask me to teach you how to
do that because I won'U there's no point in it.
There are so many people out there that will want what you have, or want what
you could offer them, if you actually thought a little about what to put value on,
that there's really no point in going down that road.
65
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

l'd be doing you a massive disserve by teaching you to sell stuff that nobody
needs or wants, because it actually puts you in a worse, even scarcity mindset, a
more 'the worlds going to get you' type mindset, and I don't want to do that.
Do you see how mind-bending language gets you into those two things at the
same time? The conscious mind can't quite hang onto the problem the same way
anymore, and they're feeling more resourceful about the whole thing.
rTt stands for Transform
lf you're doing therapy you will of course, do some testing as well, although we'll
de-emphasize that in terms of this course.
To transform them all you do is make sure they're empowered in the context
where they have to make the decision, or the context where they have the
problem, but no longer do.
So basically, attaching this to this which makes their goal easier to achieve.
Another way of looking at it is that you're attaching the resource to their current
experience so it's easier to go do the things they need to, to get their goal.
Does anyone here sell anything? When you think about the reasons why people
don't bry, oftentimes, have you ever come across clients or potential clients who
talk themselves out of buying something that you know would be absolutely
amazing for them, and just what they're looking for?
For example, they're getting skittish, find it hard to make decision, they feel bad
so they make the transition of feeling bad and they can't quite conclude on
something. Do you see where l'm coming from with this?
DGROS|ES - Hot t TO DPLORE SOIUIEo]{ES| THtNKhtG
1. Use a genuine problem , or role-play the problem through the
person. Choose something small or minor to get some easy one's
your belt. You can use the situation of sales, or therapeutic. The
model works all the way around.
other
u nder
same
66
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

When someone is in objection, do you know what the real objection is?
When and where does it happen? How is it happening? What's really
going on inside that?
o Take 20 minutes and use the PCAT formula. Ten minutes each.
o Here's the key, keep it in the back of your head. Your job is not to
resolve the problem. Your job is not to overcome the objection. Your
job is not even to get to the root of what's really going on in terms of
their thinking.
o Your only task is to explore their thinking, so you have the detail you
want, and you nail them down to something consistent. ln other
words, when you feel them escaping somewhere you ask them,
"Where did that happen?", and you nail them down, do not let that
happen. Practice a bit of mind-bending spins and that's about it.
o That is your only task.
DVI' {{
lgor's Comments
Not quite as simple as it looks, is it? lt's pretty involved. Please, rest assured lam
not expecting you to get instant results. What l'm getting you into the mode of is
to start thinking about the issues, so you start developing possibilities.
Here's what happens. When you start talking to people, mentally rehearsing
these scenarios, you'll have sometimes a half dozen different possibilities they
could answer, don't you? So you just choose one, it doesn't matter which.
One, they're more likely to answer and you go down that road. Then you have
other choices and you get another one and go down another road. Does that
make sense? This is not about resolving the problem yet, it's about how you think
strategically at this point.
You are doing a good job. I want to emphasize something, and that is, just
because I make something look easy doesn't mean it necessarily has to be
67
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

instantly there. Once you've connected the right pathways inside your own brain,
it'll be just as easy for you.
When I say easy, by the W?y, it's actually not easy for me either. The key
difference is that l've given up caring whether l'm right or wrong. Half the stuff
you all came up with regarding issues, I have no idea what to do with it, l'm just
asking questions and hoping that something will lead me somewhere.
Then suddenly, I notice a maneuver or something happening like a little escape
mechanism and then l'll pin that down. After a period of time I get a little better
at that and something else happens, so you start creating a richer model.
2. The way to get good at this is...
a) Partner up with some of the people in this room, keep in contact with
them via the phone, Skype or something like that and do this coaching
process. Externalizing other people's blocks and blockages, be it
objections for business or personal work, helps immensely in getting
out of your own head and your own assumptions.
b) lstrongly advise you to not use, shall we say, people in your life that
you have a very personal connection to, in terms of what their problem
is, because the more involved in the problem you are, the tougher it is
for you to deal with, because you'll bring in stuff you don't even
realize.
D\ID 12
ad:
dtdd
€
€
€
€
€
€e/
d!d
;ri
€'ri
;
;lseerttrt
,a
lgods Short Review Of The Past TWo Days
Let's have a little review of where we've gotten so far. ln the first couple of days,
we focused on just speaking like a covert hypnotist and some of the advanced
language - the mind-bending language.
Yesterday, we focused our attention on thinking like a covert hypnotist. ln other
words, learning to maneuver inside someone's mind so that you can actually
have the fine feeling for what you need to say in order to persuade them in a
context, either therapy or sales and so on.
68
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
,
,
,e
1,eeeeCeCeG
j

What I want to focus on today is how to put them together in a strategic way. ln
other words, you have a good sense of how someone is thinking. You have a good
idea of how to speak using mind-bending language.
How do you put those two together in a very strategic way so you can plan like an
advanced covert hypnotist would?
Maneuvers:
Maneuvens
Awareness
Negation +Not
sySTEM Qs (who,
where, when, how,
what)
SySTEM SPINs
Time Shifts
Pauses (run on
ln terms of maneuvers, you can shift
people's awareness around.
/ lt's easy to add negation.
,/ You're familiar with the idea of the
sySTEM's question's and how they
can spin you out in different
directions.
You're familiar with the different
kinds of spins we put on, the two or
three different phrases that you can add in a different way, which allows
you to accentuate the spin that you're creating.
We can move through time by using predicates or tenses. You can shift
through time.
,/ You understand the importance and the value of pausing at the right time,
partly so they can process what you're saying and, of course, partly so that
you can change the meaning after the pause, so that they have a little
unexpected moment.
'/ The other thing we covered so far are the systems predicates.
A couple of quick things I want to just throw in there in terms of what else you
can do. This is more to give you some feeling as to where you can go with this.
This is not an exclusive list, but to give you an idea that this is a starting point.
Even though this is an advanced covert hypnosis program, it should be a
platform, from which you build whatever you want out of it.
69
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfieet Hypnosis Publishing

You can add all kinds of things. For example, we've been playing with language
and spinning people out in terms of the building blocks they use to make reality.
lf you start changing the sequence of that sequence, it changes the meaning,
doesn't it. lt's the same building blocks, you just change the meaning, from 'the
dog wags the tail' to 'the tail wags the dog', the meaning changes significantly,
doesn't it?
So, when you reverse the syntax, you can actually change the impact something
has in a way that can be quite mind-bending because the person starts going,
what's going on here?
What we're going to do now is start thinking in terms of strategy. How do you
know what you want to say and when you want to say it?
Power Loops
A power loop is a hypnotic process, a strategy you have inside your mind to take
you from A to P.
The PCAT formula , for example, is an example of a power loop. You start with a
problem, clear the slate and bypass the critical factor from the problem, get a
resource, associate it and you transform the entire situation.
In order to be able to use those things or to think in those ways, you have units
within that. ln other words, between the P and C, you want to do certain things.
You want to move them certain directions. You want to make more of the
problem, less of the problem and how do you maneuver through those
experiences?
Example - What if you came across someone whose mind was so closed, that
new ideas just wouldn't go in? Wouldn't it be useful to open their minds up?
What if someone is stuck in a rut and they can't see choices, their mind is stuck,
wouldn't it be useful to open their mind up to give them more choices?
A closed mind is somewhat of a narrow mind isn't it? lt's a narrow focus. lt's
focused on one idea. What we want to do is open the mind; we want to send
them in different directions.
What opens the mind? What about things like 'more than', 'beyond', or'above'?
'Think about whatever you're thinking of right now and go beyond that. More
70
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
CCeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
€4cC
C,

than the thoughts you're having right now, are the ones that are coming aren't
they? Above all, keep enough of the mind on the ideas that are coming that you
weren't aware of."
Do you see how words like 'more than', 'beyond' and 'totally' are opening words,
words that encompass more things as a bigger picture?
What is the reverse? 'Less than', 'only this', and maybe 'inside' as well, tend to
bring the mind down.
You might think, 'we don't want to close minds, we want to open them' wouldn't
that seem fair? What happens if someone is sitting there and they're stuck with
all these choices going "l could do that, I could do this" and then they sit there
happily contemplating their choices but never get anything done?
At that point, what do you want to do? You want to hone their mind down into
specifics, so one is inductive, which basically gives the unconscious mind
permission to find more and the other one is deductive, which tells them to hone
in on one.
So now we have a little pattern developing don't we. "Consider all the choices
you have",'all' is an opening word isn't it? "Beyond the choices there will be one
that only fits you, above all, find that one and totally consider it now, but, only to
the extent that you can do something about it."
What's the first thing that comes to mind? Do you see how l'm stretching your
mind, closing it up, stretching your mind, etc? lt's a kind of fractionation.
This doesn't at all match your experience over the past few days does it, opening
up so big and confused, then closing down thinking that you get it. Opening up
again, thinking "Oh, my God, this is a roller coaster' and closing it down, thinking
"Oh, my God I don't get this anymore".
There's so much choice - oh, this is clear. There's so much choice - oh, this is
clear. Do you see how that's working? Meanwhile, you're stretching their minds.
So you can open or close their minds. You can create more abstraction; you can
create more concreteness, depending on what you need.
71
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

You can create more induction, which creates more choices, or you can hone
them down through deduction to one or two simple things they can actually do.
You can overload or you can simplify, do you see how that works?
lf there's a lot of emotion attached, you have to go in, clear the emotion to the
objection and come out.
Unless you go in and clear out whateve/s going on there, the objection will
remain. They can't make the decision to come see you because they'll either be
too afraid, too confused, or whatever.
This is at sales level. Of course, you can see the obvious therapeutic application
too.
lf, on the other hand, they're going "like yeah, I don't know if it'll work for me",
are they particularly attached to that, or do they just throw it out there to see
what happens? At that point, you simply move it to one side and say I understand
that.
Do an agreement reversal. You agree with it and then you reverse it. Say "l
understand that, of course, you have doubts it's only natural isn't it? Now aside
from the thoughts you're having now, how do you want to think that's so much
more, so when you will have had whatever you came here for, you can look back
and go that was worth it?"
Aside, start again, open up, hone down, look back...do you see how we've
created a loop, a whole process just based on the language and what it does to
the mind?
Ghanging The End Point
We can also change the end point. How about this "You're all here for some
reason and I know you don't know what it is...the more you think about it and go
beyond whatever you thought was there, you begin to have so much more choice
and you can totally consider all that only to the extent you feel good now."
Open up, create choice, hone down, and then you create a target, feel good. So
in other words, you're saying going into a trance of infinite possibilities to find
out what's there, select one of those things only that happens to conform to the
whole category of feeling good.
72
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
CeeCCeCC
lECaaaaCaGaaaCCCa
]FCaaaaaaCaaaaaaaaa
J

I don't know which one it'll be, but it'll be one of them. And, even if it isn't, I can
spin back and do it again. So you get to choose where they start and where they
end up. You get to choose the journey they take, to the open or close their mind.
Example - How can you unstick someone when they're stuck in a particular point
of view? "My decision is final!" Have you ever heard that?
I had an executive I was coaching earlier in my days who was about to lose a big
account. He got an email that said "This is what we decided to do, this decision is
final now, it's been approved and we're going forward".
He sent them back a two line email...something along the lines of...as your
deciding that, what else...whatever, he put in some reframe around what they
were missing in terms of working with his company.
Ten minutes later, he got a phone call from the CEO of the company that was just
dumping him saying you know what, you're absolutely right, let's talk.
It's not always going to be that cut and dried, but do you see how you can take
people's minds, when they think they're stuck but they're not?
Making A Decision
Believe it or not, you are still making the same decision now to keep going with
that decision. You can change your mind about it at any time, so decisions do not
exist.
Relationships do not exist, you relate, you decide, and you keep relating and keep
deciding every moment of your life, until you don't. That's when the relationship
is over. You stop relating or stop relating in that way.
The decision has been broken. lt hasn't broken really, it's not like a little toy
where you can whine and say "Oh, mom I broke my decision", it's simply that you
changed your mind.
How To Stick Something TogetherArd Make lt More Real
You do it the other way. There's something you can do that's actually very subtle
in both directions that has nothing to do with language. lt has to do with
attention. Remember, where our attention goes, our energy flows.
73
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfreet Hypnosis Publishing

lf someone keeps looping back to the problem, where's all the attention going?
Where's all the energy going? What's becoming more real?
lf you distract people away from the problem, where is the energy going now? To
something else. So if you want to build something, you put attention on it.
Example - Let's say someone says "l've wanted one of these toaster ovens
forever now." "Really, how come?" "l don't know, I just feel it's going to be
amazing to have one of these, it's going to be awesome!"
"Really, you really think it's going to be awesome?" " Yeah." "How do you know?"
"lt's just awesome, I saw it on TV and so on." " Really?" "Yeahl" "Are you sure?"
"lt'd be awesome to have this thing."
What am I doing?
l'm spinning his attention back over and over to his feeling of how cool this thing
will be and l'll do it in different ways, but the point is, its building attention on
how positive and awesome it will be to have this thing. lt's becoming more real.
Do you see how simple that is?
How To Separate and Integrate Experiences
Using Predicates
How do you separate and integrate experiences using these predicates? As you
feel 'this', what happens to 'that'?
Do you see how they come together? lnside of both, what's the same? What's
the only thing that drives'that'? See how'that'comes together.
Aside of those, between those what else is going on? Aside from that, what's
this? Do you see how l'm separating or bringing together. Together with this, that
can be this, can it not? Do you see how your language can separate or integrate?
Now you can have separation, for example, you can do "How are you doing right
now?" "Im feeling bad." "Between the bad feeling and what you know, you
realize there's a space that you can think in, isn't there?" Do you see how I
separate it out?
74
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
Iecccccccccc:
€ee
€eC
€
€ee
€,
€
€d,c
€ccd:c
€
€
€
€
€
€
€
€
€
€Ce

Example - So when you look at that memory way over there, something that had
happened to yoU, you can think about that little boy or girl, and all the things that
happened to him. And, you know that he made it through don't you?
Do you see what l'm doing now? Separating.
At the end, of course, is "As you consider that boy and all the stuff that's
happened to him, you realize that this is just one experience. That little boy
became this young man and that's really you, isn't it?"
"lnside you you've always had that, so as this grows up inside you, you realize
that was just a memory and you are more than that aren't you?"
Do you see how we're cycling through these things? How do we start using this
stuff and putting it together? This is what we're interested in.
Power loops are basically a process where you take people through little steps
that gets you to an outcome. lf someone is feeling an intense feeling that's
negative, before you can handle that feeling, they have to be in a position where
they can interact without being overloaded by it.
So what is it I already imply as the first step? Separation, which you can do by
dissociation or by a different language like between and so on.
But that doesn't solve it all does it? You may have to move to other experiences
that they can then bring together before they've integrated it.
Do you see how l've created a little journey here? l'm here, l'm overloaded. I
separate. I jump to a different point of view.
I come up with a resource. I bring those resources together and re-integrate. So,
l'm here now feeling much more positive about the whole thing. Do you see how
that works?
Do you see the loop that's gone through which allows you to transform? By the
w?y, the PCAT formula, ds far as l'm concerned, is pretty much the key to
everything you'll do. You'll just be able to do variations whether it's...
Sales
Teaching
75
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

You're running through the same loop, we're just putting different variations and
spins on different things.
EGRCtriE - LJSilIIG FCAT hl SAES AIID THAf,ryty
1. Get into groups of 3 or 4 people. Those interested in sales on one side of
the room, those interested in covert therapy, change and so on, on the
other side. You'll all get a chance to do both anyway.
o Start engaging your brain first and brainstorm how to use a PCAT
formula for a simple bit of covert therapy, and a more complex bit of
covert therapy, like a full regression technique or something like that.
o Discuss it in the group, maybe draw up little plans; throw in some notes
as to what language might be useful here and there, what the effect of
the language is, why you might use it and so on.
o Here's a hint. lf you don't have any experience as a salesperson, make
sure the people you're in the group with do.
o lf you have less experience as a therapist, in other words, you're more
of a novice starting up; make sure you're in a group of people who
have more experience, that way you both learn from each other.
o Twenty minutes per group. As a group, you're going to design a simple
sales process and a complex sales process, a simple bit of covert
therapy and a complex piece of covert therapy.
76
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
CeCCCCCCCCCCCCCCGCaCCCCCCcaaCaCC
€C
€
€
€dd
€cdJ:

l--Lttr
Ipi.I.pppi-i.!
-AAA3
-
-
-
-3
)
)A
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
-)
)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Igor's Comments
Some of you find this a little bit difficult, of course. Remember, this is just
practice, the more familiar you become with the foundations, the easier it gets to
apply it.
There's a reason why we spend three days building foundations, because
applications become really complex if you have no foundations to work through.
So, to the extent you go off and apply the foundations even more, you'll find this
even easier once you leave here.
You all know my tricks now, it's not fair!
This is how I would do this, step by step. Whenever you do your stuff, especially
power loops, you start off very blatant, no matter which group you were in.
1. Step one is to make the client excited. Are you excited client? No? Get
excited. Okay. Think of it in childish steps like that because then it's easier
and very clear what you're trying to achieve.
2. The next step is to layer over that a little bit of sophistication so it's a little
more fluid. Consider a time that makes you feel more excited and how
does that feel now? That's a little more fluid and smooth, but still pretty
obvious what you want.
3. The final stage is to make it covert, so you present it in a way that no one
sees. As you're looking at this, I noticed you had an experience, what was
that? All the things you're thinking right now, lwant you to realize that
rest assured, it'll only give you more than that. I know that's exciting, I
understand.
Do you see how l've now moved them toward the same place, using my spins and
all the other stuff and doing it increasingly covertly? So it doesn't matter on what
end of the scale you're standing, because you'll get to the end eventually, it's just
a question of how fluid you are with the tools as you go along.
77
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

DvD 13
Sales Ard The Govert Hypnothenapy Process
What I want to do now is to start working through some simple processes to take
away with you.One for a sales process, and one for a covert hypnotherapy
process. Just so you have something stable that you can pull out of the bag any
time you need it and you can adapt to fit the situation you're in.
lwant to give you one on both camps, because when you have that range, you
can pretty do anything with it. They will both conform to the PCAT formula to
some extent. ln other words, there'll be variations on a theme.
78
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
PGAT Sales Process
P- Every sale is about solving a problem.
lf there is no problem, there is no sale.
lf they don't want it, there is no sale.
Either you find a problem worth solving, or you walk away.
lf you can't resolve their problem, it's unethical to sell them anything.
A problem is painful or it isn't a problem; even if it's positive, otherwise
there is no motivation for change.
Use H+
Use awareness language to intensify the problem, using predicates such as:
think, feel, consider, become aware of, contemplate, recall, remember,
experience, look at, see, hear or notice.
You also have spatial words like deeper and inside.
You have time words like now, through and during.
Build the problem up as if it is a current experience.
lntensify the problem to the extent that you can help them resolve it.
Then you can do some of the systems questions.
Parameters
o What's the problem?
o Where are you now?
o Where do you want to be?

-
-
-
-
-
-
-)
)
-
-
-3
-)
-
-
-3
-3
)
)33333
)333
)3
)3
)
)33
)33
PGAT Sales Process
The thing l'd like to do is start up piece by piece, so when you go off and actually
practice this, you understand each element.
Rather than give you a list of things to do, we want to break it down in terms of
the strategy, where the loop is, what you're trying to run through, the power
loops. You're also trying to fit in the language and mindset as well.
What are you doing when you're doing sales? 'P' Solving problems. lf they don't
have a problem to solve, can you sell anything? lf they don't want it, how can you
sell something? You either find a problem that's worth solving, or you walk away.
Now luckily, in most sales type situations they will come to you with a problem.
ln terms of the sales process, the first thing we want to do is to activate whatever
the real problem is, or the pain is. Problems have pain don't they? Otherwise
they wouldn't be problems, would they?
lf a problem isn't painful it's not really a problem. You have to know what the
problem or pain is otherwise there's no motivation for change.
By the way, this doesn't necessarily mean that you can't have positive problems.
Does anyone want to go on holiday to enjoy a nice exotic location somewhere,
have someone rub you down with oils and massaging a little bit, spoon feeding
you your cocktail, etc? lsn't that nice?
Do you have that right now? How painful is that? Do you see that the absence of
something is as much of the problem as the presence of something?
So the first thing we want to do is identify what the problem is, and stimulate it,
and there's a couple way's you can do this.
lf they come to you with a problem already, then you just run with what they
have, or you can begin to explore what they're talking about to find out.
By the wdy, this is an ingenious sales strategy for the one-on-one type process.
Not necessarily in terms of groups or doing a sales pitch.
79
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

Do you realize there's a difference in terms of sales pitch, because there's less
interaction involved? But if someone comes to you and says can you stop people
smoking? You have a rough problem don't you?
lf you start digging into it saying "Do you want to stop someone else?" And they
say "lt's me" you ask them what they've done that has failed. What's the only
thing left to you right now? Do you feel the spin going on? Once you're exploring
the problem, you want to start to intensify it.
You'll drop them right in the middle of it so they realize 'damn, this is something I
really want to resolve'. "As you step inside your identity as a smoker, what are all
the things you're not capable of that you really want to have?" Can you see the
intensity being built up at this point?
What kind of language allows you to identify the problem and intensify it, in
terms of the predicates we have? Awareness language. So if you turn awareness
onto the problem and keep using different kinds of awareness language to get it
back on the problem, will it escalate? Yes.
Example - Everyone think of a problem you have in your life, I don't care what it
is, just something minor.
Put your hand up if you're actually thinking of a problem right now. Now consider
that problem for a moment, in all its aspects. You know you feel certain things
when you're thinking about that don't you? The more you do the more you
realize that deep down inside, that problem is something you want to fix isn't it?
Beyond all the things you've done it's all failed, hasn't it? That's why it's still here.
And it's here right now isn't it? And it will continue all the way, until something
ha ppens.
Do you see the first two steps in action? Did you start feeling a little bit? Were
you thinking, "You bastard, now you put me into it again"? Can you sense the
motivation for change building? That's your leverage.
Can you hear the language? All, more, inside, deeper...those are your systems
predicates aren't they? Remember those, space, time, energy and matter.
80
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

33333333333
'Beyond'can be beyond whatever they've tried they've still failed, so you have to
make sure you're doing mini loops within that to keep them plugged into the
problem
This is important isn't it?
So, you get to this stage here and we're pretty much in the parameter stage
aren't we?
o What's the problem?
. Where are you now?
o Where do you want to be?
Notice that I can ask them where they want to be and intensify the problem at
the same time, can't l?
"So, when you think about that problem you thought about a moment ago and
really consider it, you know what it'll be like when you don't have it, don't you?
It'll feel pretty good wouldn't it? But you know you don't have that yet, don't
you?"
"You're not there yet and, to the extent that you're not there yet, you really want
something to change, don't you? So when you think about all the things you do
want, and you realize you don't have it yet", now we can start moving on to the
next segment.
What l'd like you to realize is that today we'll be focusing on you, to make sure
that things you don't have are the things that you do. Would that be something
worth exploring? Do you see me pulling you into the whole process here? I don't
even know what the hell your problems are, this is all based on the systems
predicates, can you see that?
l'm creating a loop for you to find your own thing. Now when you actually have
content, it gets even more covert, because it sounds like you're talking about the
problem.
The next stage, you don't want them stuck inside the problem because all that
does is depress them and they'll be stuck there forever. Great, you've just made
another miserable person, well done. The only purpose is to clear their mind and
8'l
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

spin. Basically, you use your mind-bending language to spin them out of
whatever the problem was.
The only purpose of plugging into the problem is to create a launch pad for them
to realize the solution is actually worth having. How many times, either as a
hypnotherapist or a salesperson, has someone come to you, you present them
with your idea and they go "Oh,l don't know if it's worth it"?
Example - They tell you, "l don't know if it's worth it?" And you go, "Are you
kidding me, a better life?"
A friend comes up and says he has insomnia, can't sleep at night. So l'm going
through the whole spiel of how sleeping is easy, it's no problem at all, etc. Then
he finds the fee. At that time it was tz}f an hour, which now would be 5240. So
he looks at the fee and gasps, and says "l don't want it that much".
What's he thinking? He's thinking about the money. I say "Oh really, how good
are you sleeping?" He says "Not very good." "Are you enjoying that?" "No." "So
are you enjoying that as much as that pair of jeans you're wearing? Two hundred
and fifty dollars for that wasn't it?"
"So what would you rather do, trade those pair of jeans in to be able to sleep
comfortably for the rest of your life, or to keep the pair of jeans and just be so
tired you can't even do anything with them? lt's up to you."Do you see the
difference?
You have to plug them into the problem for them to have a sense that there's
something worth solving in the first place. Then you clear their mind of that.
Why? Because, you're going to start accessing resources, you're going to give
them a solution, but the solution never works if they're in that depressed state of
mind.
Have you ever given someone some advice whilst they were depressed? How will
that work?
The sales process is giving advice isn't it? Here's what we have to fix, that. But, if
they're so depressed that everything sucks then your advice will be included in
that.
82
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
PGAT Sales Process
C - Using language to open people up to what you're
offering.
Use sySTEM predicates to assist in spinning people out of the problem and
opening them up to the possibilities you're offering.
Use directional predicates that distance them from the problem i.e. past,
aside from, far, yet, now.
Distancing them from the problem creates space for something else to
ha ppen.
Critical Factor Bypass, clearing the slate, some language for that:
o Aside from...you're moving yourself away from 'that'
o Beyond
o Above all...you're getting physical distance
o After
o Until...until creates a dividing line
o But...is a dividing line
o Ago...puts it behind you
o Later perhaps
o To the extent
. You can also go before time,'it's before this', ?s if the problem
hasn't even happened.
o 'To the extent'is a useful one. "Can you think about the problem
only to the extent that you can go beyond that now?"
Your thing just can't work because they don't feel it working right now, so in
order to create hope and inspiration for them to change, you have to be able to
create a dividing line between what was and what will be, and they'll be stuck
right in the middle.
You're then going to say to them, "Which way do you want to go?" They'll take a
deep breath and say "l'll go over there."
83
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

Now, do you understand what we're doing with this stage? Yes. Where are we in
the PCAT formula?'C'. What kind of language fits at this stage? Let me make it
easy for you.
ln terms of the system predicates, what kind of language will assist you in
spinning people out of the problem and creating enough of a trance of infinite
possibilities that they can actually open up to the possibilities you'll be offering
them.
"How about, aside from all the things that have failed, isn't it worth considering
all those things you haven't y€t, that could actually help you go past this?" (Past,
aside from)
"Above all, thinking of all the things you haven't done yet, doesn't it help you
realize that that problem can only be temporary, it's just that you haven't solved
it, yet. Now, shall we look at some things you can do to make all that so far and
gone that you don't even care anymore?"
(Far and gone, yet, now)
Do you see how, l'ffi distancing myself from the problem and creating an open
space for something else to happen? Do you see that working? Do you notice
how systems predicates allow you to do this?
I really want you to get this, because this is a very strategic process we're going
through. Would it help if we lined out some actual words that fit here and here
so you could write them down?
The problem- for these two stages we wanted to have a problem, identify the
problem and intensify it. So, we want to have some kind of awareness, 'think',
'feel', 'consider' and 'look at'. There's so much more, but if you need one
example of it that would be it.
I can give you some alternatives if you need them. (Think, feel, consider, become
aware of, contemplate, recall, remember, experience, look ?t, see, hear or
notice) lt's classic awareness language that brings them into the problem a little
bit. Then you can do some of the systems questions.
How can you maintain your idea of H+ if you're pushing them deeper into a
problem? Consider it this way. You're about to help them resolve something.
84
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing
caccccccccccccccccccccccdriJ,c,
d,ccccc,JcJJJJJJJ

Example - Let's use an analogy, which actually happened to me when I was a
teenager.
We had a cat and one night she didn't come back. We were a little worried, so
the next day we hear this meowing and she's in the flowerbeds. She somehow
got her paw caught in her flea collar and all night long had been carving it up,
literally almost up to the bone, and cut all the way through her shoulder, and was
not a pretty sight.
She was crying something pitiful. Here's a problem. We need to get her to a vet
and she needs to be cleaned up, sewn up and all the rest of it. But, if l'm going to
take the collar off, is it going to cause more pain or less? Every touch is going to
make this thing tighten, and she was not a happy cat, by the way.
Luckily, it was a small cat. So, we had to cause a little bit of pain to create enough
space to clear stuff out so the healing could begin, because she couldn't heal
whilst that was still there.
This is how people work with problems, they put an isolation thing around the
problem so they can cope and get on with life. You have to strip off the coping
mechanism enough that you can clean up what's inside it. Otherwise, you're not
cleaning anything up, it'll bounce off the shield they've put around it to be able to
cope.
So, you're only intensifying this to the extent that you can actually help them
resolve it afterwards. Because, if you don't, what's going to happen is they're
going to be safely protected by their coping mechanism and they'll never deal
with it, so they'll keep having the problem.
lf you don't do this stage, what you're guaranteeing is that you'll have the
problem for longer. Do you want that? No. So then, the only ethical thing as far
as I can tell would be to put them into the problem enough that they realize that
they want a solution, and that you can actually help them.
Now, it would not be ethical to do that if you didn't actually have a solution for
them, because then all you're doing is creating a pity fest and that's no good. But,
to the extent that you are convinced that what you have to offer can actually
help them.
85
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

How could you be ethical any other way than to plug them into the problem
enough to change it?
That's where experience comes in. lf, for example, you're a starting
hypnotherapist, with a stop smoking session you're a safe bet. Sexual abuse, you
may not want to go down that road too much.
lf you're in business you have a whole set of business experience, say you're
working for a corporation, they already know what they can do. So, if you don't
know what your company does then you have no business selling it yet. That's
why, when you join a company as a rule, you tend to go through a process of
training to be able to sell the product, so you understand what it can do.
So, when someone says to you, "Well I need this", then you go "You know what,
that's not us." Does that make sense?
That's the difference between selling something ethically and unethically.
Which your industry already knows how to do, and you're creating that process,
or in terms of therapy, vou have the experience to do that level of work.
Somewhere you'll be in a gray area and it's up to you to decide how hard you'll
push because you don't know how far you can take it, so you might go this far
but not further.
This is something you have to find your own boundary about.
So we have awareness language to get them into the problem, don't we? Now
we need to intensify it. What things intensify it?
86
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
eeeeeCCGCGGGGCGGGGGCCCCC
;G
;
;
;
;G
;
;
;
;
;
;CCCccG

With this, you'll say it and then go back to the problem rather than a solution.
This can go two ways, "so what else have you done that's not the problem" goes
away from the problem. "What else is going on inside you, that's more than the
problem you've been thinking about", deepens it.
"Only think about that problem enough to realize that this is something you
really want to change, isn't it? You tell me." But of course, how can they not,
when l've led their mind down that particular path?
Do you get how that works? ls that enough in terms of the language? So we're all
clear on some examples of the language you can use and you can find other
examples like it.
The energy words are very useful for it, but you also have spatial words like
'deeper' and 'inside'. You have time words like 'now', 'through' and 'during',
because you're building it up as a current experience.
You can have matter words like 'all', 'each' and 'every','what else' ' inside this'
and 'only'. So they do have the whole system predicates, it's just that you're
using them strategically to keep focusing the attention back on the problem over
and over again to build it up.
Clearing the slate, let's get some language for that.
87
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

You can also go before time, 'it's before this', like the problem hasn't even
happened. You might sov, for example, "So before you started smoking, you
realized you were a non-smoker and quite happy don't you?" Do you see how
l've gone before it now, to still clear the slate?
To the extent' is a useful one, "Can you think about the problem only to the
extent that you can go beyond that now?" lt takes you up to a threshold and then
uses some of the other system's predicates to pop you through the threshold.
ln terms of matter again, they all work in terms of where you focus the attention.
All the things that are not that. Here negation becomes very useful doesn't it?
"So if you think about the problem you've had, and consider all the things that
are not that, they're the same things that allow you to be more then you used to
think. So when you will have the ability to look back on yourself a long time after
this is over, won't you feel proud of yourself that this is something you've
overcome, right?"
Do you see how that language works? Are we clear on clearing and spinning
words, in terms of the 'C' part of the formula?
88
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sffeet Hypnosis Publishing
eeeeCCCCGGGGGGCaGGGcGGCGCCC
PGAT Sales Process
A - Presenting your Solution
The solution is to help them go inside and find a resource.
Present the benefits or value of your solution.
Take them to the state they want to be in.
Tell them what it will mean to have your product or service.
Access Resources
o You'll be more successful in life.
o You will be happier.
o You will feel better.
o You'll get more done.
o You will no longer feel bad.

What's the next step of the formula?'N Now we'll start going into the solution
elements.
The two stages here, presenting or offering your solution and, very importantly,
presenting the benefits or value of that solution. So you present your solution,
this is what we do. That's your classic pitch. That's what people think about
regarding the sales process.
All they think about, this is what we do; this is our solution, they don't bother
with starting the whole process off, or with finishing the whole process off. They
just present information and hope for the best, which is really no sales progress
at all.
So, you're going to offer your solution and then the benefits of the solutions.
What is the value of this to that person?
Let's consider the problem you thought about a moment before, and I know
you've been thinking about it some time now, which means it's probably a little
weightier than it used to be. "Aside from all those things, all the things you've
failed at, you realize that there's still hope for somebody to change, otherwise
you wouldn't be here would you?"
'There's so much more to you that it's really a question of finding that isn't it? So,
to the extent that I can show you a process to go inside and find something that
will totally demolish that problem, isn't that something that would be valuable to
you?"
"How much better will you feel? Beyond how much better you'll feel, how much
more will you be capable of? Won't you be a success in life, or should we say a
greater success in life, when all those things that used to be a problem no longer
are, isn't that fair to say?"
"And if you're feeling the way you want to feel, most of the time, because there's
no guarantees for everything is there, but if you're feeling the way you want to
feel most of the time, how much more will you get done that makes you a true
success in life?"
89
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

"So, isn't it worth exploring something inside you that's so much bigger than the
problems you've had, so they no longer have to follow you? Wouldn't that be
worthwhile doing?"
/ Do you hear the entire process up to this point?
/ Did we start with some kind of pain? Briefly, just to reactivate it.
,/ Didn't we intensify it slightly? yes.
/ Did we clear the mind a little bit to move a little separation from that?
'/ Did we offer a solution, which is to go inside and find a resource?
,/ Did we tell you about the benefits and the value of it?
/ Or, did I just hope you would work it out for yourself?
,/ How did I show you the benefits?
Partly the idea was to take them to the state they want to be in. The way I
showed you the benefits is to actually tell you what it'll mean. You'll be more
successful. You will be happier. You will feel better. You'll get more done. You'll
be a greater success in life. You will no longer feel bad.
These are all benefits, aren't they? These are things you wanted, are they not?
They're valuable to you. ls this making sense to you?
Do you see how the strategy we've been building up so far plugs in very naturally
to all this stuff?
It's great, because rather than telling you how good you'll feel, I asked you how
much better will you feel, and while you're considering that, and whether you
want to debate me, I say beyond all that so I put that aside and you take it into
consideration that "Oh, that is true".
Take one extra step from that. This is how we get more technical. By considering
how good you feel and you started that loop going, thinking maybe I will, maybe I
won't...beyond all that, what else will be happening? Where's my launch pad?
Did I launch from depression or from feeling good?
lf l'm launching from feeling good and open the frame up, where are you going to
go? All the other positive things that are possible, aren't you. l've sent you into a
positive spin inside that trance of infinite possibilities and you don't even have a
chance to argue about it because the thing that's worth arguing about is already
behind us.
90
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing
CCCCCGGGGGGGGGGG
AFGGGGGGGcCG
;ccC
;C
;
;
dr:ccccccc

So, I use that as a launch pad into that space, great and there's nothing to argue
about at that point.
PGAT Sales Process
T - Take them into the middle so they can make a choice.
You now have two positions:
1. What is happening now?
2. Where do you want to be?
You want to put them smack in the middle so they can make a choice.
Transform
o Do you want to be here?
o Do you want to be there? lt's up to you.
o To the extent that they forget the problem, you may want to plug
them into the problem enough while you're doing this to remind
them that they're not there anymore, or that they don't have to be
there.
Do you see why we selected the words, the 12 mind-bending power words the
other day? They're not the only ones, but in my opinion, they're some of the
most useful ones. They take you in many different directions.
Of course, lthink all the things on the list are valuable, and there are more only
to the extent that are useful to you though.
T' What you're essentially doing here is you have two positions. What is
happening now, and where do you want to be? You want to put them smack in
the middle so they can make a choice. So, do you want to be here, or there, it's
up to you?
To the extent that they forget the problem, you may want to plug them into the
problem enough while you're doing this to remind them that they're not there
anymore, or that they don't have to be there.
9{
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfreet Hypnosis Publishing

DvI' 14
Thenapy and the PGAT Formula
Shall we have a look at how to use the PCAT formula as a therapeutic process?
You have a problem, which is the 'P' state. You do some spins, 'C which spins
the mind out of the problem.
'A'You find some kind of resource, you spin around until the resource ends up
mixing up with the problem and 'T outcomes - with the question here - you test
whether they have attached properly.
92
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing
PGAT Formula for Therapy
P - Parameters - Access the Problem.
/ Use H+
'/ Use awareness language to intensify the problem, using predicates
such as: think, feel, consider, become aware of, contemplate, recall,
remember, experience, look at, see, hear or notice.
,/ You also have spatial words like deeper and inside.
'/ You have time words like now, through and during.
/ 
Build the problem up as if it is a current experience.
/ Intensify the problem to the extent that you can help them resolve
it.
,/ Then you can do some of the systems questions:
o What's the problem?
o Where are you now?
o Where do you want to be?

aaaa3a33aaaaa3aaaa
-aaa3annn????????????????
C - Critical Factor Bvpass - Spin the mind out of the problem.
{ Use sySTEM predicates to assist in spinning people out of the problem.
/ Use directional predicates that distance them from the problem i.e. past,
aside from, far, yet, now.
/ Distancing them from the problem creates space for something else to
happen.
,/ Clearing the slate, some language for that:
o Aside from...you're moving yourself away from 'that'
o Beyond Above all...you're getting physical distance
o After
o Until...until creates a dividing line
o But...is a dividing line
o Ago...puts it behind you
o Later perhaps
o To the extent
o You can also go before time, 'it's before this', ?s if the problem hasn't
even happened.
o To the extent' is a useful one. "Can you think about the problem only
to the extent that you can go beyond that now?"
93
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

A - Access Resources - Find a resource and spin them around
until they find a solution.
'/ The solution is to help them go inside and find a resource.
/ How can you help them find a solution?
./ The simplest version of all is to:
1. Spin them around until they naturally fall into a trance of infinite
possibilities.
1. Remember, this is where anything good or bad can happen.
2. Once they're in it, you can steer them towards one thing or another.
/ We're going to have them start searching for solutions.
,/ You do not need to know what the solution is, they will.
'/ To the extent that you let them find it, not only does your life get
easier, so does theirs.
/ Take them to the state they want to be in.
o You'll be more successful in life.
o You will be happier.
o You will feel better.
. You'll get more done.
94
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

b9P2
p
lav
l^^?
t,\???222222233
)22
)2232
)
)
)
)
)
)t
)
)
)
)
)
)f
)3
Will you be able to solve every problem like this? No, it's a process, a simple
process. You're sitting on a park bench with someone who is a little bit miserable.
That will work fine. A friend of yours is having a bad day. That will work just fine.
Someone who has come back from a war zone? I don't think that'll work out fine,
there's going to be a little more that you'll need.
Let me do a little pre-frame here, we'll only go through the idea of covert therapy
on the following understanding:
1. lf you are not already a hypnotherapist, in other words, you don't have all
the other trainings and skills that plug into this, please do not work with
big issues with people. Deal with small things like a study aide, exam stress
where they have a test coming up, or they feel a little blue and you want
to pick them up and so on. Those things are fine.
95
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfieet Hlpnosis Publishing
7- Transform -Make sure the outcome is where they want to
go. Test whether they have attached properly to the outcome.
{ Just attach the solution to the problem.
{ Essentially you're saying, '?s you think about the problem, take the
resources with you and change".
,/ Now we need to have a test to make sure they've attached to that
outcome. We need to know that it's worked.
/ There's a very simple device that allows you to test things covertly. lt's
called is a rhetorical question.
{ lt's a question that you don't really need an answer to.
'/ What you're really doing is asking the other person's unconscious mind
to give you a demonstration of where they're at.

lf we're talking about real therapy, deeper emotional issues and so on,
please do not go there unless you have the skill set that allows you to
manage those things that may come out if you start digging around bigger
stuff.
2. For those of you who aren't interested in therapy in that sense, please
treat this model more as a contrast to what you did earlier so you can see
the range, how you can have the same formula and actually apply it in
different ways, so you can start applying it to whatever you want.
3. lf you're already trained as hypnotherapists then go nuts, have fun with it.
You can do this very overtly as well, right? But this is an advanced covert hypnosis
training isn't it, not an advanced overt hypnosis training. We expect we'll be able
to do things at the end of this that no one else other than you will actually realize
you've done, right?
Most of you will be familiar with this. There are many different versions of this
vehicle, but this is the simplest one, so we may as well throw it out there.
The'My Friend John' Technique
Essentially, the My Friend John technique is you telling a story about someone
else, who had the same problem but went through a particular process, at the
end of which he no longer had the problem.
ln describing what happened to him you're actually guiding the other person
through the same experiences so they can resolve their problems.
Example - I had a friend called John. John had a problem. lt was a real issue. You
know those kinds of problems that follow you around? The more you think about
that thing, the more annoying it gets. lt was a small thing but it was really blown
out of proportion to the point that even considering it used to just wind him up.
You know those feelings you get when you think about things and you just can't
get past that?
The interesting thing about John was that he's sitting there thinking about that
problem, he's really considering that problem, and at some point John said to
96
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

tFn
Inn
-
-
-
-A
-)
-)
)
-
-
-)
)
-)
)
-)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
himself 'This is silly, because above all, all those things I haven't thought about
whilst lwas thinking about this problem, are all things where I could feel good,
but I wasn't."
To an extent, he realized that all he had to do was look beyond the problem at
the whole of his life, and he suddenly realized this was a tiny thing compared to
everything else, isn't it? So there's John looking at those things going "Wow,
really? l've been doing all this stuff to myself. Why should I bother?"
Of course, then he begins to recall. Once you can look back and realize that it's
not you, you can begin to recall and remember all those times that are so much
better than that.
There's John sitting on his park bench thinking through some pretty deep issues.
He's beginning to remember amazing times in his life, inside of those memories.
Experiences begin to grow to remind him just how much more he is than that.
Of course, you know what happened to John, don't you? He starts to feel good,
doesn't he? He sits there, he's smiling and he's contemplating all those things
that he's not - or at least used to be - and he can be again, to the point, that
when he looks at all those things that used to bug him he is so far beyond them
that looking at the problem he actually realizes hey, I can deal with this.
He only has to look at that one problem one step at a time and realize, every
single thing he's had in his life, all those experiences have prepared him to look at
that and go "Wow, I'm far beyond that now". That's why I like John he's a real
thinker.
lgor's Comments
My recommendation is you actually use real people because it's easier for you to
keep the reality frame.
How do you use it in sales? lt's the same process, you talk about clients that did
certain things, that wanted certain things and this is how they reacted, how they
thought, how their own objections got overcome, and as a result of which how
happy they are.
97
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

We're in the problem or the general parameters. We're really in the same
position; we're just going to elaborate on the language until you've intensified
the problem enough that they're actually plugged into it.
Think of it in terms of having the neurology light up. When the problem lights up
there's enough charge there that when you steal the electricity, it drains it out of
the problem so there's no longer a problem.
Once you've plugged them into the problem you need to get them out of the
problem enough that they have choices.
The next one gets very interesting. We're at the'access resources'stage. We're
going to have them start searching for solutions. You do not need to know what
the solution is, they will. They don't know it yet, but they will. To the extent that
you let them find it, not only does your life get easier, so does theirs.
How can you help them find a solution? The simplest version of all is to spin them
around until they naturally fall into a trance of infinite possibilities. Remember,
this is where anything good or bad can happen.Once they're in it, you can steer
them towards one thing or another.
I'd like to introduce you to some other ideas.
Regression Thenapy
How might you do a regression purely linguistically, given the model we just set
up? Do you know what the simplest way of regressing someone is?
You follow the affect bridge. Basically, a strong emotion comes up and you're
already halfway there at that point. Those of you who have done the
conversational hypnotherapy training know what l'm talking about.
Example - There's John sitting on the park bench and he's feeling terrible. All
those emotions are welling up, really welling up. He feels it intensely inside
himself. He's feeling all those things and it's growing stronger, so much more
than before.
We're taking the idea of the problem and rather than spinning too soon, we're
letting the problem itself develop the emotion we'll regress on. So, there he is
98
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
CCCCCCcCCaCq
CCCaaGGaCC
;saG
;aG
;
;G
;C
;
;
;
;d,cccc
l

with the emotions and suddenly he asks himself "John, where
memories?"
lgor's Comments
are you in your
Do you remember the questions from before? Where are you going inside your
memories?
Example Continued - Beyond the present moment, his thoughts were racing
back, because he's felt this before. "When did you feel this?" John asked himself.
"When did you feel this?" Suddenly, he stepped back from himself and he looked
right down there and saw 'Oh my God, I was that young? Look at that little bov" ,
he told himself, "so young, all the way down there". He felt a real wave of
compassion because that kid was suffering.
lgor's Comments
Do you see where we're going with this right now in terms of regression therapy?
We have the emotion, do we not, the 'affect brid ge'? We've gone back on the
affect bridge. We've done the dissociation to give him some distance to be able
to do something, and we've begun the coaching process from adult to child.
Are these not classic maneuvers in regression therapy? You work out how the
whole story can actually run someone through these maneuvers totally covertly.
You're just talking about John and his poor messed up childhood, but really
everyone else, as long as you track, are they keeping track with you, are their
emotions welling up with you, are they distancing themselves - if they're not
distancing enough you might add something.
Example Continued - He was looking at
thought far and beyond this, above all
perspective and realize it's just one little
there.
lgor's Comments
that and he was still welling up, so he
else let's look at the whole of life in
moment. That poor little kid way over
You're really emphasizing those movements until the person pulls themselves
together enough, which tells you they've just dissociated.
99
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

Dynamic Mental lmagery
l'll just give you a quick overview of the symbols induction of dynamic mental
imagery so you know what we're doing.
Basically, you send someone to a calming, relaxing place, from there they go
somewhere else, have a symbol come up, they interact with the symbol to the
point they get a resolution. They symbolically change with the symbol chang€S,
and you've all seen how powerful that is when it's done well.
Example - There's John sitting on the park bench and he's feeding the ducks. lt
kind of reminds him of that warm comfortable place he used to go as a kid. The
water shimmering, the sun is shining down, not a care in the world. lt was a
beautiful day in John's life, a really beautiful day.
One of those days when nothing can go wrong, do you know what I mean?
There's John thinking back and really enjoying that beautiful day. Of course, this
is how daydreams work, isn't it? ln his daydream his mind begins to wander.
It wanders down a path one way or another, he doesn't quite know all the
different directions it could take, but as he wanders this path he has a feeling
something is happening, and it's something very important. Something is
happening that relates to that problem that he was thinking about, and it's very
important.
He doesn't realize that as his mind wanders the highways of his daydreams, he's
walking towards a place inside his mind where something is going to happen,
where that problem will just disappear. He doesn't realize this yet. All he knows is
that he's wandering and it's kind of an interesting site. Some past memories,
some experiences, some heartfelt thoughts - and there it is, that other place.
The interesting thing is, just when he gets there, he discovers a symbol, a dream
symbol. Much like you can have dreams every night, and you can dream of
someone that represents someone else -it looks like a friend but it's really a
relative, you know that kind of dream I mean.
He has a dream just like that. He sees an actual symbol, something he did not
expect to see. He actually sees a symbol. He tells himself "John, look at that.
What is that"? The one thing he knows is he did not expect it to be there, he
doesn't even know what it means yet. Yet there it is, right in front of him.
{oo
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing
CCCCCCCCCCCeCCCCCCCCeeCCeCCeeeeeeeeeeee
e,cce

aaaaaaa
)
)
)
)
)
)attttta
)
)
)
)
)
)ttttt
)
)
)
)t
)t
)
)
)
)t
The strangest thing occurs - in the back of his mind John gets the sense that it
means something. lt's so important, if only he could put his finger on it, it would
totally resolve the problem he was thinking about, but he doesn't know what it is
yet.
How could he? He's having a daydream, and yet there it is right in front of his
eyes. He can feel it, the pressure is building, and it almost makes sense, but not
quite yet.
lgor's Comments
Do you see where we're going with this? Can you follow the whole process of the
dynamic induction based on that? lt's kind of a dramatic story anyway.
A'Like to Dislike' Pattem
You want to switch something that they like and get them dislike it, like chocolate
for example. Like chocolate, and they want to not like chocolate as much.
We can talk about John not liking chocolate, no big deal, or we can make it
vaguer, talk about one thing and make it something different. I don't care either
way. We'll do it the hard wdy, why not?
Let's say you want to change your approach to chocolate, and use something
different to make you change chocolate.
Example - There's John sitting on that bench. He starts thinking about this.
There's his ex-girlfriend, and he loves this girl. That's a problem for him because
he knows that this is no good for him anymore, but he loves this.
It's like one of those things that you know you shouldn't have, but you just can't
help but say yes.There's John sitting on his park bench and he really loves her,
but when he looks at her he suddenly realizes it's not the thing that he loves, it's
how it makes him feel.
It can't be her; it's all about him. As he looks at her, the strangest thing begins to
happen. That image of her seems to recede into the distance and all that's left is
this strange kind of shimmer in that place.
101
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfreet Hlpnosis Publishing

ln his daydream, he's thinking about that girl next door in the office, the one that
really does care for him, and the one that's good for him. So, he thinks, this really
is good for me, I know it. This is good for me. But he doesn't feel it yet.
So, he begins to wonder - what if I saw that person with these qualities right here
in the shimmering, that position right there? I wonder what would happen if I
could do that now? But you can do anything in a daydream, can't you?
So, inside his mind he just sends that other person in, the one that is good for
him, shimmering just in the right wdv, just in the right size, just in the right place.
Do you know what happened? lt felt exactly the same way.
He looks at this new person, it feels like a new person, she's good for him and he
likes it. He thought to himself , "l might just keep this".
The Drcam Machine
l'll give you one more thing in terms of expanding your horizons. lt's one I really
like; I call this the 'Dream Machine'. The Dream Machine is awesome because
you can change anything.
ln dreams crazy things happen don't they? And, of course, have you ever had a
dream that when you woke up from the dream - like say something bad
happened in the dream, and when you woke up you still felt the aftershock of
that so it kind of ruined your day?
You've also had the other kind of dream haven't you, where something so good
happened that for no apparent reason you wake up and you feel great. ln fact,
your whole day goes well, doesn't it?
Example - There's Jim, and he's lying in bed at night and he's wondering "What
kind of dream will I have?" One thing is for sure, he's got a machine inside his
mind that knows when to dream. He doesn't have to plan them.
Who sits there before going to bed and plans out the first thing that'll happen,
this person will come up - who does that? Jim certainly didn't. He went to sleep
and he realized that anything can happen in your dreams. lt can, can't it?
Anything can happen in your dreams and it can be good.
You can dream of a problem and realize that you are so much more.
102
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

lgor's Comments
By the w?y, do you see this? The Dream Machine now does this. You go through
the whole process because it's a metaphorical resolution, it's an extra step and
it's simple and easy. You don't even have to tell them what the resources are.
lnside their dream who knows how he's going to solve that problem. He doesn't
have to, the Dream Machine knows.
Example Continued - All he has to do is kick back and fall asleep, let the dream
come and resolve it for you. That's what he said to himself. "Just let that dream
come and resolve it for you."
One thing is for sure, you are so much more than you've ever realized. John
must've been right. He knows he's had all these experiences in his past that have
made him the person that he is. He has succeeded so wildly in ways that he didn't
even notice.
Something inside him must know much more about how to grow and change as a
human being than his conscious mind ever could. John's a smart fellow. He
decided to do some sleep therapy. He went to sleep and allowed those dreams to
come- healthy dreams, healing dreams, dreams that took him far beyond his
wildest imagination, because the Dream Machine is where that is all created.
Of course, that's where it can be solved, can't it? He had an amazing dream.
When he woke up in the morning guess what? He felt far and beyond better than
he's ever done before, only this time it stayed with him for the rest of the day.
That became a pattern for the rest of the week and that set a trend for the rest of
his life.
Sleep Therapy
Now we're going to do the same, but we're now using a language to spin them
through a different situation and different complexes.
Do you understand how in this stage, the'A'stage, the search for solution stage,
you have so many resources available to you its' unreal?
Finally, we come onto the "T" transforming stage, where you just attach the
solution to the problem. Essentially you're saying, "As you think about the
problem, take the resources with you and change".
103
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

Example - John thought about the problem, and it was changing.
This is not rocket science, although it may seem like it at first.
The Test
Now, because we are doing covert therapy, w€ need to have a test in there
somewhere, and we need to know that it's worked. There's a very simple device
that allows you to test things covertly.
That's called is a rhetorical question. lt's a question that you don't really need an
answer to. What you're really doing is asking the other person's unconscious
mind to give you a demonstration of where they're at.
Example - At the end of this dream, John wakes up. How do you think he felt?
lgor's Comments
You watch them. lf they go "ugh", then they're not there yet. lf they say "tell me"
they've already told you, haven't they?
You have to watch your audience to see their reaction to the rhetorical question
because that's what the unconscious mind is doing. By the way, does this seem
ingenious to you? lt's no! this has been around for thousands of years.
Do you know where this exists? Fairy Tales. There's been an interesting trend of
late where people have cleaned up fairy tales, all the bad stuff. Think about what
they're doing. You had a context in which children have the opportunity to face
difficult moments and come out resolving them.
You now take away the difficult moment, how are they ever going to know how
to react when the actual event happens? There's no safety mechanism left for
them to deal with it.
Depending on how you tell that story, can you not see how a simple fairy tale,
while emphasizing the PCAT formula, (because all fairy tales have a PCAT process
in them), could allow children to resolve their issues without having to think
about them?
104
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

Versus, if you clean it all up, there's no problem. All it is, is Billy was happy. Yay!
Billy is still happy. Yay! Billy will carry on being happy. Yay! There's no
transformation going on.
Personally, lthink it's a little bit ridiculous to clean up fairy tales. You guys get to
have your opinions on this sort of thing, but I look at it like a covert hypnotist.
Based on that, do you understand the process and how simple it is, but really
how sophisticated you can get in all these stages?
The point of this is you don't run through it like a script, you stay on each stage
until you watch the response occurring inside the other person.
EGRCFiE - IT'IY FREND JOI-IN' TECHNICUE
1. Spend 10 minutes each with your partner. Choose a problem, or let your
unconscious choose one for you" Your unconscious gets to select one for
you, and surprise you with how much better you feel when you don't have
those things anymore.
. lt really doesn't matter what you think you know, you just let the other
person tell you a fine story about his friend called Jim, John, James,
Billy Goat, whatever; and just observe how your own body naturally
responds to the transition of the story.
o That means you get to do covert therapy. You get to change things that
are so secret you don't even know you have them. Pretty good, isn't it?
lgor's Comments
It's easier by the way if you've learned hypnotherapy, because that's what you
were doing. The purpose of the exercise is not for you to be good at it, yet. The
only purpose of the exercise is for you to learn more about the process.
Do you notice how these stories become easier to tell when your mind can go to
where it went yesterday, which is inside theirs?
That's the point folks. lf you have to sit there and script it out you've missed the
point.
{05
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

lgods Glosing Gomments
There's nothing wrong with you going right back to the very basic exercises; who
are you, what are you, what will you have been? Anything but only this; those are
your training wheels and if you're not comfortable yet with being spontaneous
with allthis stuff, then go back to just some of it, the bits that are easy.
Bit by bit you start integrating it, because we've pushed you through a pretty
intense journey the last four days, haven't we? lt's been an intense journey,
hasn't it? You should feel like you've really been working hard at this, because
you have been.
So to the extent that you take that journey slower, at your own pace you'll get a
destination without any effort. lf you try to run to the end before you've actually
got to the beginning, how could you possibly finish that race?
Congratulations, vou have pushed yourselves right to the outer limits of inner
space and beyond. Those limits are different for each of us, and your skill set will
be different accordingly. lt doesn't matter where you are, what matters is that
you're here now. From here is where you'll get there.
GUIDED EGRGSiE - Breathe in, breathe out, and relax. That's right, because you
came here with a dream, dr ambition, something that you wanted to achieve.
lnside each of our dream's lies ambitions and those ambitions get fulfilled by
what's even deeper than they are.
Only go as deeply inside your ambitions that a dream can come out in which you
can be fulfilled. You thought you came here to learn a certain skill and beyond
that skill is everything you are yet to become.
You can find that inside yourself as simply as recalling the memory of a dream.
Dreams are the most interesting of human experiences because we do not know
what dream will come.
Every single experience you've ever had can be formulated into a dream, grown,
strengthened, and become more positive with time. You've had a collection of
very intense learning experiences here, which means when you dream at nights
comfortably and peacefully your mind can begin to assimilate all the pieces.
I had a dream once, of an amazingly complex machine - cogs, whirls, things that
turned and spun. Every item meticulously crafted, like the most elaborate
{06
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing
CCCCCCCaCC
€CCCCCCCCCC
€
€
€
€C
€cc
d,dj,d
d,ddddddddla
-.1

clockwork mechanism, precious jewels embedded in each item, and the machine
worked perfectly.
When I dreamt that dream, I did not know what this machine was capable of. I
just observed it moving meticulously, carefully, smoothly and elegantly.
I did not realize at the time, that I was observing my own dream machine. The
dream machine merely processes experiences. Experiences go in one end,
dreams and changes come out the other.
I said to myself "What if you took all the experiences you've just had and placed
them into the machine? Let it sort everything out, let it clean, polish, refine and
use. I wonder what will come out."
Such an elegant machine could only possibly produce amazing artifacts, real
works of art. lrealized that every experience going through this can cause
someone to awaken with great changes, the capacity to experience a richer life
and produce greater successes.
Now, I don't know how long that dream lasted, it seems to me it may have been
weeks, even months. Each night the mechanism ticking, whirring, moving,
changing, every night and perhaps it's continuing. What ldo know is that amazing
changes take place when the dream machine works through your experiences.
I'd like to thank you and the experiences you've had for being here and going
beyond what you are used to, into a territory that's so alien that it became
familiar now.
To the extent you take that journey each and every night, polishing, refining,
creating greater elegance in what you do and how you think and behave. Your
skills as a master of hypnosis will so far exceed those that have gone before you
that you won't even realize just how good you really are.
You only get to enjoy the benefits of being more influential, more charismatic,
and a greater force for good in everyone's life. That makes you a very decent
person, a good person.
So you might as well consider that tonight, when it's time for you to really dream.
I wonder when you'll discover the dream machine for yourself. Will it be before
you have all these marvelous changes, or will it have been working for you
107
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

silently in the background long before it reveals itself to you? You really don't
know, do you? You get to find out.
With that happy thought I'll welcome you all back to this place, in which case, you
get to take everything that's happening inside this room, outside and make it
work. lsn't that something worth thinking about?
Audience: Yes.
{08
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
CCCaaaOaaaaaC
;
;CCCJC
;JJJJJJJJJJeJCJJJJJJ
]
O:J

Advanced Govert Flyrels Appendix
The SIISTEM Resource
tII22
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)a3
)
)
)
)3
)
)
)
)33333
)333
)
)
The Simple SySTEM
+Not
Who are you?
\Mhere are you?
When are you?
How are you?
What are you?
Add a suggestion to the sySTEM Q - example - happy
+Not
Who are you... that's happy?
Where are you... that's happy?
When are you... that's happy?
How are you... that's happy?
What are you... that's happy?
Time Shifts
+Not
Who are you?
Who were you?
Who have you been?
Who had you been?
Who will you be?
Who will you have been?
{09
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

FULL Goniugations
+Not
Present
Who are you?
Who are you being?
Who have you been being?
Past
Who have you been?
Who were you?
Who were you being?
Who had you been?
Who had you been being?
Future
Who will you be?
Who will you be being?
Who will you have been?
Who will you have been being?
Conditional
Who would you be?
Who would you be being?
Who would you have been?
Who would you have been being?
Modals
Who might you be?
Who could you be?
Who should you be?
Who ought you to be?
{{o
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

Subiunctive & lmperative
lf you were to be...
Be!
The SIISTEM SPIN
who, what, when, where, how are you...
+Not
...anywhere but here/there
...anytime but nodthen
...anyway but like this/that
...that's anything but this
Pure Awareness
+Not
See, hear, feel, sense, consider, notice, listen to, think about, remember, look at,
find, experience, recall, check, discover, appreciate, focus on, concentrate on,
pay attention to
Apposition of Opposites
Notice foot...
notice not foot
Awareness Pacing
+Not
See the wall,
Feel the floor
Go inside
111
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfieet Hypnosis Publishing

Awareness Pacing Spin lnduction
+Not
See the wall, feel the floor,
Notice the feelings of going inside anytime but now
Close your eyes in hypnosis
As you resolve problem X
... (after 3-4 loops) Continue doing this till Problem X is gone
Awareness Spin
See, hear, feel, sense, consider,
find, experience, recall, check,
pay attention to
+Not
Notice everything...
Watch everything...
Hear everything...
... that is X...
... that is Not X...
...anywhere but here/there
...anytime but now/then
...anyway but like this/that
...that's anything but this
notice, listen to, think about, remember, look at,
discover, appreciate, focus on, concentrate otr,
112
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

Awareness Gross Spins
VAK +Not
s!6TEMs Gross Spins Problem
Not
{{3
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
Awareness X
Spin
Spin
See, hear, feel, sense,
consider, notice, listen to,
think about, remember,
look ?t, find, experience,
recall, check, discover,
appreciate, focus oh,
concentrate o[, 
pay
attention to... X...
only here/there...
everywhere
he re/there...
only now/then...
anytime but now/then...
like this/that (in every
way)...
anyway but like this/that...
and only this/that...
and anything but this/that...
but
only here/there...
everywhere 
but
here/there...
only now/then...
anytime but now/then...
like this/that (in every
way)...
anyway but like this/that...
and only this/that...
and anything but this/that...
Keep adding as many layers of the sySTEM spins as you like
Problem X
Spin
Spin
(When you VAK... X...)
Who are you
Where are you
When are you
How are you
What are you
only here...
everywhere but here...
only now...
anytime but now...
like this (in every way)..
anyway but like this...
and only that...
and anything but that...
only here...
everywhere but here..
only now...
anytime but now...
like this (in every way)
anyway but like this...
and only that...
and anything but that.
Keep adding as many layers of the sySTEM spins as you like.

s!6TEMs Gross Spins Resource
+Not
s!6TEM Awareness Gross Spins
+Not
As you VAK X... SP|N... SySTEM are you...that isY... SPIN
As you remember the problem... onyway but like this... who are you being... that's
more than you know... anywoy but like thatT
As you remember the problem... onyway but like this... where ore you not... thot's
more than you know... onyway but like that... not now... only anything butthat?!
114
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
eeeeeeeeeeeeeCeeeeCeCCCeCeCCCeCeeeeCCeCCeed
Resource Y
Spin
Spin
Who are you
Where are you
When are you
How are you
What are you
(that is... Y...)
only here...
everywhere but here...
only now...
anytime but now...
like this (in every way).
anyway but like this...
and only that...
and anything but that...
only here...
everywhere but here...
only now...
anytime but now...
like this (in every way)..
anyway but like this...
and only that...
and anything but that...
Keep adding as many layers of the sySTEM spins as you like.

The SySTEM Predicates
{{5
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
aaaaa
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)222?2DDDD??2
?)
?)P9DDDD9D99Pn9P
Space
Time
Energy
Matter
Anywhere
Above
Beyond
Aside (from)
Here
There
lnside
On top of
Underneath
Next to
Beneath
Deep Down
At
On
ln
Between
from...to...
within
Across
Against
Alongside
Amid
Among
Behind
Below
Far from
ln place of
Near
Next to
Opposite
Over
Past
Through
Anytime
Before
After
Earlier
Later
Yet
Already
Now
Soon
During
While
U ntil
for (3 Days)
Since (thursday)
by (sunday)
ago
Between
from...to...
up to
ls
Was
Has been
Had been
Would have been
Could have been
Will be
Will have been
Anyhow
Totally
Completely
Only
Absolutely
To the extent
Enough
Less than
More than
Exclusively
Pa rtia lly
Against
ln addition to
**Go Nuts!**
Anything
Any
All
Same
Every
Each
A part of
Other
What else
Once
Only
Except
Save for

Maneuvens
Awareness
Negation +Not
sySTEM Qs (who, where, when, how, what)
SySTEM SPINs
Time Shifts
Pauses (run on sentence)
Additional Maneuvens
Reverse Syntax & Puns
Metaphors of Movement
Trance Phrases
sySTEM Predicates
Rapid Reframes
Strategy
What effect does each "spin pattern" have?
Rapport
Open/Close (Expand/Contract) Focus
I nd uct/Ded uct (Abstract/Concrete)
Change Start Point (Subject)
Change End Point (Object)
Cement/U nstick ( Nomi nalise)
Associate/Dissociate (th is/th at, he re/th e re, n ow/th e n, y ou / (s) h e)
Separate/lntegrate
I ncrease/Decrease (Zeno Effect)
How much spin
{{6
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing
CCCCCC
1;
1;
1;]s
1;a
]F
1;C
1;C
1;
1;eCCvUaaaJaaaaadJjJJIiJddJ

atttI2PP9
| .r.9DD
La.?2?2?2?????7?????abbbbbb?ubu22?
HowTo Keep Them Engaged
You need their minds engaged or it's just silly words!
Hot Topics
Flattery
Challenge
Surprise
Meaningfulness
"Conversation" markers
Wlrat You Gan lnfluence
Thoughts - Beliefs
Feelings - States
Acts - Behaviour & Physiology
lnvoluntary Acts - Autonomic Nervous System
How Greate The Hypnotic Gontext
(H+)
I ntense Attention Focus
Sou nd I mportant/Mea ningful
Repetition/Echo
Absorb Attention
Attitude
Surprise
Agreement Reversal
Hot Topics
The Gadfly Maneuver (annoy them into correcting you)
Principles (X lnfluence
There are many tools & principles - these are some of my favorites!
Agreement
Compliance & Responsiveness (always test for acceptance)
Consistency
Reciprocity
lnfluence v Force (Don't TRY to Persuade)
Respect v Attack (Blame & Ego Shields, Keep Best lnterests)
117
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

Status & lmportance (Source (you) & Message (idea))
Mood v Mind (Hearts & Minds)
You cannot experience what your mind doesn't grasp!!
Force -v- lhfluence
Force your opinion v collapse their opinion.
Force = You're wrong buddy!!
Surrend€r = You're so right! I'll agree to whatever you want!
Agreement Reversal = You're so right... that... there's even more things than
that !
The Explorer's Gambit = What makes you say that (NB: Avoid Negative Tonality!)
The Exaggerated Opening = All food should be green... in fact everything should
be green
The Echo Explorer = You think X... how do you figure that?
CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCelCC
QI
QI
erCCelCC
erel
erCcCelcelC
eralGG
Tylpes Of Hypnosis
Overt & Covert - Direct & lndirect
Overt Direct - e.g. Stage: quick, but can build resistance
Overt lndirect - e.g. Ericksonian: balanced between speed and smoothness
Covert lndirect - e.g. POCH: Very smooth, smallest chance of resistance, but
slow
Covert Direct - e.g. NLP & MBL: quick & powerful fixes for melting resistance
in the moment - but less strategic than POCH
MBL = the master key to turn any situation around. lt's not in the language;
it's in the ideas expressed BY the language!!
118
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

PGAT Sales Process
P-Every sale is about solving a problem.
lf there is no problem, there is no sale.
lf they don't want it, there is no sale.
Either you find a problem worth solving, or you walk away.
lf you can't resolve their problem, it's unethical to sell them anything.
A problem is painful or it isn't a problem; even if it's positive, otherwise there is
no motivation for change.
Use H+
Use awareness language to intensify the problem, using predicates such as: think,
feel, consider, become aware of, contemplate, recall, remember, experience,
look at, see, hear or notice.
You also have spatial words like deeper and inside.
You have time words like now, through and during.
Build the problem up as if it is a current experience.
lntensify the problem to the extent that you can help them resolve it.
Then you can do some of the systems questions.
Parameters
C - Using language to open people up to what you're offering.
Use sySTEM predicates to assist in spinning people out of the problem and
opening them up to the possibilities you're offering.
Use directional predicates that distance them from the problem i.e. past, aside
from, far, yet, now.
Distancing them from the problem creates space for something else to happen.
Critical Factor Bypass, clearing the slate, some language for that:
119
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. O 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

Later perhaps
To the extent
You can also go before time, 'it's before this', as if the problem
hasn't even happened.
'To the extent'is a useful one. "Can you think about the problem
only to the extent that you can go beyond that now?"
Do you want to be here?
Do you want to be there? lt's up to you.
To the extent that they forget the problem, you may want to plug
them into the problem enough while you're doing this to remind them
that they're not there anymore, or that they don't have to be there.
Let them give you their decision.
A - Presenting your Solution
The solution is to help them go inside and find a resource.
Present the benefits or value of your solution.
Take them to the state they want to be in.
Tell them what it will mean to have your product or service.
Access Resources
./ You'll be more successful in life.
/ You will be happier.
./ You will feel better.
/ You'll get more done.
{ You will no longer feel bad.
T - Take them into the middle so they can make a choice.
You now have two positions:
L. What is happening now?
2. Where do you want to be?
You want to put them smack in the middle so they can make a choice.
Transform
120
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Sfieet Hypnosis Publishing

PGAT Formula for Therapy
P - Parameters -Access the Problem.
Use H+
Use awareness language to intensify the problem, using predicates such as: think,
feel, consider, become aware of, contemplate, recall, remember, experience,
look at, see, hear or notice.
You also have spatial words like deeper and inside.
You have time words like now, through and during.
Build the problem up as if it is a current experience.
lntensify the problem to the extent that you can help them resolve it.
Then you can do some of the systems questions:
./ What's the problem?
/ Where are you now?
./ Where do you want to be?
C - Critical Factor Bvpass - Spin the mind out of the problem.
Use sySTEM predicates to assist in spinning people out of the problem.
Use directional predicates that distance them from the problem i.e. past, aside
from, far, yet, now.
Distancing them from the problem creates space for something else to happen.
Clearing the slate, some language for that:
Aside from...you're moving yourself away from 'that'
Beyond Above all...you're getting physical distance
After
Until...until creates a dividing line
But...is a dividing line
Ago...puts it behind you
Later perhaps
To the extent
You can also go before time, 'it's before this', ?s if the problem hasn't
even happened.
'To the extent' is a useful one. "Can you think about the problem only
to the extent that you can go beyond that now?"
121
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

A - Access Resources - Find a resource and spin them around
until the resource ends up mixing up with the problem.
The solution is to help them go inside and find a resource.
How can you help them find a solution?
The simplest version of all is to:
'/ Spin them around until they naturally fall into a trance of infinite
possibilities.
'/ Remember, this is where anything good or bad can happen.
'/ Once they're init, you can steer them towards one thing or
another.
We're going to have them start searching for solutions.
You do not need to know what the solution is, they will.
To the extent that you let them find it, not only does your life get easier, so does
theirs.
Take them to the state they want to be in.
./ You'll be more successful in life.
/ You will be happier.
/ You will feel better.
,/ You'll get more done.
7- Transform -Make sure the outcome is where they want to
go. Test whether they have attached properly to the outcome.
Just attach the solution to the problem.
Essentially you're saying, "As you think about the problem, take the resources
with you and change".
Now we need to have a test to make sure they've attached to that outcome. We
need to know that it's worked.
There's a very simple device that allows you to test things covertly. lt's called is a
rhetorical question.
It's a question that you don't really need an answer to.
What you're really doing is asking the other person's unconscious mind to give
you a demonstration of where they're at.
122
Advanced Covert Hlpnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hypnosis Publishing

aaaaaaattttttttt
123
Advanced Covert Hypnosis - The Mind Bending Language System. @ 2010 Street Hlpnosis Publishing

