Advanced Covert 
Hypnosis 
 
 
Full Transcript 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By Igor Ledochowski 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               2                          StreetHypnosis.com                      
 
Table of Contents 
 
DVD 01 – Page 3 
 
DVD 02 – Page28 
 
DVD 03 – Page 51 
 
DVD 04 – Page 74 
 
DVD 05 – Page 95 
 
DVD 06 – Page 117 
 
DVD 07 – Page 141 
 
DVD 08 – Page 175 
 
DVD 09 – Page 198 
 
DVD 10 – Page 218 
 
DVD 11 – Page 253 
 
DVD 12 – Page 282 
 
DVD 13 – Page 316 
 
DVD 14 – Page 341  
 
Bonus DVD 1 – Page 361 
 
Bonus DVD 2 – Page 391 
 
Bonus DVD 3 – Page 415 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               3                          StreetHypnosis.com                      
 
Bonus Audio CDs – Page 444 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DVD 01 
Full Transcript 
 
 
Igor: 
So welcome, how are you doing? This is the Advanced Covert 
Hypnosis. Are you all excited? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
I am. This has been a long time coming. I envy you all, do you know 
why? It‟s taken me 10 years to be able to teach this in a way that‟s 
going to be as easy as you all are going to learn it.  
 
It took me eight years to master „mind-bending‟ language and another 
two years of breaking my head to do what we‟re going to do today, so 
you all will be breezing through it. 
 
 
How many people here are completely new to hypnosis, like maybe 
yesterday was their first day? Did you all turn up for the bonus day 
yesterday? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Did you enjoy it? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
You all are in an interesting position because you‟re going to have a 
great four or five days, which will be very easy and straightforward.  
 
 
Who else has trained with me before, like with the Conversational 
Hypnosis and so on? So you‟re familiar with the idea of mind-bending 
language right? You‟ll find this is a much easier way of doing it. We 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               4                          StreetHypnosis.com                      
 
have four days to do what we normally do in four hours. It‟ll be very 
exciting. 
 
 
Let me check out a couple of things. First of all, is the volume okay? If 
you go to the back can you hear me all right? If at any point I get a 
little fast, because I‟ll be very excited over the next four days, please 
put your hand up and say “Slow down”. I‟m counting on a room full of 
hypnotists to slow me down, okay. 
 
 
Where do you all come from? How many here are from the west coast? 
What about the east coast? There are a few. How many of you are not 
from the US at all? All right… 
 
Student: 
I‟m from Texas. 
[Applause] 
 
Igor: 
You have your whole country to yourself. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
Igor: 
Once again, welcome to the Advanced Covert Hypnosis Program, I‟m 
really excited to have you here. We‟re going to be doing pretty crazy 
stuff over the next few days, but before we get into the actual 
program, I have a couple quick announcements. 
 
 
First of all, we‟ll have a relatively light day compared to the 
Conversational Hypnotherapy training, but it won‟t be nearly as 
intense. Everyone is expecting their brains to explode, but feel free to 
relax because this will be a much easier ride. You‟ll go to similar places 
but in a much softer buffer zone.  
 
 
Secondly, we‟ll take a lunch break about 1:00 o‟clock maybe a bit 
sooner, so if anyone needs to regulate their sugar intake feel free to 
regulate that round. We‟ll be starting at 9:30 sharp every day, so if 
you can arrive maybe 9:15 that‟d be good because it‟s a big group so 
the sooner you come back and settle down, the sooner we can actually 
get into content. 
 
 
Finally, in terms of exercises, again it‟s a big group so would it be okay 
if I chide you a little bit to get you back from the exercises to actually 
carry on doing the actual work; otherwise, all the little extensions that 
can happen sometimes can slow the program down, which means we 
deliver less content. 
 
 
Personally, I‟d rather teach more then less. Wouldn‟t that be fair? 
 
Students: Yes. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               5                          StreetHypnosis.com                      
 
 
Igor: 
I think that‟s pretty much it, in terms of announcements. You all know 
the drill other than that. You‟ll be doing most of the work while I sit up 
here smiling and going “that looks hard”. The main thing for your 
expectations over the next few days is that this is not a hypnotherapy 
training. 
 
 
For the next five days it will be all about influence.  
 
 How can you influence other people with the way you 
behave, things you do and the things you say?  
 
We‟re talking about things you do and say, but we‟re talking about 
mind-bending language aren‟t we, so how does that fit? As we‟ll come 
into shortly, the secret to mind-bending language isn‟t to talk like 
someone who‟s on drugs.  
 
The secret to mind-bending language is to think like someone who‟s on 
drugs, and your language just follows naturally. So my job is to put 
you all on drugs for the next two days, then we‟ll start speaking like it 
and you‟re actually totally congruent with that. 
 
Is that okay with everyone? 
 
Students: Yes! 
 
Igor: 
So please feel free to drink the water, you‟ll like it. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
A little more serious note, this is not a regular hypnosis program. One 
of the reasons we had, for those of you not familiar with hypnosis 
before, come into the bonus day yesterday and have a little crash 
course in hypnosis… 
 
 
By the way, wasn‟t Spencer an amazing hypnotist? Didn‟t you have a 
great time with him? 
 
[Applause] 
 
Igor: 
I think he deserves that.  
 
 
One of the reasons I wanted you to have that crash course, apart from 
the fact that you all, with more experience, will see someone else in 
action who is very good at what he does and hopefully see the 
principles we‟ve been talking about in action, but in a different way so 
you get a sense of how you can adapt it for yourselves. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               6                          StreetHypnosis.com                      
 
 
 
For those of you who don‟t have experience yet, what that day is about 
is to satisfy your curiosity about what is hypnosis? What is trance? 
What does it feel like? How do we put them under? The main reason 
for that is when you spend the next four days doing what we‟re doing; 
now you‟ll realize it‟s not that. 
 
 
So, whatever your expectations were about hypnosis, I invite you to 
put them on hold for a moment. Whatever your expectations are, in 
terms of how it will look, what you‟ll do and what magic bolt of 
lightning will come out your eyes and fingers just put those on hold for 
a few days.  
 
 
By the end of the training feel free to start making this more 
conversational and practical. Feel free to bring your attitudes back, 
your ideas back and all that sort of stuff. For the moment though, we‟ll 
be adding all types of training wheels to what we‟re doing so we can 
prepare your minds to basically think like you‟re on drugs.  
 
 
It‟ll be a slightly unusual set of experiences. They‟ll be fun. They‟ll be 
comfortable, but we will have some leeway first to make it easy for 
you to do mind-bending language. Is that okay with everyone, right? 
 
 
The next thing is there are many different styles of hypnosis to go for, 
I mean you are familiar of course with the idea of overt hypnosis, 
covert hypnosis and you realize this is a covert hypnosis seminar which 
will be taught overtly. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
Igor: 
Yes, I‟m going to teach you covert hypnosis covertly one day and no 
one will know it‟s happened.  
 
 
There‟s also direct and indirect hypnosis, which are the two that most 
people think about. It‟s like stage hypnosis, like the show you saw last 
night, which was pretty fun wasn‟t it. It‟s very much command and 
control style, do this, do that, experience this, experience that. And, it 
has tremendous advantages. 
 
 
Of course, the first advantage is that it‟s very fast, do you notice that? 
People go into trance very quickly. They respond very quickly. Stuff 
starts happening very quickly. The disadvantage of course is that your 
likelihood of building resistance or finding a block along the way tends 
to increases. In other words, it‟s riskier. 
 
 
There‟s nothing wrong with it, if you‟re willing to accept the risk and 
work around it, but there‟s a slight risk involved.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               7                          StreetHypnosis.com                      
 
 
 
Then we have the hybrid which is overt hypnosis presented indirectly. 
Most of you are familiar with that in the sense of Ericksonian hypnosis. 
It‟s very indirect, round the house and no one is quite sure what‟s 
happening. But they all know its hypnosis. 
 
 
Let‟s face it they‟ve walked into a hypnotherapist‟s office and know 
that something is going on. Now, of course, when I say Ericksonian 
hypnosis I do not mean the work Erickson himself was doing, because 
that was basically everything.  
 
 
He went from overt to covert, direct and indirect, he took the whole 
range. I mean specifically the little creature we‟ve come to call 
Ericksonian hypnosis, which is just a portion of what he ended up 
doing. 
 
 
Then, of course, we have covert indirect hypnosis, which is what the 
Power of Conversational Hypnosis home study course is all about. 
Are you all familiar with that? So, what‟s the difference there?  
 
Overt indirect hypnosis is a balance between the speed of direct 
hypnosis, overt direct hypnosis and the indirection, in other words, the 
moving round of obstacles rather than going through obstacles of the 
indirect approach. 
 
 
So when we have covert indirect hypnosis, which is the power of 
conversational hypnosis, we have a very powerful and influential 
system but there‟s one major flaw. Does anyone know what it is?  
 
Student: 
Slow. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly, it‟s something you build up. It takes time. It builds 
momentum as you go along. It‟s like one of those old fashioned flash 
cameras. Once it flashes it‟s great, but it takes a long time for the 
battery to charge up. 
 
 
Does that make sense? 
 
 
So we come onto what we‟ll be covering here, which is the idea of 
covert direct hypnosis. So, we have the speed and power of direct 
hypnosis, but we have the smoothness of a covert approach. Does that 
make sense? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Now, the reason I want to go through this as a starting point is 
because the two approaches go hand-in-hand; they compliment each 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               8                          StreetHypnosis.com                      
 
other. The covert indirect hypnosis, the power of conversational 
hypnosis, that approach is very strategic. You lay your foundations 
very carefully. You do little maneuvers. You let it grow, add some stuff 
and let it grow some more. 
 
 
It‟s like making Coby Beef, get the cow drunk and massage it, get it  
drunk, massage it, it takes time. What we‟re doing today is more like 
taking someone to a bar and having tequila slammers. It doesn‟t take 
much time at all, they will be wasted and they‟ll know you did 
something, although they‟ll have no idea of what it is in the morning. 
 
 
The reason I want you to be aware of that fact is because we‟ll be 
ideally blending approaches, so everything you‟ve learned so far in 
terms of covert hypnosis will still count, so you‟ll still be using that in 
your day-to-day settings. It‟s just when you don‟t have the time, or 
when something comes up and you want to resolve it quickly and 
move on, that‟s what we‟re doing here, it all counts.  
 
 
It‟s great for sales. Is anybody here in sales? All of you should have 
your hands up right now because life is selling people on whatever you 
want, that‟s influence isn‟t it. So when an objection comes up there‟s 
something there, a problem or an obstacle and you need to be able to 
dissolve it quickly. 
 
 
What do you do when you have an elevator ride to create that 
connection that allows you to do whatever else you need to do, the 
opening for a more strategic conversational hypnosis approach, that‟s 
the kinds of things we‟ll be focusing on today.  
 
 
Does that sound like fun? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So, I‟m going to assume that you‟re familiar with the Power of 
Conversational Hypnosis.  
 
If you‟re not, don‟t worry, you don‟t need any of that content to be 
able to do what we‟ll be doing here, but I‟ll strongly encourage you at 
some point to learn it, either from us or someone who has something 
similar because the two approaches blend perfectly like hand and 
glove. 
 
 
I mentioned earlier that the secret to mind-bending language is really 
how you think.  
 
 
Does everyone here know what I mean by mind-bending language?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               9                          StreetHypnosis.com                      
 
 
Is there anyone who doesn‟t? One or two, that‟s why you‟re here. 
 
 
In the hypnosis industry, especially over the past 20 years or so, 
something that came out of Erickson‟s work primarily is the idea that 
the best way to do hypnosis is to confuse the hell out of people 
because then they have no critical factor and you can go straight into 
their mind and cool stuff happens. 
 
 
And there is a lot of truth to that, however, I‟ve come to realize that 
it‟s actually not the confusion element that‟s important. In other 
words, people go after confusion thinking that they‟ve got some 
powerful trance that allows them to do other things. 
 
 
There is also truth to that, so I don‟t want to knock that as an 
approach because there‟s a lot of value to it.  
 
The problem is, people end up going out and start behaving literally 
like they‟re on drugs, like weirdo‟s coming up with all kinds of 
confusing statements like, “when wasn‟t the time now, yesterday that 
tomorrow‟s future wasn‟t happening right now, hey?”  
 
 
People are then suddenly confused and they also shy away slightly, 
lock their doors and then call the police. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
So in terms first of all, of doing things covertly, meaning don‟t get 
caught, that‟s not the best thing to do is it? In terms of being 
influential again, how much influence do you have when someone is 
busy trying to figure out how to run away from you, even if they have 
to chew their own arm off and leave it behind? It‟d be a fair trade, 
right? 
 
 
Not the most influential moment in your life is it? I believe the reason 
for it, and I know this because I did it myself, believe me I have a 
collection of arms in my cupboard that people have left behind trying 
to get away from me. The reason is because I went after confusion. 
 
 
I tried to confuse the hell out of people, succeeded fantastically and 
failed in my end purpose, which is to influence. Does that make sense? 
 
 
So what if we look at the whole equation differently? What if the 
confusion was not the cause of the influence, the opening of the 
doorway to influence, but was a side effect? Consider this. Do you 
recognize this? It‟s like the night sky isn‟t it, in reverse? Do you like 
my art?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               10                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Consider the night sky as an analogy. You‟re space travelers like in 
Star Trek, to boldly go where no one has gone before. Here is where 
everyone goes. It‟s what everyone knows, it‟s their reality, what we 
believe in and what we do. Everyone will have a slight variation of this 
called „consensual reality‟, isn‟t it? 
 
 
Now, depending on where your personal weirdness is and we all have 
it, you know, you might be a little more up here, down there or you 
might have a slightly more expanded or even a more contracted 
version, but essentially this is where we live. 
 
 
Now when you do have a slightly unusual experience, you go 
somewhere other than where you are normally going. So it makes 
sense that if you go somewhere which is so alien to where you‟ve been 
before that you can‟t make sense of it, so the purpose of what we‟re 
looking for is to get people out of their habitual way of thinking, of 
being stuck and saying this is the only thing that‟s possible. 
 
 
By the way, has anyone ever given someone else advice and had it 
thrown right back in their face again? It‟s pretty common isn‟t it? Why 
do you think they throw it back? Because it doesn‟t fit in here. Your 
advice is about something on the periphery up here and they just don‟t 
know where to put it. 
 
 
So of course, what do they do? They go „oh, rejection‟. It doesn‟t fit in 
my little universe; therefore, it can‟t exist. Does that make sense? So, 
as far as I‟m concerned, the key to influence isn‟t trying to force 
something into this, it‟s to create an opening to let more stuff in. 
 
 
Now, it doesn‟t always happen and you don‟t need it all the time, but 
as a result of this people‟s minds end up going to places they‟re not 
used to. If they‟re not used to it, how can they make sense of it? They 
don‟t know what criteria to apply in order to make any sense of it.  
 
 
Imagine someone from 1000 years ago, they‟re running around still 
making fires, lighting their nightlights with oil or wax, and suddenly 
they turn up and see the Internet, a car or an airplane. What do you 
think they‟d make of all these things?  
 
Students: It‟d be magic. 
 
Igor: 
Right. It‟d be crazy. It‟d be frightening. Can you imagine them walking 
past an airport and suddenly this great big thing starts screaming at 
them as it takes off? Can you imagine them being a little nervous 
about the whole thing? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               11                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Because they‟re having an experience so outside of what they know its 
mass confusion and they don‟t know what to do with it. Many years 
ago this exact same thing happened. Who‟s familiar with the idea of 
Captain Cook? Captain Cook comes to, as I now know, the Cook 
Islands.  
 
 
So, he turned up at his own islands, before they were named after 
him. Of course, they came in these massive European style Clipper 
ships with the big sails and three to four masts. They‟re sailing along 
and as far as they‟re concerned they‟re on an adventure right? They‟ve 
seen a lot of things.  
 
 
You see, for the natives on the island, they‟d only seen other people 
like themselves because they‟re pretty isolated in their island chain. So 
you can imagine you‟re looking out to see one day and this great big 
something is turning up on the horizon. 
 
You don‟t know what it is. You didn‟t even know it was made of wood, 
how could you, you never touched it, never seen it and its out in the 
distance. So, you‟re trying hard to make sense of what that thing out 
in the distance is, and it‟s drawing closer. 
 
 
It‟s coming closer to you and it‟s this indistinct shape. Your mind 
furiously tries to grasp what this might be, and the closest thing you 
come up with, this big darkness that blocks out the sun from time to 
time is that it might be a storm cloud, because storm clouds block out 
the sun, don‟t they? 
 
 
They appear on the horizon as these indistinct shapes and then draw 
closer. But this is the strangest storm cloud you‟ve ever seen. It grows 
larger and larger, coming directly for your island. So before you know 
it, you and the whole village are standing there looking at this thing. 
 
You‟re still trying to make sense of it. It‟s a storm cloud but its not, 
what is this thing? Then, of course, these faces begin to appear, white 
pale faces. So, you go searching back in your memory or personal 
history and you remember the legends of the pale face Gods that you 
were told about as kids, by the campfire. 
 
Now, it‟s not unreasonable for you to make an assumption here, is it? 
You have pale faced Gods arriving in a storm cloud, so they must be 
Gods must they not? Then out come these long boats and the pale 
faces step inside. These long boats you recognize, they look close 
enough to your canoes that they must be canoes. 
 
But, these canoes are not on the water they‟re floating in the middle of 
a storm cloud. So, what are these canoes that can fly? Isn‟t that proof 
that you‟re watching Gods descending from the sky? When the sailors 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               12                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
finally row into shore and you meet them face-to-face, it‟s not an 
unreasonable thing to assume that you‟re face-to-face with Gods, is it? 
 
Of course, you and I both know that that would be a mistaken 
assumption, but how would they know any better? The really 
interesting part isn‟t how the villagers reacted, because they react like 
we do whenever new information comes. The really interesting part is 
how the local medicine man, the shaman reacted. 
 
You see, the shaman‟s job is to do what all of you will be doing over 
the next few days. His job is to see different parts of reality, to travel 
through space. He‟s the original Star Trek, only instead of outer space 
he goes through inner space. 
 
 
He experiences things that no one has experienced before. He goes 
places that no one has gone before. And, he has learned the ability to 
make sense of things that no one can make sense of.  
 
Some of these things he can even describe and some are so far 
beyond language that they don‟t even attempt to. Perhaps they‟ll 
throw in an analogy or a metaphor, but it‟s just an experience. So 
there‟s the shaman, and the whole village is going nuts over all these 
pale face Gods, throwing feasts, giving them gold or whatever else 
they have. 
 
He‟s thinking this is certainly something different. He goes out to the 
beach every single day and stares at this ship, this floating cloud. He 
looks at it repeatedly and his mind is traveling furiously through all the 
experiences he‟s had and beyond them. 
 
He goes deep inside those experiences he‟s never had in order to 
make sense of something he‟s never seen. Of course, he resists the 
temptation to try and make sense of it. It could be a dragon or a 
floating island. What is this thing? 
 
Instead of trying to make sense of it by encapsulating what he knows, 
he allows a different experience to emerge, that goes far beyond 
anything he‟s had before. Inside that experience he has a realization. 
This floating cloud, this storm cloud, hanging off the coast of their 
island is no cloud at all. 
 
It‟s like one of their canoes, only far larger, more complex then 
they‟ve ever seen before. And like those magic eye processes, at first 
no one can see it and says you‟re being stupid, you‟re crazy. Then 
another person sees it and says you might be right.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               13                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
When two people can see it, then three can, then there are four and 
before you know it the whole village sees the ship for what it is. The 
storm cloud literally evaporates. Of course, reality hasn‟t changed. As 
far as what‟s going on everything‟s the same, but it‟s all totally 
different now because their minds can have an experience they‟ve 
never had before. 
 
Imagine if you would, that you were born inside a prison that had no 
locks. The house is pleasant enough but there are no windows to see 
the outside world and no doors. When you walk around this house it 
seems like you have complete freedom does it not? 
 
And, how could you know you‟re a prisoner when you have no 
conception that a world beyond those walls can possibly exist?  
 
There are clues, clues that the other people, your fellow inmates have 
missed. You get to a portion of the house and as you walk straight 
down the corridor, when you get to a turning point you can turn right, 
you can make the right choice. You keep walking and when you run 
out of corridor again, you can make the right choice and turn the right 
way. 
 
You keep going right and you get right back to where you started from 
and of course, that‟s the whole world and then one day, you might be 
sitting at a meal with the others there and someone says, I wonder 
what‟s left for dinner? 
 
And a thought strikes you, I really do wonder what‟s left, because 
you‟ve been so busy doing what‟s right that you have no idea what 
could happen when you find what‟s left.  
 
What do you think would happen, if you went to the extremities of that 
house and started to ask yourself, what‟s left when I don‟t go right? 
Perhaps you‟d find a little alcove somewhere, the place where the 
prison guards come in and out without anyone realizing it. 
 
Perhaps you‟d find a corridor that leads to the outside world. Can you 
imagine what that very first day would look like? The sun rises and it‟s 
the first sunrise you have ever seen. In front of you, you see rolling 
hills that go into the distance so far you think it must be a painting, 
because you‟ve never seen such spaces. 
 
You take your first breath of fresh air, feel the wind on your skin and 
see the sky towering above you. Can you imagine the impact that it 
would have on you? Wouldn‟t that be something that starts off as 
confusion, but ends up as delight?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               14                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
This is the kind of delight that we‟re aiming to get people towards. 
These are the types of journey‟s we‟ll be doing over the next few days. 
In order to be able to take people to these strange and fascinating new 
worlds, you have to be able to go there first yourself. 
 
What is our job as hypnotists, if not to be the guide? You can‟t guide 
someone through an experience you‟ve never had. I‟m sure you can 
point the way and say okay, through that door somewhere is what you 
want. And others have said these things, but how much more capable 
will you be when you walk through those doors yourself and you see 
that first sunrise? 
 
You‟ll actually experience the endless expanse of hills rolling in front of 
you. You‟ll actually feel the breeze on your skin, something that no 
one that‟s going to follow has done yet.  
 
You could race right back into the house and describe all these things 
to other people. Wouldn‟t they think you were on drugs? So of course 
you can‟t tell them about it. You can lead them to the corridor and 
prepare them for that final step. 
 
That‟s where I thought we‟d start off today, if that‟s okay with 
everyone. To start a journey, to expand our own thinking, our own 
neurology so that rather than spending all our time in here, we have a 
way of navigating through here. 
 
Now, of course, this is very big. We‟re not going to have enough time 
in four days to map all this stuff out, but hopefully we‟ll make enough 
in roads into different places that you can take the rest of the journey 
on your own for the rest of your life, if you want to. 
 
More importantly, you‟ll know when someone gets stuck on a 
particular problem, a negotiation or in a hypnotherapy practice and 
they get stuck on some idea, thought or way of feeling, you‟ll know 
why they‟re stuck. It‟s because they keep trying to make the right 
choice. 
 
As soon as they stop trying to make the right choice and just find out 
what‟s left, they‟ll have a lot more choices, including the ones you 
want them to select. Doesn‟t that make sense? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So, with that thought in mind, rather than spending time focusing on 
the language straight away, I thought we‟d focus on the experiences 
first of all, so you can experience what it‟s like to gently step out of 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               15                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
that house and have different experiences. Slowly at first, but building 
up speed as we go along. Would that be fair?  
 
 
Now, before we go into that, there are a lot of you here and of course 
all of you notice how people‟s realities are never quite exactly the 
same, are they? You may talk to someone who‟s fascinating because 
they‟re kind of like you, but there‟s something a little different.  
 
 
That means they‟re aware of seeing the world stuff a little more on one 
edge or a little more on the other and so on. That‟s why we find it 
fascinating talking to some people because their edges are far outside 
wherever our edges are, and by talking to them it expands the walls of 
our own house doesn‟t it? 
 
 
 
Of course, those so-called boring people, I don‟t believe they‟re 
necessarily boring it‟s just the only thing they‟re telling you about is 
such a small space inside your house that you know so well that you 
don‟t really care about it anymore because it‟s familiar to you. 
 
 
So, seeing how this is an advanced covert hypnosis course it‟ll be fun. 
 
 
I thought we‟d start with a little exercise where we get to find out 
where those people‟s maps are. In other words, where is the territory 
beginning that you‟re not familiar with, so that you start expanding 
your experience by finding out what other people have. 
 
 
What kinds of questions do we normally ask of people when we want 
to find out things about them that we don‟t know about ourselves? 
Don‟t we normally start with something like, who are you? Where are 
you from? Sometimes you might ask “Where are you coming from?” 
but, that‟s not the same question as where are you from, is it? 
 
 
So even if its just one question, there may be many ways to answer it 
and that‟s part of the interesting thing isn‟t it, you ask someone a 
question and you get a totally different answer than you expect. 
 
 
Have you ever asked anybody, when are they from? I‟d be curious to 
find out how they‟d react to that. Of course, we usually ask people 
how are you doing and that sort of stuff. But, I wonder if there are 
other things you can ask about how they are that isn‟t how they are. 
 
 
Yes, and of course, the „what‟ question, to complete the set could 
again have all kinds of permutations couldn‟t it? What are you doing 
here? What made you come here? What are you expecting from this? 
Do you see how many variations you can have with just five simple 
questions? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               16                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
 
So your mission, should you choose to accept it Jim, is to look around 
the room for a moment and see there are like 150-180 people in the 
room, and that it would be fair enough to say that if I give you 5-6 
minutes you could meet everyone and ask them these five questions?  
 
 
You‟re an advanced hypnotist now aren‟t you? I‟ll give you 7, so 
everyone stand up, mill around and make sure you ask all these 
questions to everyone in the room within the next 7 minutes. Off you 
go. 
 
 
We are essentially here to influence are we not? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
 
Igor: 
I hope so otherwise you‟re in the wrong seminar. 
 
 What kinds of things can we influence?  
 
 
We can influence how people think. 
 
We can influence how they feel. 
 
We can influence how they behave. 
 
We can influence what they do involuntarily, like dreaming, their 
physiology, biology, etc. 
 
 
These are different levels of influence that hypnotists have, right? Now 
we have to somehow stimulate the five senses as a way of getting a 
message across, which will end up influencing something within that.  
 
 
I think the ancient Egyptians had a very interesting concept. They 
actually had six senses. The sixth sense isn‟t the one we like to think 
of as a sixth sense of intuition, or some psychic power of juju magic 
power. The sixth sense is a very smart sense, which in my opinion, is 
probably the most important sense of all. 
 
 
More important than the five senses we currently think of as being our 
reality. Any ideas what that one might be? 
 
Students: Common sense…imagination…dreaming… 
 
Igor: 
You may or may not agree with this, but the sixth sense is your 
awareness. Think about it. Do your senses make any sense unless 
something is there to be aware of it? If you lose any one of your 
senses what‟s still left? So your awareness is what makes sense of 
your senses, doesn‟t it?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               17                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
When your awareness goes, you can have senses without it meaning 
anything. But when your awareness is there you can have no senses, 
but it still has meaning and/or existence, does that make sense? So 
what we‟re here to do is to influence their awareness in order to 
influence the way they think, feel, behave and so on. 
 
 
This gives us a lot of scope into how we do it. It can be mind-bending 
language just as much as it can be mind-bending activities.  
 
 
There are many principles in terms of how we influence others. I‟m not 
going to suggest that I‟ve got an exclusive on what all those principles 
are. There are so many of them that it would take a couple weeks of 
seminars just to talk about them in terms of a list. 
 
 
 
There are a couple that I think are of a particular importance, at least 
in the way I work and hopefully, if I share them with you they‟ll be 
useful for you as well. I think one of the most important principles of 
influence is something which we all run afoul of every day, myself 
included, and that‟s this one. 
 
 
Force vs. Influence 
 
 
How many times are we trying to persuade someone, and in fact all 
we‟re trying to do is force an opinion on them instead? Oh, you 
shouldn‟t be doing that do it this way, this is much better. How many 
times do you know you are right, and you may actually be right? 
 
But, how useful is it in terms of your influential process to tell people 
how wrong they are, rub their nose in it like a little puppy dog, slap 
them with your newspaper, kick them out and say because I‟m right? 
That works doesn‟t it?  
 
If you‟re doing it for yourself, by all means, enjoy it. But, if you‟re 
doing it for influence, sure there are better ways of approaching these 
things. So, would you be interested in experimenting with a couple of 
different attitudes to get a sense of how different ways of presenting 
the same idea can actually be more or less influential, in other words, 
how they impact on you and other people as well? 
 
Wouldn‟t that be something interesting and worth doing? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
To make this very easy and to take our own personality out of it, 
because we don‟t want people running around insulting people and 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               18                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
having fights in the middle of this club, that wouldn‟t be a happy 
moment.  
 
 
Let‟s take a simple idea that hopefully, none of you are attached to. 
For example, „all chickens should be green‟. Is anyone really attached 
to that idea? If any hands go up, please go to the back of the room, 
ask for a refund and you‟re welcome to leave. All chickens should be 
green, that‟s a random idea that no one can really get too excited 
about right? 
 
 
The interesting thing is not the idea, but how you go about influencing 
or challenging that idea, does that make sense? Let‟s use the standard 
model that we all know and love, a little bit of force. 
 
 
 
 
How do people use force to change ideas? We‟ll try this out. What if 
you were to walk around, you meet someone and go hi, how are you 
doing? They say great, by the way, do you know that all chickens 
should be green? Of course, we know better than this, red chickens 
are the best. So you tell them no, you‟re wrong. Then you‟ll sit back, 
cross your arms and say see, I told you. 
 
 
Notice what that feels like.  
 
 
Then, you‟ll swap roles, do the same thing with the other partner and 
notice what that feels like so you can compare it when we switch 
approaches. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Everyone stand up. We‟ll go around and do the same little milling type 
thing only this time we‟ll be sticking to just that one interaction. Do it 
two or three times, I‟ll stop you in a minute or two once you‟ve had a 
few goes, we‟ll try something else and we‟ll do that a few times until 
we try different variations of it.  
 
 
Does that seem fair? Off you go. 
~~~ 
 
 
Pleasant? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Did you enjoy people telling you no, you‟re wrong? That‟s quite 
satisfying as the person forcing it, but not as satisfying for the person 
receiving, isn‟t it? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               19                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Let‟s try another one, something people use and let‟s see how 
influential this is. Let‟s imagine for a moment, when you hear that all 
chickens should be green that you know for a fact that the best 
chickens are red, because you had one last night and it was so yummy 
it‟s unreal. 
 
 
Vegetarians, just go with me on this one. 
 
 
So, you know all chickens should be red but for the sake of harmony 
you‟ll sit there and you‟ll nod politely and go yes, I agree, all chickens 
should be green.  
 
 
Notice how that inner conflict works for you, as the influencer, make 
sense? Same exercise slightly different response. Off you go. 
~~ 
 
 
 
Okay, leave the chickens alone.  
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
How was that? 
 
Students: Great. 
 
Igor: 
So, when you ignore what you actually believe and agree for the sake 
of it, do you enjoy that? Are you being particularly influential? So, 
does force work particularly well? 
 
Students: No. 
 
Igor: 
Their surrendering to their position, does that work particularly well? 
 
Students: No. 
 
Igor: 
Let‟s see if we can play around with this, shall we? As you were the 
people with the green chicken fetish, was it quite nice to have people 
agree with you? Wasn‟t that pleasant? So there‟s some value to it, it‟s 
just not enough is it? 
 
 
What if we took a little bit of both and mixed them together. For 
example, if someone says all chickens are green and you smile politely 
and say you are so right. There are so many ways of looking at 
chickens beyond color.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               20                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Notice how that‟s very different than saying you know, you‟re so right 
that there are so many different ways of looking at chickens beyond 
color.  
 
 
Do you feel the difference? What is the difference? What am I doing 
differently? 
 
Students: Timing. Open their minds in different ways, etc. 
 
Igor: 
What‟s happening is we‟re allowing part of the message to settle in, so 
we‟re mollifying the beast inside and then, as they feel yeah this is 
good, you add a little bit more and they go oh, I‟m curious, then you 
reverse it. It‟s called an agreement reversal. 
 
 
You‟re agreeing with them just enough for their minds to open enough 
for you to change the position on them. Does that make sense? Does it 
always work? No. But the principle is what we‟re working on right now, 
does that make sense?  
 
 
So go ahead and play with it. I want you to play with the different 
types of timing. Sometimes race all the way through and see how that 
works. Sometimes pause for your own sake and see how that works. 
Other times pause and wait for them to settle down with each idea, 
and then add the next piece, like just when they think they‟re coming 
to a stop ooh, there comes the next piece, just before you lose 
momentum. 
 
 
Give it a go. 
~~ 
 
 
The question over here, just in case people were asking as well, do 
you want me to repeat the statement? The statement itself, there‟s no 
magic in the language, it‟s the idea we‟re presenting. The idea is you 
can agree, create some kind of middle intrigue type thing in the middle 
and you‟re going to reverse the idea, or start moving in different 
directions. 
 
 
The example I had was simply, I totally agree with that or I totally 
agree with that idea that there are so many ways of viewing chickens 
beyond their color. You‟re a smart person to think of that.  
 
 
I changed it a little because it‟s random, but do you see where I‟m 
going with this? Do you see how they‟re going yeah; I am…wait 
what...? So play with it but don‟t get too caught up in the language, 
it‟s more the principle involved that matters. Does that make sense? 
 
 
Off you go. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               21                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
~~~ 
 
 
Did you enjoy that? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Was it interesting? 
 
Students: Yes.  
 
Igor: 
What kinds of things happened? 
 
Students: I got hungry. 
 
Igor: 
Would it be fair to say that your ability to influence people has 
increased slightly? We‟re not even talking about some crazy mind-
bending juju or anything like that. We just got a bit of a maneuver, a 
sense that there‟s a principle emerging here, isn‟t there?  
 
 
 
 
So, wouldn‟t it be fair to say for example, that getting some form of 
agreement is going to be a useful part of the influencing process. 
Would that be fair to say? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So when you agree with them to a certain extent, it opens something 
up and when you get them to agree with you to some extent, that 
whole influencing process starts taking place more naturally and 
smoothly. But it‟s not about pure agreement, agreeing with everything 
they say, because there‟s no influencing going on other than on you. 
 
 
Let‟s see if we can explore some other ideas.  
 
 
The next one is what I like to call the explorers gambit. Something we 
don‟t really do. There are different ways of doing this and most people 
do this by an indirect application of force. Let‟s say someone says I 
think all chickens should be green. We‟re all familiar with this one and 
by the end of the week you all will believe it. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
Of course, you‟ll do a little mind juju, but what if this time you turned 
around and said sir I‟m curious, what makes you say that? You have to 
explore a little about the mindset. You can make up whatever you 
want. Make it whatever you want, but it has to have some sort of 
logic. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               22                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
 
For example, if I had a bunch of tasty green chickens recently and that 
leads me to conclude that all chickens should be green, it‟s not about 
the color, it‟s about the taste isn‟t it, but I‟m telling you about color 
whereas, what I‟m really concerned with is the taste. 
 
 
This is how most problems occur. People will give you a conclusion 
rather than what they really want or need. Then you go off and paint 
all red chickens green and they go no, these aren‟t good enough. Of 
course they‟re not, because they don‟t taste the same.  
 
 
There are two ways you can play with the explorer‟s gambit and I‟d 
like you to experiment with both in the next exercise.  
 
Student: 
You know, Igor, all chickens really should be green. 
 
Igor: 
All right, that‟s interesting. So tell me, what makes you say that? 
 
 
Student: 
Well, I had a half dozen green chickens on my plate last night and the 
texture was just great. 
 
Igor: 
Wow, half a dozen…mini chickens… 
 
 
Okay, let‟s do the same thing again with a different style. 
 
Student: 
You know, Igor, chickens really all should be green. 
 
Igor: 
What makes you say that? 
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
Do you notice how your attitude, your manner makes a complete 
difference? This can be important, because when we talk about mind-
bending language people start going oh, let‟s do this crazy mind-
bending stuff and we‟ll go into their heads, do all this crazy stuff and 
come back out. 
 
 
That‟s no good if the rest of your communication is subtext, the 
texture of what you‟re saying violates the idea that you‟re presenting. 
So you can see how saying the same thing in two different ways has a 
very different impact.  
 
 
Now that you can see it, I‟d like for you to experience it. Spend a few 
minutes with your partners or different people as you meet them, and 
oscillate. Go from the friendly explorer to the abusive explorer, oh 
yeah, time to get some of that anger out. Off you go. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               23                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
~~~ 
 
 
 
All right everyone how are you doing? Are you enjoying that?  
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So you notice there‟s a difference in when your attitude comes into 
what you‟re doing in terms of what you‟re presenting. You might get 
some interesting information just with the explorer‟s gambit, and there 
will be other elements of that that will be more useful as time goes by. 
 
 
But really, for the moment, would it be fair to say if you‟re going to be 
respectful vs. more aggressive or blaming someone, that‟s going to 
increase your ability to influence other people, is that not true? The 
mind opens up more, rather than closing down. 
 
 
 
 
Let‟s put this on the board as well. This is particularly important…how 
many people here are involved in some type of corporate culture?  
 
How familiar are you with the opening gambit, „let me give you some 
feedback‟? Eyes glaring, steam coming out of the nose, you know what 
you‟re in for don‟t you? That‟s a classic example of how people hijack a 
good idea and totally kill the spirit of it by simply twisting the idea or 
the concept around.  
 
So we have to be very careful that whatever we do, especially with 
mind-bending language that‟s going to take people out of what their 
comfort zones are, to do it in a way that‟s very respectful of where 
they‟re coming from and also where they‟re going to. Does that make 
sense?  
 
If you start blaming or judging, and a hint of that starts leaking into 
what you‟re doing, your ability to influence starts diminishing. Why? 
Because people‟s shields go up. As a rule we all have fragile ego‟s, I‟m 
no different then the rest of you, and if you push the right or wrong 
button drilling people, we have defense mechanisms that automatically 
reject everything like anger, leaving tears or other things, but those 
are not the most useful ways of influencing people. 
 
They can be used from time-to-time and I know people do, like 
emotional blackmail and all that sort of stuff. Personally, I don‟t like it; 
I think there are more effective ways in which it can be a win-win for 
everyone. So, rather than one person feeling guilty and the other 
feeling bad, you get what you want but you both feel like crap. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               24                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
How about they get to feel amazing, you feel great and you both get 
what you want. Both types of worlds are available. Being very precise 
about being respectful rather than letting some hint of blame, 
aggression or attack coming to what you‟re doing is going to be very 
important. Can you see how that would work? 
 
So again, keep that in the back of your mind as we continue through 
the day because there will be times, as people‟s ideas start coming out 
where you might not actually agree with what they‟ve got. That‟s not 
the good starting point, even if you want to change someone‟s attitude 
because it‟s useful for your work, whatever you do. 
 
The starting point always has to be where they are, rather than where 
you want them to be. Does that make sense? 
 
Student: 
Yes. 
 
 
Igor: 
Let‟s see if we can take this principle a step further, shall we.  
 
 
We have the idea of respect vs. attack, but sometimes you can 
actually violate this rule in a respectful way. In other words, have you 
ever noticed when you put people under pressure, something comes 
up where you get more honest answers so there‟s some value in it, 
although not necessarily the one we want to use as our opening 
gambit. 
 
 
What if we were to use that in a way that still uses the respect idea vs. 
the blame idea, wouldn‟t that be useful? 
 
Student: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
I like to call this the exaggerated opening. In essence, you‟re going to 
misunderstand what someone is saying to such an extreme that it just 
becomes ridiculous. One of two things will happen. 
 
1. Either, the ridiculousness will taint the position they‟re taking so 
they can‟t quite stick to the whole green chicken thing, or 
 
2. They‟ll actually have to give you more information, things they 
wouldn‟t normally tell you because you basically goaded them 
into giving you more. 
 
 
It‟s a little bit like kids on a playground. Here‟s the line…I dare you, I 
dare you to step over and they go; I‟m doing it. We‟re going to do that 
in a way that people are going to respond to.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               25                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Essentially, we need to find what‟s called a „hot topic‟, a topic that the 
other person really gets engaged by it, it‟s their thing. If they don‟t 
care about it, then this opening won‟t work. Let‟s say you really cared 
about chickens and their color, in particular the green chickens 
because they are delicious. 
 
Now, you tell me how delicious the green chickens are and I turn 
around and go, you know what, I know where you‟re coming from, all 
food should be green, everything. You know what, the whole world 
should be green and we should shoot people that have anything other 
than green on. 
 
You can get guns in Vegas can‟t you?  
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
 
Notice what happens. If you really believe in this whole green chicken 
idea, what do you feel like doing? You either contain the position that 
only some chickens need to be green or some foods, and what that 
does is it forces you to go back the other way, where the momentum 
goes this way rather than that, and you can start riding it further 
forwards. 
 
Therefore, rather then saying all chickens are green now, you might 
say it‟s enough that some chickens are green. Do you see how you‟ve 
moved their idea a little bit by going way too far one way, so by trying 
to reign you in and get more moderate, they‟re opening the door for a 
more moderate opinion in the first place which gives you the first step 
towards influence. 
 
Again, I‟d like for you to experience it, play around with it, especially 
with what happens at the end of it so when they give you the all 
chickens will be green thing, exaggerate and go to town on it and 
people with the green chicken fetish, please do your best to respond 
genuinely.  
 
In other words, this is something that‟s really important to you. So, 
when someone goes way over the top, put them in their place and say 
no, you don‟t understand and see what comes out of it, see what 
positions start developing. Make sense? 
 
Off you go. 
~~~ 
Did you enjoy that? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               26                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
What happened when you exaggerated things? 
 
Students: They changed their minds. 
 
Igor: 
Do you notice how it‟s much easier to change someone‟s position, 
rather than attacking it, you actually force it further than they want to 
go and it releases a bit. 
 
 
Notice how when they changed their mind a little bit it‟s a lot easier to 
keep going forwards.  
 
1. What we‟re using is something called the contrast principle. 
 
In other words, when you‟re contrasting green chickens to red 
chickens then there might be a fight there. But, when you contrast 
green chickens to this ridiculous world where anything that‟s not green 
gets shot…it‟s like hang on a second that‟s a little extreme, I‟m not the 
green chicken Nazi. 
 
 
So the contrast principle is important. We‟re going to start using this 
as we go through because again, notice how what we‟re doing, we 
don‟t really care about these exercises– we‟ll be adding a few more in 
a minute don‟t worry– what we care about is how the impact is on the 
other person‟s mind. 
 
Can you feel a little roller coaster running through your own 
mind as you’re doing this? 
 
2. The second thing you may have noticed is the consistency 
principle.  
 
 
Do you notice once someone says something, actually it‟s this way, 
no-no actually it‟s this way here, it‟s much easier to keep them to it. 
When they say some chickens should be green rather than all chickens 
it‟s much easier to say well, if some chickens should be green then its 
okay for others to be other colors, right. Well I guess so, sure. 
 
Well, if it‟s okay for them to be another color, at least some of them 
would be okay to be red, right? So now notice how just by taking a 
little consistency they say this is how it is great, well if this is how it is, 
then this must be true also, so you get to move them by them being 
consistent to their own thoughts and actions. 
 
Would you like to explore that idea a little further? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               27                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Students: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Let‟s take the idea of how we can cement this while it‟s still the same 
time, creating a little change or the opportunity for change.  
 
 
Let‟s say someone says again, all chickens should be green. If you just 
said yeah, I agree all chickens should be green, what are you doing? 
You‟re cementing the position aren‟t you? It‟s becoming more 
consistent. You have to stay with it and go, you feel like oh, I can 
starting with my red chickens now because I already said I want to be 
green chicken. 
 
 
But, what if you used this idea and started playing with the language a 
little bit, just so it sounds like you‟re agreeing without actually 
agreeing.  
 
For example, all chickens should be green. You really think all chickens 
should be green don‟t you? You really think that, all chickens should be 
green. Notice how, if you believe it, it‟s validating because he‟s heard 
what I have to say, and if you attach something onto it then you can 
begin to open up an opportunity for change. 
 
So you really think that all chickens should be green, tell me, what 
makes you say that? Do you see how we begin to combine some of the 
principles we‟ve been playing with here, the respect, agreement, 
consistency but we start combining them a little bit to create an 
opening? 
 
Can you feel a sense like something is opening up inside your mind, 
like oh it‟s kind of these things here? That gives you more information 
to play with in order to change the construction inside their head, 
rather than just the language that‟s coming out of their mouths. 
 
Do you want to give it a go? 
 
Again, very simply, the challenge comes in all chickens should be 
green, you come back, reflect it and it‟s important you don‟t say I 
agree all chickens should be green, but rather you‟re acknowledging 
ah, so you think all chickens should be green, great. 
 
You think all chickens should be green. Tell me, how do you come to 
that conclusion? How does that work?  
 
Does that make sense? 
 
Students: Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               28                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Igor: 
Remember, very importantly, we want to keep within the respectful 
frame rather then the blame or attack frame.  
 
 
All right, spend a few minutes doing that and we‟ll come back. Off you 
go. 
~~~  
 
DVD 02 
Full Transcript  
 
 
Igor: 
How was that, interesting? As the subjects that people with your rigid 
green chicken believes, do you find how there are some other ways 
that allow your mind to open up a little bit more, at least to consider 
the possibility of other ways of being?  
 
This is important. This is what we‟re looking for. We want to create 
that opportunity inside people‟s minds to just consider another way of 
being, and that‟s where the mind-bending language plugs in. 
 
If you don‟t have that, you‟ll just sound like a retard on acid. I‟m sorry. 
I won‟t repeat it. It‟s not very polite. It‟s not really the face of a good 
therapist or salesperson. The mind-bending language as a sequence 
works incredibly well to create these special kinds of covert trance, 
which we‟ll talk about more as we get into them, but only if you create 
the context, the space inside the mind in which they can sit, which 
means: 
 
1. The shields have to come down. 
 
2. They have to actually take your ideas seriously enough to 
consider them. 
 
Otherwise, there‟s nothing. So in terms of the principles, these aren‟t 
all of them. We‟ll come up with a few more principles before we‟re 
through. Would it be fair that we can kind of summarize all these with 
a simple idea, which might be if you want to change their mind, you‟ve 
got to change their mood first. Would that be fair to say? 
 
Do you feel how there‟s something happening with the last few 
exercises that changed your mood enough to be willing to contemplate 
an alternative reality, shall we say, with a lovely chicken world, other 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               29                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
than the one you might have had, but first and foremost, you needed 
the right mood – a shift in mood that allowed the mind to follow.  
 
If you‟re going to change people‟s minds, change their moods, and the 
mind will follow. This is kind of summarized – there are all kinds of 
interesting campaigns. The military has done these as well, the hearts 
and minds campaign. If you want someone‟s mind, you start with their 
heart. When they feel it, then they‟ll believe it.  
 
The same sort of principle, it‟s just hopefully on a more sophisticated 
level because we‟re creating openings inside the mind.  
 
We‟re starting with creating the mood, which is going to be accepting, 
open to ideas, rather than closed to ideas. That‟s the fundamental shift 
we have to make inside the mind before these other maneuvers start 
taking place.  
 
 
You can ask the same question, you can present the same kind of 
information, and depending on how you do it, what context you set up 
and what impact that you‟ve had on the mind before the question or 
the information has been presented, you‟re either engaging them on a 
very light level and maybe rejecting it, or they‟re going to engage on a 
deeper level and other stuff starts happening.  
 
Would that be fair to say that‟s how your experience has been so far? 
 
After a break, would you like to explore this idea of how to shift the 
mood to actually get a much deeper impact on their mind? Would that 
be useful? Let‟s take 15 minutes for a break, but if you aim to be back 
here in 10 minutes, it‟ll take a few minutes for people to settle down 
and so on, and that way we‟ll be starting more quickly.  
 
Did you enjoy the morning, the warm up? Do your brains feel like 
they‟re doing a little bit of work now? Remember, what we‟re doing 
here is we‟re setting a context, aren‟t we? We‟re setting a context that 
allows us to start influencing people. It‟s like you‟re a master gardener.  
 
Before you start throwing seeds on the ground and hoping for the 
best, you‟re preparing the ground. You‟re digging it up and making 
sure the weeds are out. You‟re checking the soil for conditions so you 
know what kinds of things will grow in your soil. Make sense? 
 
Those of you who are familiar with this will, of course, know this. 
Hopefully, the things we‟ve been doing this morning will start enriching 
our concept of H+. Does anyone remember what we mean by H+?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               30                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
It‟s an intense desire for the other person to experience trance, 
coupled with an intense desire for them to have a very positive 
experience. Notice, we don‟t want anything from them. That‟s kind of a 
needy thing. Please, please, please have this experience so that I can 
feel better. We want a lot of things for them. So we want them to 
experience it for its own sake and, of course, the mind-expanding 
cause of that positive experience is built into that already. 
 
So, now you have some maneuvers that will enrich that ability. The 
reason why I say this is because it‟s the most important thing you can 
do in any process or influence, as far as I‟m concerned – and you‟re 
welcomed to disagree with me at any point. It‟s a free world, for the 
moment. The most important thing is to create the context in which 
everything else happens.  
 
 
I find so many people focusing on, what are the techniques? What is 
the language pattern? How can I memorize all this crazy language? 
They‟re missing the point. You can have all the language in the world, 
but if your context is messed up, then there‟s going to be very little 
that‟s happening. If anything, you‟re going to annoy people the other 
way.  
 
So always be aware of the context. When you‟re putting on hold all the 
things you‟ve done up to this point, your other hypnosis trainings, your 
experiences and so on, the one thing I‟m going to ask you to keep 
relatively alert is your sense of a social context that you‟re in. Different 
types of conversations allow you for different types of, say, intimacy, 
different types of questions, and so on. Does that kind of make sense? 
 
From time to time here, we will purposely violate the social contract in 
order to see happens when you do that. So when you do it out there, 
with real people – because, of course, you are all fake people, pretend 
people. When you do it with people who haven‟t been trained in these 
things, you‟ll be able to violate enough of the social contract to create 
the conditions you need without violating it so badly that you break all 
connections.  
 
So that fine tuning is something you carry into this with you and the 
only thing here with these things is helping you find what elements 
you can emphasize to make more of that. 
 
I promised you before the break that we‟d be taking these principles, 
basically this thing here, and we‟ll be using it in order to basically start 
people‟s minds navigating to brave new worlds. Wouldn‟t that be 
something? So let‟s start, if very simply. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               31                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Remember our five magic questions– 
 
 
Who 
 
Where 
 
When  
 
How 
 
What 
 
This is not a metaphysical seminar. I‟m not going to do any spiritual 
enlightening guru type stuff. I‟m not going to have you contemplating 
your navel for 10 hours at a time. Those things have value, but it‟s not 
the purpose of what we‟re here for.  
 
So it may look like this for a moment but really, what we‟re interested 
in is not so much the metaphysics behind what we‟re about to, it‟s 
more the experience you put someone through.  
For example, if I asked you who are you, chances are most of you 
would answer with your name, right? Would that be fair? Why is that? 
Because that‟s the social context.  
 
Do you shake hands everyday and say, who are who? Oh, my name is 
so and so. Oh, I‟m so and so. Well, great.  
 
Of course, if I said to you, who are you, and you gave me your name, 
I‟d say, I know your name. I can read it on your label. What I want to 
know is who are you? Who are you? Do you begin to see what‟s 
happening here? Can you sense it? A little bit of pressure.  
 
Your mind is kind of spinning into like a loose gear shall we say, and 
you‟re not quite sure how to answer that yet.  
 
So what I want you to do is ask the same five questions. The first time 
around, very quickly, in the same way you did this morning. Who are 
you? Where are you and so on? You want to get a sense of what their 
answers are. It will take you 30 seconds.   
 
Once you‟ve asked them the normal way, I want you to start using 
H+. In other words, start sounding like you are the guru. Like you 
have your big yellow sash, you‟ve shaved your head, you‟ve got funny 
marks on your head and you really are interested in something other 
than the trivial answer. In other words, you‟re interested in their 
answer that is not this, because this is what we‟re familiar with.  
 
So when you ask these questions: Who are you? Where are you? When 
are you, etc, I want you to notice the distinction between how people 
answer when they answer off the top of their head, or when you‟re 
really making them pay attention and answer in a different way. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               32                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Now, as a subject, when you‟re asked a question, the second time 
around anyways, your job is to try and answer the question as best 
you can. However, you might not be able to, right? You may have an 
experience that you can‟t put words on. You may find your mental 
wheels spinning for a while. It doesn‟t matter. It‟s the act of trying to 
answer the question that matters. 
 
This whole thing in hypnosis, that trying – do or do not do, there‟s no 
try – I think someone called it a Yoda-ism the other day. There is truth 
in that, but the truth is there only in, shall we say, on a more 
conscious level, where people have used it as an excuse. Yes, I‟ll try to 
do that. It‟s telling you there‟s an insecurity there and they‟re hedging 
their bets.  
 
The kind of trying we‟re talking about here is the one that actually 
makes your brain do something. Hence, it will alter what‟s happening 
inside your brain. There was an interesting bit of research done with 
obsessive compulsive disorder. They would go weekly meetings where 
they would watch brain scans of other people where their compulsion 
kind of lit up, and they had pretty hard-wired compulsions.  
 
In between those meetings, their only task was when they got home 
and did whatever their compulsion was – like kissing every window 
before they leave – they should try – and this is the word, try and 
resist it for as long as possible. 
 
If they fail, no big deal, if they did it for five seconds one day, no 
worries, they kiss their windows and they leave. The next day maybe 
it‟s 10 seconds. Now when they look at these brain scans over a 
period-of-time, and it does take time, they‟re rewiring their brain.  
 
They can actually see the structures changing from week to week, 
month to month.  
 
So, trying absolutely counts provided something‟s going on in here. As 
hypnotists, I want to ask these questions blandly, to get a bland 
response. Then, I want you to use your H+, really look at them 
meaningful. Use your tonality, like this is the most important question 
in the world. You might even repeat it a few times. Who are you? Who 
are you really? 
 
They might be tempted to say, oh, I‟m a so and so. I know your name, 
but who are you?  
 
By the way, do you see what I‟m doing? If someone gives me a bland 
answer, when I‟m actually asking a “deeper” question, or a question 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               33                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
that‟s designed to get them to consider it more deeply, when they give 
me an answer in here, I acknowledge it and then I‟ll say I want 
another answer that‟s not this. 
 
So where does that send them? It sends them anywhere but what they 
know. That‟s where we need them to be. So, just play with this a little 
bit. Probably five or six minutes apiece, is that enough for you?  
 
Audience:  What you‟re describing now, does that fall under mood versus mind? 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. So the attitude that we‟re creating here is the mood for them 
to answer the question differently, and you‟ll get a different response.  
That‟s kind of the dynamic I want you to start noticing. You can ask 
the same question in one particular mood, and the answer comes out 
snappy and quickly.  
 
You can shift their mood by shifting your own mood, by getting a little 
bit more serious, a little bit more hypnotic, staring at them friendly, 
and asking the same questions again, and noticing that as their mood 
changes, the type of answer you get back will also shift. That includes 
their inability to speak.  
 
In other words, they have no ability to add labels onto what their 
experience is. 
 
Audience:  Yes. 
 
Audience: Are we just asking two or are we asking all five? 
 
Igor: 
You‟re going to ask all five questions: 
 
1. Who are you? 
2. What are you? 
3. When are you? 
4. Where are you? 
5. How are you? 
 
You‟re going to spin through that. If I give you 10 minutes apiece, is 
that going to be enough time to do both versions, the light version and 
the deeper version, is that okay with you? Off you go. 
 
~~~ 
So, how was that? Did you find it interesting? What happened, 
anyone? So what kind of things happened? 
 
Audience: We tried to hypothesize that it was actually fairly necessary to ask the 
question in a way that was just normal to start with. Walk up to 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               34                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
somebody and just go, who are you really? As opposed to saying, so 
who are you, and then coming back to the question so, who are you 
really? 
 
Igor:   
This is interesting. You notice how when you‟re doing this, you‟re 
actually playing with a social context before you violate it? Remember 
the old principles; you‟re acknowledging them before you start abusing 
their minds a little bit. That‟s very important.  
 
Now, the other thing that happens and remember; this is just an 
exercise right now. 
 
 
We‟re going to be building on this exercise, but it‟s also important to 
see where you can start pulling out in terms of, when you do start 
violating the social contract, what starts happening? Some of the 
things are positive, like did you notice your minds spinning in different 
directions.  
 
Some of the things are negative; like you realize that if someone 
random came up to you on the street and said that, you‟d think, okay. 
 
Audience: I just noticed that when you got questions like, when are you, it 
reminded me of the tip trance from the mind-bending language where 
you get the mental stutter and you can‟t put words on the answer. 
 
Igor: 
Did you notice how some of these questions are already loaded 
because we don‟t go around asking people, when are you? We don‟t do 
that. That‟s just not a normal question, is it? Again, it has the potential 
to violate the social contract enough that they might check your pupil 
dilation.  
 
But then again, if done at the right time, it can send your head 
spinning in a loop. You begin to feel your head spinning a little bit, like 
it‟s kind of working out of normal rhythm. That‟s very important. 
 
Audience: It was like you were trying to find an answer that should be there, and 
you couldn‟t find the file maybe to dig it up. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. Did you notice that? It‟s like you know it‟s there 
somewhere, but what the hell is it? The place all this stuff comes from 
by the way is – I didn‟t invent the whole process. The foundation for 
something called “Beyond Words,” which one of my hypnosis mentors, 
John Overdurf came up with, and we built on that to create this 
particular model. 
 
 
I like the title, Beyond Words, because doesn‟t it take you to that 
place? Just keep that in mind because we‟re not playing with a 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               35                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
different type of trance than the one that most people are thinking 
about.  
 
When you watch a stage hypnosis show, like you did last night, when 
you do the regular kind of overt direct hypnosis and so on, it begins to 
take people into trances, but different kinds of trances than the ones 
we‟re playing with here. That‟s because we‟re creating a different – we 
have a different purpose with it. 
 
 
 
Audience: When you start to use the term, who are you, it gives you a dimension 
and it defines their character and the substantive value that comes 
with that, and as a psychologist, I can see the difference in them and 
the way they express themselves, and the values that they bring to 
you.  
 
It gives you more definitive information to play with and understand 
who they are, but you really understand the essence of who they are. 
 
Igor: 
Right and you have to switch the tempo on them to be able to get that 
essence more clearly. Because what you‟re doing is you‟re kind of 
exploring this area around the edge at the moment, which says okay, 
these are things I define myself as. Now, the interesting thing is – and 
we‟ll come on to this in a moment, what do you think would happen if 
you took them right to the edge.  
 
 
Normally, if you ask them, who are you, it‟s somewhere right in the 
middle of us, isn‟t it? It‟s like, yeah, my name‟s John or Jack or Jill or 
whatever. Then you get a little bit weird on them and go, no but who 
are you really? You might even touch their shoulder or gaze at them 
intently and go there‟s something going on here. Who are you really?  
 
 
Of course, did you feel the pressure of it to respond? That‟s part of it is 
the pressure. It‟s very important. That kind of forces you out of the 
regular context right up to the edge.  
 
Some of you popped over, which is you kind of ran out words because 
there are no words on the outside of the edge. Some of you can just 
answer it and you‟re kind of on the inside of the edge.  
 
Some of you might have experienced it like being on a little journey. 
So, you start off with something clear like, name. Then it might be 
profession. Then it might be some tasks you do. Then it might be 
something that‟s special to you. Eventually, you get to this point where 
it gets increasingly difficult to answer.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               36                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Did some of you notice that sort of thing happening? So you‟re kind of 
gently maneuvering them towards the edge of what their reality is. On 
occasion, they pop over the end, in which case they just sit there in 
this amazed mini trance, thinking what do I do with that. I don‟t know 
what to do with that, because they‟re beginning to have an experience 
that‟s outside of their ability to make meaning of yet. 
 
 
 
Audience: Do you keep pressing so they can go through that? 
 
Igor:  
Yes. Absolutely. Remember, these are just warm-ups for now, but 
you‟re learning the tools of the trade, and the key thing we want here 
is we‟re going to pay attention to them and put pressure on them to 
get them further and further to the edge, and then pop them 
somewhere else. 
 
 
So pressure is your key tool. Now, we want them to consider these 
ideas fully, don‟t we? If they can give the answer easily, how fully are 
they being considered? Because they‟re basically opening up a second-
hand drawer that says, okay, here‟s a quick response for this one.  
 
 
So when they give you one layer of answers, what you‟re basically 
doing is, if we imagine that little circle we had before is right over 
here. The first time they answer something, they say their name. 
Then, what you‟re saying is, who are you? Then they‟ll go with 
something else. They‟re still within your normal reality. They say your 
job, for example, or the things they do. So you say, great.  
 
 
Then you say who are you? At this point, they start thinking a little 
harder like, what the heck. Then you go great. Who are you? Each 
time you do this, and the key thing is you cannot let them go back to 
what they were saying before. The pressure pops them further and 
further towards that edge until they make their way out of the house, 
and they see that first golden dawn and go, ah.  
 
 
Now, I don‟t expect that to happen here yet. All we‟re looking for is 
can you build the pressure and move them closer and closer towards 
the edge and notice their responses changing, the quality of their 
responses changing. 
 
Audience: I guess we were sort of going out of the house because the answers 
went from fairly conventional about like what you‟d expect to really 
kind of metaphysical. 
 
Igor: 
Right. Now we‟re not interested in the metaphysics at this point, 
although it‟s a very valuable, shall we say, spiritual, metaphysical 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               37                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
exercise. What we‟re interested in here as hypnotists is the journey 
that people take.  
 
Basically, when people talk about metaphysics, in some respects the 
way I view it is they‟re talking about everything that‟s outside this. 
When it starts getting inside here, that‟s when you have your, shall we 
say, your pseudo metaphysicists.  
 
The ones that talk all the spiritual lingo perfectly, but when you look at 
their lives, there‟s not very much richness. There‟s a disconnect 
between what they‟re saying and what they‟re doing. That‟s because 
it‟s all inside here.   
 
So we are talking about the same sort of thing, but it‟s going in 
different directions. Our purpose isn‟t to make it more spiritual, by the 
way. It‟s to open choices up. Right now we‟re navigating inside 
someone‟s mind. 
 
Audience: One of the things that I noticed as we were digging into the next level, 
the conversation got beyond just the Pavlovian reflexive response and 
got into a real conversation.  
 
Igor: 
Right, because now the normal responses, the little bits of paper you 
just have in your pocket and you go, oh here you are, the automatic 
responses no longer work. So people already think it even within this 
realm. So what do you think is going to happen when you get them 
out of that realm? Wouldn‟t that be interesting? Would you like to find 
out?  
 
Audience: So, there really isn‟t a right answer, and they are really going to be 
able to give you an answer? 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. And it‟s exactly the point where they stop being able to 
answer your question that you know you‟re hitting some interesting 
territory. Did anyone here have a sensation whether it‟s right at the 
beginning or later on, where their mind just kind of went blank, but it 
was kind of like you felt stuff happening. It wasn‟t like you just didn‟t 
think anymore. He felt stuff happening, but you had no idea what it 
was, anyone? 
 
 
So, you‟re feeling your mind doing something, but you have no idea 
what it is. It‟s because it‟s trying to figure out what the hell you‟re 
sensing on these boundaries. You haven‟t been able to make sense of 
this yet because there‟s no language attached to it. We make meaning 
through language.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               38                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Those of you who want to have more on that idea of it, the mind-
bending master class looks into the idea – I‟ll give you the 10 second 
version of this.  
 
 
In order for you to know this is a chair, you have to be able to label it 
and you have to be able to limit it to say all the things that it‟s not. It‟s 
not a couch. It‟s not a bed. It‟s not part of the carpet. So by elevating 
it in terms of purpose by putting a label on it, you‟re actually limiting 
its purpose also.  
 
 
What we‟re doing is we‟re taking it to a place where you‟ve not had the 
chance to put labels on things yet, which means you haven‟t had a 
chance to limit those things yet, which is why you‟re sitting there 
going, what the hell is that? That‟s when you open – I call this a trance 
of infinite possibilities (TIP).  
 
Why? Because when you get to that point, the very fact that you 
haven‟t put labels on it yet, the fact that you‟re not trying to contact 
its meaning, means that anything is still possible. From there, your 
journey can go in any direction. It could be positive, and it could be 
negative. Anything is possible.  
 
Audience: I got a feeling of a warm sensation. I felt sort of sweaty when I got to 
that point. I really wondered what it was and why I felt that way, but I 
can see now that… 
 
Igor: 
It‟s basically your neurology activating, but because – does anyone 
know what an emotion is? An emotion is actually a physical sensation 
coupled with a label to make it mean something. Two people can have 
the same physical sensation or very close to the same physical 
sensation.  
 
One will experience anxiety; the other will experience excitement. Yet 
the adrenaline dump and all those chemical things going on will be 
very similar. 
 
 
So the label that you attach to the emotion makes it emotional. So 
what you‟re experiencing right now is a physical sensation element 
without a label to put on it yet. I could give you some of those labels, 
but I won‟t. Did you enjoy it? So, whatever it was; was good, right? 
So, let‟s find out how much more of that can happen. 
 
Audience: When we got close to the edge without the adjectives, without all the 
verbs that you were giving me, who are you, would that be proper or 
did I take tools away? 
 
Igor: 
In what way?  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               39                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Audience: Like they were telling me I‟m a father, I‟m this I‟m that. Or this is 
what I do. So taking those adjectives, those role-playing and those 
verbs, without all those, who are you? 
 
Igor: 
Essentially, that‟s kind of where we‟re going with this. There are many 
ways you can express the same ideas. You‟re basically saying, not 
those. Instead of saying, without all those, because that imply that 
you can‟t have them, you might say, okay, so you‟re a father. That‟s 
not what I‟m interest in. Who are you?  
 
You can do it both ways, by the way. One is taking them away, which 
is de-labeling, which can be bit scary for some people. I know one 
person who did this, actually one we did in Sweden. He was telling me 
he‟s a coach and he‟s doing some metaphysical coaching with 
someone. He basically took this woman's identity out. She was a 
mother, and that‟s all she knew. That was her whole life.  
 
So, he did sort of a variation of this say, who are you that‟s not a 
mother. The poor girl was in tears. She couldn‟t handle it because he 
was taking the whole label away from her and that was her whole 
experience.   
 
So, you can do it harshly that way, in other words push people 
through that and that can be very, very useful with the right person at 
the right now. Or you can be inclusive with it saying, okay, so you‟re a 
father. Is that all you are? Who are you really?  
 
 
Of course, that‟s just thinking about who. What about when, where, 
how and what? Do you see how we have a lot of scope and ways of 
stretching people out just asking these questions? We haven‟t even 
begun with the mind-bending language yet. That‟s a little bit trippy. 
This is the warm-up.  
 
Audience: When we got started with this, I was reminded of the movie with Jack 
Nicholson in Anger Management, where he said, who are you, and 
basically took this person to the point where she just got angry and 
lost it. In that case, it was how he was being with them was to cause 
them to be angry.  
 
So, I immediately was thinking along those lines, and my partner, the 
way he approached it was so phenomenal that it had me go beyond 
that.  
 
 
There was something really great about being genuinely interested, 
not negating, not saying, no that‟s not the right answer. So I‟m 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               40                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
realizing how sensitive I will be to somebody saying, you‟re not doing 
it right. That‟s not right, by being genuinely curious. 
 
Igor: 
Do you see why we began with this? Do you see how easy it is to slip 
from being respectful, doing the explorer thing, to being aggressive 
and attacking? Who are you! If nothing else, it‟s annoying, isn‟t it?  
 
 
 
How many people have hung around a more spiritual community and 
have some person sit there that you don‟t even know and tell you, so 
who are you, man? Go inside and find out. The idea is right, but the 
violation is wrong. Their timing is wrong, their social contract isn‟t set 
up, and really they‟re ignoring you as a person. They‟re not being 
respectful in how they ask it.  
 
There‟s nothing wrong with the question. The question is a great 
question to ask. There might not be anything wrong with how they‟re 
asking the question, it‟s just when.  
 
Audience: This is kind of an observation mixed with a question. A metaphor came 
to mind, which is imagine you‟re trying to pull someone across a room, 
and between you is a piece of tape made of paper. My sense is to get 
somebody from the middle to the outside, you‟re trying to subtly pull 
them, but if you move too quickly, it tears.  
 
If you move too slowly, it tears. The way you know how fast to move 
is by observing how they‟re reacting to your movement. 
 
Igor: 
You know what, I like that. That‟s a great metaphor. That‟s a really 
lovely metaphor because it is about pressure. It‟s about creating the 
right amount of tension. Too much, you lose them. You become 
disrespectful. You become aggressive. Too little, and there‟s no real 
impetus. They just start running around in a circle. So, that‟s a 
beautiful metaphor. Thank you.  
 
 
Shall we take that metaphor and apply some more? Would you like 
that? We‟ve been kind of edging towards the corner, the edges of their 
reality a little bit, right? Would you like to have a very simple way of 
getting them right to the edge straightaway? Would that be useful? It‟s 
a very quick maneuver, but again, it‟s all about having this in place. If 
this is not in place, they will not follow. 
 
 
So here‟s how we‟ll begin. We‟ll begin with the same questions: Who 
are you? Where are you? When are you? How are you? What are you? 
We‟ll have the deep layers first. Don‟t worry about the light version. 
Do it with a different partner just to get a different reaction, then you 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               41                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
can watch them going into these, shall we say, altered states that are 
unusual types of covert trances.  
 
 
Now, when you‟re doing that, I want you to create a contrast so you 
can actually see how different ways of phrasing the same ideas come 
through. So if you ask them, for example, who are you or where are 
you, they give you a particular answer or they start spinning and 
whatnot. Then you can turn around and ask them: 
 
 
Where are you not?  
 
Who are you not?  
 
How are you not? 
 
Just by my asking those questions here – and I don‟t even have the 
full intensity of the pressure and the contact and so on, can you 
already feel your brains kind of starting to spin a little bit more than 
before. Can you start feeling that? So, we‟re just slightly starting to 
bring in something more. The negation, the „not‟ basically says, 
whatever you think it is, go somewhere else. 
 
We have to be careful with this because other things can start coming 
out, and we‟ll start playing with that afterwards. For the moment, do 
you want to play with that one? We‟re going to focus on these 
questions, plus a negation. So we‟ll have the negation now.  
 
We‟re going to have a contrast to the positive question, who are you? 
Then, again, who are you not? So you‟re going to contrast one against 
the other so you can see what the impact is when you add a negation. 
 
Just observe the reaction that they give. They may answer. They may 
not answer. They may have different experiences. Notice both as the 
observer – the hypnotist, and as the subject – being asked it, what 
happens inside your own neurology.  
 
The key thing is attitude. This is the key to the whole thing.  
 
Was that interesting? How many here are starting to get a little bit 
emotional? A third, maybe half the group or so, so you can feel we‟re 
starting to raise the power up a little bit, right? 
 
It‟s important when we get to this point there are a couple of things 
we need to do in terms of your own personal health and safety. We‟re 
doing this stuff as training exercises to understand how we can open 
up the mind to do certain things.  
 
1. First of all, as hypnotists, we set the context. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               42                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
If you say when are you, with big tearful eyes, what kind of experience 
are they likely to go towards? A less positive one perhaps. It might be 
useful. It might be absolutely useful in terms of doing some therapy or 
something like that. Whereas if you go, who are you or when are you? 
Do you see how your attitude totally shifts the experience? That‟s the 
first thing. 
 
2. The second thing, this is adult learning.  
 
In other words, you as subjects get to choose how far through your 
own maps you decide to range. You do not jump off something that 
you‟re not ready to jump off yet. So if something starts going toward 
an edge you don‟t like do you know what you do? You go okay, noted, 
I‟ll come back some other time I‟ll go explore somewhere else. 
 
What we‟re not doing here is therapy. We‟re not trying to get you to 
de-label your whole experience and bring up all kinds of stuff so that 
you end up falling off the edge somewhere and never coming back. 
We‟re going to start exploring our own, shall we say, inner personal 
space.  
 
If you start getting to places where the Klingons are hanging out, and 
you go oh, no- no- no, I‟m not ready for that yet, I‟m going to get 
some more lifesavers or whatever makes stuff go.  
 
So you, as subjects, have the absolute right and the responsibility to 
choose not to go some places if they start arising. Do you see where 
I‟m coming from? It‟s important because these are not exactly 
complex questions, are they? They‟re about to get very trippy, which 
means you need to just make sure you go to the point where they‟re 
useful for you and at that point, you go great, had the experience, now 
I‟ll go somewhere else as well. 
 
Why is this? Some of these questions here, believe it or not, you 
already have – if you can create the context that we‟ve been playing 
with all morning, you already have the capacity to create a full blown 
conversation or regression where no one actually realizes it‟s 
happened. 
 
Who here had a very strong emotion come up, either positive or 
maybe a little negative? Those strong emotions, do you know about 
the affect bridge? They suck you right back to other experiences. So, 
what if you were, let‟s say, a hypnotherapist, a psychotherapist or a 
coach, and you had a person sitting with you, just to give you an 
example of how powerful this can be.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               43                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
You create that context, and you ask them, who are you not right 
now? They get a little bit emotional and you say where aren‟t you? 
Then something wells up.  
 
A simple question like where are you right now? When are you? They 
might say I‟m six years old on the playground. If they don‟t get the 
question you can say, so where are you in your memories?  
 
Do you see how it just released a full blown regression, totally 
covertly? I can clean all that sort of stuff up before anything officially 
hypnotic could happen.  
 
Do you see how powerful this stuff can already be? The irony is, folks, 
this is the warm-up act. We‟re just preparing your minds to be able to 
handle some much more trippy concepts. Are you having fun? Want to 
do it some more?  
 
What do hypnotists do? They show, right? So, what does it mean when 
you hypnotize someone? What do you do? You put them in a trance. 
When you get them in a trance, what do you do? Do you hit them? I 
want one of those hammers.  
 
Audience: You open up their subconscious. 
 
Igor: 
How? How do you do all these things? The basic tool we have is 
suggestion, isn‟t it? So we use suggestion in order to do exactly what 
you said, to open their mind and bypass the critical factor. Get their 
attention organized on certain things so they have an experience, and 
so on. 
 
 
So far, we‟ve been opening stuff up. We‟ve been preparing the ground 
so that when you present hypnotic ideas, they have somewhere to go. 
No? You open the cupboard up and go oh, this one‟s empty. Let‟s put 
some stuff in here.  
 
 
So, wouldn‟t it be useful to have some stuff to put in there, seeing as 
you‟re opening the cupboard up anyway? Now, as a rule, what‟s a 
better thing to suggest, especially in a training like this? Positive or 
negative things, happiness, learning and joy, versus depression, 
misery or fear; tough call, I know. 
 
 
Even if you‟re not getting strong emotional responses – and that, by 
the way, is not the purpose. I‟m just pointing out that it can happen 
because you‟re already accessing interesting stuff, positive and 
sometimes negative. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               44                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
You‟re all feeling, when these things start happening, your mind‟s 
beginning to spin a little bit more. Going a bit more, running on 
empty. You can feel stuff happening, but you can‟t really put your 
finger on what it is. It‟s like one of those annoying things when you 
know something‟s there, but you don‟t quite know what it is.  
 
Do you feel a sense of that happening? Because, that‟s the open 
window we‟re looking for. What if, when that window opens up, in 
other words, they‟ve gone away from where they‟re used to, what if 
you let them loop around back into where they‟re used to in a very 
positive way, or even to augment it in a way they‟ve never 
experienced before. Wouldn‟t that be something? 
 
 
The exercise is very simple. You‟re going to do exactly the same thing 
again, you can use the positive or the negation, doesn‟t really matter. 
Mix and match them. You can now play with any of the questions. 
Then do all the questions in a row. You can mix and match the 
questions as your instincts guide you.  
 
 
Did you notice how each of these questions, by the way, send you to 
different parts of your mind. Is that fair? It sends you to different 
kinds of experiences. Allow your instincts to guide you a little bit in 
terms of what questions you ask. The only thing we‟re going to add 
now is a positive suggestion, a positive experience.  
 
 
For a moment, just consider if you would, and really consider this. 
When are you not, right now, that happy? Can you feel the machinery 
working? Now, it doesn‟t quite matter where you‟re ending up. What 
matters is how you present the idea and the suggestion again, noticing 
the impact that it has on someone else.  
 
How it accentuates, if you like, the whole search mechanism, which is 
search through ideas that they don‟t even have yet, at least not 
consciously.  
 
 
With the language we have up to this point, we‟re opening up a 
doorway. We‟re sending someone outside this little house that they‟ve 
been used to and they see it, but they don‟t know what to make of it. 
So now when they‟re there, you‟re basically telling them in all this vast 
expanse of nature that you‟re seeing for the first time maybe, or you 
never fully appreciated it, search out one thing. Look for the deer, or 
the bluebird. 
 
 
Now that their filters are a little clearer, we‟re saying, search out 
experiences that make you happy. They may or may not come down 
on that yet. Why? Because you‟re kicking a search into process rather 
than getting a result for the moment.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               45                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
All you‟re caring about is that the search that they‟re having, which is 
a random search, begins to be targeted towards something useful. 
You‟re targeting their attention towards happiness, as opposed to 
anything else. 
 
 
We‟re taking this universe and saying, keep searching in this direction 
because we‟re not interested in the others yet. These are the happy 
experiences over here. 
  
So the way you do it is very simple, you do exactly what you said a 
moment ago. All you do is add a simple suggestion at the end of it. 
The timing is going to be interesting. Please do play with different 
versions of your timing. Who are not right now, that‟s happy? Do you 
feel the difference?  
 
Audience: Should we stay with one suggestion? So, if we‟re with happy, stay with 
happy. 
 
Igor: 
Stay with one suggestion. Yes. Stay with one theme. I recommend 
happy. Why? Because is there anyone here who doesn‟t like being 
happy? Is that a bad thing for anyone? So, let‟s keep it simple for now 
because we don‟t want to overcomplicate this right now.  
 
Right now, all we‟re doing is exploring stuff. We don‟t even know what 
that stuff is yet. So, we want to keep it as simple as possible so that 
when you start comparing different experiences, you have things that 
are worth comparing to each other. Make sense? Thank you. 
 
Audience: Is the „right now‟, is that important? 
 
Igor: 
No. It just adds a little bit of extra spin. I‟m just doing it right now just 
because it‟s preparing you for later stuff. For the moment, stick it to as 
simple as you want.  
 
Audience: When are you not happy? 
 
Igor: 
Yes. Just notice where that sends people‟s minds and be prepared for 
the answers.   
 
 
Not always, you can say when are you, that‟s happy? Actually, play 
with different variations because it means very different things when I 
say when are you not that‟s happy? When are you not, that‟s happy. 
There‟s a big difference. 
 
So do play with the variations exactly like that, because the timing is 
going to be absolutely crucial and I don‟t want to give you the specific 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               46                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
timing. I want you to play with different ones and notice the different 
answers you get. 
 
 
I‟m not going to be there for you with a stopwatch each time and go, 
okay three seconds to go okay, now the other one. That‟s not going to 
happen. So get used to playing with different timings and how it 
impacts in different ways, some will be more positive than others just 
notice what happens. Make sense? 
 
Audience: So the question is; is it actually a question that I‟m expecting an 
answer for? 
 
Igor: 
No. 
 
Audience: So I‟m not eliciting a response. 
 
Igor: 
You don‟t care about what they can answer. You care about them 
trying to answer. The distinction is you want them to process it, to 
really engage with it. If you‟ve done your job right, they will not be 
able to give you an answer because they‟re outside of their boundary. 
But they‟ll sit there going – you put the pressure on saying well, what 
is that?  
 
Has anyone ever seen a stage hypnotist takes someone‟s ability to 
speak away? Well, you have a much easier trick with doing that now. 
You‟re literally taking them to the point where they‟re beyond speech, 
the ability to put meaning onto what‟s happening, but they can 
experience it without having language interfere with it. That‟s a very 
good thing, at least as a training wheel goes. Make sense? 
 
If they answer their problem, you just ask the same question or a 
different question again, with even more momentum to spin them 
even further out. The one thing you do not want, though – just as I‟m 
thinking about it now, is for them to go, I wonder what‟s for dinner 
tonight. They‟re clearly not engaging with the idea at that point. 
They‟re not engaging with the question. Does that make sense to you? 
 
Audience: What‟s the role of, that‟s? 
 
Igor: 
The word, that? 
 
Audience: Yeah. 
 
Igor: 
Find out. Do it in different ways. 
 
Audience: I don‟t know if this is even good English. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               47                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Igor: 
You haven‟t even done it yet. Do it in different ways, emphasize it in 
different ways, pause in different places and find out! Okay, all clear. 
Big smiles. Ready to get happy and enthusiastic juju vibes? Let‟s 
spend 10 minutes doing that. Stick with the same partner once you do 
the exercise, but use a different partner from the last round. Off you 
go. 
~~~ 
 
How was that? Are you noticing that the spin is starting to accelerate a 
little bit? Do you feel the engine‟s kind of winding up for something? 
Yeah? So what kinds of things happened to you? 
 
Audience: One thing I noticed is that the spin really accelerates if you ask your 
next question as they‟re entering the trippy state. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. This is great. Did you notice how timing is everything? 
When you have all these complex language patterns, you don‟t want to 
waste it. It‟s like putting seasoning on a meal. You do it at just the 
right time.  
 
Has anyone ever been on a swing? What happens when you kick your 
legs out too soon? Do you go faster or slower? So in order to be able 
to operate a swing – it‟s a very technical mechanism – you have to be 
able to find exactly the right spot, the sweet spot that will accelerate 
you, rather than slow you down. 
 
The same is true of hypnotic language, especially this advanced covert 
hypnosis stuff we‟re doing, the mind-bending language we‟re doing. If 
you find exactly the right spot, you accelerate. If you miss the spot, 
you‟ll decelerate.  
 
How many people had that sort of experience as well, almost by 
accident, if you like? Excellent! Just put your hands right up so we can 
see them properly. Good. It‟s about half of you. So, this is why I‟m 
saying to experiment with the timing.  
 
You‟ll know the timing when the other person has a response, and if 
you start doing it too soon, it kind of kills the response a bit. If you do 
it too late, it‟s okay. If you do it at just the right pass, it‟s like they‟re 
starting to come down from something and then poof, they launch off 
again. 
 
It‟s kind of a verbal form of fractionation, if that makes sense. So, 
that‟s an excellent point. Thank you for that. 
 
What he was saying is – and I can‟t remember the exact words, so feel 
free. Actually, why don‟t you say it again? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               48                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Audience: Well, I‟m not sure exactly what I said the first time, but you get a lot 
more spin, a lot more trippiness if you add in the next question just as 
they‟re peaking with the first question. 
 
 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. Essentially, what you‟re looking for is – did you all notice that 
when you asked a certain question with a certain amount of spin, their 
mind starts kind of drifting off somewhere, but it‟s an intense focus 
because they‟re going somewhere.   
 
 
Then, after a period of time, they‟re there for a while, and then almost 
like the energy slows down, and it‟s like they‟re slowing down or 
they‟re coming back outside a little bit, or they‟re getting ready to do 
something else. 
 
 
Is that something you all spotted overall? Whether or not you use it, 
who spotted those kinds of maneuvers in people‟s minds when they 
were answering your questions? At times, they accelerated and at 
times they sort of started calming down again after a little bit of time. 
You get this by watching, by the way. You don‟t just ask the question 
and then go, la, la, la.  
 
 
You ask the question, and then you watch. See how they‟re 
responding. Where are their eyes going? What‟s their breathing doing, 
and so on? The thing that happens is the question will accelerate their 
thinking to some degree, and then it starts to slow down again, like 
they‟re coming down from a new high of some sort.  
 
 
At that point, before they‟ve come back to their regular thinking style 
again, their regular consciousness, if you add that extra little tag, it 
could be just, that‟s happy, or the not. Or it could be another question 
to follow up from the previous one. That‟s when you have the most 
impact because the critical factor is most off line.    
 
Audience: I was just wondering as you lead somebody to this kind of trippy state, 
their mind hits a snag and they‟re confused. Then, you pile on another 
question. What about the fact that, that might lead it to be not quite 
so covert of a method where they realize, oh wow, this guy‟s tripping 
me out. 
 
Igor: 
What‟s he doing to me?   
 
Audience: Right. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s a great question. Bear in mind that right now, we‟re 
accentuating certain things as training wheels. We‟re not actually 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               49                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
going into covert influence yet. You realize this, right. We‟re just 
building experiences up here.  
 
 
The second thing to realize is when you start doing this in a 
conversational context – right now we‟re doing it in a hypnotic context, 
so it‟s a little bit more obvious. We‟re, shall we say, hamming up the 
H+ and some of these other mannerisms to create the effect so you 
kind of know what you‟re looking for.  
 
 
Once you can do that, you‟ll end up having what sounds like a regular 
conversation with people, but you just put a little bit of spin here and 
little bit of spin there, and it just takes off. 
 
 
To get those nuances, you‟ve got to have the more gross maneuvers 
down first, and you whittle it down to just the right amount for that 
time.  
 
Audience: I noticed that when Terry and me were practicing the exercise, we 
were just kind of experimenting in how smooth the non-awareness can 
just drop right in right when they‟re floating. Then, you‟re just like, 
that‟s it.  
 
Igor: 
It‟s just begging for it, isn‟t it?  
 
Audience: It‟s begging. It‟s just like right there. 
 
Igor: 
They‟re just begging to be knocked into trance. Then, it‟s gone. Thank 
you. For those of you who haven‟t done the conversational 
hypnotherapy training don‟t worry about that too much. It‟s just like 
he‟s adding a little bit extra. 
 
 
The point of this – and by the way, I think that non-awareness fits 
perfectly into this, but the whole point of this is, let‟s say we just did it 
at a crude level, and we left it as we are right now, and you just left 
today and that was it.  
 
 
Can you just consider if you‟re having a chat with someone. They say, 
what‟s hypnosis? You ask them a few of these questions and put a 
little spin on it, and just as the mind is drifting off, you do your whole 
TV evangelist impression. There‟s no resistance. The context is perfect 
for it, isn‟t it? 
 
 
So if you want to have a really dramatic trance, that‟s a great way to 
do it. It‟s all in the set-up, isn‟t it? All people will see is you just 
whacking them on the forehead and then going to sleep. They‟re going 
to go, that‟s how you do hypnosis.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               50                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
But of course, you and I both realize that the hypnosis happened 
before you said the word sleep don‟t you? It‟s all in the set-up. It‟s 
creating the right context, and this stuff helps you immensely to do 
that.  
 
 
So, those of you who had your bonus day yesterday who learned the 
rudiments of hypnosis, you may be a little bit nervous because maybe 
it‟s your first day of doing it and so on. Did you notice when you add 
this to what you were doing there, it suddenly becomes even more 
powerful.  
 
 
What you did yesterday was pretty damn good anyway, wasn‟t it? 
Right, yes. No?   
 
Audience: I think it‟s kind of slick how you can put that suggestion in there, while 
they‟re brain is going around, thinking. Normal hypnosis, you just have 
to, at that point, either handshake or throw them off balance to put 
them under. It‟s just a covert way of putting them… 
 
Igor: 
That‟s the point. So, remember, we‟re not doing overt indirect 
hypnosis. We‟re doing cover direct hypnosis. If people will know to 
look for these special trances, they‟ll see it because it‟s blatant.  
 
 
Who here is a practicing hypnotherapist or hypnotist of some sort? 
How many times have you had someone in a trance, you did great 
work, and then they come back and they go oh, I wasn‟t in a trance. I 
heard everything you said. That‟s a pretty common answer, isn‟t it? 
 
 
If they don‟t believe they were in a trance in the first place, why not 
use that for covert hypnosis. So, you put them in a trance and then 
recognize – and you end up having the result anyway without them 
knowing it‟s happened. If someone said, you were in a trance, and you 
say, don‟t be silly, I heard everything you said, does that make sense? 
That‟s kind of where we‟re heading with it, but we‟re not there yet. 
 
 
Let‟s take one final question, and then we‟ll head off to lunch. Go 
ahead. 
 
Audience: I was just going to say, I found when he asked me to elicit just the 
positive state, I could go there, but it wasn‟t as strong. But, if he 
asked, how I was not being positive in a certain circumstance? New 
boundaries, like the feeling where I would go, I was eliciting whole 
new boundaries in that state, what that could mean to me. 
 
Igor: 
Right. Essentially what you‟re saying is, when he took you on a tour 
inside of what you know, it was okay. When he started taking you to 
an area you don‟t know, it gets more intense. An interesting thing here 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               51                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
is how you present the spin. You can put the negation in, and still not 
negate the happy.  
 
 
 
Most people think if I say, who are you not that‟s happy, or where 
aren‟t you that‟s happy, people think oh, he‟s asking me where am I 
unhappy, but I‟m not.   
 
 
It just depends on how and when you say it. Who are you not that‟s 
happy is very different from saying who are you not, that‟s happy. Did 
you feel that? So, you have to get very used to these nuances. This is 
a subtlety we‟ve been talking about, which comes back to your 
question from before. 
 
 
 
When you develop that skill for fine tuning yourself, for sensing where 
this is and the rest of it at that point, you become a very powerful 
covert hypnotist. But we‟re not there yet, folks. We‟re just doing 
warm-ups, right? 
 
 
Are you enjoying these things? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
DVD 03 
Full Transcript  
 
 
Igor: So, did you all have fun before the break with the exercises we were doing? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Are you beginning to see or get a sense that these maneuvers can be 
quite subtle? That we‟re going a little bit more extreme at the moment 
and they can be used very subtly to one extreme, but now we‟re 
developing the mind muscle to go to different places? 
 
 
The most important thing to me is; are you beginning to sense how 
your own mind is being shifted into different directions and 
experiences? 
 
 
This is important, because you need to have experiences before we 
can take people to those experiences. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               52                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
 
How many people here have come across the idea of mind-bending 
language or something similar before, the language of confusion and 
that sort of stuff?  
 
 
How confusing is it to use it? Do you confuse yourself? I know when I 
started it was like, what the hell, and sometimes I would come up with 
something that was great and they‟d say can you repeat that; I‟m 
going no. I have no idea. 
 
 
So, I find that very unsatisfactory that we just throw out random stuff 
and hope for the best. In order to not be random or confuse yourself 
with the stuff you‟re doing or saying; you need to expand your mind to 
places so you know this is this kind of place, and that is that kind of 
place. 
 
 
Let‟s look at this language for a second. What kind of experiences are 
we shaping here? That looks for identity, what people identify with. 
Who is just an example of what, isn‟t it? Who are you and what are 
you are very similar, but still a little different right? 
 
 
If I asked you when are you, that again is asking a different type of 
question. This is more about time, this is more about identity or 
identifying something like, which chair or what chair?  
 
 
How is about equality isn‟t it? You‟re looking at equality, in terms of 
how is someone running, not talking about the activity of running, but 
the quality of it.  
 
 
And where is a location in space, so you‟re already moving through 
people‟s minds in different ways and this is at a very subtle level so 
far, right? 
 
Audience: Another question just occurred to me, it‟s like, who are you not? So 
now I‟ve gotten the answer of who I am not. I am not a multi-
millionaire. And, the next question is why am I not a millionaire? So, 
why would be a follow-up question maybe. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, although be careful with the question of why. Why is a useful 
question, but the impact it has as a rule, think about yourselves. Ask 
yourself about something you do well, something you like, why are 
you good at it? Ask yourself about something you‟re not so good at, 
why did you fail? 
 
 
As a rule the question why cements things in and makes them more 
concrete. Why? Because it demands a rationalization, it‟s asking your 
mind to come up with a reason for something, an excuse. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               53                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
 
Right now we‟re trying to break down rationalizations. We‟re trying to 
break down the very labeling system that keeps us inside this space. 
So why is a very good question to ask once they get somewhere 
useful. 
 
Audience: What you‟re saying is, at the stage we‟re at, it can throw them right 
back into reality? 
 
Igor: 
Yes. If it‟s something useful, like if I asked you who are you, that‟s 
happy? You light up and go why? Why are you so happy? And they say 
oh, because all these good things are happening, etc. so they‟re 
justifying to themselves why they‟re happy and in so doing they do 
more happiness. 
 
 
This has happened to all of us hasn‟t it? You come home after a hard 
day or maybe you make a mistake one day and something doesn‟t 
quite work out the right way. People will sit down with you and say 
why, why‟d you do it? 
 
 
How useful is that? You sit there knowing you made a mistake and 
now they‟re drilling you into that mistake even further, it sucks and 
now you feel like it sucks even more right? 
 
Audience: Right. 
 
Igor: 
How easy is it to get out of your depression when someone is asking 
you why are you so sad, little soldier? They‟re asking you to justify a 
sensation of sadness or whatever. Now, if you actually take the 
question at face value and you‟re answering it, you‟re actually keeping 
yourself there. 
 
 
So why is a very useful and powerful question, I know a lot of people 
in the hypnosis community who say never ask why, but I don‟t believe 
there‟s such a thing as never do something. You just have to be aware 
of what the impact is. That‟s why, why is not on the list. 
 
 
We‟ve been navigating the inner space a little bit, so how about we do 
a little time traveling instead and shift gears a little bit to something 
along the lines of Jules Verne. We have these lovely little brass things 
in here and that reminds me of Jules Verne, so we may as well go 
down that path. 
 
 
We have our classic questions who, what, where, when and how so 
let‟s start with these, because we‟re still working on the same sort of 
level for the moment. Instead of being stuck on the present tense isn‟t 
it different to ask, who are you versus who were you…that‟s happy? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               54                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
 
What were you, that‟s happy? When were you not, that‟s happy? Can 
you feel more spin starting to develop now, as you navigate through 
time? So where were you?  
 
 
In the English language there‟s something like 36 different moods and 
tenses, so we don‟t have to go nuts in terms of getting them all, but 
does this not add a lot of layers to what we‟re doing here. Asking you, 
when will you be, that‟s happy. Or, where will you have been? Or, 
where will you have not been that‟s happy versus, who were you that‟s 
happy?  
 
 
Do you see how it starts tripping you out in different directions? We‟ll 
add the negation here plus the not, this is optional so we‟ll put it in 
brackets on the board so you can decide on whether or not you want 
to add this. We‟re going to add purpose, because of course, we‟re 
hypnotists and hypnotists suggest things, so it may as well be 
something nice. 
 
 
So we‟re doing exactly what we did before the lunch break, the same 
exercise again. The negation can come in and out as you wish it to, 
sometimes it‟s there sometimes it‟s not, so don‟t be stuck on making 
everything negated. 
 
 
The thing we‟re adding now is going to start navigating people through 
time. There are a lot of variations here; we‟ve got five of these plus six 
of these, plus the not which doubles them up again and while I‟m not a 
mathematician I believe it‟s around 60. 
 
 
That‟s a lot of variations. So, rather than sitting down for an hour and 
working through every single variation, although by the way, I 
recommend you do it at some point because it‟ll be worthwhile. How 
about if we select a starting point at random and pick one.  
 
 
Pick a time sequence at random, then flip a coin at whether or not 
you‟re not and then add this at the end. So you‟re now being a little bit 
more selective, but you‟re starting to target different experiences and 
at first you need to let randomness take care of the directions for you, 
while you build up experiences and then you might start getting a 
sense of oh, I‟d like to take them more this direction than that 
direction. 
 
 
Are there any questions? 
 
Audience: When you say time sequence do you mean… 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               55                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Igor: 
Are you, were you, how have you been, we‟re basically changing the 
tenses. 
 
 
This is the starting point. This is the direction, forwards or backwards 
in time basically. This is; are you going to be inside or outside the 
circle a little bit; inside their experience or outside of it? All of this will 
tend to be more towards the unconscious experience anyway.  
 
And finally, we‟ll make sure it takes on a spin, a direction to go in so 
that you‟re moving them somewhere positive. Of course, everything 
you‟ve done so far still counts, so all the positive states, the H+, 
creating this window of opportunity and so on, all that still counts.  
 
Is everyone clear on this? Any other questions? 
 
Dave: 
I‟m curious; can we sprinkle in the not in different places within that? 
 
Igor: 
Right now why not. Absolutely. It will have a different effect, so you 
may as well start playing with how it fits into different ways. Again, 
this is play time.  
 
At the moment we‟re not even interested in how much you‟re 
influencing people, we‟re 
interested in you getting 
reference 
experiences inside your mind that we can use to create more, so it‟s a 
trippy mind-bending language. 
 
Audience: Is it possible that you could do a demonstration with one of the 
students here for that? How do I understand it, it seems a little bit 
complicated, can you do some role playing? 
 
Igor: 
Where were you not that‟s happy? Just consider it. 
 
Audience: Where was I not… 
 
Igor: 
That‟s happy. Who are you, that‟s happy? When will you have been, 
that‟s happy now? Are you getting it? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So, how will you have been having done this, that‟s not just happy but 
more. 
 
Audience: That‟s happy. 
 
Igor: 
Isn‟t it? 
 
Audience: It is. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               56                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Igor: 
Are you getting a sense of where we‟re going with this? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
We‟re not quite there yet, we‟re just building up. You‟re playing with 
this right now, these are still games, but you‟re building your hypnotic 
muscle. If you can get your H+, your hypnotic intensity and really 
make them engage with the ideas fully that‟s great. 
 
 
What we‟re not doing is, all right then, where have you been not that‟s 
happy? What will you have been that‟s happy? Where were you not 
that‟s happy? Yay! 
 
Audience: That‟s boring. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. So notice how I have a complete lack of intention there, so 
the whole context we talked about has disappeared hasn‟t it? How are 
you going to take my questions seriously if I don‟t? When I say 
seriously I don‟t mean sternly serious, you can have a twinkle in your 
eye, but still be really meaningful as if this is the most important 
question you‟ll ever get to ask someone. 
 
 
Does that make sense to you? 
 
Audience: Yes, thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Is everyone ready for the exercise? 
 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
All right, 10 minutes. Find a different partner; off you go. 
 
~~~ 
Interesting? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Are you starting to feel yourselves spinning a little more? Now, out of 
curiosity who is starting to feel a little more buoyant or happy? This is 
part of what we‟re doing here. Remember, what we‟re not trying to do 
is persuade people, because once people think about persuasion 
they‟re actually trying to do it like some type of force. 
 
 
Be happy. Go on cheer up. Can you see the force coming behind that 
or even the idea of blame or criticism, that you‟re not good enough the 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               57                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
way you are? Do you get a sense of where people are coming from? 
We‟re trying to avoid that. 
 
 
All we‟re doing is asking a question, isn‟t it? That‟s a reasonable 
question to ask, even though it sounds a little wonky. The second 
thing is, if you‟re not trying to persuade someone, but all you‟re really 
doing is asking a question, then surely you don‟t care about the 
outcome, do you? 
 
 
Because wherever they land will be the right place isn‟t it? Notice how 
what we‟re doing here isn‟t trying to get the magic bullet, the one 
thing that will get everything done, but it‟s a process. You ask a 
question they have a result. You ask another question, there‟s a 
different result. You ask another question, and each time it begins 
shaping itself around. 
 
 
So overall, over a period of time, notice how each time you do this 
exercise you tend to be a little happier. Your mind starts putting more 
focus on those experiences and they come out, don‟t they? Even 
though you don‟t necessarily know where they‟re coming from or what 
they are. 
 
 
Sometimes you just sit there and think, I feel great and I have no idea 
why. Has anyone had that type of experience so far? You feel great 
but aren‟t sure why, but you‟re not going to start questioning it. 
 
 
You could always try to ask yourself why you feel so great. Why not? 
Why do you feel so great? I wonder what‟s going on.  
 
 
Michael: 
Can you change out the suggestion from happy to something else? 
 
Igor: 
Of course you can. Remember, what we‟re doing right now are training 
wheels. I am not in any way, shape or form suggesting that the rest of 
your life you go out there and start sticking people under street lights 
going hey, who were you being that‟s not happy now? Bye-bye. 
 
 
That‟s like a random love attack thing, I like that it‟s not a bad idea, 
but you have an infinite variety of places this can go, this is just an 
example of the places you can take people.  
 
 
In my opinion, this isn‟t even an elegant example yet it‟s a pretty 
blatant one and we‟ll get into the more elegant things as time goes by, 
we‟re just building your awareness up, your ability to use this 
language and to go there in your own mind so you can find these 
places easily. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               58                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Would you like to have a quick way of using what we‟ve been doing 
this morning as a tool of influence like sales or something?  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Realize this tool is only as good as it‟s not. When you stop trying to 
make it work it will, and when you weren‟t trying to make it work, it 
probably won‟t. So, its okay for you to not make it work to the extent 
that it will, is that okay with everyone? Realizing of course, that it‟s 
not anywhere near as elegant as it will be. 
 
 
 
So all you do is take something instead of happy, something the other 
person values, for example, when someone buys a washing machine 
what do they value? Economy, because they don‟t want to go to the 
Laundromat and get it done every week, or maybe ease. 
 
 
So you add a simple question like, when you‟re looking for a washing 
machine, what will you have been looking for that‟s more than easy? 
Because this machine does this, this and this, then what you‟ve done 
is for a moment, you‟ve opened their mind up so that when you start 
painting the picture of how wonderful life will be with this machine or 
whatever it is your usual sales process. 
 
 
I hope this isn‟t rocket science to you. Then it has somewhere to sit, 
so does it mean that you‟ll absolutely sell that washing machine every 
single time? No. But the appeal begins to increase and will continue 
increasing the more you do this sort of thing, does that make sense? 
 
 
 
It‟s my hope that in time you don‟t do any of this stuff anymore. I‟ve 
spoken to many of you before, hypnosis is not something you do to 
people or even with them, it‟s something you become. It‟s an attitude 
that you adopt, and when your own mind goes to these different 
places, the curiosity you have about these places naturally gets 
triggered. 
 
 
You say hang on a second, you‟re saying this is a problem, I‟m curious 
about this, how does that work? Surely it might be that, but wouldn‟t it 
mean this as well? Yes, you‟re right, what do you want to do about 
that? I‟m going to do it. 
 
 
We‟re not there yet. Right now, we‟re just playing with language.  
 
 
The next thing I want you to do is take two sentences from this, 
randomly constructed and write them down. It doesn‟t matter what 
they are, just randomly construct them. They may have not‟s in them, 
some time elements, just take two separate ones, two different 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               59                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
starting points, two different times maybe one with a negation and one 
without. 
 
 
The reason I want you to write them down is so in a moment you can 
do this same exercise again, only sticking to those two sentences. You 
see what we‟ll be doing this time round is emphasizing every single 
word separately each time you repeat it, because when I say who are 
you not, that‟s happy? It‟s different if I say who are, you not that‟s 
happy? Who are you, not, that‟s happy? Who, are you not, that‟s 
happy? 
 
 
Do you see where I‟m going with this? The words that you emphasize 
and the places you leave your pauses totally transform the meaning 
people take from what you‟re saying. I want you to get very sensitive 
to what you‟re emphasizing, where your pauses are and how that 
affects other people. 
 
 
Is that easy to do? 
 
Audience: On the sentence how will you have been? Is it better a negation, how 
will you have not been or how will you have been not? 
 
Igor: 
Try both. You can sprinkle a not wherever you want for now, just for a 
little seasoning.  
 
Some of them will sound a little more like English is not your native 
language, and it can happen, or that you need a little man in a white 
coat to come get you, and that can happen but it‟s okay because we‟re 
still doing training, trying to get used to the differences things that 
happen when you use language in difference ways. Of course, you 
realize that right now we don‟t care about the language, do we?  
 
What we care about is where does it send your mind when you‟re 
hearing 
these 
things 
emphasized 
differently, 
said 
differently, 
pronounced differently and paused differently with some of the 
variations we‟ve been discussing so far? 
 
These are training wheels. And, if you don‟t go through training 
wheels, when it comes to the big boy‟s stuff, which we‟ll be doing later 
on today and tomorrow it doesn‟t make any sense, it gets hard for 
your brain to process, because it hasn‟t been there yet, whereas now 
it‟s going there. 
 
So once it has gone there enough, you can look back and make it easy 
to do things you haven‟t done yet. Are there any other questions? No. 
All right then, in that case, find a different partner, take another 10 
minutes and start playing with this idea. Make a point to emphasize it 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               60                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
and watch your partners for their reaction. Can you spot differences in 
how they‟re reacting based on what you‟re saying and how you‟re 
saying it? 
 
Feel free to ask them afterwards to compare different statements. 
When I said this one more and this one more, which one had more of 
this? Which one had more of an impact? Which one had more spin? 
Get feedback because that‟s what you need right now. 
 
 
We‟re doing the same exercise as before only this time you‟ll only have 
two sentences, either where have you been that‟s happy, or how will 
you be that‟s happy? The difference now is rather than just randomly 
construct sentences as you did before, you‟re going to start using the 
same sentence repeatedly, but emphasizing different words. 
 
 
Where have you been that‟s happy? Where have, you been that‟s 
happy? Where have you, been that‟s happy? See how that works? 
We‟re going to keep this stable and we‟re going to vary another part of 
what you‟re doing in terms of the formula.  
 
 
These are formally to get you used to speaking and doing things in 
different ways.   
 
Audience: Are you saying that happy as a comparative or are you saying that is 
happy, that‟s happy? 
 
Igor: 
Yes I am. 
 
Audience: That‟s what I was afraid of. 
 
Igor: 
Off you go 
~~ 
Daniel: 
It changes the connotation according to where you put the emphasis. 
 
Igor: 
Right. Notice how your mind starts spinning in different ways and goes 
to different places? This is what we‟re doing; we‟re looking for different 
ways of adding spin.  
 
Audience: It was interesting to notice where you have to go to even begin to find 
the answer, even when you‟re not answering the question. 
 
Igor: 
Right. It forces your mind to go places even though you can‟t do it if 
you‟re the subject, you‟re trying to figure it out, but you‟re spinning 
your wheels so you‟re discovering new territory. But even as the 
hypnotist asking the questions, you‟re going there yourself a little 
aren‟t you? That‟s very useful. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               61                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
That‟s part of how you prevent yourself from being confused with 
what‟s confusing them. But of course, confusion isn‟t the operative 
element. We‟re not looking for confusion in order to get the result 
we‟re looking for.  
 
Confusion is a side effect of the places we‟re taking them to, which is 
basically, to open their minds to be allowing some new information to 
come in. Confusion is not the state we‟re looking for, it‟s the side 
effect of where we‟re taking them. 
 
Audience: And every question generated a different emotional response as well. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, it does a different emotion for every season. Thank you. 
 
Audience: I noticed that I kept forgetting my question. You would ask it and then 
you would ask it a different way, and then you forgot how you asked 
it. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly, because you‟re being taken there yourself, so it takes a while 
for your mind to acclimatize and be familiar with what‟s going on. 
That‟s why we write these things down; otherwise, it‟d be very 
difficult, trust me I‟ve tried it both ways and not writing it down, two 
hours later are you okay? What? 
 
Audience: When me and Geri were working together we noticed we would both 
end up really happy after the statement; we‟d just sit there and start 
laughing kind of dumbfounded. Then, when she was saying it and 
putting her pauses in the right place, I even started experiencing some 
catalepsy where my eyes would start dropping. Is that what it‟s 
supposed to do? 
 
Igor: 
That‟s part of the impact it will have, it‟s not supposed to do it, 
remember all we care about is where you send the mind. Part of the 
reason that‟s happening is because you‟ve done a lot of these now. Do 
you notice how it gets more trippy the more you start stacking these 
questions on top of each other? 
 
 
That‟s the affect we‟re looking for, because in a normal conversation 
you don‟t start here. It doesn‟t fit in normal conversation, does it? 
What you can do is start leading a normal conversation by putting a 
little spin, adding more spin and by the time your spin becomes bigger 
and more blatant they‟re so far down the rabbit hole it actually makes 
sense. 
 
 
It‟s true, so they‟ll never know it‟s happened. Everyone else thinks you 
are both eating space cakes or something, but to you you‟re making 
perfect sense to each other.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               62                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Audience: I was just going to say, when the emphasis was on the first words in 
the suggestion it would elicit the state inside of me and I‟d feel so 
good that I knew I had to go back and consider the question, but there 
was a bit of a pause, because I was just enjoying the state. 
 
 
So I‟d go back, but I didn‟t really feel like I had to because I already 
felt pretty good. 
 
Igor: 
Notice how the pause is in different places. What do pauses do? 
Essentially, what you were just talking about, they offer your 
neurology time to process, to actually have the experience. If you rush 
through, how can they have the experience?  
 
 
It‟s like saying let‟s go to the best restaurant in town. Quick, you have 
two minutes to finish up. Do you see where I‟m going with this? It 
ruins the whole point of the experience. Here‟s a fine bottle of Cognac, 
champagne or whatever your poison happens to be, bolted. Finish it 
all, you have 10 seconds. It kinds of defeats the object doesn‟t it? 
 
 
Audience: At one point, it was clear that the confusion was around simply 
untangling the words, as opposed to the meaning. I sort of took 
advantage of that to drop in a simple, what would it take to make you 
happy, and it pushed her right into it. 
 
Igor: 
So, now you end up having the more linguistic elements, because 
when you get more complex, just trying to make sense of it 
sometimes creates the confusion. When, of course, you go to the more 
classical confusion patterns, where you drop in a simple suggestion 
and that takes them in the direction as well. 
 
 
If that‟s happening, by the way, the reason it is, is because the idea is 
being presented a little too quickly. There‟s nothing wrong with that, 
by the way, because the confusion you‟ve created obviously creates a 
context where you can drop in a simple suggestion. 
 
 
Isn‟t that the classic pattern, confuse a little, put in a simple 
suggestion and that leads them out of the confusion? What we‟re 
doing here in order to make it more conversational, rather than using 
confusion as the vehicle we‟re using to ride, confusion tends to be a 
side effect because it‟s not the same kind of confusion, it‟s more like a 
knowing without knowing how you know, or what you know; it‟s like 
there. 
 
 
The simple way to do that is to slow down the delivery so every 
element makes sense on its own, it‟s just the whole thing together 
locks your brain in a weird sort of way.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               63                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Audience: During this session we‟ve had with you, you have instilled – speaking 
personally– who are you? It has been said repeatedly so many times 
that, at first, it was somewhat confusing, but by golly I feel great, 
because I really know now who I am. So thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Whatever you think you are right now, just wait. 
 
Audience: Yes. I love it.  
 
Igor: 
Because there‟s more. 
 
Audience: Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
You‟re more than that aren‟t you? 
 
Audience: Totally! Way more than that; I‟m waiting. 
 
Igor: 
So we‟re just starting rather than finishing now. 
 
Audience: Okay. 
 
Igor: 
Good job.  
 
 
Audience: So, I picked up on where you put in the pause and the syntax.  
 
Igor: 
Oh, I was just going to say his lips aren‟t even moving, how did he do 
that? That was really trippy for me. 
[Laughter] 
 
Audience: I project my voice well. I use that at the Bellagio also. So, where you 
put the pause or the way you present the words, what I see happening 
is if you do it in the right order with the right presentation, it‟s like 
sending someone out with centrifugal force and when they come back 
through, if you present the word at the right time it picks up speeds 
and accelerates them right out the other side. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly! So, it‟s like you have a slow swing starting and each time the 
swing comes round you go faster and faster and faster, building up 
more momentum. It‟s creating a sling-shot effect that sends people to 
amazing places.  
 
 
By the way, I know there are other questions and comments, but 
would you like to know how to turn that on and put some real 
testosterone and speed in everything else on top of that? 
 
Audience: Yes. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               64                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Igor: 
Just these basic concepts and you double the impact you‟ve had the 
whole day to this point; we‟ll double and even triple that by simply 
adding one thing. Would you like that? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Let‟s listen to a few more questions and we‟ll go there. 
 
Audience: We were just asking a couple of questions. If we ask five of them in a 
row, just not rapid fire; we couldn‟t answer them. Your mind is 
spinning, but if we all have the same positive intention that‟s putting a 
suggestion in the mind even though you don‟t realize it. 
 
 
Could you end that with a question like, how do you feel now? 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. That‟s a great place to do it. In fact, if you think back to 
the Conversational Hypnotherapy model, which was a different 
training, that‟s exactly what you do with the mind-bending language. 
You‟re spinning them into the trance of infinite possibilities over and 
over, then suddenly you just go, so what‟s happening now? Or, how do 
you feel? 
 
 
They‟ll say amazing. Say if you feel amazing just think about the 
problem, what happens? Problem, what are you talking about problem, 
look at these guns, problems disappear.  
 
 
Audience: Is the affect based upon the subject‟s inability or ability to actually 
verbalize a response? That‟s an issue I‟m facing the more we do these 
experiments. 
 
Igor: 
Are you facing it in terms of, that you‟re increasingly less able to give 
answers? Or, are you still able to give answers? 
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
Thank you. Perfect. Wherever you just went that‟s exactly right. That 
was for your unconscious mind so we‟ll do one for the conscious mind 
now, shall we. 
 
 
We‟re trying to take people beyond what they know, beyond what‟s 
habitual and normal, beyond the confined spaces of your normal, 
everyday experiences. Why? Because that‟s where the potential lies, 
isn‟t it? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               65                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
The problem is if they‟re outside here then how can they verbalize it? 
Going back to our analogy, if you‟ve always lived in a house with no 
doors and no windows to the outside world, you don‟t even know that 
an outside world exists. 
 
 
One day somehow you discover some crack in the wall or mirror, you 
walk through, you‟re outside in the open air; how do you describe the 
concept of open air to people in the house? How do you describe the 
feeling of seeing an endless landscape with a horizon that isn‟t the 
wall?  
 
 
It‟s an experience they‟ve never had, so they have no reference point 
to it. Therefore, the less people are actually able to verbalize things, 
unless of course other things are going on like regular confusion and 
so on. But, as a rule, if you take them to these points where they‟re 
literally thinking they can make sense of something it‟s like, I know 
what this is, but I don‟t know what this is. 
 
 
It‟s this thing and I can‟t quite name it. It‟s because they‟re just 
outside their territory and that‟s exactly where you want them. Does 
that make sense? 
 
 
So, whatever you‟re doing you‟re in the right place. Or, whatever your 
partner is doing with you, they‟re doing the right thing. 
 
 
Okay everyone, I made a big promise, to take this and double or triple 
the impact wouldn‟t that be something. 
 
 
 
You notice there‟s a theme going on here, we‟re sending the mind in 
different directions, like locations in space, times, we‟re talking about 
qualities here, the energy or quality of something. We‟re talking about 
separation in terms of items, what items we‟re talking about. 
 
 
We can express the same idea by adding a little more spin, which will 
make more sense in a few days, once we actually get onto it. 
 
 
When we have the idea of space, for example, we‟re sending people 
anywhere but where they‟ve been. If they‟re going somewhere they 
already know we‟re sending them somewhere where that isn‟t, so 
they‟re going anywhere but where they know, right? 
 
 
By the way, notice how mind-bending language is starting to make 
sense to you now. Right, it‟s like yeah I follow that that makes sense. 
If someone just walked in they‟d be saying what the hell, what‟s he 
on. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               66                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
So any time, or all the time, is the same for time isn‟t it. If you send 
someone to some point in time past the future where they haven‟t 
been, then it‟s any time but now isn‟t it?  
 
 
If people can have any quality or be any how would it not? Any care to 
guess on the fourth one in our four musketeers here? Any one, any 
which or anything right, so I‟m going to go with thing purely because 
these are the most natural things we have in the English language.  
 
 
If English is not the language you want to use this in, there should be 
equivalence in your own language, but there will always be nuance‟s 
that change. That makes sense doesn‟t it? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s a good question to ask. In English, it gets even worse, because 
English has all these other things you can put on top of it. Do you see 
how you have a lot of directions you can go in?  
 
 
Now we‟re creating a distinction. We‟re saying not here, here and here 
can be space, time, qualities and so on. So what‟s a way of expressing 
the idea of not, either than saying not, any ideas? 
 
 
How about this? It‟s a very small word with a big impact; the word 
„but‟. The word „but‟…that negates whatever just went through that. I 
like you but. If I said I like you and then I‟m adding but, what we‟re 
doing is we‟re saying whatever just came before is not that, does that 
make sense? 
 
 
So, we‟re choosing some words, at the moment, to sensitize you how 
every single word you‟ve used your entire life has a specific effect on 
other people and as you start becoming more aware of these things, 
your ability to use them for influence starts skyrocketing. 
 
 
Now, let‟s have a look in terms of talking about some location here, 
right, anywhere but here because we don‟t want them here. Of course, 
if they‟re somewhere else you can just add there, instead.  
 
 
When you consider all the things you‟ve done that make you unhappy 
and go anywhere but there, where does that leave you?  
 
 
With time we have the same thing don‟t we? We have now and we 
have then. What do we have with qualities? We need to do a little 
variation, at least, in the English language, like this or like that. Does 
that make sense? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               67                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
How are you being happy in any way but like this, now? How much 
more is that? What will you have been that makes you happy 
anywhere but now? Do you feel it? Do you feel yourself tripping down 
that little rabbit hole? Wave bye-bye to Alice; she hasn‟t come this far 
yet. 
 
 
Then there‟s this one, which is simply this and that. So you see here 
you have much more variation if you add these things together. You 
have a starting point. You have to transition through time. You have a 
direction or heading, like a suggestion. You give them pause and time 
to process. Then you add extra velocity. 
 
 
You know the nitro cars with the tanks, you put the tanks on so when 
you‟re driving the car at maximum speed, you go let‟s lift that baby up 
and it just takes off, that‟s what this does. 
 
 
But before you take off you have to have the direction it goes in, do 
you not? Is this making sense, or not? Is it not making enough sense 
for you to be able to do the exercise and find out? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Any questions whilst there‟s still a conscious mind left? 
 
Audience: Can you do another example? 
 
Igor: 
What will you have been thinking that‟s good about this exercise any 
time but then? And beyond that, how will you be, feeling great that is, 
having done this exercise anywhere but here?  
 
 
Try and keep up. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
It just gets better or give up it‟s much easier that way. Does that 
make sense or not, as the sense may be? 
 
Connie: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Yes. We are going into these little worm hole thingy‟s and we do not 
know where we‟re coming out. Your mental health is not guaranteed. 
But wherever it is it will be fun. 
 
[Laughter] 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               68                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Igor: 
Sure. Any how but like this or but like that, because that‟s asking for 
quality and when you‟re asking about quality it‟s like what; how is it, 
like what?  
 
 
You have lots of variables now don‟t you? Think about it, you have lots 
of variables if you can keep up and don‟t worry, tomorrow we‟ll start 
handing out some notes so you can keep the semblance or track of 
this. It won‟t be that easy anyway. 
 
 
So, you have the idea of where you start. You have an idea of where 
you send them. You have an idea of a direction. And now, we have a 
little hyper drive that spins them into space and if that didn‟t do it this 
will, right? 
 
 
So between this and that you can do anything but anything you‟ve 
done, so when you go beyond that it‟ll be easier right. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. It‟s just so much easier to agree and do the exercise isn‟t it? 
 
 
Ten minutes apiece, off you go. 
~~ 
 
Who is finding their minds are starting to spin out of control a little bit? 
 
If it gets a little bit wet around the ears that‟s just your brain matter 
dripping out, don‟t worry about it too much. Are you enjoying 
yourselves, that‟s the big question? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Have you noticed how it‟s already at this level, although it‟s relatively 
mechanical still? It‟s very powerful stuff and we‟ve not even turned it 
to any practical purposes yet, have we or not? Who knows? 
 
 
When it‟s no longer now but then, then you‟ll be able to look back on 
this and say hey, now is a good time to use it, isn‟t it?  
 
 
Let‟s hear some experiences. Put your hands up and wait for a mic. 
 
Audience: I don‟t know if it‟s a question, statement or observation. What I notice 
is it‟s not really what you say as how you initiate it and you‟re able to 
recognize when to say the next statement. You have to be aware of 
the person‟s feedback, of what they‟re giving you. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               69                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Igor: 
In other words, it‟s not their words that count it‟s their physical 
reaction. 
 
Audience: And if you know the corresponding thing to do afterwards. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. Do you see how you‟d be wasting a wonderful opportunity if 
you‟d just run these things together when you say where have you 
been that‟s not happy anywhere but here? That‟s pretty trippy on its 
own, but you‟re wasting it because you‟re not giving them the full 
experience, are you? 
 
 
Versus, where have you been that‟s not this happy anyhow but like 
that? Isn‟t that much more of an experience for you? Look at these 
smiling faces I like this, I‟ll have to do this more often in seminars.  
 
Audience: Along the lines of what you just said I noticed this past time, because 
it was long, the phrase we were saying, that I was very internal as I 
was saying it. And because of that it would just come out as a phrase, 
and I really wasn‟t paying attention to what he was doing at all.  
 
 
The previous time, I noticed we were completely focused on what the 
reaction was, so much so, that in one example I paused before saying 
happy and it was subconscious, but I did it because I could see how 
his face was changing. It completely changed his reaction to the word 
happy, so there was that connection. 
 
Igor: 
And that‟s the thing. Right now we‟re doing training wheels, so I 
expect you to lose the thread a little then come back and lose the 
thread a little bit, but this is interactive. You cannot do covert hypnosis 
if you don‟t have a normal interaction, because most people don‟t just 
stand there and have you lecture them like oh, I‟m here now, talk. 
 
 
 
It doesn‟t happen, so you‟ll need to create that space, the opportunity 
to allow the experience to come through and this is it, focus and watch 
their reactions, that‟s why we had the other exercise before we threw 
this in. 
 
 
If we do the same exercise again, we probably won‟t have time for 
that tonight, but if you were to do it again but this time have only one 
sentence because there‟s much more to do, and you emphasize each 
element, including each element of this with different pauses and so 
on, you get so much mileage out of just one phrase don‟t you? 
 
 
It‟s huge. Now, on top of this you have thousands of ways of 
expressing yourself don‟t you and we haven‟t even hit the freestyle 
section yet, this is all formally to make life easier.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               70                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
So these are training wheels and yes, at first you‟ll feel it and then 
you‟ll use them a bit more and you‟ll be paying attention to where you 
should be which is the person in front of you, because then you can 
know your timing right? 
 
Audience: I‟m a little worried that it‟s starting to make a little sick kind of sense. 
 
Igor: 
Don‟t be worried about what you‟re experiencing. Here‟s the irony, if I 
ask you what‟s making sense you can‟t tell me can you?  
 
Audience: No. 
 
Igor: 
What‟s happening is, you‟re starting to explore some territory outside 
your normal reality and it‟s starting to make sense. It will happen in a 
few days time when you come back to the same kinds of questions; 
you‟ll be able to start putting labels on these things. So your world just 
got a little bit bigger. 
 
 
Then, of course, after this same maneuver with a bit more spin to get 
you even further out into inner space. 
 
Audience: So it is a sick kind of… 
 
Igor: 
It‟s a sense. I personally think it‟s more about being healthy, but it is 
definitely expanding your thinking, so you‟re in the right place. 
 
Audience: My partner and I realized that during the exercise sometimes the 
cognitive mind would get so busy trying to think of how to answer this 
question, we would substitute happy with like grateful and things like 
that.  
 
Then we would notice that some of the phrases put a certain way, in 
the midst of the confusion, we would automatically start feeling 
happier. So, it was like a one-word suggestion. 
 
Igor: 
Remember, what we‟re doing right now is opening the cupboard to find 
the empty shelf so we can put something on it without any competing 
ideas. 
 
 
Why not clear the slate so you can put your ideas there in a simple 
way. That‟s just a starting point. Right now we‟re doing simple 
resourcing, which is using mind-bending language to take them into 
their inner space, so you‟re putting them in a place where language 
doesn‟t normally converge, which means the shelf is still relatively 
empty. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               71                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Then you present a simple suggestion like happiness, gratefulness and 
so on, which means the body goes I know that, and it starts reacting 
to it. This, by the way, is the simplest level of using this. We‟ll get into 
much more sophisticated territory. That‟s a very good observation to 
make. 
 
Audience: How will you respond that‟s happy for me, when someone speaks to 
you like this anyhow, but like this? 
 
Igor: 
All I can do is smile, nod and agree. 
 
Audience: No, I mean, if someone were to approach you; how would you 
respond? 
 
Igor: 
It depends on the context. In here, I‟ll smile and go good girl. 
 
Audience: What if it‟s somebody you find utterly repellent, what would you do 
then? 
 
[Laughter] 
 
Igor: 
There‟s always going to be the what-ifs. The point is right now these 
are training exercises. This is not how you‟ll use it. I hope you realize 
this. This is not how it‟s intended to be used. This is purely intended to 
prepare your minds to be able to use this eloquently in regular 
conversations. 
 
 
In order for you to use it with subtly and sophistication, your mind has 
to be able to make certain maneuvers first, understand it and know 
the territory. So we‟re exploring the territory first, you can have some 
mental mapping created, so when we take things off and put into 
normal conversations it doesn‟t become weird. 
 
Let‟s face it, if you went to the bar right now and pulled someone out 
of one of the other seminars and then did these language things with 
them, they‟d think you are nuts. You are bonafide nuts; I‟m going to 
call the police now, thank you very much. 
 
 
Why? Because it doesn‟t fit the context, does that make sense? 
 
Audience: Yes, but that‟s not really what my question was. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. 
 
Audience: So let us say that someone was to come to you and they did not know 
that you had this understanding, and they began to use these 
techniques on you. Just for your own amusement how would you 
respond? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               72                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Igor: 
Oh, I would probably play with them. If they‟re playing with me then 
why shouldn‟t I play with them? 
 
Audience: Let‟s just say, I know there are a few ladies in here, what would you 
recommend to some of those ladies if there happened to be some 
predatory person somewhere who wanted to use this language on 
them? Not anybody in here of course, but how would you respond? 
 
Igor: 
Bite back.  
 
Audience: Yummy. 
 
Igor: 
If they‟re playing with you then play right back. You have control don‟t 
you? You have choice of where you go and what you do. By the way, 
just to take it out of the whole male/female thing, the whole predator 
thing isn‟t just a guy trying to pick up a girl or a girl trying to do things 
with a guy. 
 
 
It can be a sales process. Someone trying to sell you a car you don‟t 
want versus a car that you do. It can be an idea, someone trying to 
sell you on an idea that may or may not be good for you. This sort of 
stuff is happening all the time anyway. Influence is not the problem. 
 
 
The problem is– Are you doing it with integrity? 
 
 
As far as I‟m concerned, when you start losing sight of this, that‟s 
when whatever you do, no matter how positive it might sound ends up 
getting sleazy and pushing people off.  
 
 
Why? Because, if for starters you don‟t even have respect enough for 
the other person to let them have their own experience and offer them 
a choice of possibly better ones if they want them, then what are you 
doing? You‟re going back to a slightly more covert version of force, are 
you not? 
 
 
You‟re trying to force an experience rather than invoking one. If that 
happens, the mindset people have will, as a rule, contaminate the way 
they‟re saying it so they come across as– what are you doing? This is 
being weird, why are you doing this? Versus someone coming up in  
childful delight saying, this can be so much fun and you go, I like this 
I‟ll play along. 
 
 
It‟s all in the attitude. It really doesn‟t matter what the context is 
guys/girls, boys/girls, sales, ideas, universities, whole countries are 
led this way aren‟t they? People are presenting ideas to you and whole 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               73                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
countries are deciding on whether or not to go to war, whether to 
spend money or not, whether it‟s good to have, for example, an 
abortion or not. 
 
 
I‟m not suggesting that I have the answers to these problems; they‟re 
big, but it‟s actually happening anyway. So as you become aware of it, 
you come to have more choice again and say all right, that‟s a good 
place, I like this place, or you look round going this is not such a 
happy place, wherever you send me I‟ll go somewhere else again. 
 
 
So you have more choice and that‟s what I want for you. Does that 
make sense? 
 
[Applause] 
 
Audience: Igor, the way I experienced it in teaching negotiations, to me it‟s a 
matrix of integrity and skill. For example, if its low integrity or low 
skill, that‟s basically show a gun and say stick em‟ up, give me your 
money. High integrity low skill is begging. Low integrity high skill it‟s 
lying, cheating and stealing. If it‟s high integrity high skill then it‟s 
doing it with the H+ intention at the best you can do, best you know 
how. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s why we start with H+.  
 
 
Here‟s the thing, why would someone possibly try and force their 
opinion on you? The only possible reason is because they have the 
mentality that there‟s not enough and if they don‟t take it from you 
then there can‟t be enough. 
 
 
Whereas, as far as I‟m concerned, there‟s more then plenty because 
when you look at this there are so many good options out there, that 
even if you‟re not interested in the one I have for you, I‟m sure that 
I‟ll find something in here that will meet both our needs and we‟ll both 
be happy. 
 
 
The only problem is, if you have a wall beyond which you can‟t go, 
then you‟ll have rejected it automatically, won‟t you? So my job isn‟t 
to persuade you or force my opinion on you, my job is to open the 
gates and say hey, look at this big place. Do you think that‟s cool? No, 
how about that, how about this, how about that?  
 
 
Just looking at a pure sales process, if your product is no good then 
you have no business selling it. If your product doesn‟t fit the client 
you go great, we‟ve explored it but you have no business selling it. If it 
happens to fit and the only reason they‟re not getting it is because 
something is preventing them, by the way, that‟ll be in most cases. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               74                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Then you have choices again and that‟s what we‟re offering people 
here. 
 
 
Does that make sense? It‟s actually a much more powerful way to 
influence because you‟re not. 
 
DVD 04 
Full Transcript  
 
 
Igor: 
If you‟d stand up for a second so everyone can see you it makes life 
easier for everyone, as well. 
 
Audience: My question– my partner and I– when we were doing it, we found it 
was better if you asked a question that they could relate to and give 
you part of an answer, or at least give you some answer before you 
came back with a double whammy, the not happy, but whatever.  
 
 
It gave him some place to start and then they had nowhere to go, at 
least that‟s what it felt like to me. 
 
Igor: 
What is the essence of what we‟re doing here? Remember, the 
language is not the important thing, right? It‟s the experience inside 
their mind. Now, if people are habitual to what you‟re doing, which is 
something that can happen a little bit here, they expect you to speak a 
little bit weirdly. So they go oh, okay, here‟s another one of those 
crazy words. Yeah-yeah, I get it.  
 
 
 
Are they really considering those ideas? Are their minds spinning 
through space or are they kind of kicking back and going, yeah I know 
this one. There are many ways to do this, but your most important 
task if you‟re going to be using this kind of language, this advanced 
covert hypnosis, and you want to have quick results, you must get 
them to engage with the ideas you‟re presenting. 
 
 
If they do not consider them fully, then there‟s no spin. If there‟s no 
spin, then there‟s no opening up. If there‟s no opening up, there‟s 
nothing to put an idea in.  
 
 
One of the ways to do it is exactly as you discovered, which is you ask 
a, shall we say, relatively normal question that‟s easy to answer so 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               75                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
that you engage that part of the mind that answers questions. They go 
oh, yeah this and that.  
 
 
Then, you start adding a little bit of spin onto that, and they start 
going, well, I guess this is in the same category of normal questions. I 
should be able to answer this. So they try to answer that. Then, you 
put a little bit more spin, and a little bit more spin, and before you 
know it, you‟re in this deep covert trance process.  
 
 
But, because at each step along the way you just added a little bit 
more, it was easy for them to follow. Does that make sense? 
 
 
It‟s not the only way to do it, but it‟s a very good way.  
 
 
 
In fact, one of the things we‟ll be doing as we continue into the more 
freestyle version of this – because, of course, right now we still have 
training wheels, right? When we start getting into the freestyle 
version, we do want to make this sound totally natural and normal. 
 
 
Remember, the key here is we‟re not trying to persuade anyone 
of anything.  
 
 
If you try to persuade someone of something, essentially, what you‟re 
doing is a mindset. You‟re trying to force one idea. That comes from a 
mindset that says that there is only one way. That‟s not enough.  
 
 
What I‟m suggesting is a much more freedom-enhanced mindset, 
which is there‟s more then plenty for everyone. It‟s not a question of 
forcing one idea. It‟s a question of getting so many options, that at 
least one of them will make you and them both happy at the same 
time. 
 
 
That, to me, is the key to effortless persuasion, because it‟s good for 
everyone. How can you have buyer‟s remorse when what you‟ve got 
actually works for you?    
 
 
If you‟re in the mindset of oh, no I‟m not going to force this, I‟ve got 
these little tricks; otherwise, they might not want it. Well, guess what, 
you‟re coming from a mindset where you‟re thing has no value in the 
first place. 
 
 
That‟s either because it doesn‟t work – in which case change whatever 
you‟re offering, or it does and you‟re just not aware of it – in which 
case change yourself so you actually find the value in the things that 
you‟re offering. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               76                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
You have plenty of choices, believe it or not. You have plenty of 
choices, so why would you go down the road of forcing things, which 
doesn‟t work so well anyway. If anything, it can damage your 
reputation and these sorts of things. 
 
 
The point of all this is that you‟re adding choices.  
 
If you add choices, they have to engage in the process. 
 
To engage in the process, one great strategy is get them answer 
things that are easy to answer. 
 
Then, lead them bit by bit into spinning around more until they 
find more freedom, more ways of approaching the same 
context, ideas and so on. 
 
Audience: I had asked if you could hook up the first part of this where you would 
say, what were you that‟s not happy? Could you hook it up with any 
part of the anywhere but here, anyhow but? 
 
Igor: 
Yes. For example, if you‟re asking a where question and you suddenly 
end up with a time answer, a time spin, that‟s a bit weird isn‟t it? So, 
the simple answer is, it depends on the effect you want to have.  
 
 
If I said to you, when have you been happy? When is, of course, a 
time question? That‟s anytime but now. It seems relatively 
straightforward doesn‟t it, because they‟re staying in the same logical 
loop, the idea of time?    
 
 
You can spin with that, and put that into a regular conversation and 
people will go wow, that‟s kind of an interesting question. Now, you 
can add more spin by doing the same thing.  
 
 
When have you been happy that’s anyhow but like this? 
 
 
The answer is not in terms of what you‟re putting together. It‟s how 
you‟re doing it. Let‟s think about two things that will definitely not 
work. 
 
 
How will you be that’s anywhere but here? 
 
 
Those two concepts don‟t fit together that well. It‟s all a question of 
how you present it. Remember to spend a lot of time on your 
presentation.  
 
1. First of all, where you‟re coming from, the idea of respect and 
so on.  
 
2. Second of all, in terms of your delivery, which are the pauses 
and the emphasis.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               77                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
 
So, you can have the same thing. How will you be that anywhere but 
here? This doesn‟t make sense on a purely logical level because you‟re 
switching tracks, right? So we‟d ask something like, how will you be 
happy anywhere but here? 
 
 
Doesn‟t that seem like it really makes sense now suddenly. I‟ve made 
the same switch. The difference is in my delivery and my allowing you 
to pause to have one portion or experience, which then makes you 
assume some things for the second portion of the experience. 
 
 
 
This is where you start learning about experience. We‟re going to go 
into some crazy spinning places with this stuff. This is just the 
beginning for now.  
 
 
The point is you can just throw it out there as random language, in 
which case, you‟re quite right with the idea that people just throw it 
out and it becomes either sleazy or stupid, like you‟re on drugs. I did 
promise you that would be a little of what we‟d be doing.  
 
 
Or, you can focus on the delivery and the place that you‟re coming 
from, as a result, of which makes more sense in a weird sort of way. 
Do you see where I‟m coming from? Can you feel it?  
 
Audience: Something that we discovered is you can shove multiple negations in 
there. Like, what will you not have been that’s not anything but this? 
 
Igor: 
Right. Again, all this comes down to the timing and the pauses so you 
end up having these spin cycles.  
 
 
Already, just based on what we‟ve done so far –by the way, are we 
going at the right pace for you? Is it too fast or too slow? Is this a 
good pace? It‟s important that you get basics, and then when we start 
mixing things together, you have lots more choices. Really, though, 
it‟s not about the choices as much as how you deliver them. 
 
 
The not’s can fit in anywhere or not. As long as you use the not’s in 
the right way so they enhance the quality of what you‟re doing, as 
opposed to detracting. There was a period in time when I was training 
myself in mind-bending language, where everything just had not. I 
thought, what do I do, just throw a couple of not’s in there and hope 
for the best? It‟s true. 
 
 
Anyone who‟s been through the Conversational Hypnotherapy Program 
where we do much more of a crash course, spending a more compact 
time with the mind-bending language that it becomes more 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               78                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
unconscious, it‟s very tempting for the conscious mind to hang onto 
something silly.  
 
 
Like, let‟s just put lots of not‟s in and it will work. As opposed to just 
letting go and letting the context develop the language for you. This is 
the difference.  
 
 
You‟re now starting to make meaning out of things that sound like 
they are not meaningful, and therefore they become more meaningful 
than they were. It‟s just impossible not doing this, isn‟t it? 
 
 
Mike: 
Is there a reason that we left the identity out, the anyone? 
 
Igor: 
Yes. Actually, you can have anyone in there as well, no problem. It can 
get very trippy at that point if you‟re anyone but you.  
 
Mike: 
That‟s what I meant. Yeah. What would happen? 
 
Igor: 
I‟m not sure all the minds in this room are ready for that one yet. 
 
Mike: 
Okay. So this is advanced? 
 
Igor: 
It‟s the advanced-advanced. It‟s the master level one. Let‟s play with 
our brains dribbling on this one for a while, before we go any further. 
Are you all good with this? 
 
Audience: One of the things I just noticed when you read, when have you been 
happy anytime but now, I just got that that presupposes I‟m happy 
now. So that presupposition is all of a sudden in there, so if somebody 
comes to me that‟s in an un-resourceful state and I say, when have 
you been resourceful anytime but now? It all of a sudden pulls it into 
now.  
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Audience: That‟s part of what this is meant to do. Is that it? 
 
Igor: 
Its part of many things that it‟s meant to do, so don‟t worry about it in 
terms of the details just yet. Let‟s just focus on the experiences we‟re 
developing. As we go into freestyle, I have plenty of maneuvers and 
plenty of directions to take you in, but we‟re not there yet because 
otherwise, you‟re minds will expand a little bit too quickly, and you 
know what happens then? Exactly. Poof!  
 
 
It gets a bit messy, and we don‟t want that in this training- different 
trainings absolutely, but not this one.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               79                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
 
Are you happy? Are you enjoying this? Happiness will hopefully be 
inculcated by now. Let‟s take these ideas and just put them to rest a 
little bit. Let‟s just start the whole cycle again from scratch and build 
up on a different theme. Would that be of interest to you?  
 
 
We can‟t go around life all the time just asking who, what, when, 
where and how. We could, but we want to start liberating ourselves 
from this a little bit. This is just a starting point and we‟ll continue a 
little bit more in a moment. 
 
 
Remember, we started the day by asking about the different senses, 
the five senses and so on. The key sense as far as I‟m concerned is 
the sixth sense. It‟s not what you see, hear, feel, touch, and taste, 
although that‟s part of it. It‟s the awareness that allows you to make 
sense of all that. That‟s really what we‟re playing with so far, isn‟t it? 
Would that be fair to say? 
 
 
So, why don‟t we just go off the awareness directly? How many people 
know what the fundamental formula is for doing hypnosis, as far as 
what we‟re doing in this sort of school or this tradition? 
 
Audience:  Indistinct group talk. 
 
Igor: 
Yes. By asking a question and seeing the reaction. Then, putting a spin 
on the reaction which makes them more conversational, but in terms 
of just doing hypnosis, what‟s the basic formula? ABS. 
 
 
Let‟s make it simple. For those of you who are not familiar with the 
formula yet, it just means you haven‟t bought enough products, so 
come on.  
 
 
A = Attention 
 
 
You need their attention. You need their awareness of things so you 
can shift their attention through experiences so they end up having the 
experiences that you want or need them to have, be it therapeutic or 
whatever. 
 
 
B = Bypass 
 
 
You‟re going to bypass their critical factor. This is the part of the mind 
that automatically rejects information, including information that might 
be useful for them. Like that little piece of advice you normally like to 
give to people, and they throw it right back in your face because they 
can‟t handle it for whatever reason. Their walls are up. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               80                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
S = Stimulate 
 
 
You‟ve got to stimulate the unconscious mind. You‟re getting 
unconscious response.  
 
 
 
Now, you did all this yesterday, didn‟t you on the Bonus Day, when 
you did that little crash course in hypnosis? Wasn‟t that the stuff you 
were doing then? You got their attention. Sleep. Bypass the critical 
factor through shock, surprise or other things. Then, you presented 
some suggestions, some ideas, like your arm is stiff and rigid.  
 
 
 
Do you see how that works? 
 
 
Well, we‟re doing the same stuff here. We‟re moving people‟s attention 
around. Initially, with these kinds of questions, but then we‟re going 
through different kind of experiences. So, why don‟t we skip the 
questions, and go straight to the awareness? Wouldn‟t that be 
something?  
 
 
So what kind of things – and a lot of you already know this, of course - 
what kind of things can you use to focus people‟s attention, or hijack 
their awareness and move it around? 
 
 
H+ is definitely going to set the context for it 
 
body sensations 
 
memories 
 
anything that their awareness can turn on 
 
 
So basically, we‟re talking about language of awareness, aren‟t we? If 
I ask you to recall a happy moment, I‟m navigating your memories, 
aren‟t I? If I say, whatever you do, do not recall the happiest moment 
in your life? Just don‟t think about how good it makes you feel. It‟s like 
the whole pink elephant thing, without the alcohol. 
 
 
So, we have awareness language that navigates your awareness. 
 
 
feel 
 
see 
 
hear 
 
touch 
 
taste 
 
 
We want to have things like:  
 
 
think 
 
consider 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               81                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
These are more neutral, aren‟t they? They‟re not attached to one of 
your five senses, are they? Even recall is closer to thinking or 
considering than it is to your five senses, isn‟t it? This is not a finite list 
that you need to memorize, there are many versions, but you get a 
sense of what we‟re coming through with this. 
 
 
You can move people‟s awareness simply by using language that refers 
to awareness. Whatever happens, please don‟t pay attention to your 
left foot now because if you were to pay attention to your left foot, you 
might actually compare it to your right, and notice it feels different.  
 
 
Do you see that it‟s very easy and straightforward to move people‟s 
experience just with the language because they have to pay attention 
to what you ask them to pay attention to, whether they want to or 
not, to decide whether they want to do it? So at least at one stage, 
you‟re kind of there already.   
 
 
So we‟re going to have a quick exercise just to play with this a little 
bit. I‟d like, for you to first write down maybe a dozen different 
versions of this. Words about the five senses: 
 
 feeling 
 hearing 
 seeing 
 smelling 
 tasting 
 
 
But also write down words about this pure sixth sense: 
 
 
recall 
 
remember 
 
think 
 
consider 
 
observe (although that can be a visual thing, as well) 
 
Audience: Are we going to be able to mix and match, like both, could I use recall 
the time you saw… 
 
Igor: 
We‟ll come on to that in a moment. Let‟s just keep it simple for the 
moment and we‟ll build up onto it. But I like where you‟re heading with 
this.  
 
 
You can have single words or little phrases like, become aware of, or 
pay attention to. All we‟re talking about now is can you use a simple 
vocabulary to grab someone‟s attention and move it onto something. 
That‟s it. That‟s easy to do, isn‟t it? So, maybe six minutes to do this in 
pairs. Here‟s what we want to do.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               82                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
 
Spend a couple of minutes designing a list with your partners. You 
have a whole bunch here to start with. Then, use that list to make 
them pay attention to some part of their experience, either a personal 
experience like a part of their body, or an external experience, like the 
lights in the room, the sounds of other people and so on.  
 
 
I don‟t care where the experience goes as long as you‟re moving the 
experience around. Make sense?  
 
 
Just to add a little twist – do you want to add a little twist on this one 
because this is easy, isn‟t it? Exactly.  
 
 
All of you please become aware of your left foot for a moment and 
notice that you can be not aware of that left foot, as well as being 
aware of what’s not a left foot.  
 
 
Do you see that just by placing my „not‟ in different places, there‟s 
some stuff that you‟ve been playing with already, but it starts to 
change the meaning quite dramatically, doesn‟t it? 
 
 
I want you to have this apposition of opposites. For example, scan 
your body until you find a good feeling and realize what it‟s not.   
 
 
Do you see what it‟s doing to you? Everyone‟s kind of going this isn‟t 
hypnosis, is it? It‟s very simple. Remember, the H+, the attitude 
you‟re creating. I‟m not having anything vaguely hypnotic in terms of 
the context if I say: 
 
 
Think about what’s wrong with your left foot! Yeah. Think about what’s 
wrong with your right foot!  
 
 
So make sure you do all the other normal pieces as well. 
 
 
Make eye contact. 
 
Smile friendly. 
 
Have an intense desire for them to have a positive experience. 
 
 
Then you say: 
 
 
Notice the sounds in the room. Notice what aren’t the sounds in the 
room, and don’t notice the sounds that are in the room. 
 
 
Notice how your experience continues to shift each time, right? Play 
with it with all the different types of awareness language, including 
negations of different elements in the equation, just so you notice how 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               83                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
it spins your awareness in different directions. Is that easy to do? Do 
you want six minutes or ten?  
 
 
You want to go crazy. Let‟s go with six minutes. Make sure you both 
have a go at this. Have as wide a vocabulary as possible. This is 
important! So play with it, and we‟ll add something after that.   
 
Igor: 
All right, folks, was that easy? Was it fun? Did you notice how it‟s 
again starting to turn your mind in different directions, just by placing 
the word „not‟, more carefully?  
 
This is important because you don‟t want to just throw not in 
randomly, and hope for the best. You want to know what the effect of 
it will be. The best way to do that is to do it with people and have it 
done on yourself to get a sense of it. This one definitely feels like 
someone‟s on drugs, whereas this one doesn‟t. Something that does 
not feel like drugs or not, I guess it must be. 
 
 
So let‟s start adding on to this and use this more purposefully in terms 
of hypnosis. The next exercise is something very simple. Most of you 
will be familiar with it in one shape or another, but let‟s do the 
exercise anyway just to allow a little bit of build-up to come through. 
Is that okay with you?  
 
 
Who‟s familiar with the idea of pacing and leading, anyone? I thought 
as much about half the audience. Anyone with your hands up, make 
sure you choose someone who didn‟t have their hands up. That way, 
you‟ll have more fun. 
 
 
This is a simple induction. Make three statements about their 
awareness that are true. For example,  
 
1. All of you are sitting down.  
2. You can feel the chair that you‟re sitting on. 
3. You can hear the sound of my voice. 
 
 
 
Those are three statements about your experience. You‟re aware of all 
those three things, aren‟t you? Now, once I‟ve made three statements 
about something that you can experience, I‟m going to add one 
statement about something that I would like you to experience, but 
you may or may not be.  
 
 
For example, you can hear the sound of the buzzing lights and the 
sound of someone sneezing. You can think certain thoughts and begin 
to relax.  
 
 
You‟re looking at something, carefully considering what it is we‟re 
doing here and having sensations inside your body which means, you 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               84                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
can relax even further now because you have a lifetime of experiences 
that you can recall, and you‟re not aware of sensations like your feet 
until I mention them. You can hear sounds that help you to relax even 
further.  
 
 
Let‟s just pause there for a second and notice what‟s already 
happened. Do you feel the whole vibe in the room coming down? What 
we‟re doing is we‟re allowing ourselves to use the same language now 
to begin to lead their attention towards some simple suggestions.  
 
 
For the moment, let‟s stick to simple things like: 
 
 
relax 
 
calm 
 
trance 
 
focus 
 
 
Those of you who are familiar with my work will, of course, recognize 
what these are, right? What are these called? Trance themes. So, 
you‟re going to talk about themes, ideas that are relatively hypnotic, 
and as you do so, an experience comes to life inside the other person, 
and they tend to become more and more hypnotized.  
 
 
What you‟re using is the current experience as a stepping stone to the 
experience you want them to have. It‟s a much milder form of creating 
the same spin that we‟ve been talking about. It‟s still a spin, but it‟s 
much milder, almost imperceptible. Does the exercise make sense? 
 
 
So, just repeat the same loop repeatedly with different themes that 
you absolutely know are going to be in their awareness. Let‟s put it 
this way. How many of you have been thinking thoughts? I know. I 
have these psychic powers, man.  
 
 
You can all recall times in the past, could you not? Now, of course, it 
would be ridiculous to say yes, that you‟re aware of the sensation of 
that chair until now. You see already how I‟m leading your awareness 
around, which means you‟ll do great on this exercise. It‟s a much 
milder form of putting the spin in.  
 
 
I really just want you to get used to the formula a little bit because 
we‟re about to put octane gas into this, but not yet. Are you ready for 
this? All right let‟s take five minutes apiece, 10 minutes total. You 
really want to go to town on this. Find somewhere comfortable to do 
this. If your partner ends up with eyes closed, muscles relaxed, 
drooling in puddle on the floor like an idiot, then you‟ve done a good 
job. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               85                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
So really create that hypnotic atmosphere, a more classical trance. 
More down time, more relaxed, more like the things you were doing 
yesterday. Just as a variation from the more conversational covert 
stuff. Is that okay with you? All right, find a different partner. Off you 
go. 
 
Igor: 
Who enjoyed that? Who didn‟t?  
 
 
 
Audience: I did not enjoy it. 
 
Igor: 
She‟s messing with me. The danger of my teaching this stuff is by the 
end of Day 4, you‟ll be using it on me; there‟s only one of me and 180 
of you I‟m really screwed or I‟ll be enlightened by the end of this 
week. It‟s one or the other. It‟s the risk you take, isn‟t it? 
 
 
So it was kind of fun, wasn‟t it? Now you can use it as a very valid 
induction, it‟s one of the more, shall we say, standard modern 
inductions. NLP made this one famous. Milton Erickson was the 
medical doctor that pioneered this particular approach. It‟s a wonderful 
induction, isn‟t it?  
 
 
We‟re interested here in the idea of mind-bending language, more the 
advanced covert hypnosis. What we‟re interested in is how do we use 
this whole process to navigate through spins a bit more. You know 
what I mean by spin, don‟t you? Does your mind feel like spinning 
when you go through these spins? That‟s where the word comes from. 
It‟s not technical. It‟s not anything crazy with the language.  
 
 
The spin happens inside the mind or it doesn‟t. If it doesn‟t, then you 
do it again. If it does, you do it again. Either way is better, isn‟t it? 
This is straightforward, right. Simple to do.  
 
 
Who found themselves experiencing the kind of the things that were 
being suggested to them? Anyone? More relaxation. A little more 
focus. Would you like to develop this now into a very simple 
mechanism for solving problems? Again, whether or not you solve a 
problem is irrelevant. It‟s what you‟re training your mind to do in the 
process. That‟s the important thing, as far as we‟re concerned. Does 
that make sense? 
 
 
To the extent you‟re willing to not overcome the problem, are you 
going to try and make it happen? So, the less the problem is there, the 
more it‟s actually working, so the language is actually doing its job, 
right? Of course, whether or not the problem goes is irrelevant 
because either way, you win. No? Or have I misunderstood this? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               86                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
 
I‟d like for all of you to consider a problem for a moment, just 
something more nagging, not the biggest life issue you have. If your 
favorite monkey got hit by a truck and now you‟re traumatized, don‟t 
choose that one. Choose something small. Like someone cut you off on 
the way to work the other day.  
 
 
 
 
 
Just something that annoys you a little bit when you think about it, or 
maybe you feel a little bit of anxiety or fear because you‟re about to 
have to do something, and you‟re not quite sure if you‟re capable of it, 
not the biggest thing in your life, something small. 
 
 
Please let me know if you have something like that in your mind. You 
don‟t have to tell me what it is. I just want to know that you have 
something in mind. A small to medium-sized nagging little problem, a 
little anxiety, a little fear and a little anger, something like that. Hands 
up when you‟ve got it. So, there‟s a few of you still thinking.  
 
 
So, those few of you that are still thinking, please feel free to plug into 
this as soon as you‟re ready. Those of you who have a problem, just 
consider that problem for a moment. I‟d like for you to think about it, 
not to the extent that it actually makes it a big problem. Just enough 
for you to experience it to a small degree and you can now. Can you 
not? To a small degree? 
 
 
So as you think about that problem, I want you to realize that there 
are, so many other ways you can do this. For example, you‟re aware 
of the sounds around you. Of course, my voice is one of those sounds 
and you‟re having certain feelings. Beyond all the thing‟s you‟re 
experiencing inside that wasn‟t the problem, notice that you can begin 
to get a sense of this thing resolving.  
 
 
So go ahead and notice what you see. Feel some sensation in your 
bodies. Listen to the sound of the humming lights as you just close 
your eyes, and begin to go beyond the problem into a solution beyond 
now.  
 
 
Feel the sensations of a trance developing. Continue to listen to my 
voice, and sense the temperature in the air. As you experience 
everything but right now inside this, and begin to resolve that problem 
further.  
 
 
Feel that transformation continuing. Notice your thoughts reflecting 
things, recall all those moments that aren‟t now, beyond that problem, 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               87                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
as it continues to resolve, as you consider anything but this and enjoy 
it.  
 
 
How has that thing that was a problem changed? Any ideas? Not now, 
I mean but as you open your eyes. So, what kinds of things happened 
folks? This is the microphone time.  
 
Audience: I literally could feel myself past it. It was in space behind me.  
 
Igor: 
So, for you, it was almost like there‟s a special awareness thing, and 
then the problem is behind you. How do you feel about it now? 
 
Audience: I feel great.  
 
Igor: 
You feel great? 
 
Audience: Yes, excited to tackle the problem and get rid of it. 
 
Igor: 
Fantastic. Interesting. What other things did you have? 
 
Audience: We became very internal. It brought us inward to… 
 
Igor: 
So you‟re speaking for everyone? 
 
Audience: No just myself. I went inside and found associations with that problem, 
which actually makes it now a plus thing. It‟s a positive. 
 
Igor: 
Oh really, it‟s a positive now, because you‟re smiling, right? 
 
Audience: Yeah. 
 
Igor: 
How‟s that work? 
 
Audience: Very well. 
 
Igor: 
Really? Are you sure? Something must have happened. I don‟t know 
what that is.   
 
Audience: Yes, while you were speaking I noticed the problem, of course, before. 
It‟s a minor one, but still it‟s been nagging me. While you were 
speaking, I did go into kind of space and I did actually see waves 
around that were just enveloping, but good, warm, gentle. 
 
Igor: 
So, you were actually starting to see solutions to this? 
 
Audience: Yes and then the problem just went away. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               88                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Igor: 
And the problem just went away. 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
The problem just went away. 
 
Audience: It didn‟t seem even of any consequence at all. 
 
 
Igor: 
How‟s that work? Beats me. Thank you. Is there a question over here? 
 
Audience: As I experienced what you were going through, giving to us, I was 
able to put the experience into a context, and within that context, your 
words gave me the content I needed to see the problem‟s resolution. 
It‟s quite common for me to see it that way, because you gave it to 
me in a previous class.  
 
 
Now I‟m experiencing it, and it gives me a lot more depth and 
understanding of what I can do. I can get my mind to go to wherever I 
want it to, to help that resolution become a fact.  
 
Igor: 
Thank you for that. Let me just pause a second before we carry on.  
 
 
Did you notice how everyone‟s talking about very different kinds of 
experiences? I saw the problem resolve. I just felt myself going inside 
and had a positive association. It‟s behind me now. It reminded me of 
all these other things that I was doing.  
 
 
Did you notice how each one of you is experiencing that totally 
differently, in terms of where it‟s sending you, yet with the same exact 
instructions? This is very important because when we go into this more 
with the awareness spins and so on, you will never know where the 
person will land. You can‟t know.  
 
 
You can get an educated guess if it will be more positive or negative, 
based on what you‟re emphasizing or phrasing. But you will never 
know where they‟ll actually land, and you don‟t have to. Wherever 
they land will be the right place for the next cycle of things to begin. 
 
 
Does anyone want to add anything before we do something about 
this?  
 
Audience: The problem didn‟t go away. I still can‟t have my sauna in the morning 
before class because it‟s not open, but the way I feel about the 
problem changed and the way I saw it. I realized I could work around 
that, the way I could change it within myself is what happened. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               89                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
Igor: 
Remember what we talked about before, we‟re not trying to force an 
opinion. If someone turned around and said, oh, I have a problem 
because this thing won‟t change. Reality hasn‟t changed, has it? It 
hasn‟t re-arranged itself magically just to suit your timing, but as your 
perception changes, two things are important. 
 
 
1. You not only feel differently about a sauna, which is good. Now you 
no longer have to feel frustrated or a little annoyed that you can‟t 
have it. 
 
2. More importantly, as far as I‟m concerned is that the consequence 
of those feelings is changing? 
 
 
You said it beautifully, which is now you‟re thinking about alternative 
ways of getting what you want anyway. Do you see that? This is very 
important. Why is it a problem for you? You‟re stuck in this little reality 
there, and it can be nothing but a problem. It bugs you.  
 
 
When you release that as a potential problem, it‟s not that you feel 
better about it and that‟s it because you‟re still in the exact same 
world, aren‟t you, except you‟re a little bit more positive, which is 
probably an improvement. 
 
 
The important thing is you‟re now starting to find other options that 
are at least as good as the one you wanted in the first place. So to the 
extent that you let go of an option that wasn‟t working for you, not 
only did you resolve a problem, but actually got something better in 
return. Isn‟t that worth something? 
 
 
This goes right back to the question that you asked before which is, 
why would anyone want to force their opinion on you when they have 
so many more ways of getting what they want other than having to 
use force? It‟s just a matter of realizing that you have a choice. If you 
think you don‟t, then of course you don‟t, and that‟s where problems 
start arising.  
 
 
When you realize that you can have it, you start spending more time 
trying to find a better solution than to enforce the one that‟s not 
working, and then who needs to have force, right? It‟s just a huge 
waste of energy, time and effort. It‟s so much easier to do something 
different, isn‟t it? This is hopefully, something we‟ll start expanding a 
little bit.  
 
 
Who‟s having a good time so far? Yeah? Only one person clapped, but 
that‟s okay. I can accept that.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               90                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Do or do not. There is no try. All right do you want to have a go at this 
whole, I‟ll call it problem destroyer, if you like. The process is very 
simple. We‟re going to base in on what we did a moment ago, but 
we‟re going to add a little bit. I‟m going to simplify it from what I did a 
little bit just to make it easy for you.  
 
 
We‟re going to start in exactly the same way as you did a moment ago 
by giving three pacing statements. In other words, things they can 
verify in their awareness.  
 
 
Things they‟re feeling. 
 
Things they‟re thinking. 
 
Things they‟re hearing. 
 
 
Now, we‟re going to add one awareness spin. In other words, you‟ve 
got three things they‟re aware of here in the pace already. So when 
you ask them a question that they can easily answer, what happens? 
They engage with you more fully. So we‟re doing the same thing here. 
Three statements they can easily verify. They go yeah, that‟s true. It 
locks them in.  
 
 
By the way, three is not the magic number. You can ask four or two. 
We‟re just going to pick three for the sake of ease. Then, you‟re going 
to attach on to it one more statement that sounds like it should be the 
same kind of thing, but it‟s not.  
 
 
Notice everything that you weren’t thinking until now. 
 
 
It sounds like it‟s exactly one of these three things, but you‟re putting 
more spin on it, which sends the mind out to one of these little open-
ended trances a bit more. When you add a suggestion, it has that 
much more room to grow in. It‟s like you‟re getting all the weeds out 
of the way, you‟re putting suggestions in the ground and letting that 
start to grow up.  
 
 
Then, just for the hell of it, just because we can – this might be 
something you did already – a trance theme like: 
 
 
relax 
 
go deeper 
 
calm 
 
focus 
 
 
Do you remember the trance themes you did in the previous exercise? 
So basically all we‟ve done is we‟ve inserted the awareness spin 
between the two steps of the previous exercise. You‟re putting a little 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               91                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
bit more torque on what you‟re doing before you present a trance 
suggestion.  
 
 
Then, at the end of it all, you‟re going to add another thing about the 
problem to make it resolve. So, you‟re just attaching a simple 
instruction along the lines of: 
 
 
as that problem resolves 
 
 
 
So what this might look like in a more formal way – and feel free to 
depart from this once you get the idea of the structure – this might 
look this: 
 
 
You’re all sitting there feeling the sensations of the chair against your 
back, and you can notice everything that isn’t this moment as you go 
into a trance, and that problem begins to resolve itself.  
 
 
Do you see how we‟re adding extra loops and then we‟re going into a 
solution, we‟re basically telling the unconscious mind, solve the 
problem. Just get on with it. Of course, it will not solve the problem in 
here. You‟re sending them out here first and saying, hey look around 
maybe some of this will work.  
 
 
No? Well, then, do another cycle. Go over here and check around. Is 
there anything over here that will work? No? Let‟s do another cycle. 
Eventually, you‟re going to end up somewhere that has something of 
positive value in relation to whatever that problem is, aren‟t you? It‟s 
just a question of time, isn‟t it?  
 
 
How much time do you want for that, five or ten minutes each per 
person? So 10 total, any questions on this? It‟s just four simple steps. 
 
 
If you want, let‟s make it very easy because I‟m not interested in 
getting very technical with the language yet. Just use any of the 
awareness language, like: 
 
 
notice 
 
recall 
 
 
So, you can hear me. You’re thinking about this exercise. You, of 
course, can sense your shoes. You do now. Which means you can 
recall doing things anyhow but like this, as you go into a trance and 
begin to resolve that problem. 
 
 
This is just a spin on it. We add some kind of awareness language 
ahead of this just to be able to introduce the spin, and we just carry 
on. Does that make it easier for you? Is every cool with this one? Feel 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               92                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
free to use that. Feel free to depart from that. I honestly don‟t care. 
What I care about is that you have an awareness spin in the middle of 
this to really put more torque on the induction.  
 
 
 
 
Get some kind of induction, some kind of trance process going, and 
then reel out of that into a problem solution. Then cycle through over 
and over again, as often as those five minutes allow you, just to notice 
what happens. 
 
 
Find a different partner. Off you go. 
~~~ 
 
Igor: 
Did you enjoy it? Are you minds still spinning a bit out of control? 
Exactly. Who actually resolved a problem, as a result of that? Of 
course, you realize that was not the point, right. Are you noticing that 
it‟s actually relatively simple? Just add a little bit of spin into the 
regular stuff you do anyway, and it adds a bit more power, a bit more 
kick. Would that be fair to say? 
 
 
So, you did nothing other then what you‟ve been doing today, but 
you‟re adding to things you did yesterday, or the day before in terms 
of your regular inductions, the element induction, instant inductions, 
Ericksonian inductions, it doesn‟t really matter what. 
 
 
Can you already see that this on its own will go far beyond the regular 
induction process and add more power, so it‟s only easier for you? Is 
that fair to say?  
 
 
Are you enjoying this? Let‟s get some microphones out here. 
 
Audience: This is wonderful. Olga had a great awareness when we did this 
exercise that some problems don‟t need a solution, they just need to 
be let go of. 
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Audience: Let go and go beyond somewhere else, and then it just resolves itself. 
Just letting go is the – holding on is the problem. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly! 
 
Audience: It was great. Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Notice how your solutions become very often spontaneously more 
enriched by what you‟re doing. This is what we‟re looking for, we‟re 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               93                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
looking to give people more choices, not less. Have you come across 
the idea of aversion therapy, which is like you make it taste 
disgusting?  
 
 
The only problem I have with it is you‟re making people‟s reality 
smaller and smaller because you‟re taking away choices, this minus 
cigarettes. You‟ve haven‟t grown in any way, have you? 
 
 
It doesn‟t mean you can‟t grow, as a result of it and so on. It‟s just my 
preference is go straight for the growth. Give them so many choices 
that cigarette‟s isn‟t one of them. We talk about this in the mind-
bending language master class. If you‟re in a room and all you have is 
a broken rocking chair, what are you going to see each time you walk 
in? A broken rocking chair. 
 
 
With all your associations oh, this is bad, and so on. If you fill that 
room with so many wonderful toys, when the kid walks in, where are 
his eyes going to go? He‟s overloaded with choice, at which point the 
broken rocking chair just can‟t be a problem because life with that in 
the room is so much better you‟re just focusing on it instead, because 
there‟s too much choice to be stuck with.  
 
 
That‟s how I look at things. You‟re welcomed to take it on board or 
not, it‟s really up to you. 
 
Audience: While I was being the hypnotist, I had the problem of my switching 
back to its conscious state, its critical state because I still haven‟t got 
the pattern down yet of this new language that we‟re learning. So, 
what can I do about that? 
 
Igor: 
Well, anything less than not practicing more, wouldn‟t it help you to let 
go of enough so that you can actually enjoy the process instead, would 
it? Just curious. Does that answer your question? 
 
Audience: I was just going to say that he was doing the wash, rinse, repeat 
through this. About the third time, the problem didn‟t resolve, but it 
spit out about 50 answers that I could later act on. That‟s what it did. 
 
Igor: 
Think of this. This is ultimately, what we‟re talking about now, massive 
creativity. We‟re not interested in destroying the problem. What we‟re 
doing is we‟re creating so much creativity the problem can no longer 
exist. Something‟s going to give. Something‟s going to work.  
 
 
Does that kind of make sense to you? Are you enjoying this? Is this 
kind of fun? Do you want to do more of it? Better come back 
tomorrow. We‟ve kind of finished for the day today. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               94                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Before you head off though, there‟s something important for you to 
realize. You‟ve been working quite hard today, right? There are a lot of 
ideas and processes you‟ve been going through, and you‟ve been 
expanding your mind. It‟s kind of like taking a mind-expanding drug 
without the hassle of the police arresting you.  
 
 
You should feel, first of all, a little bit more, shall we say, latent in 
terms of positive things have been happening, but possibly a little bit 
of fatigue because your mind has been stretched. It‟s been used, like a 
muscle. Of course, the thing‟s that happens with muscles when they‟re 
used is that once they get a chance to rest, they begin to develop and 
grow. 
 
 
As far as the mind goes, the time that you develop that rest period is 
called sleep, is it not? You know that you will sleep at some point. It‟s 
going to happen. Try to resist. This is my hypnotic induction. Try to 
resist going to sleep at some point in your life and you know you‟ll fail 
because as soon as you fall asleep, something else is going to happen. 
You‟re going to have a dream, several dreams, per sleep period.  
 
 
The wonderful thing about dreams is, good things can happen in 
dreams. You can have any experience you want, and many more 
besides. So to the extent that you fall asleep at some point later 
today, and allow your mind to do what it does naturally when it rests 
and dreams, you can take all these experiences and begin to process 
them inside, so that it enriches your way of living. 
 
 
All the things you‟ve experienced here are just the beginning of all the 
ways you will have experienced your life once your mind expands 
enough to really enjoy understanding how much choice you really have 
beyond all the limitations you thought you had, which is just less 
choice than you really do. You‟ll probably discover in your dreams 
alone that you have so much more variety that you could never be 
stuck again.  
 
 
 
Whoever gets stuck for a dream? They come automatically, do they 
not? Whether you think about them or not, those dreams will come. So 
you might as well enjoy them and discover that your life gets richer as 
a result. Might you not? 
 
 
The only thing I have left to say is thanking all of you for turning up 
here and paying attention, both consciously and unconsciously. As the 
conscious mind recedes in importance, the unconscious mind actually 
starts to get it, which means by the time you have to use this stuff 
consciously, it will be there for you and that‟s a nice thought to think 
about, isn‟t it?  
[Applause] 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               95                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
DVD 05 
Full Transcript  
 
 
Igor: 
Did we survive the first day? Are there minds imploding yet? Can you 
hear me in the back? Yesterday, we spent some time running through 
the language and the different spins, and seeing the impact it had on 
our own minds, as it stretches our attention into different places. 
 
 
Did you notice how when we‟re doing these things, it‟s not so much 
the language that we‟re interest in, although that‟s very important. If 
you don't have the context, it starts taking away from the actual 
language in terms of where people go, because they‟ll just answer 
your question either haphazardly, or they won‟t take it seriously.  
 
 
Does that match your experience a little bit? 
 
 
So I want to start this morning off with an exercise that a lot of you 
will be familiar with, but something which I think is very important, to 
be able to create that context a little more. To create that sense where 
people go wow, something important is happening here and I‟d better 
really concentrate or think about this question properly. 
 
 
Who here is familiar with the idea of the hypnotic gaze exercise? 
Anyone? It‟s about half of you. The exercise is very simple. All it 
entails is looking. Can anyone look? 
 
 
Now, it sounds very simple but actually, it‟s surprisingly not easy. In a 
moment, I‟m going to ask you to split up, get a partner and sit down 
somewhere comfortable. I will give you just five minutes. That‟s all. 
We‟re going to watch each other in silence. Look at one eye or the 
other.  
 
 
If you have difficulty looking at their eyes, you can look at the center 
of the bridge of their nose. That makes it easy in terms of the 
emotional impact it has on you. 
 
 
I‟d like for you to spend five minutes just focusing on the other 
person. Remember when we talked about the H+, focusing on in terms 
of something positive is going to happen. It‟s going to be something 
with hypnotic intent. I don‟t really care about the results in terms of 
how they react.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               96                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
What I do care about is that you spend five minutes just totally 
immersed in that kind of experience and noticing how the whole 
experience changes. Notice the experience you have when someone‟s 
looking at you for five minutes and so on.  
 
 
Let‟s just start this off as a warm-up, and then we‟ll just dive into 
doing some more crazy mind-bending language juju. 
 
Audience: Question from audience not on microphone. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, although it will happen in the same five minutes. Is everyone 
clear with what you need to do? I recommend you work with someone 
you don‟t know. It‟s a lot more interesting. Unless there are any other 
questions, then just take five minutes now and warm up with that. 
 
~~~ 
 
Igor: 
Was that a little easier or harder than you thought it would be? Easier? 
Interesting?  
 
Audience: At first I thought five minutes was an awful long time to stare into 
somebody‟s eyes, but when I look into Debra‟s eyes, there was such a 
feeling of oneness for me, I just felt whatever she was feeling, but I 
was sending her all my love and energy. At times, we began to smile 
at each other. I just felt really close to her. 
 
 
There were points that I couldn‟t even see her face. It was just like 
blending into everything. It was just a great, great experience. 
 
Igor: 
If you can preserve that attitude whilst you‟re doing all this mind-
bending language, don‟t you think that might be a little bit more 
powerful? Does anyone else want to say something? 
 
 
In that case, let‟s do this exercise again, but let‟s actually add some 
spin onto it. Would you like that?  
 
 
Let‟s go back to what we did yesterday, remember this and this? 
These are easy. You don‟t have to do a whole lot. The only thing I 
want you to do though, is we‟ll do the same exercise again for about 
two minutes.  
 
 
Once you feel that same sort of connection, or your mind calming 
down, or whatever it was you were doing just now – did you notice, by 
the way, how your mind sort of settles down after a few minutes of 
doing this, and you‟re into this sort of steady rhythm.  
 
 
Is that fair to say in terms of what you were doing? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               97                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
 
Once you‟ve hit that rhythm, and not before – this is very important – 
once you‟ve hit that rhythm, and not before, to the extent you can 
maintain that sort of feeling that you have, start very slowly saying 
some of these things. I don‟t care which one it is. You can choose one 
ahead of time and write it down.  
 
 
You can choose one in the moment spontaneously. You can make one 
up. I honestly don‟t care so much what you‟re saying at that point.  
 
 
But once you‟ve got to that point where the rhythm is going, without 
breaking the rhythm, start slowing adding one or two of these things 
in and then watch their reaction, then do it again, watch the reaction, 
and so on. 
 
 
So we‟ll have one person do it for about a minute or two, and then the 
other person will do it for about a minute or two. You‟ve got a couple 
of minutes in the beginning to kind of warm up, and you‟re done. 
 
Audience: If they ask who are you, are we supposed to respond or just kind of 
continue the exercise? 
 
Igor: 
All right, you‟re going to continue with the exercise, but you‟re not 
going to ignore it. You‟re going to actually think about it carefully, as 
part of the exercise. The important thing is that you are absolutely 
thinking about it, and if you really feel like answering, feel free to do 
that. But that‟s not the purpose. It‟s not important, whether or not you 
do answer, all right? 
 
 
The key here is you start by setting that sort of state, the looking and 
getting that connection thing going. Then you use some of this 
language. Notice where the impact is? Then after a minute or two, 
you‟ll just go quiet, give them a little nod, and then it‟s the other 
person‟s turn. So you‟ll have the experience of doing both sides of it. 
Does that make sense to you? 
 
 
Again, this is just another way to put another layer on what you‟ve 
already done before we carry on with what we‟re doing today. Easy? 
Stay with your same partners for now. Spend about two minutes first 
to set yourself up. Then, when you‟re ready, just dive in. 
 
~~~ 
 
Igor: 
All right. How was that? Interesting? How did you notice it being 
different from what you did yesterday? Anyone? 
 
Audience: More H+ in the process. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               98                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Igor: 
Right. What was the impact on you as the subject? 
 
Audience: I felt more connection. 
 
Igor: 
You felt more connection? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Did you find it easier for your mind to go to these other places, rather 
than just being spun out? Everyone in general, do that as well. Did you 
notice it‟s kind of a gentler way of spinning people through things but 
actually, it takes them much further would that be fair to say? 
Excellent! Thank you. 
 
Audience: Yesterday when we were studying who, where, when, how and what, 
there were words that began to make a little bit of sense. They were 
confusing to me, but today when I asked my partner who are you I felt 
that connection, I was her and I knew she was me.  
 
 
We both felt, and where have you been everywhere here right now? 
How will you be? I will be everything, right here, right now, eternally. 
What will you have been? Nothing, but who I am, who you are and 
we‟re one. That‟s how I felt. 
 
Igor: 
Very good. Now, just notice this. This is important. Although it‟s 
starting to sound a bit like a metaphysical seminar, isn‟t it, this is not 
what we‟re aiming at. It‟s fine. I mean you‟ll have lots of very 
interesting experiences here. The key that I want you to get is how 
much more your influence rises when we start doing what we actually 
talked about yesterday. 
 
 
Hopefully, you see this whole thing here being done at a slightly more 
intense level now. Does that make sense? This whole idea of: 
 
 using it with respect 
 using it with integrity 
 
 
If nothing else, if for no other reason, you‟ll do it just because your 
influence rises. Seriously, this is why yesterday when we talked about 
what if people try to use this without integrity and without respect. It‟s 
like go ahead, the only person that‟s going to suffer ends up being you 
because that kind of cuts the interaction.  
 
 
It breaks the social contract to a certain extent, people just can‟t 
follow this stuff, and they‟ll just think you‟re a weirdo, and chances are 
you will be. It‟s true. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               99                          StreetHypnosis.com                    
 
 
Whereas, if you‟re actually using this with integrity – and it is kind of 
intense, isn‟t it? As a hypnotist, do you notice how this makes 
everything much more intense for you also? This is one of the ways 
that you have to use mind-bending language. Depending on how much 
spin you put on, you have to be there with a spin.  
 
If you like just a light spin, that‟s fine. You can be more 
conversational. But if you‟re going to go with heavy spin, you no 
longer go conversational at that point. You have to switch into this 
other mode, otherwise you do come across like you‟re trying 
something on, or you‟re being a little bit weird. Does that make sense? 
 
 
As a hypnotist, you have a range as much as your language has a 
range. They have to go together. Otherwise, you risk all kinds of 
consequences.   
 
Audience: I think it‟s probably been pretty much said, and I don‟t know if I can 
enhance that but definitely, the connectivity was there, and my story, 
I suspect, is going to be similar to others. I can‟t help but recognize 
the growth that is occurring.  
 
 
As a hypnotherapist, that true H+ state that has to be achieved, I 
know in terms of that connectiveness, a week ago, there was a 
particular party and it was there, somebody across the room that just 
ticks you off.  
 
 
When we were together, this person represented somebody that had 
not had a positive influence on my life. I suspect the same thing was 
true on the other side. It was extremely difficult to do that staring. At 
that point, I had to become, okay, well if I‟m the hypnotherapist, and 
this is going to be a positive session, how can I be that is going to 
positively influence this?  
 
 
So I envisioned him as my brother, and getting into the proper strait, 
everything changed. As I‟ve seen that person maybe five or six times 
since then, there‟s always a big smile at each other, when it started 
out completely opposite. The words are just flowing, and it‟s all 
becoming meaningful.  
 
Igor: 
Thank you. I really appreciate that. Again, this is very important. 
Although, strictly speaking, this is not a hypnotherapy seminar, the 
applications of hypnotherapy are obvious, especially if you‟ve done the 
Conversational Hypnotherapy course. The mind-bending language 
stuff, you know exactly how to fit it in. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               100                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
The key is, can you create that genuine collection of respect and 
rapport versus the kind where it‟s kind of antagonistic. It‟s like, I‟m 
going to pull one over on you, and so on. I know both work because, 
let‟s face it, that‟s how the world has worked for a long time, but my 
preference is definitely this one over the other. 
 
 
 
You get to pick and choose, however you want to do it. I know for a 
fact that the more, shall we say, into someone you can get, in terms of 
their mindset and the more you‟re going to alter that, the more this 
helps you get into that because their shields come down. 
 
 
When the shields go up, you can have the most amazing trickery in 
your language, but it will do very little. Feel free to experiment and 
you‟ll find out for yourselves. Thank you.  
 
Audience: I think you just mentioned it, the idea of the shields coming down. It 
seemed easier using the language to find out or look at the person to 
see what they needed. They didn‟t even have to tell you. You could 
look into them and just ask them a few questions, and it was like, 
that‟s it. Now we got it. That‟s what we need to work on. The language 
just seemed to flow. It wasn‟t even thinking anymore. 
 
Igor: 
Perfect. You‟re right in the right place. By the way, are you all 
interested in how to do this stuff totally spontaneously without having 
to do any of these formulas, or memorizing anything at all? We‟ll come 
on to this, this afternoon. You‟re in the right place. 
 
Audience: There‟s a product back there for sale that I‟m sure will tell us. 
 
Igor: 
I‟m sure. In the meantime, the thing to recognize – and this is what 
we‟re building up to today, is that language without the mindset is 
useless. 
 
1. You‟ll struggle finding the language in the first place. 
2. If you do find the language, it‟s just because you memorized it. 
3. It won‟t have the same impact. 
 
 
 
So, we want to start from this base, which will help you get the actual 
language more naturally anyways, and secondly, it will actually help 
the impact be that much more profound. Does that make sense? 
 
 
So, we‟re going to be adding more exercises as we go along today, but 
really, only do them to the extent that you can carry on doing what 
you‟ve been doing here and surfing from doing it conversationally, but 
with the same attitude, which is a little trickier.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               101                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Then, doing it more, shall we say hypnotically, with the same attitude, 
which is a little easier because that allows your mannerisms to become 
more hypnotic. Either way though, your language will come out 
smoothly and fit the context at that point if you go there first. 
 
 
 
 
We‟ll take two more questions, and then we‟ll move on. 
 
Scott: 
I just want to tag on to what he said. Yesterday, there was a bit of 
struggling to get the words right, the tempo right and the sequencing 
right. That all just dropped away because as we had the connection, 
my sensory acuity went up ten-fold so I could see the micro shifts as I 
was speaking.  
 
 
It was clear when to stop. It was clear when to start. The next things I 
said, I didn‟t have to plan them out. The next phrase just came, and I 
didn‟t have to think two or three phrases ahead. 
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Audience: So that connection is phenomenal and the sensory acuity that‟s 
available is incredible.  
 
Igor: 
It‟s relatively easy to get, isn‟t it? It just requires effort in terms of you 
need to put your attention on it. If you can go there first, if you can 
switch yourself on – and it requires energy, but when you do it, this 
stuff comes so easy that it‟s almost ridiculous.  
 
 
I really want you to experience that, and hopefully you‟re starting to 
get a sense of that now. Are you? Excellent!  
 
 
One last point… 
 
Audience: Well I guess at this point, it might be a bit redundant what I‟m going 
to say because it seems to be the same theme. Yesterday, I was 
thinking of what I was going to say and what I was going to do 
because I was practicing. This time, with the connection, with the 
eyes, the window to the soul, I was just working on intuition, and I 
didn‟t have to think anymore. It just came through. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s right. That‟s exactly where I wanted you to go. Now, just so you 
realize, this exercise is easier to do today than yesterday because 
yesterday, you spent time hitting those boundaries on your own so 
now you have somewhere to go. Your instincts know where to go 
because you had all of yesterday to prepare. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               102                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
If we just did this exercise straight off the bat, well, you have nowhere 
to go with it because your mind still hasn‟t got those connections. 
Make sense? 
 
 
Would you be interested in taking a little bit more time today to use 
this very state to explore a little bit further? Here‟s what‟s happening 
to a certain extent.  
 
 
This is kind of the territory we explored yesterday. It‟s what they know 
and it‟s going on the outside boundaries. By yesterday, you probably 
hit somewhere around here. You started exploring these areas that 
you‟re kind of familiar with but kind of not. So it‟s difficult to talk 
about. Does that seem fair? 
 
 
What I want you to do today is go even further to give you even more 
choices, but you can‟t go there unless someone can guide you there. 
They can‟t guide you there unless they have that stability to make you 
be willing to actually follow along.  
 
 
You see, at this point here all that‟s going to start coming out if you, 
just use it as pure language, as either nonsense or you‟re going to 
sense that someone‟s just winding you up or something like that. 
You‟ll be playing word games. 
 
 
In order to make the extra transition from what you did yesterday to 
this stuff here – in other words, now that we‟re going to start adding 
more spin, you need to be doing what we just did this morning to help 
guide them along, which means your pauses will change, just like you 
experienced yourself.  
 
 
You just knew when to pause, right? You have to wait for them to 
come from here to there, and just as they‟re just drifting around here, 
you‟ll go oh, here they are. Then you add the next piece and the next 
piece and so on. 
 
 
So, you‟re constantly building on the momentum that you create in the 
first place. Do you know what I mean by that? So your attitude is 
going to be very, very important to help them make those shifts and 
get to these edges. 
 
 
Once you come to these edges, putting the language into these 
different places can be very easy for you because your mind has 
already been there. So would you be willing to spend the morning just 
exploring the outer edge of inner space?    
 
 
Any questions before we begin?   
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               103                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
You may have noticed that you all have a set of notes this time. This is 
going to be important, partly because I realize it‟s a big room so some 
of you can‟t see the details on the board as much, and partly because, 
well, you may lose the ability to read soon. So you may as well have 
this while you can. 
 
 
Remember, yesterday we started playing with the awareness 
language.  
 
Audience: This is just something that perhaps is a learning that I got from 
Seattle, I wanted to ask you, and I heard you say multiple different 
times that you have to go there first. I‟ve always taken that to mean 
to go into the H+, to go into respect, to go into essentially trying to 
find something good for the other person.  
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Audience: Is there a further dimension of that, that if there is something 
particular that is good for the other person, that you need to go into 
there? 
 
Igor: 
Yes. 
 
Audience: So I was just thinking when we were working just now, I was working 
with him just for a moment on safety in his body. I was wondering 
about whether what I was doing would have worked even better had I 
gone to safety in my own body. 
 
Igor: 
Try it out.  
 
Audience: Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Probably for your conscious mind, the answer will be yes. But really 
don‟t take my word for it. Do it and you‟ll see.   
 
Audience: Okay. 
 
Igor: 
In fact, you may want to switch the happiness in the next exercise to 
safety, because safety is a kind of direction. It‟s not actually an 
experience. So if you can be safe here, that‟s one thing. Safety here is 
a totally different thing – more profound. Safety over here somewhere 
is even more profound.  
 
 
So the more you can access that in yourself, the more you set his 
context where the person can‟t feel but that. Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: Yes. Thank you. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               104                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. That was a great question. So we‟re on Page Four of this 
little set of handouts. We‟re using handouts now partly because the 
language is starting to get a little bit more complicated. We‟re going to 
start with a simplified version of what we did yesterday. 
 
 
Remember, we started with the pacing language and then you added a 
little bit of awareness spin in whatever way you wanted to. Then, you 
added some trance suggestions and some problem-resolving thing. 
 
 
We‟re going to begin with the same thing, but we‟ll start taking it to, 
shall we say, the outer edge of inner space. To get there, we‟re going 
to use a formula, just so you don‟t have to think about it too much.  
 
 
We have our awareness language. Notice, sense, hear, feel and so on. 
We‟ve got a whole bunch of examples here. Then, we just want to add 
more spin onto them. So we‟ll have something like: 
 
 
everything 
 
anything 
 
 
Then, you have the idea of what the resource is, in this case (X), 
would be what? Happiness. That‟s what we had yesterday. If there‟s 
something specific that you want, by the way, like more confidence, or 
love or something like that, feel free to ask your partner to exchange 
the word happiness for that. You may as well start going towards what 
you want.  
 
 
Safety for example, would be a great example here. Then, you‟re 
going to add the spinning. The spinning is similar to what we did 
yesterday, it‟s the beginning of something we‟ll be doing after this just 
to warm you up again, to get you used to this sort of language. 
 
 
 
We‟ll basically be doing what you just did a moment ago, but we‟re 
going to add more resources at this point, and we‟re going to get used 
to moving the awareness through this. 
 
 
Here‟s what not to do: 
 
 
Notice everything that is (X) anywhere but there. 
 
 
Because you will have undone everything you did this morning. 
Wouldn‟t that be fair to say? So the language should be relatively easy 
for you right now. Is that true?  
 
 
So just do the same exercise again, spend a minute or two getting 
yourself ready, and then take them through the awareness spins 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               105                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
constantly for three or four minute with a specific resource in mind, or 
a specific direction. If they have a problem they want to solve – a 
smaller one for now until we start getting into this whole theme – feel 
free to do that as well. 
 
 
Then, we‟ll swap roles and we‟ll do the other side. Then, we‟ll come 
back and we‟ll add something on top of that. Is that easy to do? Now 
we‟re not focusing on the language here. The language we‟re going to 
use as a formula to make it easier for you to add spins on the edges, 
but what I want you to focus on is the mindset that you had this 
morning. 
 
 
Now you have what you did yesterday, plus the mindset from this 
morning, which will make it a little more different and we want that. 
So in terms of the actual exercise, it may be a little bit tricky at first, 
because you‟ll have to try to keep track of both your state and the 
language at the same time. 
 
 
But you have to connect the two together, because if you don‟t 
connect the two together, you‟ll never actually be able to use this in 
the real world. Make sense? 
 
Audience: So while we‟re doing this, is there any touch as part of this that‟s 
covert? 
 
Igor: 
Sure. Well, touching is not usually that covert because they can feel it. 
 
Audience: No, covert in that is it against what you‟re trying to get at? 
 
Igor: 
No! You can do absolutely all those things. You can touch them if you 
want to create that tension. You can lock eye contact. If their attention 
drifts, you can kind of give them a little nudge and make sure they‟re 
paying attention again. All those things, by all means, do so. I have no 
problem with that. 
 
 
The key for doing this though, is that you don‟t pop out. Like you‟re 
here, you make the whole connection and that‟s great. Then suddenly 
you go okay, great. Now notice everything that‟s (X) that isn‟t you. 
Can you see how I completely lost everything I built up? The 
momentum begins with you, and you create the sort of context, you‟re 
sub-communicating how they should interact with the ideas you‟re 
presenting. 
 
 
In this case, its take these things very seriously, have an experience 
and let your mind take you to an amazing new place, that‟s the sub-
communication we‟re trying to create for other people to fall into. 
Make sense? Any other questions? Easy? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               106                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
Find a different partner. Take five minutes apiece, and really build that 
H+, that context.  
~~~ 
 
 
All right, how was that?  
 
Audience: So at first I was completely confused, and then after a couple of 
minute, I had an epiphany, which was that if we think of three rings 
there that you drew, you need to start in the first ring. The way you do 
that is by saying, as you sit here looking at me, or something like we 
did yesterday. Something that‟s observable, because you‟re meeting 
them at their current reality. 
 
 
Then, you‟re taking them to a part of the current reality they weren‟t 
thinking about, like that feeling of happiness in your stomach. Then I 
kept getting a sense of what you were talking about yesterday, like 
spinning something. But you need to start where they are.  
 
Igor: 
Exactly. 
 
Audience: Then you can go, and if you just immediately go to that outer ring 
without taking them with you, you‟ll be there… 
 
Igor: 
On your own. 
 
Audience: They‟re not coming with you.  
 
Igor: 
I think that‟s a very important realization you made there. Did anyone 
else notice this, by the way, one or two people? If you haven‟t yet, 
please pay attention, it‟s very important. 
 
 
Remember we had the swing analogy before? What happens if you put 
a kid on a swing and you want to get him right to the top of the arch 
straightaway? Where does the kid go? Because you‟re pushing way too 
hard, right. So you have to start wherever they‟re at, and let the 
momentum start building until it‟s gone to wild extremes. Then it 
becomes fun for that person as well. 
 
 
So thank you, that‟s important to realize, especially if you use this 
conversationally. We‟ll come on to this on the final day. How to fit this 
into regular conversations without sounding weird, and that‟s going to 
be very important. This is one of the things that you have to do.  
 
 
You have to be able to fit it in to the regular context, and just add 
enough spin to start tweaking it out of its box until you get the result 
that you want, or you just keep going. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               107                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
Thank you, that‟s very important. 
 
Audience: Yes, my question is about structure. Does it really matter where you 
start on these? Notice everything. Do you start there? Or you could 
say, how do you feel, or whatever. Does the structure really matter? 
 
Igor: 
It matters absolutely nothing at all. What matters is the principle, the 
strategies behind it. In other words, are you starting in the middle 
somewhere, wherever they are? Are you moving them towards the 
edge? Are you using this language to get there?  
 
 
These are just formulae to make your life easier. If I was going to 
make you make it up from the beginning, those of you who have been 
to the conversational hypnotherapy program, you know what it‟s like 
when you have to trust your unconscious mind to come up with it 
straightaway. It can be done, but it‟s a much larger challenge isn‟t it?  
 
 
This is just an easier way of doing it. You can use the formula at first, 
and then this afternoon we‟ll start unpacking it so that by tomorrow, 
you can start doing this stuff spontaneously.  
 
 
Until then, we‟re just following the guidelines to make it easier. If your 
mind is already jumping ahead and it says oh, I‟d like to do this here 
or that there, knock yourselves out. Seriously, have fun with it. The 
important thing is how does it spin your mind? Where does it send 
you? And noticing how different things will send you to different 
places. That‟s the key thing.  
 
 
You‟re just building a reference library of experiences so that when we 
start doing this spontaneously, you have a reference library to back 
you and check out.  
 
 
Thank you. That was a great question to ask. Any other comments or 
questions? Was that fun? Are you ready for something a little bit more 
challenging? 
 
 
We‟re going to stack the deck a little bit and give you a longer 
exercise, but we‟re going to put a couple of things in place together. 
There will be more spin and more maneuvers, more strategy on your 
part. Are you willing to do this? 
 
 
So far we‟ve been doing baby steps, just adding little layers at a time. 
Now we‟re going to add a few layers at the same time.  
 
 
On Page Four, if you look at the cross-spins you‟ll notice that the spin 
language, the little addition we have at the end, has changed slightly. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               108                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
When we start deconstructing the language, we‟ll explain exactly why 
that is.  
 
 
For the moment, just assume it‟s a variation on what you‟ve been 
doing already to give you a little bit more variety. Make sense? A 
couple of things are going to happen. 
 
 
First of all, you may notice that the spin has been doubled up here. 
The reason for that is to be able to give you more momentum as 
you‟re going through this.  
 
 
Pay attention to everything that makes you feel happy everywhere but 
here, anytime but now. 
 
 
Did you notice how that adds a natural extra layer of spin right at the 
end? The key to this is: 
 
1. Don‟t read across the lines. If you read across the line, you‟ll 
actually be repeating the same phrase twice. There‟s very little spin 
there. 
 
 
 
Pay attention to everything feeling resourceful, only here, only here. 
 
 
Do you see how there‟s no more spin? It‟s redundant. You want to 
match across the line but go in a diagonal is some way or another. As 
to which other directions you do, that‟s entirely up to you. I really 
don‟t mind. 
 
 
Do you understand how you add extra layers of spin just by adding 
more tag phrases, which are essentially the same spin layer, just 
putting more spin on what‟s already going on? Make sense? Is that 
easy? Do you want to do a little bit more on that? 
 
 
You may see there‟s a big (X) in the box under awareness, right? The 
(X) is there because the content will change according to what you 
need to achieve. I‟m going to ask you to do three levels of Xs, all in 
the same process. Start with one and move through to the final one. It 
goes back to the comment we had here, which is: 
 
 
You want to start people in the center and move people across.   
 
 
Here are the three Xs. Please do follow this sequence. I‟ll happily 
explain after the exercise why we do this sequence. Here‟s the 
sequence I‟d like you to follow: 
 
1. The first (X) should just be something that‟s in their 
experience, part of their awareness.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               109                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
 
For example, pay attention to anything that’s comfortable inside your 
body, everywhere but here, only now. 
 
 
We‟re looking for a physical sensation, some part of their physical 
experience. Or: 
 
 
See everything in this room, anytime but now, only like this. 
 
 
You‟ll cycle maybe two or three of these just to see where the spin 
begins. Once you‟ve done a few of the experience ones, and you‟ve 
been spinning them out in terms of what they‟re experiencing in the 
room right now: seeing, hearing, feeling and so on,  
 
2. You‟re going to move on to a resource. The resource can be 
something they give you.  
 
It could be: 
 
 
confidence 
 
happiness 
 
safety 
 
love 
 
enthusiasm 
 
 
If there is something in your life that you would like to have 
particularly more of, this is it. Ask for it. If there‟s not, let‟s stick to the 
happiness one or self-esteem because they‟re kind of positive in 
general terms anyway. Make sense? Easy? Some yes, some no and 
some, I‟m still in the void. 
 
 
The resource can be anything that the person really wants more of. 
Keep it positive, folks. I‟m sure you don‟t want to have more hate, 
anger, fear or any of that in life, right. Ask them what they want, and 
if they don‟t have any idea and go, oh, I don‟t really know, then just 
stick to happiness because we could all do with being a bit more 
happy, couldn‟t we? Is anyone here too happy? 
 
 
So we start with experience, and we spin around the experience a few 
times, just to see where that takes us. Then, we‟ll spin into the 
resource, let that sort of start running around a few times and see 
where that takes us.  
 
 
Finally– 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               110                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
3. I want you to add some general language around the idea 
that they can solve a problem.  
 
 
 
If you have a specific problem in mind, feel free to mention it before 
you start. You do not have to give any details. Just say, I have a 
specific problem in mind. That‟s enough. If you want to keep it private, 
feel free to keep it private. If you want to share some details, feel free 
to share some details. Either way is fine. 
 
 
If you can‟t think of a specific problem that might be useful to deal 
with, just let your unconscious mind come up with something, and it 
will. Your partner, the hypnotist, will just talk about resolving a 
problem in general and then just let your unconscious mind select 
something appropriate for you to resolve.  
 
 
Again, we‟re looking for something in the small to medium range 
because this is training. It‟s not yet therapy, so we‟ll keep it in the 
training range, so something small to medium that is easy for you to 
resolve. Make sense? 
 
 
Does someone want to volunteer for this, just for the hell of it? Come 
on up. Give them a round of applause, folks. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Igor: 
Just give me a second, whilst I arrange my notes here. I‟m going to do 
my best to stick to this because this is what you‟ll be doing. Of course, 
in time, you‟ll be able to go way off the top.  
 
 
How are you doing, is it Shane? 
 
Shane: 
Yes.  
 
Igor: 
Excellent. So Shane, is there something that you‟d like to experience 
more of in terms of your life? Love, happiness, excitement, that sort of 
stuff. 
 
Shane: 
I‟d like to have better solutions for people. 
 
Igor: 
To have better solutions for people.  
 
Shane: 
Yeah. That‟s what people pay me to do.  
 
Igor: 
People pay you to come up with solutions. So what do you feel like 
when you‟re coming up with good solutions for people? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               111                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Shane: 
I feel good. People feel good. 
 
 
Igor: 
People feel good.   
 
Shane: 
The world‟s a better place. 
 
Igor: 
For sure. So what helps you come up with better solutions? Is there a 
creative stage where you‟re going to think better or what kind of 
things help you… 
 
Shane: 
I think a creative state. 
 
Igor: 
…a creative state. So creativity would be useful?   
 
Shane: 
Everything. 
 
Igor: 
Do you have a particular something in mind – you don‟t have to say 
what it is – but do you have a particular situation, problem or context 
in mind in which you could resolve something for yourself as well, 
something in your life? 
 
Shane: 
Not particularly. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s fine. We‟ll let your unconscious come up with something. So 
what I want you to do is either look at me or look around the room.  
 
 
Notice out there everything you see only now that‟s only like this. I‟d 
like you to feel all those sensations and anything but that everywhere 
but there. That‟s right. There you go.  
 
 
Think about all those things like this, only then because Shane, I want 
you to remember that creativity everywhere but here only now and 
discover the creativity growing, and only that, in any way but like this 
because, Shane, there are many places in life where you can solve 
your own problems, be happier and more successful.  
 
 
Your unconscious can choose of one of them, and just focus on 
everything that‟s this, any time but then, only right there. That‟s it. 
Feel that solution coming, and only that, everywhere but here. Enjoy 
the resolution, and anything but that, only here.  
 
 
Close your eyes, and let that continue for a while. That‟s right. Really 
feel that all the way, until you‟re ready to return. You know you are. 
That‟s right, in exactly that way.  
 
 
How are you doing? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               112                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
 
Shane: 
Doing great.  
 
Igor: 
Good job.  
 
Shane: 
Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
Give him a nice round of applause. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Igor: 
Did you enjoy that? Is that easy, folks? Don‟t know about easy? We‟re 
just layering everything you‟ve been doing so far in many different 
layers. Just think of it in terms of doing three exercises in a row. Don‟t 
feel like you have to do two and then you have to move on.  
 
 
Just do two, three, four, five or six until you, as the hypnotist, are 
comfortable with moving their experience around with this. Once you 
think, all right, I‟ve got that one. I‟ve got the hang of that one. I‟m 
getting a little bored with doing that one repeatedly.  
 
 
Then you move on to your resources, so you have another little 
challenge added in. You‟ll run that through a few times until you pretty 
much have the hang of that. 
 
 
Once this is simple for you to do, you go all right, I need a little bit 
more of a challenge. So, then you go into this. Make sense? 
 
 
You‟re only moving as quickly as is easy for you, right. 
 
Audience: No microphone, indistinct comment. 
 
Igor: 
Of course I did but you‟re smiling, aren‟t you? Do you understand in 
terms of the process, just the three steps? So you run one routine with 
one step, another routine with the same step and another routine with 
the same step. Then you go oh, this is easy.  
 
 
Next one… if you want to have numbers, just do three of each one. If 
you want to go freestyle, then just do as many as you feel like until 
you feel like you‟re moving on, either way is better. Anyone else?   
  
Audience: I noticed that you dumped altogether the first things we did yesterday 
the, who, where, what and how. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               113                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
We‟ll come back to those, right now we‟re playing with awareness, but 
we‟ll come back to the questioning things as well. For the moment, 
you have enough on your plate dealing with these variables.  
 
 
I don‟t want to add another layer by doing the, who, what, when and 
so on. Trust me. I promise you they‟ll come back in, and it will get 
much more complicated then.   
 
 
All right, easy to do? Find a partner. I‟m going to give you a little bit 
longer this time because this is a little bit more sophisticated. I‟m 
going to give you 15 minutes, so seven minutes apiece. Is that fair 
enough? Then we‟ll come back, find a different partner and you‟re 
going to switch yourselves around.  
 
 
Once you‟ve got them through this whole problem-solving state, feel 
free to get them to close their eyes and just drift for a while and let 
something else occur if it‟s appropriate. Change yourself. In other 
words, hypnotists keep track of time because in 15 minutes, I‟ll cut 
you short. If the other person hasn‟t had a chance to go at it, then 
you‟ve just taken up their time.   
 
~~~ 
 
Igor: 
Okay, folks. How are you doing? Did you enjoy the exercise, folks? Did 
it work well? Was it trippy? Are you finding yourselves going further in 
the outer limits than you did yesterday? 
 
Audience: I think it felt abstract and somewhat fragmented and diffused 
yesterday. Like there was a lot of power just moving all around the 
room. It feels like today I‟m finding the ability to concentrate on it and 
direct it. 
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Audience: Also, I think the last exercise helped with connecting my intent for the 
client with the language. 
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Audience: That had felt disconnected for me somehow. I was like I don‟t 
understand what this has to do this that. As we practice it, the 
intention can connect more deeply with the words. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. I think that‟s important. On the first day, what we were 
doing was stretching your minds a little bit first before you had 
something to do with it. Now, you‟ve gotten them stretched out a little 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               114                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
bit, and we can start adding some of the nuances in, like connecting 
your intention, which is huge. I mean that‟s the whole H+ thing, right.  
 
 
As far as I‟m concerned if there‟s nothing else you do but just that, 
you‟re in great shape. But of course, we‟ve got a lot more to put on 
top of that as well. Thank you. Go ahead. 
 
Audience: I was just marveling at how – that‟s right, that‟s my word. Marvel.  
 
Igor: 
The marvelnator. Go ahead. 
 
Audience: At the beginning of last week, when we were learning all these new 
concepts – and even for the new people, they can take it to yesterday 
when we started learning these new concepts. I found myself in a 
place where I was totally uncomfortable, unmasterful and unknowing.  
 
 
Then, as we work through it, sleep, then work through it again, it‟s like 
I‟m getting used to this expanded consciousness, which is going on 
any time you learn something. That‟s what that feeling is that I‟m 
feeling. It‟s that stretching.  
 
 
Then, when you stretch, you have to grow into it. It brought to mind a 
quote by Albert Einstein when he said: 
 
 
“A problem cannot be solved by the level of 
consciousness that created it.” 
 
 
That‟s what we‟re learning how to do here is we‟re helping people to 
expand their consciousness, and in that moment of expansion, the 
problem is no longer the problem that it once was. 
 
Igor: 
Perfect. Give that a round of applause. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Igor: 
Do you recall how yesterday we said the key to influence, as far as I‟m 
concerned, is not to. The idea is if you‟re trying to persuade someone 
of one thing, it‟s because you‟re stuck at a level of ideas where that‟s 
the only possible thing that could work for you, or for them really in 
that case. 
 
 
What we‟re doing now is we‟re given so many choices that we‟re no 
longer stuck at the level where it has to be this. So you have a 
freedom of choice. Why would you try to force your opinion on 
someone when there are so many other ways of being, it‟s just a 
question of selecting the one that matches that person, at that point in 
time? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               115                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
 
You can win and they can win, both at the same time. Your mind 
stretches beyond that.  
 
 
The other thing that happens, especially those of you who are 
interested in hypnotherapy or something like that – but also, by the 
way, all kinds of processes or influences, as far as I‟m concerned, have 
the same element involved. You have to be “bigger than the client‟s 
problem.” 
 
 
If you‟re in a negotiation and you‟re stuck at the same level as 
wherever the other person is, it‟s very difficult to make headway. If 
you‟re much bigger than whatever their problem is, you can go oh, it‟s 
that. That‟s not even a problem, look here and here and here. 
Suddenly it dissolves, and it disappears. 
 
 
You need to be able to stretch your own mind before you can stretch 
someone else‟s. That‟s what we‟ve been doing for the last day and a 
half. We‟ll carry on a little bit with this, but then we‟ll start going more 
into the actual language.  
 
 
I want you to be noticing that expanding, contracting, expanding, 
contracting, that your mind is doing. How would you like to know how 
to do that in your negotiations, in your conversations, in your 
hypnotherapy practice, with your kids, with your students or with 
whatever you want to be using this? Would you like to learn how to do 
that? Well just wait, its coming. 
 
Audience: We had also noticed the expanding, giving it the metaphor of taffy. It 
keeps going around. It gets stretched out, and yet it all sticks 
together. You‟re not going to lose it, it‟s not going to pull completely 
apart. It‟s just going to keep going back and forth like this as it goes 
around on the wheel.  
 
Also, in my experience, I‟d get to those edges and all of a sudden oh, 
it‟s there, that was fun. 
 
Igor: 
Right. By the way, are you all experiencing this as well? It‟s not just 
your mind here that‟s expanding, it‟s your whole body. Do you feel 
your whole neurology sometimes tingling, or something happens and 
you feel a switch inside has been thrown? You don‟t quite know what it 
is, but it feels good. Has anyone else had that sort of sensation so far? 
 
 
It‟s coming. Bit by bit we‟re getting there. You‟re doing a good job, 
folks. Last comment, and then we‟ll go to a break. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               116                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Audience: The not. I find that when I throw a not in there, it is not where it 
should be, and it ties me up into a knot.  
 
Igor: 
Right. So not’s your problem. 
 
Audience: Not. Yes, it is. I‟d like to know why the nots get all knotted up? 
 
Igor: 
As a rule, it‟s because you‟re thinking too much about when to put 
them in, and when you‟re not, you will.  
 
Audience: Perfectly clear. 
 
Igor:  
Just consider that for a while.  
 
Audience: Thank you. 
 
Igor:  
You‟re welcome. One last question, and then we‟ll go to a break. 
 
Audience: Yeah, it‟s fun to play with these new things, and I must admit that I‟ve 
been uncomfortable with the concept of saying feel relaxed, anywhere 
but here, at any time but now. I‟m thinking no, I wanted to have them 
be relaxed now and forever, but playing with it exactly as it is and 
living it as best I can. What‟s great is the response I‟m getting. My 
partner said every time I did that, he just went way deeper into 
trance.  
 
So I tried it on for myself. I‟m imagining going to somebody who‟s 
selling me something, and he says imagine how happy you‟ll be when 
you have this product, and I‟m going to be resistant to it. But if he 
said, imagine how happy you‟ll be when you have this product any 
time but now, I think, wow, because I don‟t have the product now. I 
will be happy then. It stamps you right through.  
 
Igor: 
There you go. There‟s a lot of subtly built into this, and soon we‟ll start 
unpacking it so that you can actually create this language on your 
own, totally on the fly, anywhere you are.  
 
 
We‟re still getting our minds expanded a little bit so we‟ll have places 
to put it. Thank you. That‟s a great insight to have. Are you all happy? 
Has this been valuable for you so far? Shall we continue shortly? All 
right, let‟s go for a break. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               117                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
DVD 06 
Full Transcript  
 
Igor: How are you all doing, did you enjoy the exercise? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
A few people have come up during the break – are a few of you 
starting to get a little lost in terms of how the hell do I use this, what 
is this stuff, I don‟t know if I have the right experience and so on? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Trust me you‟re in the right place.  
 
 
Remember, we‟re talking about mind-bending language and it‟s quite a 
sophisticated concept. Up to this point we have done nothing of 
immediately practical value, so if you were to leave today and start 
using this stuff with friends, neighbors, colleagues and salespeople, 
etc. you have no process to apply this language to yet that makes you 
more influential. 
 
 
Some of you already have enough sales or hypnotherapy experience to 
be able to make the adaptation spontaneously, but honestly, we don‟t 
care about that. That is not where we are.  
 
 
Tomorrow and the day after, we‟ll be focusing on the more practical 
applications. Tomorrow we‟ll begin that process, whereas the last day 
will be the much more practical day. 
 
 
Right now, we‟re preparing your mind to even be able to handle those 
things; otherwise, you‟ll become totally overloaded if you just come 
straight into the language and put these things together like that, in 
this process and you go huh, what…because you have no reference 
experiences to base this on. Does that make sense? 
 
Think of it this way. What we‟re building right now is an alphabet. If 
you‟re thinking well, how do I write words? You need to have the 
alphabet in place first before you can actually start writing words with 
it. Let alone actual novels. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               118                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
So we‟re starting right from the beginning, and we‟re preparing your 
mind. By the end of today the alphabet will be in place and you‟ll start 
stringing together some simple sentences, but really the essay writing, 
the novel writing and so on will come tomorrow and the day after. Is 
that okay with you? 
 
 
 
If you have a sense that you‟re not sure what you‟re doing in terms of 
making sense, I‟m talking a little bit of nonsense here. It‟s kind of 
gobbly-gook or whatever. That‟s just fine, because you are. Let‟s face 
it.  
 
The point of this is to prepare your mind and your linguistic ability to 
be able to go certain places. If as a subject you happen to have these 
experiences as well of going more into the outer edges, that‟s a great 
thing. It‟s a bonus, and it will make your life a lot easier. 
 
If not, then allow yourself to drift into that a little bit more. Here‟s 
something that‟s happening right now. Who found yesterday a lot 
easier than today, just one or two people? The thing is, yesterday we 
were just playing with the language on a more linguistic level. Today, 
we‟re switching on the other hemisphere as well.  
 
You have a hemisphere that tends to dominate with language, and one 
hemisphere that tends to be more intuitive and so on. Right now, 
we‟re trying to do both things at the same time, so your brains are 
getting more overloaded a little bit because you‟re using part of your 
neurology in ways that you‟re not used to using it. 
 
Some of you might be so concentrated left brain process, linguistic, 
logical and sequential and so on, that trying to do something vaguely 
creative at the same time is virtually impossible, right? You need to 
have a bit of time. Give yourself some time to be able to do those 
things. 
 
Who found doing the exercises more than just a gaze relatively 
pleasant, easy to do? Who found it hard? If you found it hard, that‟s 
partly to do with which part of your mind you‟re used to using. So it‟s 
an exercise I would encourage you to do more of. Why? Because it‟s 
like training a muscle you don‟t intend to use very much. 
 
Those of you that found that just looking and not speaking was 
relatively easy, who found it harder to do the looking and speaking at 
the same time? Hands up if you found it difficult to do both. The 
reason is because now you‟re trying to use both hemispheres at the 
same time, and there‟s a little bridge called the corpus callosum, 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               119                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
where information travels from one to the other, and it‟s just not used 
to doing it at that level yet. 
 
You‟re literally training your brain to do certain things. If you didn‟t, it 
would be even more confusing doing mind-bending language in a 
practical way. You have to build things up step-by-step.  
 
Chances are some of you may actually have to go home and carry on 
doing these exercises on your own before you‟re totally ready to put 
all the pieces in place. 
 
I know no other way of doing it because you‟re doing a lot of complex 
maneuvers. How many of you drive a car? Remember the first time 
you sat in a car and tried to drive it? Mine was a bucking bronco. I had 
a manual. In fact I was about 13 and I told my dad, driving a car is 
easy. I‟d seen him do it, and thought that would be no problem at all. 
He goes, oh really? He took me to a parking lot and said drive. 
 
I went, really, and he said yeah drive. Of course, in the next 10 
minutes, I just destroyed the engine, bucking around the place. 
Suddenly, I stopped and said a little advice would be nice. When I 
think about it now, when I drive a car now it‟s easy. I can drive and 
talk on the phone. I‟m not supposed to, I‟m sorry. I don‟t do it in 
America, it‟s okay. 
 
You can talk to a friend, you can listen to the radio, you can think your 
thoughts. How many of you actually drive your car with such 
automatic pilot, that you don‟t even think about the roads you‟re on 
until you‟re home? It‟s become so natural to you, but consider how 
difficult it was the first few weeks of doing it.  
 
You had all these different maneuvers that had to happen at the same 
time, didn‟t you? But they‟re second nature to you. Right now, we‟re 
doing an equivalent process. We have a whole bunch of maneuvers 
that have to happen at the same time; otherwise, you overload.  
 
Some of you will find it easier because you‟re used to doing similar 
things already. Some of you will find it more difficult because you‟re 
not used to doing these things already. 
 
What we‟re doing right now is a training process to get you ready to 
put it all together. I‟ll warn you right now, when it comes to putting it 
all together, you will have difficulty with it. Please don‟t concern 
yourself about that. Why? Because you have your notes, you have the 
exercises. Provided you‟re willing to keep practicing doing the things 
you‟ve been doing here, you will build the mental muscle that will 
make mind-bending language easy. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               120                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Remember, you‟re not here at a basic hypnosis course, this is an 
advanced hypnosis course. Whilst we allow people with less experience 
to come in with a crash course and everything else, I know we‟re still 
going to be pushing you. So, your part of the deal is, are you willing to 
do the exercises?  
 
If there‟s some stuff in here you didn‟t quite get, you know where you 
do it? Tonight you‟ll have lots of time, and you do more of the 
exercises. Tomorrow morning, get up a little earlier and do more of the 
exercises. When you go home, you do more of the exercises. 
 
Do you want to know how to change someone‟s brain, including yours? 
It‟s a very simple equation. Would you like to know it? Who‟s familiar 
with the idea of Neuroplasticity? It basically means your brain is one of 
the most flexible organisms. Like a muscle, it will grow and it will get 
stronger and more powerful the more you use it.  
 
There are two basic secrets to Neuroplasticity, and there is no way 
around this.  
 
1. You have to repeat things.  
 
There is no way around this. You have to repeat things. For those of 
you for whom the things we‟ve been doing here today are sort of 
familiar, you‟ll need less repetition because your brain already has the 
pathways it needs. 
 
For those of you who are here for the very first time, of course you‟ll 
need more practice. You don‟t have a pathway set yet. It‟s like walking 
into a forest and walking up and down a particular patch of lawn or 
whatever, and you haven‟t worn a path into it yet. Make sense? 
 
The next version is very important. 
 
2. Stimulation. 
 
This means things like: 
 
 
intensity of emotion 
 
variety  
 
 
When you have variety and repetition, your brain learns so quickly, it‟s 
unreal. When you have intensity, in other words, a powerful 
experience, and repetition, your brain picks things up so quickly, it‟s 
unreal. It makes all the connections. Of course, there are all these 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               121                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
kinds of brain foods and stuff like that for the building blocks, but we 
won‟t go down that road.  
 
 
Does that make sense in terms of a simple formula? 
 
 
 
 
You repeat things and you get stimulated by it. In other words you 
either enjoy it intensely and you have a strong experience, or you 
change or vary the exercises enough that you make pathways. 
 
Do you see how we‟re building lots of exercises that repeat the same 
idea in different ways, in order to build those pathways? One thing 
that‟s not going to happen is, for some of you, it‟s not going to happen 
here. If you‟re okay with that, then I‟ll happily teach you what you 
need to do to make it happen.  
 
You still have to create that formula inside yourself, it‟s just the way 
your brains work. 
 
Are you willing to do this? If you have any questions, please feel free 
to come up and ask me. I‟ll do my best to answer them and help you 
along the way. Realize right now, we‟re in this part of the process. The 
practical application starts tomorrow when hopefully, most of you, if 
not all of you, have done this enough that you can actually apply it in 
a practical sort of way. 
 
Can we take the rest of the day and do these exercises only to the 
extent that they‟re not actually practical yet? Knowing of course, that 
to the extent they‟re not practical now, they‟ll be easier to do later 
when you actually use them in a practical sort of way for sales, 
influence and so on. Any questions on that so far?  
 
 
In terms of a process, in terms of being the hypnotist, how do you find 
that exercise there, relatively straightforward? It‟s just putting lots of 
layers of the same thing together, so basically doing the same exercise 
three times. Instead of doing the same exercise, you‟re really just 
changing the (X) in the equation to #1, #2 or #3 each time you repeat 
it.  
 
 
Does that seem simple? 
 
 
Let‟s start going in a different direction now. This is kind of what Mark 
mentioned earlier on. Before we go down that road, would you like to 
have a simple way of remembering all these extra little pieces, like: 
 
 
Who are you? 
 
What are you? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               122                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Anywhere but now. 
 
Anywhere but here. 
 
 
Would you like to have a very simple system that allows you to 
remember these wherever you go, so you can just choose one of 
basically four things and instantly make up your own thing based on 
the formula you have right now, without even going into language in 
detail? Would that be useful? We can just skip it, if you like and go to 
lunch or something. 
 
This is what I like to call the sySTEM or sySTEMs language. The 
sySTEM is a little acronym to remember: 
 
 
Space 
 
Time 
 
Energy 
 
Matter 
 
These are just labels that will help you think in terms of what 
coordinates people build realities that you‟re focusing on.  
 
How do you know something is real? Usually it‟s located somewhere, 
isn‟t it? Even if it‟s inside you, it‟s located somewhere in space.   
 
Usually it‟s located somewhere in time. It either happened a few 
weeks ago, it‟s happening now, or it will happen sometime in the 
future. Can you think of anything that is outside of time? If it‟s all the 
time, then it‟s now, it will be, and never has been. That‟s where we‟re 
heading. 
 
In terms of energy, energy just adds to the question how, what‟s the 
quality of it? If someone‟s running lethargically, quickly or slowly, 
there‟s a different level of energy in it, isn‟t there? When someone‟s 
thinking furiously or calmly, there‟s a different level of energy in that, 
isn‟t there?  
 
So we‟re just using energy in terms of answering the question how, 
what is the quality of the experience? 
 
Finally, we have matter which basically, identifies things like… 
 
 
chair 
 
house 
 
an individual 
 
 
…and it separates it from the rest of the universe.   
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               123                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
 
 
Space answers the question where. 
 
Time answers the question when. 
 
Energy answers the question how. 
 
Matter answers the question what. 
 
 
A special version of matter of course, is who. Who is a what, applied to 
people, isn‟t it? It‟s an important one for us as human beings. When 
you say, who is that, you‟re asking of the category of human beings, 
which one are you talking about?  
 
So you have these four coordinates, and if you think of these as 
coordinate‟s in terms of how people create their reality, by switching 
the reference point, part of the coordinate, their experience of reality 
changes. A lot of you have been talking about this yesterday and 
partly today as well.  
 
When someone comes up with one of these mind-bending language 
theme‟s what they‟re actually doing is switching your perception of one 
of these coordinates of reality so that you can‟t actually perceive the 
situation, the person, the event, or yourself in quite the same way 
again. Does that kind of make sense?  
 
To the extent that the person is listening, that their mind follows along 
with it, to that extent you change or alter them in some way.  
 
If they do not follow it, you have no impact. You‟re just speaking 
gobbledygook. Do you see how that works? 
 
That‟s why it‟s very important as a hypnotist that you observe your 
client and you notice are they following, or are they not following? 
That‟s kind of what we‟ve been focusing on today, isn‟t it? You do not 
add another layer of spin until they follow the first set. If they can‟t 
follow the first set, you put in a milder layer of spin, and so on. 
 
In terms of how we‟d use this practically, again, we‟ll come on to this 
later but as a principle, does that make sense to you? Just as a 
principle.  
 
So you need to have an awareness out there in terms of how people 
are responding or reacting in order to be able to use this. You 
recognize the questions from yesterday, don‟t you? They‟re very 
simple to use.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               124                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
You should recognize the same exact pattern in the spins we put in– 
space, time, matter, energy–these are specific examples of something, 
which we will deconstruct for you.  
 
We‟ll give you all the language and stuff in time, but we‟re at quite a 
sophisticated level, so we just need reference experiences before this 
stuff starts fitting into place. 
 
Just think about space, time and energy. Which one of these do you 
want to combine? Then you have lots of ways of combining it.  
 
 
You can talk about awareness in relation to these.  
 
You can add spins in relation to these.  
 
You can add these in relation to a problem or a suggestion or 
a resource or an idea. 
 
 
Already you have a lot of variables you can have in order to make an 
experience richer for someone else, even though we‟re not even close 
to using this practically yet. So what we‟re doing here is 
deconstructing how another person experiences what is real for them 
so that you can reconstruct it slightly differently, and that will include 
of course, your bit of influence as you‟re trying to create.  
 
 
Any questions on this as a concept? That‟s easy to remember, isn‟t it, 
the system? Does it make it a little bit easier for you to think about the 
maneuvers you‟ve been using so far? They‟re just variations of those 
basic four themes.  
 
 
You combine those variations in such a way that in terms of the 
formula you have now anyway, just combine them in such a way that 
you‟re creating different qualities of spin that take you one way or 
another. 
 
As to how to use them, well, we‟re not there yet. Which ones do you 
use strategically? Don‟t worry about that. How to apply it? Don‟t 
concern yourself with that yet. That will come. I guarantee it. 
 
Everyone cool with this; yes?  
 
Doug: 
What is VAK? 
 
Igor: 
Sorry. The VAK is just awareness language– visual, auditory, 
kinesthetic– but there‟s other awareness as well. What you have here 
are actually my notes to help you out. So this is more for my memory, 
rather than yours. So feel free to cross it out and put awareness in its 
place. It‟s a lot easier for you to remember it that way.   
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               125                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
It‟s an awareness in all the senses, including considering, thinking and 
remembering, which I‟m not necessarily in those senses. 
 
Let‟s start going a little bit further now and start bringing the system 
back into the awareness stuff we were doing this morning, with the 
cross-spins added. Did you notice how the cross-spins take you further 
along this whole path? 
 
Remember, the cross-spins happen at the point where the other 
person starts reacting to one; they‟ll go off and drift around for a 
while. As they start coming off that drifting cycle, you add another one 
to re-intensify the drift. Each time they drift further and further from 
where their normal state of consciousness is.  
 
Some people, you‟ll have to be much slower. There are people I‟ve 
worked with where you work up to this after a few days because the 
tiniest amount of spin already takes them way out of their normal 
comfort zone, and that‟s more than enough. 
 
The first one is the cross-spin. You‟ll start with – what are the 
awareness things. When you notice (X). Let‟s start with a problem. 
Let‟s say you have a simple problem like, my favorite one, fear of cats. 
Why not? 
 
Someone comes in with a fear of cats. Of course, you can have 
whatever problem you want, I don‟t care. You ask the person 
something along the lines of, when you experience the problem, when 
you experience cats, when you think about cats, when you feel cats, 
when you see cats, whatever. It doesn‟t really matter, any kind of 
awareness language. 
 
When you are aware of cats, then you go into your systems cycles. So 
you ask a question, who are you, when are you, where are you, etc. Of 
course, you can change the tense if you want to, but that‟s coming in 
another layer. So, who have you been? Then you add some spins. Only 
here any time but now.  
 
See how it‟s the same sort of thing we did this morning; the spins are 
a little different, just to get used to spinning in different directions a 
little bit, but essentially the same idea, just spinning in different 
directions.  
 
You‟re doing cross-spins so you‟re adding bits onto each other again, 
and you‟re combining everything you know. 
 
 
awareness 
 
the systems questions 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               126                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
the two different types of spins 
 
 
If you wanted to, you could even combine what you have here with 
one of these ones. So when you think about how you‟re doing in this 
course, who are you being everywhere but here, anyhow but like this. 
 
Can you see what that‟s doing slowly? Now of course you have to 
make sure that when you‟re saying this to the person, you‟re not just 
rushing through it at your speed. You‟re making sure that they‟re 
thinking of every single element completely.  
 
That might mean you sit there for a moment and you repeat it. You 
might say,  
 
When you think about your experience in this course, really think 
about your experience in this course. Consider all the experiences 
you’ve been having in this course. Go ahead and do that now. Go 
ahead and think about the experiences you’ve had in this course right 
here. As you think about your experiences on this course, who will you 
have been that’s like this, anytime but now? 
 
Do you see how they‟re combined? Notice how the repetition is making 
you really consider something. I took a lot more of you along that 
second time than the first time. Why? Because your level of 
engagement with the ideas was higher. Did I get everyone in the 
group? No? Well, then I‟m working with a massive group, say I‟ve got 
to work probabilities with the group, you‟ll never get everyone in the 
group. Do you know what I mean? 
 
With individuals though, you can work it at their pace. If they‟re 
refusing to consider even the first idea, is there any point going on 
with any of the spins? Hence our starting point has to be all this, 
because without this, they‟re not even going to start considering your 
ideas. And if they‟re not considering your ideas, you have nothing to 
work with, have you? 
 
Remember, a hypnotist works with awareness, with attention and if 
their attention is not on your ideas, then you have nothing to work 
with. Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: What if they don‟t think about it properly? 
 
Igor: 
Well, that‟s a great opportunity to make sure they do actually think 
about it properly. If fact, you want it to happen here because then you 
start creating all your little strategies for making sure they do pay 
attention. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               127                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Would you like to have a couple of strategies, by the way, that will 
make it easier for people to actually consider what you‟re saying fully 
when normally they would not? Okay. You‟ve already done this, it‟s 
H+. In other words, you‟re presenting this with respect and intensity. 
Let me emphasize, intensity is very important.  
 
When you did the eye gaze exercise this morning, did anyone feel the 
intensity of the other person? Maybe even to the point where it was a 
little bit uncomfortable? That pressure, that emotional pressure is part 
of what makes this work. If there‟s no emotional pressure, it doesn‟t 
go anywhere near as deeply as you want it to go. Does that make 
sense? 
 
One of the biggest mistakes I see people doing with any kind of 
hypnosis – actually mostly in persuasion as well – is they either let off 
the pressure or they apply the wrong kind of pressure. The wrong kind 
of pressure, in case you‟re wondering, is that you‟re forcing. You have 
to believe this. This is how it works. You‟re wrong, I‟m right.   
 
Do you see how that‟s an aggressive pressure, which invalidates 
whatever their experience is? The kind of pressure I‟m talking about 
however is an emotional pressure that‟s coupled with this, the respect 
for the individual. So no matter what experience you‟re having right 
now, that‟s okay. It won‟t always be that way, but it‟s okay.  
 
You‟re going to put pressure on that until they‟re going, what‟s going 
on? At that point, you tell them what‟s going on. For example,  
 
Just consider who you’ve been being all this time. 
 
Do you see how that works? If you have no pressure in the first place, 
they‟ll go, that‟s just silly. Do you see where I‟m coming from with 
this; it is really the nuances. This is why it‟s an Advanced Covert 
Hypnosis course; it‟s the nuances that make this work. If you don‟t 
have the nuances in place…   
 
Audience: Aren‟t they creating an energy pace to work from this process? 
 
 Igor: 
To a certain extent, you are. I‟m almost talking about like energy 
medicine, and so on. I know there are a lot of people out there who 
use that sort of stuff. I‟m no expert in that. In terms of energy, what 
I‟m thinking of is psychological energy.  
 
We recognize there are times we have more mental energy, but at 
times we‟re just tired and it‟s gone because we‟ve used it up. It‟s like 
fuel.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               128                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
So what we‟re doing is, we are ramping up their mental energy to be 
invested in your ideas. Does that make sense?  
 
So in that case, I absolutely agree. You‟re ramping up their mental 
energy to invest and consider your ideas. If they only have a small 
trickle of attention, a small trickle of energy, it‟s like yes, I‟ll casually 
think about that. This process will not work properly. There will be 
other processes for that sort of thing, but not what we‟re teaching or 
learning here. 
 
Your job is to switch them with that kind of mental energy. There are a 
lot of ways we can do that, we‟ve already got some of the basic things 
here, which is… 
 
 your intensity yourself  (So you‟re locking eyes with them and 
you have this sense like, a real urgency, what you‟re saying is 
very important. It‟s not like, what you‟re saying is very 
important, it‟s what you‟re saying, is very important! Can you 
hear the emphasis?) 
 
That‟s part of what makes you consider the ideas even more fully 
and that‟s what you want. So we have… 
 
 your personal integrity 
 
 your respect for the person 
 
 the H+ 
 
 emotional pressure (you can do it through touch, but primarily 
through eye contact, and not letting them off the hook) 
 
 
Then we have these two babies. Focusing on the first one first, which 
is… 
 
 
repetition 
 
 
Think about what you want from this course. Really, think about that 
now. Really, think what you want out of this course. It’s nowhere near 
as important as the notes you’re taking because you really want 
something out of this course, don’t you. So consider that absolutely 
fully. What is it that you want out of this course?  
 
 
You’ve all come here with a specific reason, and you want something. 
You want to be able to do something or use it in a certain situation. 
Just consider that.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               129                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
What is it you want out of this course? Once you can achieve this, who 
will you have been beyond this moment, that’s not that, everywhere 
but here. Really, consider that. Who will you have been as you’re 
achieving that goal, anywhere but here, only now? 
 
So would it be fair to say that your experience of that is significantly 
different from some of the other demonstrations I‟ve given you of just 
the language on a lighter scale? Would that be fair to say because 
we‟re using repetition?  
 
We‟re using these things, and we‟re really getting you to engage with 
the ideas, the concepts to the point where they have a chance of 
impacting on you.  
 
Any questions on that so far, in terms of that as a principle or a 
concept? 
 
Let‟s take that as the background, and if you spot that someone is not 
really engaging with the ideas fully, smile, go fantastic, I now have a 
chance to practice some of these other things a bit more fully. Make 
sense?  
 
There are more things you can do, these are just the fundamentals 
and important concepts in getting people to engage with your ideas, 
and there are other things you can do on top of that to add even more 
leverage, but we‟ll add those in gradually if that‟s okay. 
 
Let‟s take that and add it to the next exercise. I need some feedback 
here; otherwise, we‟ll have to do something different.  
 
What I want you to do is ask your partner to think of a problem. If 
they can‟t think of a problem, do you know what you do? Allow your 
mind to consider a problem for you. You can sit there and think you 
don‟t really know what problem to choose, but your mind will find 
something, because there‟s always something you can resolve.  
 
Make it something easy to resolve. Some problem that‟s been bugging 
you for some time, consider that, whatever that problem is. You might 
not even be fully aware of what it is, even if you just get a sense of 
what that problem might be, something easy for you to resolve, even 
though it‟s been bugging you for some time, some little thing that you 
can resolve right now. 
 
Do you see what I‟m doing? I‟m using repetition, but I‟m also varying 
the stimulation to make you light up a little more.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               130                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
How many of you started with no problem at all? How many started 
with a problem straight away? So about half and half. 
 
Those of you who started with no problem at all, how many of you 
started to at least get a sense of something as we continue through? 
About three quarters of the people had nothing. 
 
We have about four fifths of the room, just by repeating it and varying 
the stimulation for less than a minute. Do you see how that works? 
With some people you work harder, elate longer, but some people 
they‟re right there. You say think of a problem and they‟re like yep, 
got it; in which case you just move on. 
 
The point is, at this point you need to start the interaction, you need 
to observe them to see roughly where they are. If you don‟t know, do 
you know what you do? Any ideas? What‟s going on, you got 
something? No. What have you got? I don‟t know it‟s blank. As you 
consider that blankness, behind that somewhere has to be something. 
 
Is your life perfect? No. If your life is perfect, go congratulations, teach 
me how you did that. Does that make sense? 
 
You do not want to know what their problem is, they can keep it 
absolutely private I don‟t care, but you want them to be contemplating 
some small problem as part of this exercise because that‟s something 
for them to plug into. 
 
Easy?  
 
1. Step one, when you think about the problem, recall the 
problem, think about the problem, that bits easy isn‟t it?  
 
2. Step two, then you choose any of the system questions, who 
are you? Where are you? When are you? How are you? What are 
you? 
 
If you want to put some spin on that already, you change the 
tense…who have you been? Who will you be? Who will you have been? 
Who might you have been? Who could you have been? Who might you 
be becoming?  
 
By the way, these are all correct English grammar, although more 
unusual forms of them.  
 
Then you start spinning. Again, do you go through the spins before 
they‟ve had a chance to contemplate the first part of the question to 
have some kind of reaction?  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               131                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
If you go, as you can see their problem, who might you have been? 
They‟ll go…are you ready to do any spins at that point? 
 
Audience: No. 
 
Igor: 
If on the other hand, you say who might you have been? They‟ll 
go…then you‟re like that‟s right really consider that, who might you 
have been? Who will you have been, or whatever you‟re saying. When 
will you have been and then start going into it, only not now, that‟s all 
that. 
 
 
Feel free to stick to the language in here if you want, I‟m just giving 
you random demonstrations. I‟m doing my best to stick to it, but I 
can‟t always so I apologize for that. So stick to it or ad-lib, I‟m fine 
with that as well. 
 
 
Do you get the essence of what we‟re going for? Each box is 
something you do not move on from until you get some form of 
reaction, typically with them engaging and you can see them 
considering an idea. 
 
 
Has everyone had at least one experience over the last day and a half 
of seeing another person really considering fully what you‟re saying?  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Has anyone not had the experience of actually seeing someone fully 
considering what they were doing? It‟s important. Have you all had the 
experience where you saw someone clearly not fully considering your 
ideas?  
 
 
So you know the difference between the two right? That‟s what we 
need. Can we put this all together like this, is that easy to do? 
 
Audience: Yes.  
 
Igor: 
You can put some solution ideas into it if you want. Although really, 
what you‟re doing is adding more creativity around how they observe 
the problem, but if you want to put some spin in terms of a solution, 
because they might be going somewhere a little darker, then by all 
means do so. 
 
 
You can put it in randomly, I don‟t care where. That‟s part of where 
your observations come in as well, although technically we‟ll be doing 
the resourcing later. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               132                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Again, this is not a practical technique, you realize this right? This is 
just a training tool. If you happen to resolve a problem, all right then.  
 
 
This is a little more involved, so we‟ll give you a little longer, because 
now it‟s not just reading the language out in different cycles, now 
you‟re waiting for a reaction before you add the spins. 
 
 
And once you‟ve done a whole cycle, you‟ll come right back to the 
beginning again and do the same thing on the same problem with a 
different set of spins, only this time of course, they‟ll be experiencing 
the problems completely differently because of what you did a moment 
before.  
 
 
All you want to do is cycle through that a few times, moving on only 
with the spins in each step as you see some form of reaction, and then 
adding onto it and so on. Does that make sense to you? 
 
 
I‟ll give you 20 minutes, that‟s 10 minutes apiece to do this so you can 
really go to town on it. Off you go. 
~~~ 
 
Audience: I loved that, because it felt like you were considering the problem from 
every point in the universe. And just the act of considering it from all 
those perspectives of who you are, where you are, etc. considering it 
from all those vantage points seemed to dissipate it or it just gave you 
a lot more resource, because you were considering it from so many 
points. 
 
Igor: 
What tends to happen with problems, is one of the things that allows 
problems to exist…there are a couple of things that happen… 
 
 
You have a tiny problem like this, but then you have this magnifying 
glass and in here, it looks like that. 
 
 
The reality of the problem is often not that large, especially when 
putting it context to your whole life. And one of the things you‟ve just 
discovered, is just by spinning around in terms of what is your 
greatest sense of experience in terms of life; the problem itself really 
isn‟t a big deal. 
 
 
I‟m not saying you can‟t resolve the problem, or do these other things 
with it, but just the fact of putting it back in perspective puts you 
massively more in an empowered and resourceful state. That‟s actually 
where you need to be in order to be able to resolve it in the first place, 
too. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               133                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Plus of course, coming at it from different directions that you wouldn‟t 
normally come at it from, it begins giving you many more options. 
 
 
By the way, is anyone here a negotiator? Can you see the value of 
negotiations to do this when you get stuck in the place? We haven‟t 
even done this conversationally yet, we‟re just talking about it as a 
pure principle. Can you see the value of that? 
 
 
Thank you. 
 
Scott: 
When my partner was taking me through this he had such an 
incredible trance voice, I was really pulled into it and when he went 
through and gave me some suggestions saying, anywhere but here, 
my mind first didn‟t fight with his suggestions like it would normally 
do. It fought with anywhere but here and my mind went why not and 
then where? 
 
 
I started for where it would apply, rather than fighting anything about 
the suggestion, it was brilliant.  
 
Igor: 
So one of the things you discovered, there is part of what I would call 
„the irresistible suggestion process‟ where you stack suggestions, 
loading them so heavily that the bits they want to resist are irrelevant. 
And here‟s something he just said as well, he was fighting the 
anywhere but here bit, but then he started asking himself where. 
 
 
So he‟s still in the same logical set as the question was asked in the 
first place, and the resource is still ticking in so you‟re still winning in 
terms of location and resource, it‟s just the bit that‟s being resisted is 
like I‟m having it right now because I want to have it now. I can have 
it now if I want to. 
 
 
Perfect. Beautiful. Thank you.  
 
Audience: Probably just a little bit more of what Scott was eluding to, but I found 
myself traveling through time on warp nine. Where I was, where I am, 
where I will be, coming back, doing it again and throwing in a different 
situation; it was all over the place.  
 
Igor: 
It‟s pretty cool isn‟t it? 
 
Audience: He did a very good job. It was cool. You‟re experiencing the whole 
mind shift and time is just not relevant in any way shape or form. 
 
Igor: 
Not in that experience anyway. 
 
Audience: Yeah, I want it again, anybody ready? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               134                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
Bear in mind, what we‟re doing right now is a lot of spinning in terms 
of experiences. The key thing here is that right now we‟re still in the 
training wheels, but do you feel like your mind is still being exercised 
and stretched further than yesterday? 
 
 
We‟re going a little further. After the break we‟ll do a little more of this 
to finish up and then we‟ll start de-constructing language which is 
actually softening the spins, because you don‟t have to go anywhere 
near as hard core as this to get the results you want. 
 
 
Do you understand what I mean by that? Right now we‟re just getting 
you to an edge, so when we come in, coming in will be much easier for 
you and then we can start getting practical with it.  
 
Audience: I just wanted to share. 
 
 
This was one of the most impactful, personal experiences I‟ve had thus 
far, it was amazing. I saw the solution and my partner was so intuitive 
when this illusion came, my problem was a balloon and the problem 
was written on the balloon. That balloon just popped and when he 
noticed through some type of energy, he noticed when the solution 
came, it just went on.  
 
Igor: 
It‟s powerful isn‟t it? 
 
Audience: Absolutely. 
 
Igor: 
Again, just to emphasize, it‟s powerful stuff even though it‟s just 
training wheels. Think about how much more powerful it will be when 
this is totally casual, natural and conversational. Good stuff, thank 
you. 
 
Audience: My experience with my partner, thank you very much, was the 
problem I had identified. I looked at it from everywhere to what the 
problem was, where the problem had made an image of me that was 
powerless, but being taken out, I noticed I am everywhere. 
 
 
The problem was nothing.  
 
Igor: 
Believe it or not some problems that to the extent that you ignore 
them they go away. Whereas other problems, if you ignore them, they 
escalate and grow, but there are a whole class of problems that we 
torture ourselves with, will go away when you stop thinking about 
them. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               135                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
It‟s true. Think about what you‟re doing. In terms of neuro science, 
something called a xeno effect, which is, you know the old saying 
where attention goes energy flows, it actually alters your brain. So 
when people keep thinking back on the problem over and over again, 
the problem gets larger inside their minds. 
 
 
Do you know how people create obsessive/compulsive disorder? It‟s by 
thinking about it a lot. It‟s true. It‟s literally to the point where 
pathways in their brain, like super highways get created leading to 
their problem, so that any idea leads back to that, everything goes 
back to that.  
 
 
Then they literally can‟t get away from it, because they have this huge 
information highway leading to this tiny little problem, which might be 
to touch every window in the room before leaving or something, it‟s 
trivial. But their brain is now hardwired to have to do this. 
 
 
In everyday life, people are nowhere as extreme as this, but they‟ll 
have these little mini compulsions that we think are big problems that 
are actually totally irrelevant when it comes to our lives, but we put so 
much energy into them that they actually become problems. 
 
 
So to the extent that you stop thinking about them, they actually end 
up dissolving. They don‟t just become smaller again, for many of these 
things, they end up dissolving.  
 
 
Now a caveat here, do not think that just because we‟re saying this, 
that you can ignore all your problems and they‟ll go away, they will 
not. The tax man will still come knocking on your door if you don‟t pay 
your taxes. And you‟ll probably go to jail at some point if you haven‟t 
paid your taxes in a long time. 
 
 
So there are a certain class of problems that you have to actually 
resolve, whereas, there‟s another class of problems that people just 
put way too much attention on and in by not doing so, they resolve 
themselves virtually automatically. 
 
 
Does that make sense? 
 
 
This will be important when we get into the more practical side of 
things.  
 
 
Do we have any sale people here? I know you never get any 
objections in terms of what you‟re selling, I understand that, but let‟s 
suppose some random person came in that really had a messed up life 
and they had one tiny little objection. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               136                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Those of you who are great sales people would realize that some 
objections you do not even address. They just say them and just like a 
token thing you can hear it in the sound of their voice that it‟s not that 
big a deal, and by addressing it you get into a whole bucket of trouble 
you don‟t want to get into. 
 
 
By ignoring it, as all the other stuff that‟s going on, then they go yeah 
I‟ll buy this, no problem.  
 
 
Of course, there‟s another class of objection where if you do not 
handle them there‟ll be no sale. Do you know how to tell the 
difference? Ultimately, it comes down to state.  
 
Audience: No microphone, not recognizable. 
 
Igor: 
Precisely. So what‟s happening is it‟s their state. If they‟re really 
attached to something, whether or not it‟s the actual thing they‟re 
saying, they‟ll lock into it and you can feel it. 
 
 
Have you ever really focused on something and you notice your whole 
body changes? This happens when you‟re driving down the road, you 
see something like an accident, what do you do? You join the accident, 
because where your attention goes your whole car starts steering 
towards it. 
 
 
It‟s the same thing when people get into a problem, they tend to get 
more tense, more excited, they tend to lean forward a little bit and all 
these sort of things, and of course, the opposite is true too. So you‟re 
looking for their emotional attachment to what they‟re saying.  
 
 
If the emotional attachment isn‟t quite there, I‟ve done this myself and 
have seen a lot of people that start addressing something there‟s no 
need to address, and they make a problem of something that has 
nothing to do with anything, just because they‟re putting more and 
more attention on it. 
 
 
So you‟re lighting up a circuit that is redundant, it‟s irrelevant. Does 
that make sense? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So one of the things you‟re doing right now is figure out ways of taking 
the energy off the problem and onto something else. You‟re essentially 
de-stabilizing the problem. You can make things more concrete or you 
can make things more fluid and unstable, which gives you more 
chance to change. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               137                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
So the things that are positive resources, happiness, decisions and so 
on, you can make more concrete so they lock in. Things that are more 
problematic like problems, you can make more fluid, you de-stabilize 
them which gives you an opportunity to change them if you need to. 
 
 
I want you to pay attention to this intentional thing, because it makes 
a big difference. Most of you have experienced it. 
 
Audience: It‟s interesting because like a question ago, I think you started 
addressing what I was noticing and everybody has their own particular 
experience when the mind-bending language is being done. But I find 
it so much more powerful when it is softer, that it almost makes 
sense. 
 
 
Because if it‟s too crazy, even though I‟m trying to engage in the 
exercise and be a good partner, I know at some level this makes no 
sense, so I‟m not even going to bother but, when it‟s just enough that 
it does make a little sense, it really pulls me out and you get a bigger 
circle of dots you have to make connections with. 
 
 
So that softening and doing the mind-bending language to where it‟s 
not quite as crazy, from my own personal experience, if anybody here 
is going to do it on me don‟t go so crazy, just enough, its‟ very 
powerful. 
 
Igor: 
I agree. Hopefully you‟ll all have a similar experience as well. What 
he‟s basically saying is the more the spin matches where he is, but 
takes him a little bit further, the more he can follow it. If it‟s too big a 
step then his mind shuts off and goes, that‟s silly anyway. 
 
 
This is where we need to start heading towards, if we‟re going to use 
this in a practical everyday setting, because otherwise, you just come 
across like you‟re on drugs. I‟m sorry it‟s true, it happens.  
 
 
Is there anyone here in the NLP, hypnosis general type community, 
you‟ve been around the circus a few times? Haven‟t you come across 
people who are like these weird monsters that throw this language at 
you that‟s essentially meaningless and expect like they‟ve had this 
crazy experience, like I‟m into your mind, I‟m the mind Jedi. 
 
 
But you‟re sitting there thinking, you still live with your mother don‟t 
you?  
 
[Laughter/Applause] 
 
 
You do not want to be that person.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               138                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Right now, we‟re doing more of those kinds of things as a training 
exercise and I have to keep emphasizing this because I don‟t want you 
to take this as being too real. As we progress, we‟ll take more of that 
spin off and apply it at the right time. 
 
 
It‟s only about timing. You can put an immense amount of spin on 
something, but if you do it at the right time it works, if you do it at the 
wrong time it doesn‟t. Doesn‟t that make sense?  
 
 
Right now hopefully you‟re getting more sensitive to the timing, to 
watching when people are doing something, adding a bit more then, 
etc. and so on. Does that make sense? 
 
 
When we become more into a naturalistic way of doing it, then of 
course you might have the slightest little nuance, which is so subtle 
people won‟t even notice until it‟s done. And that, by the way, was an 
example of one, but it was subtle wasn‟t it? 
 
Audience: First, you were talking about applying pressure and keeping that 
constant. It occurred to me during the session that my understanding 
of that changed a little bit. We‟ve all had the experience of having a 
therapist, a parent, spouse, etc. locked in conversation with you and 
they‟re applying pressure. 
 
 
Then they say something that makes you think, you feel really 
uncomfortable, you break eye contact and feel that pressure, at first I 
thought that‟s what you meant, but what I realized was it‟s a feeling of 
pulling…it‟s almost like as the person doing it has a magnet and you‟re 
pulling the person in the direction you want them to go. 
 
 
There is a force, but it‟s not a pushing force, it‟s like a guiding, pulling 
force. 
 
Igor: 
It‟s not forcing force, it‟s more like a general pressure, in some ways 
it‟s like squeezing a balloon. I don‟t care where the pressure goes out, 
but eventually it‟ll pop and it‟ll pop in the right place because that‟s 
where it needs to pop. Versus saying no, you must pop in this location 
here or it‟s no good. 
 
 
That to me is basically the key to persuasion and influence. You‟re not 
choosing where to pop it, you‟re just letting it pop somewhere and 
wherever that is will be the right place for whatever the next thing is 
that needs to happen. 
 
Audience: The other thing which ties directly into what you just said is that I 
notice, if you think of the three concentric rings as a bulls eye target, 
each time you go through it and they progress further outside, the 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               139                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
whole target can move. Until eventually, where you‟re starting each 
time, is far beyond where you are even in one-five minute session, 
and you don‟t know where it‟s going to go, but you can move it. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. We‟ll come to the moving, shifting target thing as we move 
forward. 
 
Audience: I have a funny issue I have to share. I have a neighbor that every 
time motorcycles go by the house, he‟s outside going loser! It annoys 
some of my neighbors to great extent, whereas I find it very 
humorous. 
 
 
He can be a scary man to some, but anyway, thinking of that problem 
as we‟re going through this, it‟s annoyance when I‟m sitting peacefully 
in my living room and I can hear him scream. So I went to that as a 
little problem, it was interesting how my mind took that and associated 
with a lot of other problems that I could solve by solving that. 
 
 
It was fun I enjoyed it. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. By the way, this is how the unconscious mind reasons.  
 
 
Do you know that thing in the back of the room that we call a door, do 
you know how that works? You have to push it, you can walk out and 
it‟ll close itself again, etc. How did you know how to get through that 
door when you first arrived? It‟s because you‟ve walked through a lot 
of doors and you‟ve figured out there‟s a method to it. 
 
 
Most of them have handles and you pull on them. Some have bars so 
you push on them. But the first time you came across a door with a 
bar on it, you had no idea what to do with it until you watched 
someone else do it or figured it out along the way, and so on. 
 
 
So what you‟ve created there is a reference experience about how to 
solve certain types of problems, and rather than containing it in that 
problem, you‟re generalizing it and you‟re creating a generative 
change pattern so it fits into other situations. 
 
 
By the way, that‟s a secret to influence in virtually any walk of life. 
 
 
If you‟re having problems solving a particular problem with a person in 
front of you, sometimes the easiest way to resolve it is to actually 
resolve a different problem that‟s similar in nature, but they‟re not 
attached to. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               140                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Then, in resolving that, it creates a pattern that makes the other one 
easier to resolve.  
 
 
 
Keep that in the back of your minds as a strategy. It‟s a very useful 
one because you‟re basically not pushing the river uphill anymore, 
you‟re actually just going with what‟s there already and there‟s a lot 
less investment or attachment to the problem, you‟re dealing with one 
of these rather than one of those.  
 
 
At that point, when you‟ve dealt with one of these over here, you just 
connect up here and it dissolves before they actually have a chance to 
realize what‟s going on, if you can attach it properly.  
 
 
Does that make sense? Thank you, that was a nice insight. 
 
Audience: I was working with my partner on a small problem and he said 
something and my whole body just shifted to the right, nearly 2 feet 
laterally. I‟ve never experienced that. What I‟d like to ask is, is it 
significant which way it went? 
 
Igor: 
It will be for you.  
 
Audience: But not now. 
 
Igor: 
It‟s not something we can say like all human beings that shift to the 
right are getting better, and all that shift to the left oh, you‟re in 
trouble now.  
 
 
It clearly means something in terms of how your whole neurology is 
organized, that‟s a very positive thing, but you can‟t generalize it and 
say I‟m going to aim for people to get that experience again in the 
future, because each person is different and it‟s a different set of 
problems being put together.  
 
 
Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
I don‟t think there‟s any science that would track that. As far as I‟m 
concerned if it‟s a positive experience, then you‟re in good shape. If it 
was a negative experience then we need to look at how to resolve it 
even further. 
 
 
If it‟s pleasant then I would say it‟s a positive experience. I don‟t think 
there‟s any neuro science that would validate saying, if it‟s a shift to 
the left then the right brain is being activated or whatever or vice 
versa. As far as I know that doesn‟t exist yet. Let‟s go to lunch. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               141                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
DVD 07 
Full Transcript  
 
 
 
Igor: 
Before the break, we started going into some more trippy dimensions. 
Would that be fair to say? And in doing so we tried to drag a problem 
along and realized that the more we go into this trance of infinite 
possibility, the possibilities end up drowning out the problem so the 
problem can no longer exist.  
 
 
Is that fair to say? Not all the time, but the more you go into this 
trance of infinite possibilities, the more the problems can‟t maintain 
themselves. It‟s like you‟re shifting through a reality into a position 
where that particular problem can no longer exist and when you come 
back it‟s dissolved. 
 
 
It‟s like popping an aspirin into a glass of water, you just can‟t co-exist 
with the water, it has to dissolve and evaporate somehow.  
 
 
Why don‟t we take the same idea and start playing with resources in 
the same way?  
 
 
What if we can navigate through this trance of infinite possibilities and 
specifically target certain resources, skills, abilities and so on, that 
would be of use to us, wouldn‟t that be something? 
 
 
So, if you want to stick with the idea of happiness, feel free to do that, 
but let‟s think about some other things. What are some other things 
that would be useful to you in your lives in terms of; imagine that 
Merlin the wizard really did or does exist. If he did exist and you could 
go back in time and visit him, and he could take you to some other 
magical realm, whatever you wanted was possible, what would that 
be? 
 
Audience: Limitless tenacity. 
 
Igor: 
I like that. 
 
Audience: Excitement.  
 
Audience: I want to be a musician. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               142                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: Elegant hypnosis technique. 
 
Igor: 
You‟re at a hypnosis seminar aren‟t you? Isn‟t that something 
worthwhile having?  
 
 
I‟m sure most of you can think about something that would be useful 
to have more of in life, like competent hypnosis, elegance, excitement, 
intuition, power, flexibility or happiness, whatever it is you want. 
 
 
Start thinking about some of these things, because we‟re about to go 
through a process that‟s not necessarily going to give it to you right 
now, but any time other than now, when you come back and look onto 
it, you‟ll be able to experience that this was the point it started. 
Wouldn‟t that be worth looking back on? 
 
 
So think about a wish list of seeds you want to plant, somewhere other 
than where your conscious mind normally is. Do you know why we 
want to put it somewhere where the conscious mind isn‟t normally? 
Because your conscious mind didn‟t make this happen in the first place 
you‟ve been wanting this for some time, haven‟t you? 
 
 
So clearly your conscious mind is the wrong place for this. Now, we‟re 
about to have a little exploration, we‟re going somewhere your 
conscious mind normally is not isn‟t it? You don‟t wake up in the 
mornings and start feeling the way you‟ve been feeling in here do you? 
 
 
That means the whole idea, the resource, these seeds of suggestions 
will be implanted in a place where your conscious mind won‟t interfere, 
because you‟re not there right, but it‟s still your mind. 
 
 
You might as well go there, plant the seed and let it go. Would you like 
to do this? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
The process is very simple. Believe it or not it‟s more or less the same 
thing you did last time only we‟ll be focusing now on the resource. If 
you look at the next line, we‟ve got the systems cross spins on 
resources.  
 
 
So we start with the same thing, with some of the awareness if you 
want. You can have the who are you, where are you and all that sort 
of stuff, but the key thing here is you‟re going to start directionalizing 
the mind towards the resources, the excitement, the competency of 
mastering hypnosis or the love of music. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               143                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Would a love of music help mastering music? I would think. The 
ceaseless tenacity and you‟ll fit that into whatever you want, but 
remember, everything you did this morning before lunch still counts.  
 
That means you don‟t just throw it all out there at a random 
statement, you begin with something and you watch them bubble up. 
And if it doesn‟t quite bubble up, you re-emphasize it repeatedly until 
you spin them and they start considering it fully. 
 
Then you talk about whatever the resource is. Then you start spinning 
some more things, each step waiting until they‟re responding to some 
extent. And when you‟re done one cycle, you‟ll look at them, they‟ll be 
floating on a high and then you start again. 
 
Do you know what you do at that point? You start again. Drill it into 
that place. There will be a special space inside their mind, a space 
that‟s not normally used in which this seed, idea or suggestion exists 
and gets to grow outside of consciousness. 
 
Therefore, by the time it bleeds into consciousness, not only do they 
have that but of course, their whole world becomes larger because it‟s 
coming from the outside. It‟s coming like aliens bearing gifts, only the 
alien is part of you. 
 
Do you want to have a quick demo or do you want to actually do it? 
 
Audience: Demo. 
 
Igor: 
Why did I even bother asking? Who would like to come up here?  
 
[Applause] 
 
 
Have a seat sir; how are you doing? 
 
Joseph: 
I‟m doing well. 
 
Igor: 
Good, well you‟re about to do a lot better.  
 
 
So Joseph, you wanted elegant, competent… 
 
Joseph: 
I like mastery better. You changed it to mastery and I think that was 
better. 
 
Igor: 
Just mastery, how about all three – elegance, competence and 
mastery? 
 
Joseph: 
That would be wonderful. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               144                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
I mean it is a wish list after all. A genie gives you three wishes. 
 
Joseph: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
I think that‟s okay. I‟m going to do my very best to stick to the script, 
because that‟s what you‟ll be going from, but I make no promises. 
 
 
You doing okay? 
 
Joseph: 
Doing well. 
 
Igor: 
Good. Tell me, when you think of this idea of elegance, competence 
and mastery in hypnosis, you‟ve obviously thought about it for some 
time, haven‟t you? 
 
Joseph: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Who were you being? That‟s right. Who were you being when you 
considered all these things about elegance, competence and mastery? 
Not now, any time but this, anywhere but here. As you get a sense of 
that, what will you have been that‟s elegance, competence and real 
mastery in hypnosis? 
 
 
Only now, everywhere including here. That‟s right. What are you 
experiencing that‟s elegance, competence, even more than mastery in 
hypnosis, anywhere but here, only then. That‟s right. What‟s 
happening now? You don‟t know do you, you really don‟t know. 
 
Joseph: 
[Smiling/laughing] 
 
Igor: 
You‟re smiling aren‟t you, because you recognize something‟s 
happened don‟t you?  
 
Joseph: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
You can feel it, can you not? And you can‟t even name it. Yet there it 
is. So what‟s happening that you can‟t even name it? That‟s mastery 
and elegance beyond competence in hypnosis. Only not here, far 
beyond now. That‟s right. There you go. There you go. 
 
 
And how have you been that‟s elegant, masterful and highly 
competent in hypnosis. Only here, beyond that you can experience 
that, can you not? What‟s happening now? That‟s right, you still don‟t 
know but it‟s getting stronger isn‟t it? 
 
Joseph: 
Yes. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               145                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
It is getting stronger. Go ahead. 
 
Joseph: 
Warmth. I feel like opening a door. 
Igor: 
A warmth through the core of yourself, an open door. An open door, 
and what‟s through that door that has been waiting all this time, which 
is elegance beyond mastery, anywhere but here, all the way into now. 
 
 
That‟s it. That‟s it, all the way. All the way. That‟s it, all the way. 
Joseph, all the way, that‟s it. And when you‟re there, just realize who 
are you now? That‟s it. There you go, that‟s the one. Whew! 
 
 
Whenever you‟re ready, and please, take your time, but whenever 
you‟re ready you know how to come back don‟t you? Don‟t let anyone 
rush you through that experience, not even yourself. 
 
 
Wow! Rock n‟ roll…how are you doing? 
 
Joseph: 
Well. 
 
Igor: 
Did you enjoy that? 
 
Joseph: 
Yes, very much. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Igor: 
Would you mind answering some questions if anyone has any? 
 
Joseph: 
Not at all. 
 
Igor: 
If you all want to pick his brains in terms of the experience, feel free to 
do that.  
 
Audience: Joseph, how do you feel differently now than you did before? How are 
you differently now? 
 
Joseph: 
Well, I guess, how do I feel differently? I‟m going to give you a 
metaphoric/symbolic answer. A lot of the experience, in terms of 
bodily experience for me, where I went out, I went into bodily 
experience happened through the core of myself right here. 
 
 
There is a solidity there where there might have been a gelatinous, 
jiggly piece. It‟s metaphor but that‟s the best I can do. 
 
Igor: 
We get very technical here don‟t we? Do me a favor, ask him why? 
 
Audience: Why? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               146                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Joseph: 
Why? 
 
Igor: 
Do you see what‟s happening? Has locking in been placed? 
 
Joseph: 
Why would be because, well, and I mentioned that when we worked in 
Seattle and did the certification, you started with the suggestion. You 
started the first day with the suggestion about opening the door to the 
master hypnotist. Whereas, I‟ve been doing hypnosis for many years, 
that suggestion was powerful and the symbol of open doors is a 
powerful symbol for me anyway. So, that door is very open and that 
would be my why. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you that was our answer. We‟ll be coming onto that later. Does 
anyone else have a question?  
 
Audience: Hi Joseph it was great to watch you. 
 
Joseph: 
Hi. 
 
Audience: How long do you think this experience took while you were…? 
 
Joseph: 
I have no idea. Here, and you have to start with this…I started this 
morning and at lunch I said, we‟ve been working on this stuff for a day 
and a half. I had a sense that we‟ve been here for about three weeks, 
so I‟m already in time delay, so I have no idea. 
 
Audience: Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
All right, are we done with Joseph? Give him a nice round of applause, 
thank you very much. 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
You may have noticed that I accidentally fell off script a little bit, I 
apologize, that‟s probably because I‟m paying more attention to the 
subject/client than I‟ll be paying attention to a piece of paper. I totally 
appreciate from time to time you may break a concentration just to 
remind yourself what you can do, and then come back. 
 
 
The point is the paper is not there for you to memorize something, it‟s 
to help you. If it‟s hindering you, make stuff up if it feels more 
comfortable. If it‟s helping you, then add more of this. Does that make 
sense?  
 
Audience: I was just going to say that Tim did something cool on the last 
exercise relating to that. He just added it to the boilerplate. He got me 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               147                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
gone a little bit and said, if you see me look down at my notes it just 
reminds you that you‟re going inside, you‟re not out here with me. 
 
Igor: 
Beautiful. 
 
Audience: The first time he looked down is when my eyes dropped. 
 
 
Igor: 
Perfect. For those of you who are not familiar with the idea of 
boilerplates, that‟s part of the Conversational Hypnotherapy training, 
it‟s standard language you use to overcome things that you may 
anticipate that may go wrong in the session. 
 
 
For example, if you think there will be sounds around you that will 
disturb, like sirens and so on, tell them up front…you may hear these 
sounds from time to time and these sounds will help you deepen this 
trance to process even further…does that make sense? 
 
 
You‟re basically hijacking an experience that might otherwise take 
away from the hypnotic one, and you‟re attaching to the association, 
the idea that it‟s going to enhance it and, of course, then it does. It‟s 
very simple.  
 
 
Just say, whatever this is…every time I look at my notes you‟ll go 
deeper and you‟ll actually even play with them, if you want to. Is that 
easy to do?  
 
 
Don‟t worry about the extra little bits we put in there, that was me 
getting carried away. We‟ll do that in the next exercise. If you do it 
now you‟ll be ahead of the game, if you do it later, you‟ll be doing it 
right on time. 
 
 
Go with whatever is easy right now. Easy exercise? Do you understand 
what you‟re doing? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
The exercise, how did it go? 
 
Audience: Wonderful. 
 
Igor: 
Are you beginning to get a sense for this, a feel for the language and 
so on? How many people accidentally started departing from the 
script, so to speak? This is what I want to see, I‟m very glad to hear it. 
Very soon we‟ll show you how to officially depart the script so you 
have much more options, choices and directions to go in. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               148                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Whatever you‟re doing now, keep going in that direction because it‟s 
very good. 
 
 
Are there any more questions you have before we move on? I want to 
do another exercise before we take a break, which I think you‟ll enjoy, 
because it starts putting all these pieces together again.  
 
 
Audience: It doesn‟t matter actually, how you use the language in which 
sequence, as long as you put the resource words in between? 
 
Igor: 
For the moment the answer is yes, it doesn‟t matter.  
 
 
Anything else? Great, I‟ve either done a really bad job or a really good 
one. 
 
 
Let‟s start putting all these pieces together and turning something in a 
little more practical. Up to this point, you‟ve basically been speaking at 
people haven‟t you? We‟ve done all this other stuff in terms of 
repetition, intensity, integrity, H+ and all that stuff, but you‟ve been 
doing all the talking and they‟ve been doing all the listening. Isn‟t that 
fair? 
 
 
So wouldn‟t it be useful to start doing some interactive stuff now?  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
See the thing is, and a lot of you have been pointing this out already, 
so I want to make it official…you have a starting point like a problem 
like this. Then you do something and it shifts. From this point your aim 
is to go shift it some more, shift it some more, and so on. 
 
 
So you‟re not trying to get all the way there on the first go are you? 
Please tell me no, because that‟s not the point. 
 
Audience: No. 
 
Igor: 
The point is shifting them a little bit and a little bit more, where each 
nudge gets a little more extreme than the last. Here‟s the thing, how 
can you possibly know where you‟re nudging them, if you don‟t know 
what‟s happening in between? 
 
 
So, part of the influence process is to get feedback, to find out where 
they are so you‟re not completely going down a blind alley or down the 
wrong path. Why don‟t we add that in to the whole equation, wouldn‟t 
that be useful? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               149                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Let‟s take this whole process and become a little more freestyle with it. 
Turn to page six, we have a little formula that‟ll put everything you‟ve 
done up to this point together in one place and really, you don‟t have 
to do this when it comes to doing it in real life, this is just so you get a 
little more practice at using the system, the awareness stuff and all 
these other language things in between in a way that‟s practical. 
 
                   Essentially, you want to start with some kind of awareness stuff, and 
probably around a problem the person is having, whether or not you 
know the problem doesn‟t matter. The problem might be something as 
simple as, I want more of something I don‟t have, like I want more 
elegance and mastery than I currently have. 
 
 
Do you see how that‟s still „a problem‟ although it‟s not really? Then 
you‟ll make them aware of whatever that is in the way you‟ve been 
doing already. Then you add some type of spin around that, whatever 
spin you want to. You can use the stuff we did yesterday, the stuff 
we‟ve put on here, it doesn‟t matter. You can even make something 
up. 
 
 
Then we‟ll go through some of the systems questions of who, what, 
where and so on. Feel free to change time scale on that also. 
 
 
You want to attach some type of resource. In other words, how they 
want to be different. Then you‟ll put another spin on them and then 
they‟ll be running around in a little soup for a while and that‟s just one 
sequence. 
 
 
Now, if you haven‟t done this already…in other words…if you notice 
something significant happen, which happens during one of the spins 
do you know what you do? No, not yet, you ask.  
 
 
First, you ask what‟s happening now? What just happened? You want 
to have a little feedback as to what‟s going on inside them. Up to this 
point, you‟ve been happy to notice that something has happened and 
you spin it again. 
 
 
Now we want to know what‟s happening for two reasons. 
 
1. We want to know where they are, so you can send them in 
more than one direction or other. 
 
2. Number two, you want to get a sense of how does different 
kinds of spinning language send people in different directions. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               150                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
So you‟re gathering feedback at a different level now.  
 
 
If you haven‟t asked them how they‟re doing now, by the time you‟ve 
gone through a whole cycle of awareness questions, plus the problem, 
a spin, a system question, plus the resource and another spin. At the 
latest, when you‟ve done the second spin you‟ll smile at them 
hypnotically and ask them what‟s happening now, what just happened, 
or how are you doing now, any of those variations. 
 
 
 
 
Whatever they say will be your starting point for the next spin, so as 
you feel whatever this is, some spin…what are you or what have you 
been? That‟s the resource and some more spin. Do you see that as a 
cycle going through? You keep deepening that, always starting at 
whatever they‟ve fed back to you.  
 
 
Easy idea? Would you like to have a demonstration? 
 
Audience: Yes! 
 
Igor: 
I knew that was coming. Luckily, I don‟t mind doing demo‟s so it‟s 
okay. Who wants to come up? You don‟t have to volunteer, I‟d rather 
choose volunteers and if you want to have this, I will be delighted to 
do that. Would you like this? With a request like that how can I resist, 
come on up? 
 
 
Have a seat here. You‟ve obviously done a good job with that, well 
done. You should be proud of yourself. Good job, right? How are you 
doing? 
 
Haven: 
Good. 
 
Igor: 
You don‟t have to tell me what it is if you don‟t want, you can keep it 
private, but is there a particular problem or issue you‟d like to resolve, 
or is it just something you want more of like Joseph, who wanted to be 
more elegant and masterful, in terms of his hypnosis? 
 
Haven: 
Just trying to get all this down good. 
 
Igor: 
So if you get all this down, it‟s inside you and you‟re using it the way 
you want to use it, what would that do for you? 
 
Haven: 
I‟d be good at it. 
 
Igor: 
Once you‟re good at this, what‟s the point of being good at it? You just 
want to know it and hide in the bathroom…? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               151                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Haven: 
I want to help other people. 
 
Igor: 
So, once you‟re good at this you‟ll be using this to help other people, is 
that correct? 
 
Haven: 
Correct. 
 
Igor: 
When you think about helping other people right now, how is that 
different compared to what you want to be doing once you have this 
stuff down? 
Haven: 
Just more of it. 
 
Igor: 
So it‟s something you already do, you just want more of it. 
 
Haven: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
How do you currently feel when you‟re doing a great job with the 
people you‟re helping? 
 
Haven: 
There‟s a satisfaction inside. 
 
Igor: 
There‟s a satisfaction inside isn‟t there? A satisfaction. So there really 
is a satisfaction inside, isn‟t there? 
 
Haven: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So, as you think about, all the people you‟ve helped in the past, any 
time before now, who were you being that‟s so satisfied, much more 
even than now? You can consider that, can you not? 
 
Haven: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
What happens when you think about that? Yeah, what‟s that? 
 
Haven: 
It‟s love. 
 
Igor: 
Its love right. 
 
Haven: 
Sure. 
 
Igor: 
There‟s a sense of love and satisfaction there isn‟t there? 
 
Haven: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s right. You‟re doing a great job. As you consider that love, really 
think about it and recall it. Beyond all the moments now, when else 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               152                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
will you experience more than this, beyond what you have not yet? 
That‟s it. Will you consider that? 
 
 
What‟s happening now? 
 
Haven: 
Just… 
 
Igor: 
That‟s right. 
 
Haven: 
…trying to access. 
 
Igor: 
It gets harder doesn‟t it? 
 
Haven: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
How are you feeling? 
 
Haven: 
Good. 
 
Igor: 
Feeling good aren‟t you? Notice those good feelings. Beyond this 
moment, what else will you have been experiencing, when all the love 
and satisfaction you‟ve yet to experience is any time but then. That‟s 
it, just think about that. That‟s it, all the way. That‟s right. 
 
 
Really consider that, let it take your mind and emotions on an 
experience. That‟s it, there you go. You can feel that happening, can 
you not? That‟s right. And as you experience this, in all the moments 
of now, aside from back then, how else are you becoming that‟s much 
more than you were, now? 
 
 
That‟s it. Much more, there you go. Now you can feel that, can you 
not? What‟s happening now?  
 
Haven: 
I have a good warm feeling. 
 
Igor: 
A good warm feeling. Is it growing? On top of that good warm feeling, 
can you recall all of these things any time but now? And who does that 
make you, only now and beyond? That‟s it. And much more than this, 
you can experience inside that, growing beyond love and satisfaction, 
the same and even more. 
 
Only now, as the starting point of the now that is not yet. That‟s it. 
You can feel that can‟t you. And it is getting stronger isn‟t it? And your 
mind doesn‟t need to make full sense of it yet, because you can have 
an experience long before your mind catches up. You can sense that 
now, can you not? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               153                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Haven: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
And that‟s exactly what‟s happening here. You‟re having this 
experience beyond all the others, and you can know it long before 
your head understands it. So your capacity to use it is only as great as 
you can sense this now and not understand it until you do. 
 
 
And that‟s just a question of time, is it not? That‟s right, just rest there 
for a while and let that realization come. Enjoy it. Learn from it. 
Memorize it. Knowing without knowing how, or even what. And don‟t 
come back from trance until you really know it inside, but outside your 
mind, inside you but outside your mind, as it is now. 
 
 
Only when you‟re ready will you find your breathing shifting, your eyes 
fluttering open, a big smile spreading across your face and you feel 
simply fantastic, all that love and satisfaction here and now, projecting 
into your future.  
 
 
But you get to experience that. Whew! How are you doing? 
 
Haven: 
Floating. 
 
Igor: 
Rock n‟ roll. Great job. It‟s been a real pleasure.  
 
[Applause] 
 
Audience: When exactly are you looking for, to ask a question? 
 
Igor: 
There are one or two personable places. The first is when I see a 
significant shift in him. Did you all see that at some point he suddenly 
took a deep breath and exhaled? That‟s when I asked him what‟s 
happening now.  
 
 
At some point, he goes nothing. Then I switched to what are you 
feeling now? He‟s searching in his mental experience, but I actually 
saw something happening in his body so I kept going after that, that‟s 
one time. 
 
 
The other time is, very simply, at the end of one of these cycles. Did 
you all hear me ask him something about his awareness as you 
experience this? Did you hear me put a spin on that? Now and 
beyond…did you hear me ask some of the systems questions like, what 
else are you? And another spin, that‟s not this. 
 
 
Did you all hear something along those lines happening? At the end of 
that sequence, I‟ll wait for a bit for him to access that, then I‟ll ask him 
what‟s happening? It‟s that simple.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               154                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
So either something happens in the middle of that sequence, in which 
I just pause and check, or if there‟s nothing that significant that‟s 
happened until then, I ought to at the end find out where he is and 
that becomes my starting point for the next sequence, the next loop. 
 
It‟s very straightforward. I apologize for letting the language get away 
from me a little, but this is where you‟re heading anyway so you might 
as well see it. 
 
Did you enjoy it?  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Was it useful? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Can you see how we‟re becoming a little more conversational? We‟re 
not totally covert yet, but something along these lines could be used 
covertly with just a few minor tweaks, could it not? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
If anyone has a question, raise your hand. 
 
Doug: 
I may have spaced out and missed it, but it seemed to me that the 
original resource was only mentioned at the beginning. After that you 
simply followed what he said without referring back to the original 
resource. 
 
Igor: 
Satisfaction was the original resource and we looped that in 
constantly, it‟s just that we added other resources also. So, it was 
satisfaction and love, then after a while it was feeling, so it was going 
to be a blend of those. So I was being a little more ambiguous. 
 
 
He was talking about a warm glow and so on, so I let that connect to 
the satisfaction, the love and, would it be fair to say it was a fairly 
emotional moment for you? 
 
Haven: 
Yes. 
 
Doug: 
Was the resource originally satisfaction or mastery? 
 
Igor: 
The resource was satisfaction. What he wanted was to be able to use 
this stuff, but doesn‟t give me anything to work with. I don‟t know 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               155                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
where he is now, why he wants to do it and so on. So the resource is 
the satisfaction he‟ll feel after having achieved mastery. 
 
 
You know the old equation people used to say, I‟ll be happy when (x). 
I‟ll be happy when I get so and so, the car, my house, etc. and by the 
way I‟m as guilty of this as the next person, but the equation is the 
wrong way around, you‟ll be getting that when you actually feel the 
emotions that allow you to do the work to get there. 
 
 
 
You‟re seeing they‟re frustrated and unhappy, so you spend all your 
energy being unhappy and none of the energy in getting the car, the 
house or the lifestyle you wanted, whereas, if you sat there being 
satisfied; it‟s not the issue of sitting there going you know what, I‟m 
just happy, now life can pass me by. 
 
 
It‟s that you‟re satisfied enough to do something about it. Do you see 
the difference between the two? That‟s why we use this as a resource, 
while still weaving in the idea of getting things done. 
 
 
By the way, the reason that tends to happen is because when you give 
your unconscious mind parameters, here‟s an end-point -  I want to 
use this with a lot of people to make them feel better. Here‟s a start-
point here‟s where I am right now. The unconscious mind just likes to 
fill the gap. It just needs a bit of a hand sometimes to do that. 
 
 
Mind-bending language is great because it allows the conscious mind 
to stop interfering whilst that gap is being filled. Does it feel like a 
gap‟s been filled? 
 
 
Can you see his face and how peaceful he is? It‟s the same thing that 
happened with Joseph, essentially but in a different way. Does that 
make sense? Is that an easy exercise to do? 
 
 
Keep it simple. The simple version is to follow the formula, which is to 
ask some kind of awareness question about the problem, put some 
spin on, ask some assistance question (who, what, where, when or 
how), put a spin on that and then ask them, how are you doing now? 
What‟s happening now? Where are you now? How are you feeling now? 
 
 
Use any of those variations, does that make sense, it‟s really 
straightforward in that sense? Whatever they say you start the next 
cycle going. Easy? Just do one step at a time. 
 
 
Everyone look at page six. Start with the language like, as you 
experience (x). You can have, as you hear (x), as you listen to (x), as 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               156                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
you see (x) or as you feel (x) with (x) being whatever situation you 
want to start with. 
 
 
It could be the problem…in this case, it wasn‟t so much a problem it‟s 
more like an outcome you had in mind. Then you have some spin, 
which could be, if you‟re in doubt use this…as you experience (x) 
anywhere but here. Then you ask a systems questions (who, what, 
where)…in this case, let‟s ask when are you?  
 
 
 
That is, why, would be a resource which in this case would be 
satisfaction, when are you that is satisfied, anyhow but like this? It‟s 
very simple. If you want to keep it to the absolute formula version 
please do it, it‟s really a no-brainer in that sense. I just wanted you to 
get used to the process rather than getting clever with the language, 
we‟ll be doing the clever language stuff shortly. 
 
 
 
Right now, we‟re simply adding a little more into the process. It‟s a 
simple sequence. Now at the end of that second spin you‟ll ask, what‟s 
happening now? How are you feeling now? How are you doing now? 
That‟s it. 
 
 
Whatever they say will be your beginning for the next step. 
Remember, the context is everything. If you‟re sitting there going like 
what‟s happening now? They may say nothing, but if you change the 
tone of your voice and say, so what‟s happening now, as you consider 
that anyhow but this? Who else are you being only now? So what‟s 
happening now, what‟s that? 
 
 
Can you tell the difference in my attitude? Remember, it‟s going back 
to respect and be gentle with them because you‟re leading them along 
the way. You don‟t have to run the language crazily, you just throw in 
one little phrase, wait a bit for them to process, then throw in another 
little phrase, wait a bit for them to process, etc. 
 
 
If they have trouble processing, what do you do? You repeat it. After a 
while, after you get bored with repeating it then you ask what‟s 
happening now. Does that make sense? Is it easier to do now? 
 
 
Who thinks it‟s easy? Half of you. Who still has questions? It‟s more 
important to know you get the exercise, so we‟ll answer those 
questions.  
 
Audience: When they close their eyes, it‟s already the end of the exercise. 
 
Igor: 
Then make sure they close their eyes sooner so you can get more 
practice at it. It doesn‟t matter, because if you get it wrong you‟ll 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               157                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
notice. And if you get it right, fine. Don‟t concern yourself too much 
about it, just go with the flow a little bit. 
 
Audience: So in our practice, do we encourage eye closure? 
 
Igor: 
It can happen, although of course up here I‟m actually emphasizing it 
myself. I‟m getting them to close their eyes because I want them to 
process it more deeply than that. I‟m also doing other things to get 
eye closures, like when they start blinking heavily I encourage it with 
„that‟s right‟.  
 
 
I do my own blinking to give them an idea of how to do it, so I‟m 
actually encouraging it because I know it‟ll help deepen the 
experience. In a regular conversation I might not do it, because I want 
them to have their eyes open, so it feels more like it‟s a regular 
conversation, only they don‟t know it. 
 
 
Up here we‟re pretty much doing it overtly anyway, because you know 
it‟s coming right, so I might as well add a little spin with the whole eye 
closure and indirect communication stuff. I wouldn‟t worry about it too 
much, just enjoy it. 
 
 
Remember, this is just training. We‟re not actually doing any change 
work or influencing stuff, we‟re still practicing language. This is not a 
practical drill yet. Are we on the same page? 
 
Audience: The worst thing is they may not go quite as deeply as they could have 
gone. 
 
Igor: 
Wow! From having an absolutely mind-blowing experience they have 
an absolutely amazing experience instead, they‟ll have to make do 
with that. 
 
 
Are you ready to do the exercise? 
~~~ 
Audience: In perfectly not knowing how to do this, it was interesting watching 
how things I was saying began to make sense to me. 
 
Igor: 
I like that. Join me in my world. I have no clue what I‟m doing either, 
but it feels good doesn‟t it? 
 
Audience: It feels great. 
 
Igor: 
Awesome! Whoever was working with him, you‟re okay in my book.  
 
Audience: I noticed that I asked him, where are you now? He couldn‟t answer 
me, he was too deep, so I was afraid to ask a second time.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               158                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
That‟s fine. 
 
Audience: I didn‟t want to bring him back to here. 
 
Igor: 
You can ask it, it‟s just that you can take away the pressure of having 
to answer it. You can say and what are you now? Just consider that, or 
don‟t you even want to say. Then I‟ll go, that‟s right, just consider that 
fully and whatever that is, do another spin on that. 
 
 
Bear in mind, we‟re doing relatively overt trances here. It started like 
a conversational thing, but who found that the conversational thing 
quickly eroded into some pretty trippy, trance thing? In regular 
conversation‟s you‟ll be doing much milder spins, unless you need 
that, just to give you a sense of direction of where this is going. 
 
 
Notice how now you can have an interaction, whatever people are 
saying will still allow you to feed things into it, make sense? 
 
Audience: I was just going to say first, that Steve is an awesome hypnotist. The 
echo effect when he‟d ask me a question and he‟d echo it right back. 
 
Igor: 
Who‟s familiar with the echo effect? That basically means, when 
someone says something to you, if you reflect it right back, it 
intensifies it. So if someone say to you, how are you feeling and you 
go, I feel great. Then you turn to them and say, that‟s right, you feel 
great, you really do feel great. You feel great and that validates the 
experience they‟re having. 
 
 
It makes it much more powerful. By the way, you can do this in 
regular conversations as well, just like you‟re amusing on something, 
like you‟re talking about some toaster oven they‟re thinking of buying, 
you do your little spiel and say how do you feel about the toaster 
oven? They go its fine.  
 
Then you say oh, so you feel fine about this, that‟s interesting. You 
feel fine, that‟s a fine oven isn‟t it? They say yeah. Then you go into 
your other mind-bending language or whatever. The echo effect is 
simply reflecting the same words back to them in a way that will help 
them intensify the experience or at the very least, validate it. 
 
The only things you don‟t want to echo as fully are the negatives, in 
which case you want to put a little spin on those in order to take away 
from the experience a little bit.  
 
Let‟s give an example of something negative someone might say, 
when you say, how are you doing now?  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               159                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Audience: I‟m tired. 
 
Igor: 
So you‟re tired right now. So at this moment you‟re tired. Can you feel 
the tiniest little bit of spin going on there? It‟s like its temporary so it 
won‟t be there forever vs. you‟re tired now aren‟t you? You‟re really 
tired aren‟t you?  
 
 
So you say oh, right now you‟re tired, just a little tired right now, for 
the moment anyway. Beyond the moment, what else awaits you that 
isn‟t that? Then they‟ll go, what? Just think about it, if you‟re tired 
right now, you know for a fact it can‟t last forever don‟t you? Yes, so 
whenever the moment comes that you‟re no longer tired, as soon as it 
comes you‟ll like it, won‟t you? 
 
 
Can you hear the mind-bending spins subtly moving inside of it? It 
sounds totally rational doesn‟t it? Would you like to learn how to do 
that? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Then you better return from the next break then.  
 
Audience: It‟s actually a statement. I had one of the best partners during this 
exercise, that even though I have to admit that I was a little resistant 
to say, let‟s give it a shot. He was so good at identifying… 
 
Igor: 
He caught you. 
 
Audience: …he did, I went into a deep trance and I didn‟t want to come out. 
Thank you, Danny. 
 
Igor: 
Good job Danny.  
 
[Applause] 
 
 
Who‟s noticing that you‟re like a pendulum? You‟re going to get it, no 
you don‟t. You get it, you don‟t. Is that a relatively common 
phenomenon? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Trust me, you‟re in the right place. It took me eight years of not 
getting it to get it, and another two years to get how to teach it, so 
I‟ve got it and not got it so many times I can‟t even count. I‟m trying 
to pump you through the same experience more quickly to the extent I 
can, in the four days we have together. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               160                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
If you get in and out, in and out, you‟ll be just fine. Trust me, at the 
end of it, you‟ll have a solid grasp of it. When you go home more 
importantly, you‟ll know how to develop it. 
 
 
Remember, this is training. You need practice to develop things. 
Training gets you ready to do it, but then you have to keep going with 
it to ingrain it. You‟ll have fun. This is fun isn‟t it? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Before the break we did an exercise where we started putting all the 
bits and pieces we‟ve been doing up to this point. Did you enjoy that? 
It‟s getting pretty trippy and hypnotic. Even if you don‟t know what 
hypnosis is supposed to be, whatever it is, it‟s like that, isn‟t it? 
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
Of course, I never use mind-bending language, I wouldn‟t dare. What 
I‟d like to do as we close the day off in terms of the last session, is to 
take the experiences we‟ve been having here, the things we‟ve been 
doing and begin to do freestyle a little bit. 
 
 
Would you like to find a simple formula to take what we‟ve been doing 
in terms of memorizing these little phrases, using them and so on and 
learning how to add a little spin to anything? A little spin if you add a 
little and a lot of spin if you add a lot, just by following the system, 
would that be useful? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
We can skip it if you like. We can talk about fingernails, polishing and 
stuff. Apparently I have very nice fingernails.  
 
 
If you turn to page seven you‟ll see the system laid out for you. Let 
me explain a little bit how this works. Has anyone here ever been a 
child? 
 
[Laughter] 
 
Audience: I still am. 
 
Igor: 
If your hand is not up, you and I have issues. Has anyone here ever 
been a child? 
 
Audience: What if you still are? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               161                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
Then carry on, that‟s still part of having been right. Has anyone 
listened to a child as they learn a language while growing up from not 
speaking very much? First, they get simple words like mom, dad, 
bottle, basically nouns. 
 
 
Then they start having a few verbs to put it together and make simple 
sentences like „dog makes sad‟ or something like that, with not much 
in between. 
 
 
Then a very interesting stage develops. There‟s a stage where they 
start filling the gaps between the words, very short words called 
predicates that add nuance. By the time a child is five or six years old 
it‟s pretty eloquent, in fact, it has most of the vocabulary they‟ll need 
that‟s been formed at that point. 
 
 
On top of that becomes layers of nuances, as they grow older. So 
these predicates are things that allow us to orient things. For example, 
the dog wags his tail vs. the tail wags his dog. They allow us to make 
certain distinctions that are very important in terms of how language 
works. 
 
 
These predicates, words like where is the can? It‟s above the fridge. 
It‟s next to the fridge to the left, to the right or inside. When do you do 
that? Before, earlier or later. How are you doing? All these things have 
certain predicates, certain kinds of filler words that allow us to form 
relationships between two ideas, two nouns or two things, so we 
understand how to locate it in reality. 
 
 
Where is it?  
 
When is it? 
 
How is it? 
 
What is it? 
 
 
If you talk about a person, you can say how is that person? Where is 
that person? Who is that person? Which is a, what and when is that 
person? Is this making sense so far? This is how we construct reality. 
In other words, the language element of reality, of experience, the 
thing that gets us locked into those little circles works by putting 
relationships between two things.  
 
You switch the relationship around you switch the meaning, as in the 
dog wags the tail, the tail wags the dog. 
 
So when we look at page seven and see these words called predicates, 
I‟ve organized them for you according to the system formula – space, 
time, energy and matter– don‟t worry about the labels, they‟re just 
there to make it a little easier to remember. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               162                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
We‟re basically talking about when, where, how and what, so in the 
space you‟ll see there‟s a particularly long list, and this is not exclusive 
by the way, this is just stuff that I dreamed up while I was writing the 
list, you‟ll notice there‟s a much longer list than all the others.  
 
We primarily locate things through space. In fact, the largest part of 
the brain is given up to processing visual information. Even in blind 
people, they still use their visual cortex to process information. 
 
It‟s also the fastest information processor. You know you have those 
computers with dual core drive or something, as far as I can tell one is 
like this really fast ultra killer thing, whereas the other is like a back-
up. Your visual cortex is that really fast dual killer thing. 
 
Vision primarily works in space, doesn‟t it? It locates thing next to a 
something, inside and so on. That‟s a little side effect, for your 
information. 
 
The reason we want to focus on this language is because it‟s hardwired 
into us by this stage. We‟ve been using it for so long that all our 
relationships, including our internal ones are based on that.  
 
Can anyone think of something that makes them feel a little bit guilty 
or bad? Consider where you were before that event. Where were you 
before that event? Before the event even happened, are you feeling 
guilty? A moment ago, you told me you did.  
 
Notice I‟m using time to move you before something, which allows you 
to go, hang on a second, it hasn‟t happened yet, I can‟t feel it. Its 
fiction your brain happens to believe because it‟s basing it on external 
experiences.  
 
You don‟t hurt before the car hits you, but boy does it hurt after. So 
we‟re going to start using these things to re-organize the relationships 
people have to the information that lets them know what‟s real and 
what‟s not real, or more importantly, how is it real, so it becomes real 
in a different way. 
 
That‟s what we‟ve been doing here.  
 
If you want to compare this to that, notice we have predicates 
anywhere, that‟s about the location, isn‟t it, here and there. Notice 
how by playing with location, anywhere but here, it sends your mind in 
one direction and locks it down again. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               163                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
In terms of the strategy, don‟t worry tomorrow we‟ll start talking about 
how to use the language more strategically. For right now, just 
recognize that all these things are basically a construction of what‟s on 
this sheet put together. You could switch any of those things there for 
anything else. 
 
For example, who are you instead of anywhere but here. You might 
say above and beyond what‟s near. Who are you above and beyond 
what‟s near? When are you within that experience until now? I‟m going 
like random AWOL across this section to show you that you can 
randomly pick words and they start adding spin already. 
 
However, we‟re not going to be random about this, we‟re going to be 
very strategic once we get to it. For the moment, do you recognize 
how this is being constructed, just as an idea?  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So now it‟s time for you to start learning how to do a little freestyle on 
this so you can add spin when and where you want to. 
 
 
Who found the last exercise, if not necessarily entirely easy, at least 
relatively doable?  
 
 
So we‟ll only do the same exercise again to the extent that it becomes 
easy. If it wasn‟t entirely easy, just simplify the exercise for yourself 
and do something like we did here. When have you been anywhere but 
now and so on? That was easy right, think about it now, the stuff we 
did yesterday is a no-brainer, right? 
 
 
Those things are on pages one through three and you‟re welcome to 
simplify it to that or to keep it as sophisticated as you did in the 
previous exercise. Honestly, I don‟t mind as far as what we‟re doing 
now is concerned.  
 
 
You do what is easy for you to keep track of, because I‟m about to 
make it a bit more difficult and more interesting. 
 
~~~ 
All I want you to do is have some kind of exercise where you‟re using 
the staple, some kind of routine like, if you don‟t use the previous 
exercise or the one before that, you might say something like, when 
you consider the situation who are you, only now, any time but then? 
 
That‟s pretty simplified from where you‟ve been so far. Would that be 
fair to say? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               164                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
This time on the other hand, with each phrase…notice how we‟re 
parting this up…when you consider this problem, who are you being, 
like this in every way, and only that? So there are four pauses in that 
construction just there.  
 
 
I‟m using this because it‟s a simple formula to keep track of. So you 
can see how that‟s basically what you‟ve been doing anyway. This is 
yes, this is no. I want to make sure you‟re all on the same page; 
otherwise, I can‟t add the next exercise. 
 
 
That bit so far is easy, right? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So now, in each of those little sub-phrases like when you consider (x), 
what are you being only now, that‟s like this? In each of those phrases 
you‟re going to introduce one of these extra little words and for the 
moment I don‟t care which it is, just randomly choose one from the 
list. 
 
 
You may sound like you‟re more on drugs or you may sound more 
intelligent, I don‟t know and don‟t care just now. We‟re just getting 
used to this language by fitting into something you already know.  
 
 
Let me do some examples out loud, so you have them as a group. 
 
 
When you consider doing this exercise above this, when are 
you going to realize before the experience, totally and only 
now, everywhere but here that’s all the same?  
 
 
Do you see what we did? It‟s exactly the same it‟s just that I‟m 
randomly choosing a word from the list and throwing it in. It might 
seem important, but it‟s actually pretty random. 
 
 
Do you want another example? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
When you think about more things than the example I’m giving 
you, how have you been already? Only to the extent you’re 
here, each and every time like this in every way. 
 
Now, I‟m actually skipping between space, time, energy and matter 
just to cycle across. I can stick within one category again, would you 
like to see that? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               165                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Of course. 
 
 
When you experience this exercise, not yet, how are you being 
during it, only between here and then? Only here now.  
 
 
Let‟s go for another one. 
 
 
Which column do you want now? 
 
Audience: Space. 
 
Igor: 
Let‟s go spacing out a little. 
 
 
Above what you’re thinking right now, who are you beneath all 
that? That’s amongst the things and only those things, that’s 
within everywhere but here. 
 
Audience: Do a matter one. 
 
Igor: 
Let‟s go with matter now. 
 
 
All the things you’re thinking about right this moment, where 
have you been that’s other, only now except everywhere but 
here and what else? 
 
 
We may as well move forward to energy since we haven‟t done it yet. 
 
 
Totally consider what you’re experiencing now and how have 
all those things been going? Only once that, you realize 
anything but this save for that. 
 
 
Does that hurt? 
 
Audience: Do you have a special ed version of this? 
 
Igor: 
You‟re in good shape, don‟t worry. It‟ll get easier when we take the 
other formulas out. Is anyone trying to make sense of this, in terms of 
as a hypnotist? 
 
Audience: He is, that‟s why. 
 
Igor: 
The job of the people to make sense of this is the subject, and they‟re 
meant to be getting spun out. So with the subject getting spun out, 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               166                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
you‟re doing the right job. If you‟re the hypnotist thinking, this is 
complete nonsense, you‟re doing a good job. 
 
 
So, are you nuts enough to do a good job? Knowing that to the extent 
that you will do this in a slightly crazy way now, it‟ll actually make all 
the other stuff be the same, easier later right. 
 
 
Is that okay with you all? Because either way is better, isn‟t it? Are 
you clear on this?  
 
Mo: 
I just want to ask, are we going down to space and then we‟re going 
to do the time or are we going to go right across? 
 
Igor: 
You can do it any way you want to. 
 
Mo: 
All right. 
 
Igor: 
You can do them all or just some of them, whatever turns you on in 
that one. 
 
Debra: 
Are we just throwing those predicates in anywhere we want? 
 
Igor: 
Anywhere, there‟s no rhyme or reason yet. No order, anytime, 
anyplace, anywhere, anyhow, anything you want for now. The strategy 
comes later. You can‟t have strategy until you have something to 
strategize about. 
 
 
So throw them in anywhere you want right now and the strategy will 
build onto the back of that. If you have no idea what it all means yet, 
that‟s fine. Do you want me to make it easier for you to make absolute 
nonsense and make it really easy and happy for you to do that? Would 
that be something you‟d like to do? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Who would like to make it easy to speak nonsense, so when you‟re 
doing this it‟s easier than what you‟re about to do, would that be easy 
for you? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Would you like that? Hands up if you want to do this. 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Okay, everyone stand up and put your things down.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               167                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Let‟s do things differently. Make a tunnel so the camera can see. Do 
this…do you all know this game? We‟re going to play this, when we 
touch hands I‟m going to make you say a word. Your job is to free 
associate something, anything.  
 
 
I‟ll start with apple. 
 
Sperling: 
Oranges. 
 
Igor: 
Fruit. 
 
Sperling: 
Basket. 
 
Igor: 
Case. 
 
Sperling: 
A box. 
 
Igor: 
Fish. 
 
Sperling: 
The water. 
 
Igor: 
Is that easy? We‟ll start with this and I‟ll give both exercises now just 
because we‟ll be up scaling. That‟s the warm up.  
 
 
The next level gets really interesting, you‟ll do the same thing but this 
time you must say something that is totally and utterly not associated 
to what they‟re saying. Observe. I‟m going to start because it‟s easier 
if I start. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
Banana. 
 
Sperling: 
Cake. 
 
Igor: 
Banana cake, hello. Do you see how not easy that is? It‟s okay if you 
get it wrong and you‟re laughing then you‟re in the right state, so 
don‟t worry about it. Do you get the idea of the exercise? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
I‟ll start you off to warm you up with a partner and we‟ll do just the 
association. When I say switch, stay with the same partner just switch 
up a gear on the exercise into non-associating. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               168                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Once you‟re there, you‟ll be streaming with tears of laughter and so 
on, we‟ll go straight into the exercise, it‟ll make absolutely no sense, 
but you‟ll enjoy it. Is that okay with you? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
There are three levels, I‟ll tell you to switch and then on the third level 
you do the exercise. Unless you want me to stop you and then send 
you into the exercise, I‟d rather just send you in straight after the 
patty cakes. 
 
 
So there will be two levels of warm up, we‟ll do the exercise, you go 
crazy on it and I‟ll give you 20 minutes to do the exercise so you can 
play around with it. 
 
 
Find a partner. 
~~~  
Audience: I‟m on drugs. Scott and I were at the bar drinking and we had a– not 
really– but through our mental picture. We were putting the book 
down and saying let‟s just have a conversation. The conversation was 
flowing left and right. We would go back to the sheet and think about 
trying another word.  
 
 
It was darn scary because I think I understood what he was saying, 
but I can‟t tell what he understood. It was cool. 
 
Igor: 
So, are some of you starting to get this now? Is it coming together a 
little bit? Don‟t worry, it‟ll fall apart again before we‟re done but it will 
come back together again. 
 
 
Thank you. By the way, I‟m not surprised that you would get Ed, 
because he‟s spent six days in the Conversational Hypnotherapy 
program getting ready to do this as well, so it‟s just a question of time 
and exposure. Getting ready for the exercises, getting a feel for it and 
in a sense of having something to do with it, that‟s going to come and 
that‟s what tomorrow is about. 
 
 
For the moment, are you getting a feel for the freestyle element of 
this? Going a little bit by the script, leaving it a little, going away, then 
coming back, etc. is that what‟s going on?  
 
Audience: What I find curious is just how we‟re, like we can‟t help but try to 
make meaning no matter what is coming out of the other person‟s 
mouth, or even what‟s coming out of your mouth when you‟re saying 
it. We just can‟t help but try and make meaning. 
 
Igor: 
Anyone else finding this out? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               169                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Here‟s the thing, you can‟t help but make meaning provided you‟re 
engaged in a genuine conversation. If you have a joking conversation 
you‟ll just be playing with it. But when you actually try and make 
sense of it like, this is really important, that‟s when it kicks in, which is 
one of the reasons we‟ve been doing all the H+, setup, eye gazing, 
etc. 
 
 
We will do more of that on the final day, maybe tomorrow, but more of 
how to put it into conversational context to make sure they carry on 
making meaning of it.  
 
 
 
What you don‟t want to happen is that they have the mental 
equivalent…do you remember in school the class joker would come up 
to you and say shake my hand and get buzzed, and then go oh yeah 
you‟re too cool… 
 
 
Now the hypno version is like oh, again. So what you don‟t want to 
have happen is that you present an atmosphere, a vibe if you like, that 
says I am about to fool you. Why? Because if people are on their guard 
they‟ll start analyzing saying, what‟s he saying? This doesn‟t even 
make sense, so I‟m not going there.  
 
 
Why? Because in the back of their heads they‟re afraid someone is 
going to make fun of them in some way, or give them an unpleasant 
experience.  
 
 
That‟s why you have to have your integrity in place, your H+ in place 
and, make sure the whole thing sounds like a real conversation to 
make sure they actually treat it like one. When they do, when they 
consider the ideas fully, that‟s when you end up being on drugs legally. 
 
 
You cannot get arrested for this, thankfully, yet. But, they do have to 
make sense of it. 
 
 
The other side is, as the hypnotist, did you find that when you‟re 
speaking these ways, even though you‟re not trying to make sense of 
it in what you‟re presenting, are you finding a tendency to be sensible 
anyway? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s fine we‟ll be using that mechanism shortly. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               170                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: One of the things right at the very end when you were asking us to 
wind it up, all of a sudden my mind said okay I‟m just gone, I was in 
the midst of this thought and suddenly it flew off. I picked two words 
and they totally were a good twist. 
 
Igor: 
So you got a good result right. 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
This is how I want you to  use this once you get through either, 
hopefully at the end of the four days together here. Or, if you have to 
go home and practice some of the drills…you have plenty of drills to 
practice, right? 
 
 
So either now, or when you practice the drills and you get more 
familiar with the language even further, the point of this is not that 
you script out this amazing thing. The point is that you have 
conversations and the spins accidentally start slipping out and you‟re 
going, that‟s pretty damn good, I have no idea where that came from, 
but I like it. 
 
 
Then it‟ll be like a genuine conversation. There won‟t be any hypno 
weirdo stuff going on, it‟s a regular conversation that happens to be 
mind-expanding or contracting, depending on what you want to do. 
 
Joseph: 
I just wanted to suggest that part of the H+ or at least a piece of it 
extended here in this aisle. It was the joy of play and entering into this 
as a playful exercise. So many of the other exercises, at least in my 
own experience, I was also…and it may have something to do with 
what happened up there…but who knows. 
 
Igor: 
But hypnosis doesn‟t work, so don‟t think about that. 
 
Joseph: 
Absolutely. We all know hypnosis does not work, not here, not now. 
 
Igor: 
Anytime but here, of course.  
 
Joseph 
Everywhere else, but not here. 
 
Igor: 
Just a private conversation between hypnotists, no need to listen in. 
 
Joseph: 
In any case, it was entering into the play and feeling that play, which 
allows joy, freedom, creativity and expression. 
 
Igor: 
It makes it more fun for you as well, right. 
 
Joseph: 
Absolutely. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               171                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
This is why the enjoyment thing has been a bit of a theme for the last 
few days. It‟s part of what lets you be more creative, more sparky and 
it makes it easier for you to do. You don‟t have to do it. If you want to 
be un-joyful as you‟re doing it, I‟m fine with that. It‟s just that it‟ll be 
easier on you if you do. 
 
Audience: So, going off on that last statement, I just have something brief to 
say. All the experiences I‟ve had with all the different partners is the 
joy of giving, but in giving I have received so much in return. So, I 
have been very happy and joyful. Thank you to all my partners. 
 
Igor: 
Great, thank you.  
 
Dave: 
Does the use of predicates in this way, is that meant to make you spin 
more or less? 
 
Igor: 
The spin is the predicate. The spin is created by putting predicates 
together in a way that we don‟t normally associate them. We‟ll be 
going into more strategic versions of it later on. 
 
 
Essentially, the more you load predicates into a statement, the more 
spin there will be. That‟s the rule of thumb you‟ll be organizing this by.  
 
 
Hopefully, that matches your experience as well. If you decide to use 
two or three predicates in a row and suddenly, you‟re like what the 
hell…of course, if you choose your predicates eloquently you can also 
sound like you‟re on drugs, which is exactly what you may want but 
it‟s not always the case. 
 
 
So how are you are you, in good shape? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Any other comments or questions?  
 
Audience: This just seems to speed everything up when you‟re the hypnotist. The 
whole concept of being able to take somebody and move them forward 
to the now that is not yet and have them look back at the them that 
was and just see the journey they‟ll be going on. And, just say look 
and see because now from here you can see where you‟ll be and 
exactly where you need to go in order to be able to do that. 
 
 
It just seems like it‟s a zip in time. You can see the physiology of the 
people immediately, but this time stopping, doing the zip and then say 
that‟s it, now what are you experiencing? It‟s so fast, such an 
accelerator it‟s unbelievable.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               172                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
Can I point something out to everyone? Do you notice the mind-
bending language, all the spins coming out of his language right now? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
You weren‟t even trying to be mind-bending there were you? 
 
Audience: Not yet. 
 
Igor: 
What happens…when your mind goes to these places before or after 
looking 
backwards 
and 
forwards, 
you‟re 
doing 
these 
mental 
maneuvers, your predicates just describe them…you weren‟t even 
vaguely confused by that were you? 
 
Audience: No. 
 
Igor: 
Right. You shouldn‟t have been, because you‟re very clear in terms of 
the process you were running inside your head. To everyone else is 
sounds like what, going to the future to look back on the now of the 
one that was, but not the one that was now, the one that will be now 
but isn‟t yet. That sounds really profound. 
 
 
This is the main reason we‟ve spent the last two days trying to stretch 
your minds out so you can go to these places first.  
 
 
Tomorrow we‟ll be focusing more on actual strategies, little things you 
can do, little points you try to hit much like he was doing there, so you 
can have processes in place that will let you do other things.  
 
 
If you want to think of them as this way, you can think of them as 
mind-bending power loops for those who are familiar with power loops. 
If not, don‟t think of them that way because it makes no sense either. 
But the point is that your mind has to go there first, than the language 
is easy. 
 
 
If your mind doesn‟t go there, what the hell do you say? So thank you. 
 
Audience: My partner and I found that it was very much more confusing when it 
almost made sense. 
 
Igor: 
Yes! 
 
Audience: Yeah. One, I don‟t know where it came from, but I was doing all of it 
with the time and I was sending him to a place that was not now but 
was not the future and was not the past. But everything else made 
sense. Where do you go from there? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               173                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Audience: Yeah. But we both ran into that, when it almost made sense it… 
 
Igor: 
It spins you like crazy. This is where we‟ll be heading on the fourth 
day. This is something that hopefully more of you are starting to get 
an appreciation of.  
 
 
We‟ve gone nuts on the language so far, haven‟t we? It‟s been pretty 
out there, let‟s face it, but I did warn you we‟d be going there didn‟t I? 
The point is not to go nuts on the language, it‟s what you do when you 
stop and add just enough to be a little different.  
 
Then, of course, it sounds like this really should make sense, why can‟t 
I get my head around this? That really makes me consider it so 
furiously with such intensity that it opened everything up. Whereas, if 
it‟s supposed to be nuts and its crazy anyway it‟s like okay I‟ll play this 
game, whatever. 
 
Do you appreciate the difference? 
 
That‟s what we were doing. That‟s where we‟re heading. How do you 
feel about this so far, good stuff? 
 
[Applause] 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
I have a mission for those of you who choose to accept it, Jim. It‟s not 
impossible but it is fun. You have your list of predicates, your space, 
energy, matter and time. In time, by the way, you can shift through 
the predicates all through the tenses; both have their version of spin. 
 
 
Who here is not going straight to bed after this? You may have noticed 
that a few other people will also not be asleep. So before you do go to 
sleep you might get to people who aren‟t, just long enough to start 
speaking to them and speaking to people is easy isn‟t it? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Now, of course, whilst you‟re speaking to them, if from time to time 
you were able to take a sneaky glimpse at your list and above all 
throw in one or two words that you would not otherwise use, before 
you know it you might be in a position where you will have been doing 
this stuff more easily then you thought? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               174                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Now, there‟s no need to, yet, although if you were to, what else might 
you throw in there that you haven‟t thought of yet that would make it 
so much more fun than anything you‟ve done up to this point? 
 
 
Wouldn‟t that be something worth considering? So, as you consider 
doing this, but only to the extent that it is fun. Who here thinks they 
might just throw the odd casual phrase or so in, to a regular 
conversation just to see what happens? 
 
 
Who here is going to do this just for the hell of it? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
This is what makes a great hypnotist. It‟s the attitude that says let‟s 
do it for real and find out. Do you feel like you have that? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So the only thing that remains for me to say right now is that after 
you‟ve done this wonderful exercise of playing with people, I know 
you‟ll have an experience before tomorrow morning and that 
experience will be something along the lines of sleep. 
 
 
Before you think about how much you‟ll be sleeping tonight, you‟ll 
know that above all else you‟ll be dreaming. When it‟s all over, you 
might look back and realize you‟ve dreamed, and yet those dreams will 
come. 
 
 
I‟m really curious to know what dreams you‟ll be having tonight. In 
dreams, of course, anything is possible. You can go anywhere and 
beyond. The middle of nowhere is here and you know where that is, do 
you not? Because in your dreams you can have any experience, you 
want. 
 
 
And all the places your minds would not go during the waking state 
are places waiting to be explored when you‟re asleep. Because in 
dreams, your conscious mind is not the one that is chiefly in control, at 
best, it has a little role to play in terms of being aware of what‟s 
happening. 
 
 
Whilst your unconscious mind chooses all the experiences you haven‟t 
had yet, so that you can appreciate being so much more than you 
thought you were, and I really don‟t know how you‟ll appreciate that, 
beyond the things you‟ve already been doing. 
 
 
Inside, each one of you knows, that you will dream, do you not? And 
whether you remember the dream or you don‟t, is not, the most 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               175                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
important part because you only dream to the extent that something 
inside you changes in a positive way. 
 
 
So tonight, when you make yourself ready to go to sleep, you get 
snuggled up in the bed, just wonder at what dreams will come and 
how much more interesting they will be, once you‟ve had enough to 
know that all this is easy and you can do more.  
 
 
Which means you‟ll wake up in the morning and go hey, I don‟t really 
know what happened, but I like it!  
 
 
That‟s similar to what‟s going to happen tomorrow during the daytime 
anyway. You may as well have your dreams reflect what‟s about to 
happen, rather than I reminding you of what just did. So the dreams 
you have tonight will help you integrate all this, only to the extent that 
tomorrow you‟ll be ready for more.  
 
 
Isn‟t that worth thinking about? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So I‟ll see you all bright and breezy in the morning, 9:00 o‟clock back 
here, 9:30 start.  
 
Thank you very much. 
 
DVD 08 
Full Transcript  
 
 
Igor: 
Good morning, everyone. 
 
Audience: Good morning. 
 
Igor: 
How are you doing? Did you have fun last night? Who did a bit of 
mind-bending, brain-melting stuff, anyone? How did you enjoy that? 
So what happened? I had this vision last night that when I wake up 
and come downstairs for breakfast, there would be all these people 
standing around and we‟d have to weave through this forest of 
petrified people. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               176                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
I‟m glad you‟re giving this a go because it‟s kind of fun, isn‟t it? I want 
to start today with kind of a general question-and-answer, comment 
section before we dive into practical stuff because today we‟ll really 
start taking all the hard work we‟ve done over the last two days and 
making it practical.  
 
 
We‟ll start using this on the fly, spontaneously to actually some 
practical purposes. Will that be interesting? 
 
 
Before we get into that, let‟s just open the floor up in terms of 
question-and-answers. If there‟s any microphones running around that 
might be useful. 
 
Audience: Yesterday, you talked about those three circles; the last circle had to 
do with guided transition. I believe that was the term you used.  
 
Igor: 
Right. Where has my circle gone? Who took it? There you go. That‟s 
where my circle is. The idea is this red circle kind of represents your 
everyday existence. The things you‟re familiar with. Things you can 
answer off the top of your head. It‟s natural, easy and so on. 
 
 
The blue circle is those things that are kind of out of your experience. 
They might be sort of more unconscious, but still part of what you are. 
It‟s still easier-ish to get into, but its stuff you‟re not used to going to, 
so it‟s unusual. It‟s outside of your walls of labels, so when you go 
there it‟s like, wow, what‟s this?  
 
 
Or, oh, I remember this, but I can quite remember how, or when or 
where it comes from. It‟s right on the edge of your normal day-to-day 
existence; it‟s easy to get to. 
 
 
The thing about the black circle is it‟s those experiences you‟ve either 
had before, never allowed yourself to have before or are so rare that 
you‟ve only visited it once or twice.  
 
 
Has anyone ever had a déjà vu feeling from a dream? Where you wake 
up and a few days later or a few weeks later, you have a similar 
experience and go, that reminds me of something. What is that?  
 
 
For example, when people dream, they have a whole bunch of 
experiences that they don‟t allow themselves to have during a normal 
waking state. That could be in that black circle also. So its experiences 
that are so far outside the norm that reaching them like this is not 
easy. So to do that, you have to be able to guide them step-by-step in 
that direction. 
 
Audience: Is it possible that‟s someone could take themselves into the black? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               177                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. There are a bunch of disciplines that focus on that. For 
example, some of the Buddhist meditation, like the passion and stuff 
like that. If you ever read some of the more, shall we say, hardcore – 
it‟s weird to think of a hardcore Buddhist, isn‟t it? I‟m going to shave 
my head! Oh wait, they do that already, don‟t they?  
 
 
But if you look at some of the more hardcore Buddhist philosophy, 
some of the stuff they talk about is massively trippy. It‟s not even 
close to what people talk about when they‟re on LSD. It‟s just way 
beyond those experiences. They navigate these realms quite naturally. 
It takes a lot of effort and energy to get there.  
 
 
A lot of the Shamanic disciplines will also go to similar places. If you 
look at a lot of the Christian mystics, they‟ve also gone to similar 
places. So your mind can go there, there‟s a whole category of people 
that focus on taking that journey, and it‟s usually lumped into the 
whole mystical tradition, depending if you‟re a Christian, if you‟re a 
more earth spirit type, whatever your particular approach is.  
 
 
Really, in my opinion anyway, they‟re navigating the same sort of 
mental realm. We‟re just touching the edges of it. We‟ve gone 
nowhere near as deep as they go, but we don‟t need to.  
 
 
In terms of what we‟re doing here, in terms of influence, as being 
hypnotists and so on, where we‟ve been going so far is more than 
enough. If you want to take it a step further there are other places you 
can go for it.  
 
Matt: 
As you know, yesterday I was very challenged with the process, and 
I‟ve got your Mind-Bending Language CD that you‟ve got on that back 
table. I didn‟t go through the whole CD I just went to the Bonus 
Induction that you include with your CDs.  
 
 
I‟ll share with you, after going through that, it‟s like everything came 
together, and it was like glued. It was awesome. So, I just want to say 
that brought it all together for me, and I appreciate your having that. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s the purpose of the Bonus CD. The Master Class is referring 
to…I‟ll talk to you separate about it, but just in case you were 
wondering, we‟ve got one on Mind-Bending Language, which is really 
what we‟re doing here. It‟s very different from this course. This 
course, for me, is kind of an advanced covert hypnosis course. We‟ve 
gone to a very advanced level to the language and what it does, etc.  
 
 
The Master Class really lays a foundation, which is much more an 
intellectual concept. Where does this come from? How are we 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               178                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
thinking? Showing you some simple patterns using these ideas, it‟s like 
this, really simplified beyond anything you‟ve done so far.  
 
 
Hence, it‟s kind of like, the way I see, it‟s like a pyramid. You have 
this, you‟ll have in time some card to go with this, and then finally, the 
course you‟re on right now. Just to take you through the whole range 
of those experiences. 
 
 
Of course, the Bonus Induction is precisely designed to do that. To 
create clarity because it can get you into all kinds of interesting places, 
but clarity is not necessarily the only thing you‟ll find.  
 
Matt: 
Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
You‟re welcome.   
 
Scott: 
One of the things I noticed in the last day or so is during the trance 
inductions, if the person who was putting me under trance spoke at a 
rate that right when I started to out breathe myself, they spoke, and 
they stopped when I stopped out breathing, and just followed my 
breath, oh my God. It‟s just like I dropped so deep in that.  
 
 
Once I felt how good that felt, if they stopped doing that and cross-
talked while I was breathing, it felt really painful. 
 
Igor: 
Right, because it‟s taking you out of that rhythm you‟re used to. 
 
Scott: 
So what is that about that rhythm? How does that work? 
 
Igor: 
Well essentially, we‟re talking about a kind of biofeedback mechanism. 
That‟s all hypnosis is. We‟re feeding back responses to the person, and 
particularly, we‟re feeding back unconscious responses. So the old 
adage we‟ve mentioned on this course already: 
 
 
Where attention goes, the energy flows 
 
 
We‟re redirecting their mental energy to unconscious processes, so 
that unconsciousness gets elevated in importance – it has more juice, 
shall we say, and the consciousness, hence, recedes because your 
energy is either here or it‟s here.  
 
 
Breathing is a bridge between consciousness, usually when you‟re 
talking in someone‟s out breath, what‟s happening is several things.  
 
1. 
They relax. Whenever your body exhales, it tends to relax.  
 
2. 
It tends to happen on the conscious as well. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               179                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
 
People aren‟t that purposeful when they‟re breathing unless their 
attention is called towards it. So you‟re basically feeding back a very 
obvious and simple unconscious rhythm and that‟s deeply comforting. 
So you‟ve got relaxation element; you‟ve got the unconscious 
element; and together there‟s quite a very powerful thing. 
 
Scott: 
The other thing I noticed is that when they spoke and it was on my out 
breath, it was almost like I was the one speaking it.  
 
Igor: 
Okay. That‟s interesting.  
 
Scott: 
I‟m wondering, are there other ways, other than breath, that you can 
mirror their… 
 
Igor: 
Sure. This is more going to like the more basic hypnosis, which is 
really what the crash course was about. But just to give you some 
quick things you can do with this: 
 
1. 
The hypnotic gaze definitely does that and the pressure 
you‟re putting people under, but it‟s got to be a friendly 
pressure, right? 
 
2. 
Touch is very important for any kind of hypnotic work. 
 
 
I know some people are skittish about touch, in which case, of course, 
you don‟t do it with those people, but as a rule, if touching is not an 
issue, I think touching is a great thing, just a hand on the shoulder or 
the arm. We‟re not talking about touching we‟re talking about 
touching. You understand the difference right. 
 
 
 
 
3. 
A little bit of rocking.  
 
 
For example, again, think about all the things that parents do with 
children or what you do with a pet to comfort yourself or the pet. 
These things are just as comforting to us as mammals, so doing them 
is actually a good thing.  
 
4. 
The sound of your voice. 
 
 
If you have a frightened child, what do you say? Don‟t be frightened! 
Is that how you respond to them? No, you say, it‟s okay, shhh, there 
there now. Don‟t worry. The bad man‟s gone away now, whatever. It‟s 
all in your tonality at that point.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               180                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
So if you recreate these same sorts of conditions in all these levels, 
they can be very comforting; hence, the trance experience is that 
much more pleasant.  
 
 
Does it mean that you can‟t do trance without these things? Hell no. 
You can do a great set of trances without them. You can do a 
massively tense trance, and you can create unpleasant trances, which 
sometimes is the right thing in terms of therapeutic work or whatever.  
 
 
 
As a default, having comfort and relaxation, I think, is one of the 
nicest windows to take people through and some of the easiest always 
as well.  
 
Scott: 
Thanks. 
 
Igor: 
No problem. Any other questions, comments, praise, cash or 
chocolate? No. 
 
Audience: Chocolate? 
 
Igor: 
Yeah, it‟s a fixation. I ought to see a hypnotist, shouldn‟t I?  
 
Audience: What was the name of that master hypnotist? 
 
Igor: 
Oh, Overdurf.  
 
Audience: Just a question, and I don‟t know if it has anything to do with 
hypnosis, but when I have hypnotized people or done regression, 
sometimes, not all time – 50% of the times, a past relative will come 
out of the blue and will begin to talk and give messages to them, and I 
don‟t know them, but my subject client knows who they are. Is that 
normal? I don‟t know. 
 
Igor: 
It doesn‟t happen to me, so it might be just if your unconscious might 
expect that, you may accidentally end up generating it. I don‟t think 
it‟s a bad thing. If it works, it works.  
 
Audience: Yeah, I‟m completely amazed that this happens.  
 
Igor: 
Right. It may just be the type of people you attract to your practice. 
As a rule, I wouldn‟t be concerned about it as long as it works. There 
could be symbols or things that are going on inside them anyways, like 
a dream.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               181                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
You know when you have a dream where your best friend, Freddy, is 
there, but really it‟s your dad or something? These different characters 
will represent different psychological forces, shall we say. 
 
Audience: All right.  
 
Igor: 
If it‟s there, use it. I have no problem with that. 
 
Audience: Okay.  
 
Igor: 
All right, folks. Is that it? Well, let‟s get some practical juju going here. 
The exercise I asked you to do yesterday evening between the 
sessions, hopefully, those of you who took the opportunity to do it 
found it was relatively easy.  
 
 
So what I want to do this morning to just warm ourselves up and get 
ready for the stuff we‟re doing, is to get a set of power words for 
mind-bending language kind of engrained into you so that they‟re 
there for you without having to think about it.  
 
 
The last thing I want you to do when you‟re using your mind-bending 
language is to say, underneath all that… since all these things are 
happening for you… more than you thought… anytime at all… Do you 
see where I‟m going with this? To a certain extent, when you‟re 
practicing, a little bit of that will happen because you‟re practicing.  
 
 
What I want to do this morning, if it‟s okay with you, is spending 
maybe 10 or 20 minutes engraining some of the core, some of the 
more important, shall we say, prepositions that I like to use so that 
they‟re there for you naturally, instinctively whenever you need to use 
them. So putting them at a conscious level, will that work for you? 
 
 
This is going to be a fun process. Here‟s a warning. To the extent that 
this makes no sense to you at all, it will work. If it starts having 
meaning, you‟ll actually find it harder.  
 
In other words, you may as well switch your conscious mind off for a 
little bit, knowing that it will be there for you at the unconscious level 
when you need it. Is that okay? 
 
 
Go ahead and stand up. Put your things down somewhere safe. You 
may want to put your name on your notes because all the notes look 
the same, by the way. You want to make sure you‟ll be able to find 
your notes again once you‟re done.  
 
 
We‟ve got the four basic sySTEM categories: 
 
1. 
Space 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               182                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
2. 
Time 
3. 
Energy 
4. 
Matter 
 
 
We‟re going to stick to them and just pull out three of what I like to 
use in terms of the more, I‟m going to say the better shall we say, 
predicates. It‟s just the ones I end up using, so you‟re welcome to use 
the same ones. If you want to do the same process with different 
ones, I‟m totally fine with that. 
 
 
Feel free to change these predicates if you don‟t like these ones, but 
these are the ones I like to use, so you can have them.  
 
 
The three words I like to use in terms of Space are: 
 
a. beyond 
b. aside  
c. inside 
 
 
 
 
When we get into the more tactical uses tomorrow, the reason for 
these three words will be much more apparent. Don‟t worry about 
writing them down. You can write them down if you want, but there‟s 
no point because you want to be able to do these without thinking 
about it.  
 
 
Here‟s what we‟re going to do. It‟s a quick exercise. This is just a 
warm-up. You‟re going to walk around the room, and you‟re going to 
ask one of the five sySTEM questions.  
 
 
 
1. 
Who are you? 
2. 
Where are you? 
3. 
When are you? 
4. 
How are you? 
5. 
What are you? 
 
 
Ask one of the five system questions. The only answer I want you to 
give for the first round is just those three words in any order you 
want. That‟s it. It‟s going to be a little bit weird, and we‟re going to 
add something in a second.  
 
 
 
How are you?  
 
 
Beyond, aside, inside. 
 
When are you?  
Inside, outside, beyond.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               183                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
I know it makes no sense yet. We‟ll be adding something else in just a 
moment. Just think of it as a warm-up. Easy? Go around to as many 
people and do that with as many people as possible. Off you go. 
~~~ 
 
 
It‟s such an exciting exercise that they couldn‟t stop. It‟s pretty 
straightforward. It‟s a no-brainer. So let‟s start filling in some content. 
Now I want to warn you, please do not try to make the content 
anything particularly meaningful or interesting, or even sensible.  
 
How are you?  
Beyond the question, inside what I feel is aside from 
anything else. 
 
 
I don‟t care what the content is. What I care about is that you‟re using 
the three predicates in any sequence that you want, and you‟re 
randomly letting your mind just fill in content in between.  
 
 
Does that make sense? If it starts making too much sense, then you 
better stop it. Off you go. 
~~~ 
 
 
So, how are you enjoying it? Is it kind of fun? Are you finding your 
brains are almost tripping over themselves a little bit trying to come 
up with stuff? Excellent! That‟s where you want to be.  
 
 
So, beyond, aside and inside are kind of a little bit engrained. It‟s 
easier to come up with so you‟re thinking more about what to say, 
rather than those things. Good.  
 
 
Let‟s add something else. This is for Time: 
 
a. before 
b. yet 
c. now 
 
 
 
Here‟s what I‟d like you to do. When someone asks you how you‟re 
doing this time, you‟ll do exactly as the first exercise, which is you‟ll 
say, before, yet, now. Only this time, when you‟ve finished, you will go 
right back to beyond, aside, inside with content.  
 
When are you?  
Before, yet now. 
Besides what we‟re saying, inside I feel aside from 
everything else. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               184                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Does that make sense? It shouldn‟t! As long as you do the exercise, 
you‟re in good shape. Does everyone understand the exercise, even if 
it doesn‟t make sense? Excellent! Easy? Off you go, folks. 
~~~ 
 
 
So, we‟ll do the same thing again only this time, we‟re going to fill in 
the content between these ones, as well as these ones. 
 
 
 
How are you? 
 
 
Before I tell you that, anything I say yet isn‟t now. 
Beyond whatever‟s going on inside, who knows aside 
from that. 
 
 
It needs to make no sense whatsoever. It‟s better if it doesn‟t I just 
want you to use those predicates and just enjoy it. Have fun with it.  
 
Audience: Do we mix or not mix the modalities. Do we say… 
 
Igor: 
I don‟t care. Mix them. Do whatever you want. As long as you use 
those six predicates, I really don‟t care. Is that straightforward, given 
what you‟ve already done?  
 
 
Those of you asking questions – just to make it more interesting, 
because otherwise you ask the same boring questions over and over 
again, – feel free to mix up the Time that you ask them about.  
 
 
 
Where have you been? 
 
 
Before or after that. 
 
 
Is that easy? Off you go.  
~~~ 
 
 
So we‟re going to do the next layer now. We‟re going to make it a little 
easier. We‟ll ignore the first two things you‟ve done. In other words, 
the Space and Time elements, forget them for a moment we‟ll come 
back to them. 
 
 
Now, we‟re going to do the Energy predicates. The three I want you to 
focus on are: 
 
a. totally 
b. only 
c. to the extent 
 
 
How will you have been? 
 
Totally, only, to the extent. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               185                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
If you want to go really crazy, you mix them up. 
 
 
How will you have been? 
 
To the extent, only, totally. 
 
That‟s easy, right. Off you go. 
~~~ 
 
 
That‟s straightforward, right. Now we‟re going to do exactly the same 
thing, so you‟re still sticking with totally, only and to the extent. You 
don‟t have to fill in the content yet, but I want you to add the Space 
and the Time predicates as well, with content. 
 
 
 
How will you have been? 
 
 
Totally only to the extent before the moment that‟s yet, 
not now, aside from everything else inside, I feel beyond. 
 
 
Feeling the brain melting again? Just when you thought, you were 
getting it, right. Off you go. 
~~~ 
 
 
That was easy, right. So, now we‟re going to use all nine predicates, 
with content. 
 
 
 
When had you been? 
 
 
Totally to the extent that I‟m only before yet now, aside 
from anything else, beyond inside I feel things. 
 
 
If you don‟t feel like you‟re on drugs by now, well you will. One 
second. There are a couple of questions. Yes? 
 
Audience: Can you use one set of predicates to modify another set of predicates? 
Like, only to the extent. 
 
 
 
Igor: 
Oh, sure you can. Absolutely. 
 
Audience: Can you mix these around out in terms of groups? Or should you keep 
all the Space ones together, all the Time ones together and so on? 
 
Igor: 
Honestly, I don‟t care. If it‟s easier for you to remember them in 
groups, stick to the groups. Otherwise, mix them up in any random 
order that you want. I honestly don‟t care what you do, just as long as 
you use all predicates and make sure you hit all nine of them in 
whatever way makes it easy for you to remember. Make sense?  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               186                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
With content, all nine with some kind of random content, so basically, 
you‟re going to talk like your friends do when they‟ve had a few too 
many, if you have that kind of friends. If you don‟t, I‟ll introduce you 
to some. All right. Off you go. 
~~~ 
 
 
Let‟s do the final round. The final round is, of course, going to be 
Matter. The three words I‟d like you to play with are: 
 
a. all 
b. other 
c. each 
 
 
Just like before, we‟re just going to start with those three. Forget the 
other nine for a moment. We‟re starting with all, other and each. 
 
 
 
How are you? 
 
 
All, other, each. 
 
 
Or 
 
 
 
How are you? 
 
 
Each, other, all. 
 
 
Whatever way you want to go around it, just get used to that before 
we add the others back in again. Off you go. 
~~~ 
 
 
All right. Is that fun? Well, let‟s take all of them together now. Let‟s do 
all 12 in one big, glorious sentence. 
 
 
 
How will you have been? 
 
 
All the time, other then now, each time to the extent, 
only that I‟m totally this, not yet, but before I tell you, 
beyond all other things aside from inside, I feel good. 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
I know. It‟s going on YouTube later. Do not buy from this man. 
Do you have the idea? Go play. 
~~~ 
 
 
So, how are you doing? Was that fun? Do you find your brains 
dribbling out your earlobes? Good. Hopefully, these basic 12 mind-
bending language type how words are engrained so you can use them 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               187                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
without having to think much about them. Is that fair? Especially when 
you‟re just throwing them in, it‟s easy.  
 
 
Why is that important to me? Because I want you to be able to 
continue to do all the other stuff, we talked about the eye contact, the 
gentle gaze, the attitude of agreement but reversing things if you need 
to, and so on. That‟s part of what you‟re going to use in real life.  
 
 
How would you like to do a quick exercise that will show you how to do 
this in real life in a regular conversation? For the moment, think of it in 
terms of just messing with people a little bit to spin their minds out a 
little bit, so that they‟re more open to your ideas, so they‟re more 
likely to respond positively. Would that be something worth doing? 
 
 
This is just easing our way to the practical element. So don‟t think too 
much about, oh, I can‟t do this with real people in the real world. It‟s 
just an exercise. We‟re easing our way slowly into getting more 
practical.  
 
 
In a moment, I‟m going to ask you to find a partner. With you partner, 
I want you to have a conversation. Before you start the conversation, 
choose who‟s going to be the hypnotist for the first five minutes, and 
who will be the hypnotist in the second five minutes. 
 
 
I would like for only one person to be the hypnotist at a time, and it 
will make a little bit of sense why in a moment. 
 
 
You‟re going to have a regular conversation about any topic you wish 
to. Like,  
 
 
Why are you here?  
 
How are you enjoying the course?  
 
What do you do for fun?  
 
Do you have any family? 
 
 
 
 
The kinds of conversations you‟ve probably been having with each 
other outside the course, in the bars in the evenings, and so on. A 
regular conversation. The topic is totally unimportant.  
 
 
As the hypnotist, whilst you‟re having your regular conversation, I 
want you to start weaving any of these 12 words in casually. The 
operative word is casually. You might want to do some of the extra 
things like staring, a friendly touch contact. You might want to 
introduce that a little bit casually and then break it off. Casually and 
then break it off.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               188                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
You‟ll be introducing some of the language casually as part of the 
things you‟re saying. So you‟re only saying those things to the extent 
that people are actually following along with you.  
 
 
Don‟t go beyond that level yet. Do you see where we‟re going with 
this? Is that easy to do? So five minutes with one person being the 
hypnotist, then one starts over and the other person will be the 
hypnotist for five minutes.  
 
 
Try to refrain from being the hypnotist when you‟re not. It might be 
harder than you think, but try it anyway. Is that easy to do? Find 
someone you don‟t know yet, preferably. Have a chat, and get to know 
them in a mind-bending sort of way. You have 10 minutes in total. Off 
you go. 
~~~ 
 
 
How was that?  
 
Audience: I‟m the kind of person who likes figuring out what the big, simple 
principle is behind something. What I‟m realizing is that we‟ve been 
focusing on all these little words and tricks of the tongue and stuff.  
 
 
I‟m getting the sense that in order to do this really all you need to do 
– but it‟s easy to say this after learning all the little things – is it‟s 
almost like we‟re looking at normal conversation through what, for lack 
of a better word, is sort of the lens of metaphor.  
 
 
We‟re looking at what somebody‟s saying sort of in the space of puns 
and witty language and dreams and all of that, so that you can easily 
take them, by asking questions, to places that they wouldn‟t ordinarily 
go. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. You see what‟s happening here is we‟re using the other type – 
the unconscious mind reasons with two types of logic.  
 
 
1. 
The law of associations.  
 
 
 
Either two things happen at the same time to the same thing, or one 
thing causes the other. 
 
2. 
Symbolism. 
 
 
If you look at any of the old type magic or more primitive cultures, 
they would burn a figure of something as a symbolic thing for 
something else. When you have dreams, and you dream about a ball 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               189                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
that actually represents maybe something you played with as a child, 
which represents a lost youth thing. You can kind of feel all that by 
just having one ball in the dream.  
 
 
Of you have one person that is actually your friend, but at the same 
time, it‟s your father, and at the same time it‟s the school teacher that 
looked after you. So it‟s like this whole friendship/mentoring 
encapsulated in one person. In the dream, all those things make sense 
at the same time, don‟t they? It‟s how the unconscious mind reasons. 
 
 
So one of the things we‟re doing is, by taking you out here first, it 
makes it a lot easier for you to reflect back on normal reality with that 
mindset. Do you find that happening a little bit? All the language does 
is it helps you to shape that slightly more and to express that.  
 
 
It‟s no good just being able to perceive it this way if you can‟t express 
it, because then you‟re just as stuck. Does that make sense? So that‟s 
a good realization, and we‟ll go a little bit beyond that too. 
 
Audience: Actually, when I was talking with Phil, we were having… 
 
Igor: 
Hold on. Just stand up. Just talk to me. Stand up because I have no 
idea who‟s talking to me right now.  
 
Audience: When I was having a conversation with Phil, and it was a beautiful 
conversation, I caught myself listening, but I was also looking for his 
words so I could go, okay, he‟s doing this. It was like I was thinking on 
two different levels at the same time. 
 
Igor: 
See, now you‟re getting it. This is where it starts getting practical. 
You‟re starting to think like a mind-bending hypnotist, like a true 
covert hypnotist. We‟ll be expanding that ability throughout today and 
tomorrow. We‟ll get more strategic with it, but that‟s exactly what 
should be happening. 
 
 
 
 
Now, not all of you will have this yet, and that‟s understandable 
because you‟re still in training. This is only the beginning of day three. 
You‟ve only been doing this for two days, and some of you have never 
even done hypnosis before. So you‟ve really been pushed to the 
frontier of a lot of things, right?  
 
 
Remember, the stuff you‟re doing right now took me eight years to be 
able to do at the level you‟re doing it. Another two years to figure out 
how to teach. So you‟re way, way ahead of the game. You‟ll have to 
do a little bit of practice to get the rhythm and so on, but the kinds of 
things you‟re describing is exactly where you‟ll end up being. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               190                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
That‟s what I do when I speak to someone. When I‟m using more, 
shall we say, covert influencing, these different levels just pop out at 
me. It‟s not like I‟m trying to do it. It just happens. It‟s not just the 
trying to fit the language in, because if that happens, it‟s just random. 
It‟s fitting it in after you‟ve had these experiences to know what this is 
like.  
 
 
If you do not know what this is like, then you‟re just talking randomly. 
You‟re just throwing out random words, and hoping for the best. That 
has some effect, but nowhere near as intense as where you‟re going 
now.  
 
Audience: I made a note on something you said the other day. You said that, 
that space out there is the place where there are no words. So, the 
exercise is a bit designed to take us there so we can put words on that 
area. Is that kind of… 
 
Igor: 
To some extent. 
 
Audience: Okay. 
 
Igor: 
So the putting of words on it is less important. It‟s more important 
that you have experience of the place so that your words can direct 
people towards something similar. Whether or not you end up putting 
words on it – in time you will put words on it. That‟s just how human 
brains function.  
 
 
Then, of course, as soon as you start putting words on these things, 
you‟ve just a bigger red zone. And there‟s something beyond that, 
which will not have words. That process will, hopefully, continue for 
the rest of your life.  
 
Audience: Thank you. 
 
 
Igor: 
It gets really trippy. My mind is so warped right now.   
 
Audience: Yeah, I just wanted to say that I feel like the exercises have made me 
a much better listener over the last couple of days. I found myself 
listening to CNBC this morning before we came down, and listening to 
the news. I‟m just kind of hanging on every single word now that 
comes to me. I‟m like, what is the meaning behind – the real meaning 
there. It‟s really cool. 
 
Igor: 
You see, when you get sensitive to language in this way, your ability 
to use it just goes through the roof. You‟ll hear someone say 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               191                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
something, and you‟ll go, that was so good. I am stealing that because 
you have no idea how good that was. And they don‟t. They‟ll waste it. 
Write it down. Send it to me, and I‟ll send it to someone. Believe me. 
Because it‟s good! 
 
[Applause] 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. Thank you for that.  
 
Audience: To lift someone higher, you have to be higher than them, so we have 
to go there ourselves before we can take someone to that place. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. You need to have a greater experience than they have to be 
able to shape it for them. Now that‟s not always the case. Sometimes 
you can say, out yonder is where you want to go. I haven‟t been there 
myself yet, but you can‟t stay at experience anymore.  
 
 
You can take them to the threshold, and after that say good luck, 
buddy. This is the experience that other people who have been there 
have given me. Until you‟ve been there yourself, your instincts won‟t 
be in the right place. You won‟t say oh, I know where you‟re going. 
You turned left when you should have turned right. Let me help you 
out here.  
 
 
Hence, it certainly helps you in terms of expanding your own mind. If 
you‟re stuck in this little red area, then someone who‟s stuck in the 
same little red area as you with a problem, all that‟s going to happen 
is you‟re going to look at the problem and go, oh, you‟re right.  
 
 
You really are screwed up. Ah, what can I do about that? Oh, man, if I 
was in your shoes right now, I‟d just shoot myself. Just end it now. 
Here are some pills – it might be much less messy.  
 
 
 
 
If your mind is bigger than that, though – if someone‟s telling you 
about these little nagging problems, and you‟re seeing them in all their 
glory that they could be but they have forgotten about, then you‟re 
going, you really think you‟re messed up, don‟t you. And you‟ve really 
convinced yourself of that.  
 
 
All this stuff is leaking out on the sides that I can now perceive that I 
wouldn‟t be able to see beforehand, that tells me otherwise. Only they 
can‟t see it yet. 
 
 
Have you read a book when you were much younger and it‟s kind of 
okay, and when you put it down it wasn‟t that big of a deal. If you go 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               192                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
back and reread the book or watch the same film again 10 or 20 years 
later, and then suddenly all this stuff hits you. You go, wow, why did I 
miss it the first time? Has anyone had that sort of experience? 
 
 
The difference is not the book. Believe you me; no one changed your 
book in the meantime. They didn‟t rewrite it. The little book elves 
didn‟t come and change the words just to make it more important you. 
What changed was you, and when you‟re different, you can start 
seeing things that were there all along, but you never noticed. You 
never realized.  
 
 
Who‟s coming to the Bonus Day on the 22nd? I recommend that you 
do, partly because we‟ll be talking about exactly these things. 
Everyone thinks right now that we‟re in a recession. Well, actually, in 
some respects we‟re not. It‟s just that people aren‟t seeing what‟s 
there. They‟re seeing what used to be there, and it‟s not there 
anymore. So of course, it looks like a recession.  
 
 
When you start seeing what‟s there, rather than what you want to be 
there, at that point all the opportunities in the world are still there. 
That‟s why there are some people out there right now making an 
absolute fortune. That‟s a little about what we‟ll be talking about on 
that day. Does that make sense? Bring your partners. 
 
 
You‟re right. You need to expand your own perceptions just so that 
you can start spotting those things that you would otherwise miss, and 
that gives your instincts somewhere to go.  
 
 
Thank you for pointing that out because that‟s actually very important.  
 
Audience: This is really the same thing you just said. It‟s almost like we‟re 
standing at the edge of a playground. I can‟t go there until somebody 
else is there to play with. All these words are like, looky there, looky 
there.  
 
We don‟t know what‟s there yet, but being in H+, it kind of creates this 
safety that we can both go there now. 
 
Igor: 
Right. Exactly. Hence, we spent the whole first two days spinning each 
other out in different directions. Here‟s the irony. You‟re all ready for 
this now.  
 
 
When you‟re spinning each other out, you‟re actually pulling each 
other up by your own shoelaces. What‟s happening is when you start 
out, you can‟t take anyone here because you‟ve not been here 
yourself, but someone can say something by accident that will take 
you to the edge here.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               193                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Once you‟re there, you‟ll say something by accident that takes them to 
their edge there. Then, someone will say something that takes you 
further to the edge and so on. 
 
 
Now, these little accidental coincidences stack up to the point where 
you end up having the experiences you‟ve had. Eventually, you end up 
out here somewhere. So when you come back to some normal person 
with a normal mortal range of thoughts, you look at them and go 
you‟re fucked because I‟m here. 
 
 
Does that kind of match some of the experiences you‟ve been having 
of late? We‟ve got a big convention on next door. I strongly 
recommend you have a little chat with them. That will be so much fun. 
Any other comments or questions? 
 
 
All right. So I thought we‟d add another little thing here. I presume all 
of you would like to be more influential and more persuasive in a 
particular aspect of your life.  
 
 
Whether you‟re a hypnotist trying to sell your practice, or get clients 
more enthused about the hypnosis that‟s going to happen, whether 
you‟re salespeople trying to sell a product, whether you‟re parents 
trying to parent children, whether you‟re teachers trying to education, 
whether you‟re writers or public speakers and so on.  
 
 
You all have areas in which you‟d like to be more influential, is that 
correct? Is anyone not? Good. So when you think about these 
particular areas, there is some information that you want to 
communicate. In other words some ideas, some attitudes or some 
principles, which, if the other person understood properly, would make 
your job a lot easier.  
 
 
 
In other words, you have some values as a parent that you want your 
children to have.  
 
 
As a salesperson, you want your customers to know things about the 
product that, if they had it, would make their life somehow better or 
their business somehow better.  
 
 
As a public speaker, there are some attitudes that, if your audience 
had them, they would get what they came for. They think they come 
for the information, but really, it‟s the other stuff behind the 
information that they‟re more interested in.  
 
 
As an author, nurse or hypnotherapist, there are always some ideas, 
some attitudes, and some concepts that if people really understood the 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               194                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
heart of it, would make your life easier and actually their life easier 
too. Am I correct? 
 
 
For about five minutes, I‟d like you to think about one of these topics 
so that you can speak to someone about this. I‟d like you to go into 
partners in a moment and talk to your partner for five minutes on this 
particular topic. 
 
 
So hypnotists might talk about the power of hypnosis, or about how 
hypnosis can help people, or about what hypnosis is and what it isn‟t.  
 
 
A salesperson might talk about their particular product and all the 
advantages it has, and you, of course, as the subject will pretend to be 
interested in it in terms of whatever that product happens to be. 
 
 
If you‟re more interested in parenting or teaching, then of course, you 
adopt that position. 
 
 
Is this making sense so far? Here‟s the thing. As you‟re presenting 
your lecture, your information, I want you to go out here as you‟re 
talking to your audience. Watch them like a hawk. Do you remember 
how yesterday we spent a lot of time waiting for them to react before 
you put more spin on things? This is what I‟d like you to do.  
 
 
Present an idea, and then you wait to see their reaction while they‟re 
kind of processing it. If they‟re not processing it correctly, you might 
say something like, let me give an example, because above all the 
things you‟ve been thinking about, the experience you haven‟t had yet 
won‟t allow you to understand this.  
 
 
 
 
You see what happens is the mind opens up, and then you go off and 
expand the same idea again. Then, you just watch how they absorb 
that. If from time to time you add a little bit of spin here and little bit 
of spin there, just in your normal conversation, that‟s great. The key 
thing you‟re looking for, though, is how they‟re absorbing what you‟re 
saying. 
 
 
If their mind is starting to glaze over a little bit, capture their attention 
again. Throw a bit of spin in, and just as they‟re going, oh, yeah, that 
makes sense. Ooh, my brain is hurting, but I‟m almost getting it. Then 
you just make it very clear for them. You pause. You let the idea settle 
in.  
 
 
Once you can sense that it‟s settling in – in other words, you‟ll see 
them react in a certain way, then you carry on. Again, with some light 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               195                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
spin here and there. Then again, when an important idea comes or an 
idea you think they might resist, put a bit of spin, and then present 
the idea again. Then you pause. Let it settle it in.  
 
 
There are many different things you can do in terms of where you 
pause, how you pause, and when you spin and so on. We‟re just 
getting used to this a little bit as a starting block. Is that easy to do? 
 
 
So we‟ll have five minutes apiece. Ten minutes in total. Find a different 
partner. I want you to give them a mini lecture on your topic, 
whatever reason you came here for. Assume they‟re interested in 
terms of the ideas, and just notice where you pause and where you 
spin.    
 
Audience: This seems to such an important segment that I think a demonstration 
might be really great. 
 
Igor: 
Sure. In fact, let‟s do a group demonstration. Why not?  
 
 
Welcome to the Advanced Covert Hypnosis Course. Now, I 
know you all have certain ideas about what hypnosis is and 
what it‟s not.  
 
 
So beyond the things you think it is, I‟d like for you to pause 
for a moment and realize that when we talk about advanced 
concepts, there are a lot of things happening that can‟t be 
what used to be in the simple level; otherwise, it wouldn‟t be 
advanced, would it?  
 
 
So would it be okay for you to just pause your thinking for a 
while and have a certain set of experiences, at the end of 
which you will be able to look back and realize that you 
discovered more about what it is than what you thought it 
should be. That makes sense, doesn‟t it?  
 
 
Do you want me to continue?  
[Silence] 
 
Igor: 
That was a mistake, wasn‟t it? Actually, the break is coming up very 
shortly. So, let‟s do the exercise and I‟ll happily give you more 
demonstrations as we go along. You get the gist of where we‟re 
coming from, right? Find a partner. Off you go. 
~~~ 
 
  
So, how was that? Did you enjoy it? Who impressed themselves with 
doing much more than they thought they could? We‟re getting there. 
Remember, you have some exercises to help you get to that point if 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               196                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
you‟re not quite there yet. Questions or comments before we go to 
break. Anyone?  
 
Audience: I was just wondering because I naturally just start doing something 
pretty similar to the previous exercises. I was thinking, well, there‟s all 
this other stuff. Maybe you were talking about it too, the stuff we had 
done the previous day. I wasn‟t sure. I was thinking, how do we do 
this now because this is kind of a different context.  
 
 
So I was a little uncertain about that. I was just wondering what we 
might have been doing there. 
 
Igor: 
In terms of the exercise itself, if you were doing this earlier on, well, 
you did much more in the chat than we wanted to. In other words, in 
the chat, all we wanted to do is put a little bit of spin here, a little bit 
of spin there. Just throwing in these words basically. 
 
 
In terms of the lecture, we‟re doing the same thing as in the chat, but 
first, the content has changed to something more important to you. 
Secondly, before you get to an important idea or a concept, you‟re 
going to create more spin so that their mind is going to settle in on 
your idea more clearly. We‟ll talk about how that happens more after 
the next break. 
 
 
I‟ll give you an example of – what was the topic you were talking 
about?  
 
Audience: I was just talking about getting different jobs. 
 
 
 
Igor: 
Getting a different job, right? What‟s important? Give me one 
important idea about getting a different job.  
 
Audience: Searching for a job. 
 
Igor: 
Searching for a job would help, wouldn‟t it?  
 
Audience: Yeah. 
 
Igor: 
Right. So if you just said to someone, go get a job. Just look for it. Is 
that likely to really inspire and motivate them? Not really, right? 
 
Audience: No. That‟s no fun. 
 
Igor: 
So, here‟s the kind of thing I was thinking about.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               197                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
We‟re in a certain kind of economy and we‟re all looking for 
jobs, right? Now, the thing about finding one is that when you 
think about all the things you haven‟t done yet to get that job, 
inside you‟ll find there‟s a person who absolutely fits the 
perfect job that you‟re looking for. All you have to do is start 
looking for a job. Start looking for a job that fits you as a 
person. 
 
 
Now, when you check inside, you know there‟s a perfect job for 
you, do you not? So when you go back and look back in 
yourself, you will have been in the right job only once you‟ve 
searched for it knowing what it is you‟re looking for. So how 
would we set aside time looking for the kind of job that you 
want?  
 
 
Wouldn‟t that be something? Do you see what just happened? How 
much more interested are you in finding a job now, although you 
probably have one already? Do you see where we‟re going with this? 
So the idea is that you‟re now learning to present your ideas in such a 
way that their mind goes oh, I like that. It does that out here because 
out here it hasn‟t got the normal problems and frames of references to 
reject it. 
 
 
Does it mean you‟ll persuade everyone? No, because if your idea is 
bad for them, they‟ll still be able to figure that bit out. The bit that 
we‟re talking about in terms of persuasion is they won‟t automatically 
reject you or your idea, because it doesn‟t fit their limited view of life 
right now, which is probably why they haven‟t got a job at the 
moment. They‟re still stuck here. 
 
 
 
Do you see the Catch-22 that they‟re in? You‟re breaking the Catch-22 
and then giving the advice you‟re going to be giving them anyway, but 
in such a way that they can actually accept it. Can you make more 
sense of the exercise now? Yes. 
 
Audience: I was just talking about the tools we were using, first. I really felt that 
that was pretty cool.  
 
Igor: 
You‟re welcome. Write it down. Keep it. Buy the video tape and you‟ll 
have it.  
 
 
 
This is where we‟re heading. I don‟t expect you to be as fluent, easy 
and natural at this yet. You‟ll get there, if not on this course, when you 
practice at home and start applying it in practical situations. You will 
get there.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               198                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
I‟m giving you tools now, you‟ve spent two days preparing your mind 
to be able to use them and now we‟re going to start easing our way 
into using them in a practical step-by-step manner.  
 
 
So you see where we‟re going, we‟re starting to escalate things a little 
bit now. And all the questions like, I don‟t know what‟s up, I talk like 
I‟m on drugs, etc. and all those concerns are starting to erode or fade 
away as we start applying the crazy stuff you‟ve been doing for the 
last few days. 
 
 
Anyone else? I‟ve done that good of a job, that‟s great. Well, in that 
case we have a break coming. Have a nice one. 
 
DVD 09 
Full Transcript  
 
 
Igor: 
Let‟s see if we can start ramping this up a little bit in terms of the 
practical applicability. The principle we played with before the break 
was the idea that when you have something important, an idea to 
present, you want to create a little bit of mind-bending language.  
 
 
A little bit of spin first to open the mind up so that when the idea gets 
presented, it has somewhere fresh to sit, rather than somewhere old 
where it gets automatically rejected or categorized in a way that may 
not be useful for it.  
 
 
Let me tell you where I got this idea from, or rather a little bit of 
research that backs this up. There was a great little study done in 
Europe, I believe it was, and I think another here in the U.S. as well. 
They wanted to check how reframes work. 
 
 
Does anyone here understand what reframing is? Reframing is when 
you take an idea that people of think of this way, and then to just 
switch their view so they go oh, actually maybe it‟s a little bit different. 
People, go, oh yeah, I get it. It‟s probably more valuable this way. 
 
 
Here‟s what they did. They had a supermarket where people were 
going around doing their shopping and so on. They had one of these 
displays with the little cheese niblets or little mini wine cups where you 
get to try things out.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               199                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
When people came up to try out the cheese niblets or the wine, or 
whatever they were using, they tried it and thought it was kind of nice. 
People said, how much is it? They would test it, this reframe process 
that we‟re about to go into, versus a regular thing. So some people 
said, how much is it? They‟d go oh, its $10, straightforward into the 
price. No big deal. Ten dollars is not too much for a high quality 
cheese. It‟s in the range there somewhere.  
 
 
The other group, when they turned around and said, how much is it, 
they would say, oh, its 10,000 cents. That‟s only $10 to you and me. 
Now let me repeat this because the timing is important. How much is 
it? Oh, it‟s 10,000 cents. That‟s only $10 to you and me.  Or maybe 
it‟s only 1,000 cents, but you know where I‟m going with this.  
 
 
 
Now just based on that alone, the number of sales, in other words the 
number of people that actually bought a cheese and put it in their 
basket to go to the checkout and so on – I can‟t remember what the 
numbers were, something like 60% or something like that. There was 
a massive increase.  
 
 
 
Think about what‟s happening there. They have a mind-bending 
moment, don‟t they – 1,000 cents. Who thinks in number of cents 
when it comes to that kind of number? How much is 1,000 cents? How 
much is 10,000 cents? Of course, you can work it out, but notice how 
your brain has to start clicking into gear now. So you have a little bit 
of space. Then, we have a subtle spin, only $10. So the word only is 
the reframe. It tells your mind that it‟s diminished; it‟s not increased.  
 
 
Based on that, people went, oh, that‟s a great bargain. Fine, I‟ll take 
it. It wasn‟t even a hardcore reframe. It was a very simple one. The 
reason we‟re mentioning this is why? First, you do not use crazy drug-
induced, mind-bending language patterns in order to influence and 
persuade. You do not.  
 
 
With some people, you might and with some people, you don‟t. It‟s 
just a question of how much spin do you put in to make it work in that 
context. If you didn‟t put another spin in the first time, do you know 
what you do? You spin again. You add a little more the second time, 
until you start getting it.  
 
 
What I want to do now is start exploring how to think as a covert 
hypnotist, especially with this mind-bending language stuff. How do we 
start using this a bit more strategically, shall we say? 
 
 
So this is where your conscious minds are actually a bit of use. Feel 
free to bring them back. Let‟s take a simple scenario, and you can sort 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               200                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
of adapt this in many different ways. I‟m using a very typical scenario 
that‟s easy to understand. 
 
 
Let‟s say you‟re selling something: a product, a service, a seminar, 
DVD set, hypnotherapy practice, or whatever. What are some of the 
more typical objections people give? One might be, for example, I 
have no time for that sort of thing. Or, I‟d love to do that, but I don‟t 
think I have time for that. I‟ve got all these crazy things going on.  
 
 
Another thing might be I don‟t have enough money. I have no cash for 
that. In terms of objections, does anyone here do sales as part of their 
living? If you have your own business, you‟re doing sales. Aren‟t these 
amongst the highest, most frequent objections you end up getting?  
 
 
I mean I know there are others, but I want to look at these just 
because it‟s going to be a useful way of deconstructing how people 
think so that you know at what point to start strategically leveraging 
your mind-bending language. Make sense?  
 
 
 
So when someone says they have no time, what are they really 
saying? In terms of what we‟re doing here, what they‟re really saying 
is, this is my reality, and inside here the bit that allows me to buy this 
product is so small that I have no time allocated for it. The fact is they 
have plenty of time, because that‟s how lives work.  
 
 
There are very few people who generally run out of time for things 
because they have more important things going on. They‟re comparing 
how much time they have left at the end of the day, spare, for this 
activity. What aren‟t they thinking about? Forget even all this. They‟re 
not even thinking about the rest of their lives; the places, for example, 
where they‟re wasting time that they don‟t need.  
 
 
So when someone says to you, I have no time, doesn‟t that make you 
a little curious? What do they spend their time on? I‟m sure there are 
some very important things, like sleeping. That‟s important. But how 
much do they sleep? Is it 10 hours a day? Or is it six? 
 
 
If they spend their time watching TV, watching soap operas and so on, 
-- for example, let‟s say you‟re doing a hypnotherapy practice, just 
because that‟s kind of my background. If they say they have no time 
to come to the clinic, they‟re telling you that they‟d rather watch 
Oprah than overcome a life-long phobia.  
 
 
They‟d rather watch Jerry Springer and all the crazy people on that – I 
have to admit, that‟s kind of nuts. I mean talk about mind-bending 
moments, right? They‟d rather watch that than actually be happy in 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               201                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
their life. They‟d rather sit there and be miserable watching that than 
do something about whatever‟s making them miserable and change it.  
 
 
Do you see where we‟re going with this? Now, of course, they don‟t 
realize this. If you point it out, they might go, oh wow. It‟s a mind-
bending moment. The thing is the reason they don‟t realize it is 
because they‟re so stuck in the tiny little dot that says, this is what 
spare time I have, and it‟s not enough for that. They don‟t realize that 
they can find time somewhere else, other than where they‟re looking 
for it. 
 
 
By the way, can you already hear the mind-bending language starting 
to develop from this place? The kinds of things I‟m interested in are, 
first of all, what are they wasting their time on? Let‟s say it‟s a soap 
opera. Great. So what do you value more, the soap opera or being 
happy? Which is more valuable to you?  
 
 
 
 
So, let me ask you this. Do you value your happiness enough to skip 
two episodes of your favorite soap opera in order to be happy? 
Wouldn‟t that be something? Can you hear the tiny amount of spin put 
into that? That‟s enough usually, isn‟t it?  
 
 
Now, we‟re adding our understanding of how people think into the 
whole mix, and it becomes a little more persuasive. Do you see where 
we‟re going with this? 
 
 
Any questions or comments so far?  
 
Audience: Does that factor in that watching the soap opera has become an 
addiction? 
 
Igor: 
It doesn‟t have to. That‟s the whole point. It doesn‟t have to because 
when you present the logic in a particular way with mind-bending spin, 
it will take them beyond the addiction enough that they actually can 
commit to coming to you and doing something about it. What we‟re 
doing is putting in enough momentum, that‟s all.  
 
 
Now, for some people, it may not be enough. Do you know what you 
do at that point? More spin. All you‟re doing is you‟re taking them 
beyond the place where they‟re locked in. An addiction is this little 
circle that‟s so tight, they can‟t get out of it. The walls are so high they 
can‟t jump out of it.  
 
Especially 
those 
of 
you 
who 
have 
done 
the 
conversational 
hypnotherapy training, you‟ve seen it over and over again how we can 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               202                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
jump people out of that cycle straightforwardly using mind-bending 
language. We‟ll talk a little bit about that sort of thing later today as 
well. 
 
 
So it‟s a just a question of getting them out of that cycle long enough 
to have choice again. Then, when they have genuine choice, what are 
they going to choose? The addiction of watching a soap opera, which 
doesn‟t really add any value to life? Or doing something for an hour or 
two that will totally transfer their lives so they‟ll be happier, healthier 
and stronger and lead a more fulfilling life? 
 
 
When presented like that, and there is actually genuine choice going 
on, it‟s a no-brainer, isn‟t it? It only isn‟t a no-brainer when something 
else is interfering. Exactly. If– as Doug was suggesting– they‟re still in 
their addition whilst they‟re making the choice. Do you see how this 
works? 
 
 
 
When you‟re working as some kind of salesperson – and by the way, 
you are all salespeople. You‟re selling ideas and concepts as much as 
you‟re selling products and services.  
 
So the point of putting the spin in is to loosen people up from being 
stuck in just one little way of being, so they can actually have a bigger 
perspective and say, in my whole of my life, how does this fit in that 
can be positive? If it does, they‟ll go for it. If it does not, why should 
they go for it? If you haven‟t got a good enough offer, that‟s all that 
happens. 
 
 
Let‟s do this as a group a little bit.  
 
Audience: My question may be beyond the scope of what we‟re doing at this 
point. No intent. Would the use of the predicate language be as 
effective in terms of taking people into a spin, when we are not doing 
it in person, but in writing? 
 
Igor: 
Yes, and you have to be more careful in writing. Because of the static 
medium, you can‟t interact with the person, so you don‟t know how 
much is too much. That‟s the first problem. The second problem is you 
can‟t enforce the tempo.  
 
So I could say to you, for example, only consider this idea to the 
extent that you don‟t go beyond your normal limitations and it makes 
your life happier. I can‟t do that in a letter because you‟ll choose the 
pace. You can enforce things a little bit with paragraphing and 
sentence structure, and so on, but it‟s a lot weaker.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               203                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
So as a rule yes, you can use it, but I would tend to sprinkle it much 
more lightly because it‟s a lot harder to entrain someone‟s attention 
that way. 
 
Audience: Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
You‟re welcome.  
 
So you get the idea generally, in terms of what we‟re doing with the 
idea of no time. We‟re going behind the scenes. We‟re figure out how 
is their life organized so they can come to this conclusion, and where 
is the flaw in their reasoning? Where is the mistake they‟re making? In 
the sense of no time, it‟s that their wasting time on the wrong things, 
and they just don‟t know that. 
 
 
Does that make sense to everyone, yes/no?  
 
To repeat it, when people say they no time, very rarely do they really, 
genuinely have no time. What they‟re telling you is that at the end of 
the day, when they count up how much spare time is left to do stuff, 
there‟s nothing left. What they‟re not realizing is that during the day, 
there are a whole bunch of things that time gets waste on.  
 
The example we‟re using here is a soap opera. It doesn‟t have to be 
the soap opera though. It might just be an inefficient use of time. 
 
 
Most corporations have people working in them very industriously, and 
they get done in a day what someone who‟s really focusing on wanting 
to get the job done can do in an hour or two. It‟s just the way the 
corporations a lot of times work. There‟s always going to be more time 
– well, not always.  
 
There tends to always be more time, so most people will have more 
time than they think. It‟s just that they‟re not looking for it in the right 
place. They‟re looking for it at the end of the day when there‟s nothing 
left, rather than in the middle of the day when they‟re wasting it on 
something that‟s not important.  
 
Then it comes down to not how much time do you have, but how 
important that something is. Let me ask you this. How many of you 
here have children? Let‟s say someone says, buy this or come to this 
seminar, or whatever. You say I‟m sorry; I don‟t have time for that. 
Because you‟re busy people, right, is that fair? Now, let‟s say that 
you‟re doing one of these busy things, one of these important things.  
 
In fact, choose the most important activity that you‟re doing. You get 
a phone call, you hear your house is on fire and your kids are still 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               204                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
inside. What do you do? You find time, don‟t you? You make time, so 
time exists. 
 
 
It‟s just the question of either they value all of these frivolous activities 
more than what you have, in which case either you haven‟t presented 
your idea clearly enough, in terms of the value of it; or it‟s no good as 
an idea for that individual, in which case let it go. No big deal, right? 
There will be other people. 
 
 
So let‟s do this same idea. I want you to start thinking about this. If 
someone tells you they have no cash, I don‟t have enough money. Oh, 
I‟m a poor little bugger. I can‟t do this. Please give it to me for free. 
Please. This has happened to you, hasn‟t it? It does happen. 
Occasionally, you might even do it because the person might actually 
be genuinely deserving and so on. 
 
 
As a rule, when someone says they have no cash, what are they 
saying?  
 
Audience: They‟re not saying that they don‟t have any cash. They just don‟t want 
to spend it on what I have to offer. 
 
Igor: 
Right. Has anyone here ever bought something completely idiotic, put 
it on their shelf and then look at it and go, why the hell did I buy that? 
It‟s still sitting on that shelf, isn‟t it? Probably still in the box it was 
bought in, sealed, unopened, taking up space.  
 
And if I can hazard a guess here, some of those things weren‟t even 
cheap, were they? How do you spend $100 or $200, maybe $1,000 or 
$2,000 on some item that brings you no value whatsoever because it‟s 
still in a box? 
 
 
So if you think of that one little item that could actually transform your 
life, you can‟t afford that. Ladies, how many shoes do you have? I 
know I‟m in risky territory here, but what do you value more? Those 
shoes or your whole life? Exactly. Risky territory.  
 
Even then, it‟s just a question of figuring out what it is about shoes 
they value. It‟s not the shoes; it‟s how you feel when you‟re wearing 
them. It‟s how you look. It‟s how you think others will perceive you. 
How about spending time learning to look, feel and move that way, 
whether or not you‟re wearing shoes, so it‟s you that they‟re looking at 
and not your shoes? Wouldn‟t that be worthwhile? 
 
 
How many shoes would you give up for that? All of them, right? I hope 
you have a lot because I‟m expensive. Do you see where we‟re going 
with this? Do you see how when people present you with an objection 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               205                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
of any sort – and we‟re just using a sales objection right now. It could 
just as easily be a therapeutic objection, like oh, my life is miserable. I 
can‟t move on. If only so and so changed, I‟d be okay. That‟s kind of 
typical one, isn‟t it? 
 
 
It‟s exactly the same thing though, isn‟t it? What happens is everybody 
has internally some kind of a flawed logic, because they‟re stuck 
thinking about too small a circle. In so doing, their logic is flawless in 
the expression of it. Like if that person did change, they would be 
much better. No doubt about it. Maybe. Or they don‟t have the cash. 
No doubt about it. Maybe.  
 
 
Our job, now when we start getting more strategic about this is not 
just to add spin before you throw in the ideas, it‟s to realize that 
people get stuck in very small dots of their experience not realizing 
that when they look at the larger picture, more is possible.  
 
Does that make sense? Any questions so far?  
 
Audience: The question I had was when dealing with an individual when it comes 
to an objection, what technique would you use to soften the rebuttal, 
because in former years I‟d try to use force to overcome the objection? 
 
Igor: 
Sure. Sometimes that is actually the correct approach as well. Some 
people just need to be mauled in a particular way. But really, the 
difference for me is the difference between this and that. Force versus 
respect. Where are you coming from when you‟re doing it? Then, you 
can maul people quite happily.  
 
Not all the time. Because you‟re doing it in respectful ways, going what 
are you talking about? I know you. You‟re better than that. Are you 
really telling me this is the case? Okay. Let‟s find out. But you don‟t do 
it like, what are you talking about! Huh! Are you stupid? What about 
this? Are you stupid?  
 
Do you feel the difference in terms of the approach? This is what we 
started day one on, precisely for this day. All the other stuff that 
you‟re doing, it definitely helps those things, but there‟s a difference 
between force and respect. Forcing your opinion, versus respecting 
them. 
 
Then, you can do all kinds of things with it. Let‟s take the example of 
no time. Remember the agreement reversal from day one? That was 
pretty nice. You agree with them, but you have a little spin on it so 
they don‟t get locked in position. So let‟s take those conservational 
hypnotherapy DVDs in the back of the room. A useful product. If it was 
going for free, who‟d want it?  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               206                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Now, somebody might think, I‟m not sure I have the time to look at it. 
Why would you want it? What would it do for you? Now, when you 
consider all those moments in your life when you‟re actually using time 
for things that you don‟t even care about – you can think of tons of 
things that you do that are almost on autopilot: watching TV, wasting 
time looking into space.  
 
Sometimes, haven‟t you all had days where you spend the entire day 
doing absolutely nothing of value at all, and then suddenly the sun 
goes down, and you think to yourself, what the hell just happened? 
Where did your day go? Because you achieved nothing of any value, 
right. We all do it. 
 
 
 
So instead of thinking of all the time that you‟ve wasted, wouldn‟t it be 
worthwhile having something to do in those times that goes beyond 
the waste that you have and actually does something for you in terms 
of your career, either as a hypnotist, or as a professional influencer? 
Wouldn‟t that be worth exploring? I don‟t know.  
 
At the very least, for those days when you‟re actually wasting time and 
have nothing better to do, because you don‟t realize that there is 
something there waiting for you, wouldn‟t it be nice to just be able to 
pop a DVD in and watch? Think about all the TV programs you watch 
that you don‟t even care about, whoever sat clicking through a TV 
program flick, flick, flick; it‟s kind of a pattern, isn‟t it? You get into a 
routine, right? We‟ve all done it. 
 
So instead of being stuck flicking, how about you just put something in 
that‟s worth watching, even if you don‟t pay attention to it. Surely 
your mind is going to grow beyond where it was just by watching 
something you‟re not even interested in, not fully, but it has valuable 
content, versus just flicking between ads. Wouldn‟t that improve your 
life if that replaced your ads? 
 
So if you think of it like that, it‟s kind of saving your brain from all the 
mindless stuff on TV. I don‟t know how much that‟s worth to you. I 
imagine, I mean I‟m not going to say it‟s something like $10,000, 
$20,000. Although, in the period of time that you actually spend 
wasting on those advertisements, it may well end up amounting to 
that in terms of your life.  
 
Even if we‟re just talking about a couple hundred dollars, isn‟t that 
something worth investing in, rather than wasting your time watching 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               207                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
TV? I don‟t know. You tell me. By the way, the DVD set is for sale, and 
it‟s good. Who‟s got it? Anyone? It‟s good, isn‟t it? 
 
Do you see what we went through here? We went through a time 
objection, and we did exactly what we talked about. We started with 
the agreement. So I understand, you really think you don‟t have any 
time. That‟s agreement, isn‟t it? But I‟m not locked into position.  
 
You really think that? Now, as we consider – notice where we‟re going 
now. We‟re going to an awareness frame. Remember the awareness 
language from day two?  
 
As you consider all those things that you only waste time on – can you 
hear the mind-bending language begin to spin into it – all those things 
that you only waste time on beyond the things that you actually want 
to do and achieve in life. So when you‟ve done them and you look 
back and go oh, my God what a waste. You have whole days where 
you just go through them in a daze, and nothing happens. 
 
So how much more would you want to have in your life, not have 
those moments, so you have moments that are actually worth living? 
Wouldn‟t that be something? 
 
Can you feel the spins happening? Now I‟m not actually necessarily 
forcing anything on you, am I? All I‟m doing is, I‟m freeing you from 
the day-to-day mundane things where it says it‟s okay to waste this 
time watching TV and wasting my life, and so on. 
 
Then  I‟ll present to you an idea which might be an alternative, which 
is instead of watching all these random TV programs or just flicking 
through it, how much more valuable would your life be if you had 
something you can put on that you can watch just as mindlessly, but 
at least it prepares your mind to be more influential and have a richer 
life and more positive life instead? 
 
You‟re doing the same activity. It‟s just the result is different, isn‟t it? 
Isn‟t that something worth investing in? I don‟t know. You tell me. 
 
It genuinely has to be your choice. I personally, honestly, do not care 
whether you buy the set or not. I know that as aggregate, they will be 
bought, and they will be bought by a lot of people because it has 
value. All of those who have it know that. You appreciate it. The 
refund rate on that is virtually nil.  
 
So I‟m not trying to persuade you. Remember, that‟s forcing my 
opinion. You have to buy this or your life will suck! I don‟t come from 
that sort of school. But I can create a space in your mind where you 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               208                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
start thinking, hang on a second. You know my life could be a little bit 
richer.  
 
It could have a little bit more in it, and those moments I‟ve wasted 
doing stuff that is mindless, well I could just do mindless tasks to 
actually build something, rather than not. It‟s up to you if you want 
that or not. It‟s really not my choice.  
 
Do you see how we‟re now very softly breaking through objections by 
understanding the mindset that allows them to exist in the first place? 
 
You won‟t always catch people this way. Why? Because sometimes the 
objections that you‟ve kind of mind read a bit, in terms of how it 
works, you‟ll miss the point.  
 
When they say no time, it might be that their kids are screaming 
around all the time. There‟s no time to concentrate and so on. That‟s a 
very different scenario to wasting time watching TV, isn‟t it? So then 
you may have to explore that in a different way, and we‟ll touch on 
that s we go through it a little bit more. 
 
For the moment, do you get the principle of how you use mind-
bending language coupled with the reframe?  
 
 
You have an idea.  
 
Someone presents an objection.  
 
You run some spins around it. 
 
You present them the idea again and it has somewhere fresh to 
go. 
 
If you understand the mindset that allowed them to conclude the 
objection – because this is not really the objection, it‟s all their 
thinking. This is the conclusion behind all the thinking that got them to 
this place. Does that make sense? 
 
If you can understand that thinking, and you use your mind-bending 
language around that thinking, the conclusion disappears, doesn‟t it? 
Which means the objection disappears. Do you see how that works? 
Yes? 
 
Audience: Thank you. So, it might also have a late effect, right? So I might still 
decide that I don‟t want to buy that DVD, but then I get home and I‟m 
flicking through the channels, and I‟m like, man, I should have bought 
that DVD. So as soon as the office opens the next morning, I‟m on the 
phone saying, I‟m going to buy that DVD. So it doesn‟t necessarily 
happen in that moment. You might plant a seed to blossom later. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               209                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
Exactly. Bear in mind, of course, that you can always enhance the 
effect a little bit by pointing things out like this. If you go home and 
think about it twice, it will be twice as expensive because there‟s a 
discount here. So you‟re now adding a little bit more spin. It‟s like, oh, 
I don‟t know. They‟re thinking that way already, right. So you may as 
well make the decision easy for them. 
 
 
You‟re absolutely correct. By the way, there are people who are quite 
happy saying no, I want to think about this. They‟re quite happy to 
pay the extra money just to have extra time. No big deal, right? So 
yes, you‟re absolutely correct.  
 
 
 
You either capture them in the moment because they‟ll be able to 
click, or on some occasions, they need to have some experience in life 
that reminds them, yeah, man, this really sucks. All right, I‟m going to 
go for Plan B after all.  
 
 
Do you see how this is a much gentler way of – not even just in sales, 
but in terms of influence in general. You‟re creating a context where 
people can and want to be influenced, rather than trying to force an 
opinion on them, which is very disrespectful to them as a person.  
 
 
Do you see how that works?  
 
Audience: So with regards to time, when I‟ve trained some of my students – 
because I‟m a broker, and I have agents that work. They don‟t have 
time. So in order to overcome that before, I actually start my training 
by saying, let‟s everybody get together a daily schedule. What time do 
you guys get up in the morning? Oh, 6:00. What time do you go to 
bed at night? 10:00.  
 
And every half an hour, I‟ve had them put what they normally do. 
Television takes at least four hours, so I times that by seven, and say, 
you‟ve lost so many hours. You‟ve lost a whole day just watching 
mindless TV. Then, I‟ll go, that Oprah episode that was on Monday, 
what all did they talk about? They can‟t remember.  
 
Like if I say to them, what happened on 911? What did you eat? What 
did you do? Where were you? People won‟t remember. But training 
they will remember. So every objection that I have – I‟m talking about 
my personal experiences, it‟s my own roadblocks I‟ve put inside. I 
have built that little circle around me, but since I made that, I can 
break it.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               210                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
Exactly. That‟s exactly right. All we‟re doing as covert hypnotists is 
we‟re assisting that process. We‟re helping them escape to this point 
where they have more freedom of choice, genuine freedom of choice, 
which includes whatever it is you‟re offering them. 
 
 
If at that point a better offer comes along than yours, well then, you 
either better up the ante or step back and let them enjoy their life. 
Either way is better, right?  
 
Audience: In regard to the no time objection, you need to understand the setting 
and the mindset of the people without intruding into their personal life. 
Because the minute they feel that you‟re analyzing them, it defies the 
purpose. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s all about where the respect comes in. So you say, I‟m just 
curious. Tell me a little bit more about this, and so on. 
 
Audience: Right. Now, when you do this mind-bending language – the 
agreement, the awareness and the spins, the predicates, do they have 
different impacts if they are space, time? You‟re talking about time. Do 
you use only time, or do you use a variety of things. 
 
Igor: 
Ask me tomorrow. We‟re not there yet. There will be, but we‟re not 
there yet. Okay? For the moment, just think of it in very simple terms. 
You have an objection. You understand the mindset behind the 
objection. You‟re going to put some spin around the mindset, rather 
than the objection directly, so that the objection itself dissolves 
because the mindset behind it has disappeared.  
 
 
Then you offer your product, your service or your idea, and the whole 
thing becomes at that level much more influential. If you do nothing 
about that, and you spin in random directions, you‟ll be in decent 
shape. In terms of how you tactically proceed from there, that‟ll be 
more for tomorrow. Let‟s just build it up one step at a time. That‟s a 
very good question though. 
 
 
So, are we good with this so far?  
 
Audience: I just thought of this. When a salesperson, in writing or in person, says 
I don‟t personally care if you buy this and they focus on the value to 
you, there‟s something that happens there. I‟m just curious if you can 
explain what‟s going on, where it‟s almost like you‟re getting sucked in 
more because they‟re saying they don‟t care. 
 
Igor: 
It‟s not just that they‟re saying it. They have to actually mean it. The 
difference is the question of neediness. If someone needs you to do 
something, they‟re imposing on you. This is true. Does anyone here 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               211                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
know someone who‟s really friendly and does things for you and so 
on?  
 
They‟re always going to be extra nice and extra helping, and they‟re so 
annoying that you just actually cross the street when you see them 
walking down the road towards you? Does anyone know people like 
that? What‟s happening there is those people are so needy.  
 
They need your approval, and they‟re willing to try to bribe you to get 
that approval by doing tasks for you. It‟s not the tasks that are 
embarrassing to you. It‟s the way you feel put upon.  
 
 
They‟re actually violating your personal space, your boundaries, by 
trying to suck value of you because they don‟t feel valuable 
themselves. Unless you keep validating them, they‟ll feel bad. So now 
they‟re putting the onus on you to make them feel good by continually 
validating them. It‟s a huge responsibility, right? 
 
We feel that intuitively, and we don‟t like it because they‟re not giving 
you any value. Your life without them is much better than your life 
with them in it.  
 
So when a salesperson really needs the sale, he‟s imposing on you. 
It‟s no longer about you; it‟s about the sale. He needs something from 
you to feel better himself. It‟s exactly the same dynamic going on, but 
in a different setting.  
 
Now, when a salesperson honestly doesn‟t care because he‟s going to 
get paid either way, and he‟s just being a friendly person, at that 
point, the mechanism switches.  
 
1. First, it‟s refreshing. How many of you have actually walked out 
of a shop where you actually knew what you wanted to buy, it‟s 
there at a price you want, purely because the salesperson 
oversold you? It makes you feel uncomfortable.  
 
That discomfort is that neediness. Please, please, please, let me help 
you buy this stuff because it will make my commission go through the 
roof.  
 
2. If, on the other hand, they‟re in it for you, it‟s like, I‟ll get paid 
no matter what. If you don‟t buy it, there will be 10 people 
through this door that will buy it.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               212                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
So honestly, I don‟t care if this one sale is the one that ends up being 
a sale, or no sale, because I know it‟s going to be bought one way or 
the other. 
 
Now I can spend time focusing on you and saying, does this fit you? 
There was a gentleman who came in here the other day, I think it‟s 
one of you in the course, who had one of his friends with him. He said 
I want to use this for public speaking. Which one fits? I actually 
dissuaded him. He had a thing where when he listens to stuff, he falls 
asleep.  
 
If I was going to be the cheesy salesperson, I would say, yeah, of 
course, sleep learning works great. Yeah, buy it. Buy all of it. But no, 
because it doesn‟t work. I said, if you can‟t stay awake to listen to it, 
then don‟t buy it. Seriously. Put it down. Walk away. Save your 
money. It‟s useless to you. 
 
Now, if there are times that you can listen to it without falling asleep, 
for example, if you drive a car or there‟s some strategy you can use, 
like taking notes and so on that will keep you awake enough to if you 
go with this stuff, in that case I recommend you try this thing for these 
reasons, that thing for those reasons. If you can‟t do it, don‟t waste 
your money on it. 
 
Why would I sell him something he‟ll regret? Does that make sense? 
Now that person may go out and forget about me. He may go out and 
tell his friends oh, this is a really cool guy. It‟s because I don‟t need 
the sale. I don‟t need you to do anything for me to feel better about it. 
 
This is very important. Especially for those of you who are more 
regular hypnotists or hypnotherapists. One of the big reasons a 
hypnotherapist fails – and I did this so much when I first started – is 
they need their client to tell them how amazing the whole thing was 
before they can feel good about themselves as a hypnotist. 
 
I need you to go into a trance; otherwise, I‟m a big fat failure. Can you 
see the amount of pressure put on the client at that point? When you 
take that away, the irony is trances are very easy to get with most 
people, not with all.  
 
The H+ is not I need you to feel good, or have a positive effect. It‟s I 
want it for you. I don‟t want anything from you, but I do want it for 
you. Do you appreciate the difference now? It‟s a very, very important 
difference. It goes right back to what we talked about on the very first 
day. Need implies force. You have to give this to me, and I‟m going to 
keep reeling it to you, whether I do it directly or indirectly, passive-
aggressive or pure aggressive, until I get it. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               213                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
 
 
Respect, on the other hand, is I‟m offering. Here‟s some value. If you 
want it, great. If not, I‟m offering it more because it amuses me. I‟m 
doing it because I like doing it. Whether or not you buy it, I don‟t even 
care. For example, a whole bunch of you have asked me about 
products and so on.  
 
This evening, after the session is over, I‟ll happily talk to you about all 
the different products and what they do, how they work, how I use 
them and how they might work for you; plus, I‟ll give you some cool 
demos, like Street Hypnosis stuff, which is videotaping, so you may as 
well hang out for that as well.  
 
 
Now, my purpose there is just to show you what the value is. It 
amuses me because I really like my own products. When I see them I 
go, this is so good. It‟s true. Just so you know how I do this, 
everything on that table exists because no one else would make it. So 
I‟m like, God damn it, if you‟re not going to make it, I will!  
 
 
So I really like it. I‟m quite happy to talk about. So I‟m not doing it to 
try to force you to buy more stuff. I‟m doing it because I like talking 
about it, because I enjoy it. If you enjoy it too, then so much the 
better. If you don‟t, fine. Have a nice dinner. Enjoy your life. It‟s all 
going to be good. 
 
 
Does that answer your question? 
 
Audience: It does, and it reminds me of when I bought a car about five years 
ago, the salesman who was the head salesman at the place, the entire 
time all we talked about was his hobby of collecting old books. When 
we finished, he said exactly what you said, which was – because I was 
obviously hesitant about the price and stuff.  
 
He said look, I don‟t care if you buy this. I make my money on 
volume. If you leave today and never come back, I‟m going to make 
my commission tomorrow, the next day, and the day after that.  
 
 
It all made sense to me, and yet there was a part of my brain that felt 
like somehow I was being screwed because I had this preconceived 
notion that car salesmen will always screw you. And then, I thought 
about it afterward, and I realized you know what? It doesn‟t have to 
be that way. That‟s why I ended up buying the car, and I felt good 
about the whole thing. 
 
Igor: 
Right. If all he had was a little bit of mind-bending language to get you 
out of that mindset, then you‟d have actually felt good much sooner 
because you would have liberated your mind to go, it‟s fine. The car 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               214                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
does what I want it to do, and I trust this person enough to believe 
what he says, in terms of its quality and so on. Great! Does that make 
sense? 
 
 
These are the key processes in the whole influence process. If you 
don‟t put these bits in, you can have the most amazing language in 
the world, and all you‟ll ever be is a sleazy nobody, because that‟s the 
character you‟re projecting. Does that make sense? 
 
 
You can go ahead and do that if you want. It makes no difference to 
me. It‟s your life. Life will very quickly educate you in terms of the 
results you‟re getting.  
So feel free to play with it both ways, and when you get your fingers 
burnt don‟t come running to me because I‟ll laugh. I‟ll say I told you. 
Well, either you learn your lesson, or you move on. It‟s up to you. 
 
 
So it‟s time to do an exercise. All of you have a particular topic that 
you want to influence people on. Is that correct? You spoke about it 
just before the break in the last exercise. 
 
 
What I‟d like for you to do now is get together in groups of three or 
four people, and spend about 20 minutes, let‟s say a half an hour 
doing the following. 
 
 
In your groups of three or four people, I want you to sit down and 
write down what are the most common objections to your product, 
your service, your idea, your concept or whatever it is you‟re selling. 
Be that an early bed time for your kids, be it that you can be more 
productive at work for your work colleagues, or be it that your product 
or service is the thing that this company or person needs to buy. 
 
 
In other words, whatever area you want to be more influential in, just 
focus on that. Find two or three objections that typically arise. Now, 
this is something you‟re familiar with, so you know what the objections 
are, don‟t you? Is that a yes? Is that a no? Is that like, huh? Help me 
out on this one. 
 
 
So you know what objections typically arise when you present your 
topic, your idea, your service or your product, and so on. Yes? Hands 
up if you do. So a few hands.  
 
 
The next thing I want you to do is start thinking what happens behind 
the line when they give you the objection that is not actually the 
objection. That is the conclusion they‟ve come to, as a result of 
thinking certain thoughts, and not thinking others. Just like having no 
time is a result of thinking well, at the end of the day when I go to 
bed, that‟s it. No time left. I don‟t sit there getting bored.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               215                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
What they‟re not thinking is about the time they‟re watching TV, the 
time they‟re just dangling their feet out the window, or the times that 
they‟re staring into space and not thinking of anything in particular. 
They may value that time, which is fine. Or they may not. 
 
 
So your job is to, in your group, just throw out different ideas of how 
could someone possibly come to this conclusion, in terms of what they 
need to think to get there, and what they need to avoid thinking to get 
there. Make sense? 
 
 
Once you have that, I want you to just create some random mind-
bending language spins that includes all those things they‟re not 
thinking about, so that they are, and all the things that you do think 
about in a bigger picture, so they‟re not thinking about them in the 
same way.  
 
 
So you‟re doing the same thing we just did here a moment ago. It‟s 
just in something that actually matches and fits what you need to do 
with people. By the way, that can be a therapeutic thing too. I have 
problem (X), they‟re still thinking in a certain way to have that 
problem. For the moment, we‟ll keep it simple enough just so we have 
some simple reframes, and then we‟ll start making this more 
sophisticated as we continue. 
 
 
Is that okay with you? Do you understand the exercise? Any 
questions? All right.  
 
Audience: It‟s all written or, when you say create spins, we‟re free associating? 
 
Igor: 
You can do both. You‟ll actually role play, but I want you to say them 
out loud so you have the experience of doing it. If you want to write 
them first, that‟s fine. If you do write them first, however, what I 
strongly recommend is that you don‟t read them out. You just recreate 
them, and if they‟re a little different, that‟s fine.  
 
You‟re only writing them to focus your mind, but when you‟re 
speaking, you let something else come in if it comes in. There‟s no 
need to memorize it. That‟s the point I‟m coming at.  
 
Do you all understand the exercise? Three or four people. We‟ll have 
the assistants floating around the room, so if you want to have a hand 
in terms of not being sure about something, we‟ll float around and 
we‟ll help you. We‟ll have half an hour, so make sure that everyone 
gets a good go at this so that you have a good go at actually thinking 
through the internal logic that comes to the conclusion, which is the 
objection.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               216                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Then come up with some mind-bending spins. Not to persuade them, 
but purely to make them think about things they‟re not, and to 
consider things that they were thinking about in a different light. 
That‟s it. 
 
 
Whether or not you persuade that person is totally irrelevant. Does 
that make sense to you? Okay. Let‟s do half an hour, and let‟s do that 
now. Off you go. 
~~~ 
 
Igor: 
So, how was that? Did you enjoy that? Was that an interesting 
exercise? What kinds of things happened? What kinds of things came 
out of that? Anyone? Or was it so… go ahead? 
 
Audience: A lot more questions from my original question sprang up, and a lot of 
it had to do with my own… (hears himself on the mic and says, hello, 
give me a Barry White album and a dark room). 
 
Igor: 
There you go. I can do the dark room. I don‟t know about the album. 
 
Audience: A lot of extra questions came up, and a lot of it had to do more with 
my behavior and how I was viewing something. I think it‟s because the 
people I was working with – it wasn‟t in their face, where it was in my 
face. They were able to take a… 
 
Igor: 
So, you got some feedback as to how you‟re too involved in that 
sense, as well. It‟s a question of how you‟re influencing the whole 
influence and process in a way that you don‟t necessarily want as well.  
 
Audience: Yes and probably didn‟t know. 
 
Igor:  
Yeah, which is useful, isn‟t it? 
 
Audience: Totally. 
 
Igor: 
This is one of the reasons we like to have, shall we say, external 
figures, coaches, mentors, because they can see us in something 
where we don‟t see ourselves, and having that little bit of feedback at 
just the right time changes everything, doesn‟t it?  
 
Especially when you have a good coach or a good mentor who knows 
what they‟re looking for anyway, so they can capture it just as it 
happens, and then the timing of it is just beautiful at that point. So 
thanks, that was a good observation.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               217                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: I discovered that being in this group environment, that when I 
externalize it and put it outside of me to someone else,it seemed very 
easy. But when it was about me, I was like oh, I can‟t do this. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. This is very important. This is really the reason we‟re doing 
this at the moment. When it‟s about you, when you‟re doing it inside 
your own head, initially, you‟re still stuck in here. That‟s because 
you‟ve failed in these situations so many times – and that‟s not 
personal criticism, it‟s just that it happens. I fail all the time.  
 
 
When you talk to someone about it, it kind of naturally draws you out, 
even if it‟s just in your normal everyday awareness, not in that little 
black spot in the middle. At least then, you have more resources, more 
ways of handling it. So it‟s a very useful thing to externalize things 
sometimes.   
 
Now, there is something you can do that takes you beyond that. 
Would you like to learn how to do this process on yourself, so you 
learn how to think like a master covert hypnotist, and use mind-
bending language almost effortlessly because just the way you‟re 
thinking just produces it? Would that be useful to you? 
 
We‟ll do that after the lunch break. So are there anymore questions?  
 
Audience: This may be really just a comment. I found it very interesting that as I 
was listing the objections I normally get, it was very easy for me to list 
the objections. I know what they are. They‟re codified in my mind. It 
became much more interesting when I started exploring the mindset 
that had to be there and the mindset that had not to be there, and 
then… 
 
Igor: 
Yes, and they‟re both important, aren‟t they? 
 
Audience: Yes. They‟re both important and then, to aim strategy toward those, 
rather than to aim strategy toward the objections themselves. 
 
Igor: 
By the way, this is the key secret to being great at mind-bending 
language, and an amazing covert hypnotist. This is why you‟re in an 
advanced program now. It‟s because you‟re not dealing with things at 
face value anymore. You‟re going behind the scenes where the real 
stuff happens. Does that make sense? 
 
 
We‟ll be exploring more of those behind-the-scenes moments after the 
break, but this is really it. How many of you people are actually 
already in sales officially? How much do you wish that when you were 
going to sales training, rather than people telling you how to deal with 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               218                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
objections they actually showed you how to understand the mindset in 
the first place, so that you can actually think your way through 
problems, rather than just parrot ideas, which make no meaning to it 
initially?  
 
To me, that‟s the key to persuasion and the key to sales. It‟s not to 
take the surface value. That‟s a result. By the way, how many 
hypnotherapists are in the room? The same thing is true for your 
profession. I think it‟s true in any profession. The problems people 
present to you are not the problems. It‟s what they think their 
problems are. It‟s the conclusion they‟ve come to, as a result of the 
actual problem. Does that make sense? 
 
Sometimes you end up fixing the wrong problem, which is one of the 
reasons they come back.  
 
How would you like it if after the break we find a way of not only 
learning to think more in terms of a salesman, of the mindset that 
allows us to blow out objections before they even arise, but also as a 
hypnotherapist, when people come in with genuine problems, you can 
actually go to the real problem behind the problem, so that the 
problem they come up with, which could be virtually impossible to 
solve, actually just dissolves?  
 
Would that be worth doing? Well, I hope you enjoy your lunch in that 
case. We‟ll have an hour and a half for lunch, so be back here at 2:00. 
We‟ll be starting at 2:15 on the dot, so please be back on time, and 
we‟ll be doing some more fun things. Off you go. 
 
 
DVD 10 
Full Transcript  
 
 
Igor: 
So, this is the hypnotic equivalent of PTSD. We want you to wake up in 
the middle of the night and go, my life is amazing, okay, I‟m going 
back to sleep.   
 
Audience: Igor, would you go over the last exercise, what we were to do, I was a 
bit confused about that? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               219                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
It‟s very simple and again, usually when people get confused it‟s 
because they trying to do too many things, and it‟s actually very 
simple. If you‟ll recall, we played with two objections. 
 
1. 
I have no time. 
2. 
I have no cash (for whatever). 
 
 
These may happen in a standard sales call, but then again, in your 
situation where you want to influence you‟ll have different kinds of 
objections. Make sense? 
 
 
What kind of industry, or what kind of section, or what kind of part of 
life would you like to influence people in more? 
 
Mark: 
I just wanted to influence my wife into keeping her word and being on 
time. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent! So, you have objections to the reasons why she‟s not on 
time? You have probably collected a number of them by now, right, so 
you know that when she says, I can‟t be on time for whatever reason, 
the reason is spurious.  
 
 
There‟s something else going on behind the scene that‟s causing her to 
be late, and these are the excuses she‟s putting on it, not purposely, 
it‟s just part of how the mind works. We rationalize our behavior. Make 
sense? 
 
 
So what we‟re looking for is what is happening behind the scene that‟s 
allowing her to not be on time. There are two things: 
 
1. She‟s thinking certain thoughts. She‟s looking at the world in 
certain ways. 
 
2. She‟s not thinking certain thoughts, which if she were to 
think them, she could not be late. 
 
 
Does that make sense? Now, you‟re beginning to get a sense of where 
we‟re going with this.  
 
 
That‟s where you‟ve been starting to investigate, so with your 
partners, the reasons why you have partners is so you can externalize 
the thinking so you can reflect on it and other people can give you 
ideas. You‟ll go oh, that might apply, that might not apply. Do you see 
how that works? 
 
 
So, give me an example of a reason why your wife might be late.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               220                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Mark: 
Oh, I just want to do this one more thing first.  
 
Igor: 
Great. Let‟s just pause there. What does a person have to think in 
order to be able to think oh, I just have to do one more thing? Why 
that one more thing? What‟s going on inside her head?  
 
Mark: 
Scarcity. There‟s never enough time. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. So scarcity – so you‟ve got a question of not enough time, 
and as a result, of course, there isn‟t because she ends up doing 
things that waste time in a way that she ends up having less.    
 
 
What is she not thinking that allows her to actually have that scarcity 
mindset and not be on time? 
 
Mark: 
I have plenty of time to do the things I want to do that are important. 
 
Igor: 
Right and beyond that, what other things? 
 
Mark: 
Not sure. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s why you have the group, because they end up turning around 
saying, what about this? It may apply or it may not. Could this be it? 
It could apply. It might not apply.  
 
 
So they‟re kind of coaching you with ideas when you get stuck to take 
you further down the road of figuring out what kind of thoughts is she 
not thinking? What kinds of ideas aren‟t present? What kinds of ideas 
are present?  
 
 
Then, you can map out the space behind being late, and figure out 
how being late is a logical conclusion given whatever‟s going before it. 
Does that make more sense? 
 
Mark: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Now, you have some mind-bending language maneuvers you can go 
into. Let‟s take the idea of scarcity.  
 
 
Is there little enough time for you to actually make it so you 
have more? Do you see how that‟s a very simple thing that 
goes around scarcity? 
 
How much less time do you have, when you turn up late? 
 
 
Do you see how that plugs right into the reason, the thinking behind it, 
as opposed to their actual suggestion that was going on. What she‟s 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               221                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
saying is, I need to do one more thing. So if you engage at that level, 
it may or may not mean anything. But if you engage at the level of 
what‟s actually going on in the background: 
 
 
So, tell me, how much less time do you have when you turn 
up late?  
 
 
 
Oh, it just gets less and less. 
 
 
So you‟re telling me the more you do, the less time you 
have? How about you focus on the things that are important 
enough, that you should be on time for? What‟s important 
enough to get there on time, so you have more? 
 
 
Do you see now all the things that are going on? You use just a little 
mind-bending maneuver that naturally emerges from the mindset that 
allows her to be late in the first place. Does that make more sense? 
 
Mark: 
A little. 
 
Igor: 
We‟ll get there more. In fact, this is exactly what we‟re getting on to 
right now. We‟d just done the warm-up before the break. This is what 
it takes for you to think like a mind-bending hypnotist, a true covert 
hypnotist. You‟re getting into the things that are happening inside 
one‟s mind and you‟re switching them before they can come to their 
conclusion.  
 
 
Like being late. Like not making a sale or not having enough time, and 
all that sort of stuff.  
 
Mark: 
Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
It will become clearer as we do some more exercises. Remember, 
we‟re doing lots of exercises here. We‟re preparing you for something. 
The more you do this when you get back into your own lives, the more 
natural this becomes.  
 
 
Thank you. That was a great question. Are there any other questions 
or comments?  
 
Actually, I could not have paid Mark to do that at a more perfect time 
than he did, because this is exactly where we‟re heading.  
 
 
How would you like to know how a simple drill that you can do yourself 
– a little mental exercise – which will allow you to develop that skill, 
the ability to get to the thinking behind people‟s thinking and develop 
instant, shall we say mind-bending language that fits those scenes so 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               222                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
you can actually reframe, change objections, dissolve problems before 
they even arise. Would that be worthwhile doing? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
What I would like is to do this in a coaching format. Then we‟ll do an 
exercise backwards and forwards. I‟d like to have an example of the 
kind of things where you want to be more influential, or rather think of 
someone specific you would like to influence, in a context where 
there‟s a problem.  
 
A classic one would be Mark wanting his wife to be on time.  
 
 Can you all think of a specific purpose and a specific 
kind of problem that you want to overcome in terms of 
your influence?  
 
An objection, a behavior and that sort of stuff, who wants to come up 
here and have a chat about that? Come on up. Give him a nice round 
of applause. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Igor: 
There you go. Have a seat. So here‟s what we‟re going to do. We‟re 
going to have a chat about whomever you‟re thinking about. If this 
was a hypnotherapy training, then we‟d actually use whatever problem 
you have yourself as a demonstration, but I don‟t want to do that, 
because then all that‟s happening is I am doing the thing and 
demonstrating how to do it.  
 
 
What I would rather have, is you developing the ability to think like 
this so that you end up doing it yourself. We‟ll do a couple of 
demonstrations, then you‟ll do it. Then, you come back and forwards a 
few times until you start getting the feel for this. 
 
 
David, you have a specific scenario and person in mind, is that 
correct? 
 
David: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Can you tell us all about it? 
 
David: 
It‟s my wife. 
 
Igor: 
Your wife. Maybe we should call this the wife hypnosis. Train your wife 
better hypnosis. I‟m just kidding. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               223                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
David: 
That‟s okay. She‟s constantly procrastinating. 
 
Igor: 
She‟s putting things off? 
 
David: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Give me an example. 
 
David: 
Well, she works out of the house. She‟s an occupational therapist, and 
in order for her to get paid, she needs to do her paperwork by a 
specific time. She puts it off until the last minute. 
 
Igor: 
Specific example? When does she put it off? 
 
David: 
The last time was this past month.  
 
Igor: 
This past month. Give me a date? 
 
David: 
It was supposed to have been done by the 5th, and she waited until the 
last little hour. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent! Now, what I‟m going to do is ask you to imagine your wife is 
there, and you‟re going to ask her questions about her experience. 
Just pretend that she answers in however way you think she would 
answer. Try to keep it as real as possible, as far as how you think she 
will answer. 
 
 
It doesn‟t actually matter whether or not those are accurate in terms 
of what she would actually say in real life if you try this again. What 
matters is we‟ll have different, shall we say decision trees being 
developed, and you can just go down one root for a while and see 
where that takes you.  
 
Then you can down another root. You‟ll start developing possibilities, 
no matter what direction someone goes. It will make a little more 
sense as we do this.  
 
 
If you were with your wife right now, and you were to tell her she has 
a specific problem, and the problem is procrastination. You have a 
specific time in mind, which is the 5th of this month and, of course, the 
time leading up to the time when she should have done it. 
 
 
A natural question would be, at what point did the procrastination 
begin, because there‟s a whole period of time – it‟s not just a single 
act of it, she‟s done it several times throughout that week or month.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               224                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
What might she say if you asked her for a specific time that she 
procrastinated leading up to the 5th? It could be the 4th, the 3rd, the 
2nd, the 1st. It could be any of them. 
 
David: 
I have to do my notes.  
 
Igor: 
When might she have said this?  
 
Now here‟s something we‟re doing. One of the reasons – and we‟re 
going to be coming backwards, forwards a little bit just until we do this 
question.  
 
 
By the way, is this being a little bit helpful to you all in seeing how we 
can get into a problem? This is a typical kind of problem, isn‟t it? Do 
you see how it‟s a little bit messy, we don‟t even know quite how to 
get at it yet? Does that make sense?  
 
This is one of the most important things you learn both, as a 
hypnotherapist and an influence. Actually getting at what the real 
problem is, not what they tell you the problem is. Procrastination is a 
conclusion. It‟s not a problem. It‟s the side effect of the real problem. 
Does that make sense?  
 
Here‟s what happens. We have some little problem in the universe 
somewhere. Now around the problem is this sort of haze of confusion 
that people build up around it, and one of the reasons they have the 
problem is because they can‟t really pinpoint what it really is. 
 
Half the battle is figuring out what this is, because all you‟re getting is 
one edge of this cloud, which they‟re sure about but it has nothing to 
do with the problem. It‟s just a conclusion that tells you, whenever I 
go to this place, I get confused enough to fall out here or to fall out 
there. Procrastination is a classic example of this. 
 
When would she typically have to sit down to do her work, but 
doesn‟t? Go ahead, ask her and imagine what she says back. 
 
David: 
I‟m trying to do that right now.  
 
Igor: 
Perfect. 
 
David: 
When she comes home from her normal routine with her clients.  
 
Igor: 
Okay. Let me just take a pause there. Did all of you hear the mind-
bending nature of that question?  
 
 
 
When should you be doing work, but don‟t? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               225                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
Notice what‟s happening already, we‟re actually already teasing the 
problem out a little bit, and at the same time getting more clarity. It 
sounds like I‟m just asking a simple question, doesn‟t it? But we‟re 
putting a little bit of spin on, so she can‟t quite create the same 
problem again at the same time as we‟re getting clarity about what‟s 
going on.  
 
It‟s only a little bit of spin and that‟s why he missed it in the first 
place. We‟re going to add little bits of spin as we go along, and what‟s 
going to happen is – and hopefully, we‟ll bear this out. At some point, 
we‟ll find this perfect breaking point in the pattern, where just by 
making a simple observation with the smallest amount of spin, the 
whole thing falls apart.  
 
Let‟s see if we can get towards that, shall we? So it‟s when she comes 
home from seeing a client, is that right? 
 
David: 
That‟s when she should do her notes. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent! Give me an example of that? Ask her for a specific example. 
 
David: 
Just yesterday. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent! Now, notice what just happened? I‟m pinning him down (or 
her down actually, indirectly). We‟re pinning them down to a specific 
time, a specific event.  
 
Why? Because people with any kind of problem will try to generalize it 
into a rule, but the rule is based on something they don‟t even realize 
consciously that‟s going on. By pinning them down to something 
specific, you have more chance of actually getting that rule and then 
later on, of course, doing something with it. 
 
 
For the moment, I‟m going to ask for a time before the 5th, purely 
because we used the 5th as a starting point. 
 
David: 
She has a routine. She has specific clients that she sees. So every 
week she has certain clients that she sees on specific days. It‟s more 
of a continuous… 
 
Igor: 
So on a Monday she‟ll see certain clients. What would be the Monday 
before the 5th? 
 
David: 
I‟d have to look.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               226                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
But she sees certain people, right? So if you were to ask her – and feel 
free to hallucinate a little bit, it doesn‟t have to be absolutely perfect. 
We‟re not interested in how accurate the answers are yet, it‟s more 
about the thinking process going on behind this thing.  
 
This is literally what I do inside my head, I visual or imagine people 
with a certain kind of problem, and I start quizzing it until I figure out 
how to work with it.  
 
 
Let‟s say we‟re talking about Monday the 2nd for argument‟s sake. So 
on the 2nd she comes home, and she knows what clients she‟s seen 
that day, right? So what happens? She comes in the door, and what 
happens? She decides yes, I‟m going to do so much work and do all of 
my notes. She gets it all done, files it away, puts her feet up and goes, 
that feels so much better for having done that. Is that what happens? 
 
David: 
No. 
 
Igor: 
Oh really? What happens? 
 
David: 
She usually comes in and puts her stuff down, gets… 
 
Igor: 
Let me just stop you there. This is very important. Remember the 
contrast principle? Did you hear me just using it? I‟m exaggerating the 
position. Why? Because I want to get some information, which I might 
otherwise not get, so I have to get something very clear out. I‟m kind 
of channeling your wife now, so we‟re going around the house a little 
bit.  
 
 
By exaggerating it, what you‟re doing is you‟re pestering them to 
correct you. If it doesn‟t match even their unconscious experience, 
they‟ll know there‟s something wrong with that. Of course, in trying to 
figure out what that something wrong is, they‟ll give you more 
valuable information.  
 
So I‟m going to purposely misunderstand the situation, exaggerate it, 
in a friendly way of course, so that they correct me. Then, you have 
what you want. So if I understand you correctly, she comes in the 
door, and then what happens? 
 
David: 
She usually puts all of her stuff down right beside the couch. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent. And then she gets to work, does all the notes and stuff like 
that, right? 
 
David: 
No.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               227                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
Okay. 
 
David: 
Then, she‟ll probably go to the kitchen, get a glass of water and then 
come in, open up her computer and turn on the TV. 
 
Igor: 
Great. Then what happens? 
 
David: 
That‟s where everything stops. She gets either involved in television, 
or gets involved in… 
 
Igor: 
So on Monday the 2nd, which one happened? 
 
David: 
She went to the computer.  
 
Igor: 
Okay. She went to the computer. She turned it on, she starts doing 
her work, starts putting her notes in order and stuff like that, right? 
 
David: 
No. She actually starts checking email. 
 
Igor: 
Ask her, what‟s so important about those emails now? 
 
David: 
Just getting them out of the way. 
 
Igor: 
Out of the way for what? 
 
David: 
So they don‟t fill up and clutter everything. So she can get rid of them. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. So once the emails are done, what other clutter are you dealing 
with? Can you hear the mind-bending spin on that? The fact is I know 
the answer is, I don‟t. She does something different, but I want to get 
an answer out of this because I‟m needling to get to what‟s that 
central point.  
 
What‟s the point at which the procrastination kicks in? It could well be 
the emails. That might something she may ends up saving for later. It 
might be something later on. I don‟t know and honestly, I don‟t care 
because wherever it comes up, something will emerge. So what does 
she say? 
 
David: 
She just starts searching on the Internet.  
 
Igor: 
Oh right, because whatever she‟s searching for is so important that 
everything else is just going to take a backseat, right? 
 
David: 
Pretty much. 
 
Igor: 
Really? So what was that, that was so important on Monday 2nd?  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               228                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
David: 
I don‟t know. 
 
Igor: 
Ask her. 
 
David: 
Oh.  
 
Igor: 
I‟m not talking to you, you‟re my channel, you‟re the medium. Ohm. 
Don‟t take this so serious. 
 
David: 
No. I‟m not. I‟m thinking.  
 
Igor: 
I know. I‟m teasing. 
 
David: 
I‟ve seen her do this enough. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. So it doesn‟t really matter if you‟re accurate. All I care about 
is giving you a suppose. What is she looking for, for example? You 
know your wife better than anyone else here, so you can give us a 
decent idea of what it might be. If it isn‟t, it still gives an 
understanding of how to maneuver this way. 
 
David: 
Pretty much to get away from what she was doing. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent. So, she comes in, she does her emails to get them out of 
the way, and then she starts surfing the Internet really because it‟s 
more to get away from what else is going on, rather than actually 
doing something worthwhile. Is that it? 
 
David: 
I think so, yes. 
 
Igor: 
So ask her – just pretend that‟s just how she says it. So it‟s more 
important for you to get away from it, than it is to do something 
worthwhile. Is that it? 
 
David: 
Yeah. 
 
Igor: 
Now, did you notice how we put a little bit of mind-bending spin on 
that? We‟ve locked the position in, right. What is that? What happens 
just before you decide you have to get away from it? What is there to 
get away from? Feel free to just hallucinate for her a little bit.  
 
David: 
That‟s what I‟m doing. I‟m looking to see where she‟s going with this. 
It‟s just I think to stop being the occupational therapist.  
 
Igor: 
Right. So it‟s kind of like a break from what you‟ve done before. So, 
are you taking a break at the right time? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               229                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
David: 
Not really. 
 
Igor: 
Really? How do you know? Did you notice, by the way, how there was 
a tiny little bit of spin going on there, but it might be enough to bust it, 
and it may not. So is she taking the break at the right time? Ask her. 
What does she say? 
 
David: 
No. 
 
Igor: 
So what happens?  
 
David: 
To her? Right now? 
 
Igor: 
As you say that to her, how does she react?  
 
David: 
She just kind of sits there and she‟s starting to think about what I‟m 
saying. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent. Now, is there likely an emotional reaction at this point? I 
suspect there will be somewhere around this area. 
 
David: 
Not yet. 
 
Igor: 
Not yet, but we‟re getting close. 
 
David: 
Yeah, I think so. 
 
Igor: 
Which direction would you have to go to get something more 
emotional? I‟m thinking in terms of your telling her what to do. Just in 
terms of getting the experience that happens when she‟s going 
through emails. 
 
David: 
Just asking her the question starts to get her. 
 
Igor: 
It does, doesn‟t it? It‟s the same question about not breaking at the 
right time. Perfect.  
 
Just a little time out here.  
 
What are we doing right now? Do you see how we‟re beginning to zero 
in? The behavior really is procrastination. Then it‟s actually email and 
all they think about is the emails. They forgot about their Internet 
searches as well, so we got a little bit closer, but then they got 
distracted. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               230                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Remember I asked, so whatever you‟re doing with your emails, you‟re 
searches must be much more important than getting the jobs done, or 
whatever it was we said. 
 
 
Actually, we got an agreement out of that. That‟s why she‟s confused 
because she‟s just been spun out again. We went right back to the 
thing and said, what is it you‟re searching for? Oh actually, it‟s just to 
clear my desk, so I have a break from being a therapist and so on. 
 
So we‟ve gotten a little bit closer to this, haven‟t we? We‟re actually 
very close, but haven‟t touched on the nub yet, but we‟re very close. 
How do I know? Because we‟re getting an emotional reaction and the 
emotion that‟s attached to it is the cloud that confuses things. 
 
 
Is this beginning to make sense a little bit? So she‟s giving a bit of an 
emotional reaction. So what I might do at this point – and feel free to 
do this for me. Ask her, what‟s happening now? 
 
David: 
Right now, she‟s feeling a little pressured. 
 
Igor: 
One would hope. Is it the same pressure that she gets when she‟s 
finishing her emails and is about to start surfing or is it a different kind 
of pressure? 
 
David: 
It‟s different. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. What‟s the other pressure like? Did you hear this?  
 
David: 
The other pressure, as far as searching for the emails, or… 
 
Igor: 
Once she finishes the email and they start petering out, and the desire 
to do searches on the Internet increases. So when does one switch to 
the other?  
 
Again, did you notice just a little bit of spin on these mind-bending 
questions? I‟m sending them to unconscious territory to get more 
important information out. Can you see how this is happening? 
 
David: 
Right as soon as the emails are done, she just switches over and just 
starts going in.  
 
Igor: 
Really? So if she didn‟t do that last email, then she‟d actually get all 
her files sorted out first, couldn‟t she? Did you see what happened to 
him? Do you feel the mind-bending spin on that? It‟s very minor, 
right? But, what am I doing? I‟m taking the position that‟s presenting 
oh no, the switch happens, boom, one right after the other.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               231                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
What is the logical concept here? If you never finish the first task, then 
you‟ll never switch, right? So we‟re going to put a mind-bending spin 
around that first, because actually that‟s not exactly what‟s happening. 
The switch happens as a result, of something else. 
 
 
There‟s a question over here? 
 
Audience: Can you repeat that last question. 
 
Igor: 
I‟ll do my best to repeat what it was. I‟m not entirely sure. It‟s 
something along the lines of, so if you never finish that last email, 
then you‟ll never make the switch to where you were on the Internet, 
and you‟d be able to do all your important work instead, right? 
 
 
Now, if I needed to – because some people would start finding 
excuses, you need to pin them down. So if I had a sense that she was 
going to try to wriggle out of it – although in this sense, I don‟t think 
she might.  
 
But if she does, you might say, so let me just get this straight. You do 
your emails, and as soon the last email is finished, a switch gets hit 
and you have to do the Internet, is that right?  
 
So you‟re telling me as soon as the last email gets finished, there‟s like 
a mental switch that gets flipped, you don‟t even have any choice in it, 
you just have to go do the Internet instead, to change track and so 
on? Is that right? Is that what you‟re telling me? Is that what you‟re 
saying? 
 
David: 
No. 
 
Igor: 
No. What is that? You see, now I‟ve got one of two things. I actually 
went down the other road that the one expected. If she said yes that‟s 
exactly what happens, then I‟ve got her locked in. Then, I can do my 
whole, well if you don‟t finish your last email, then can you get the 
other work done?  
 
I‟m about to find something out differently now, which is going to tell 
me what happens in between, which is what I want, so either way I 
win. So, what‟s that?  
 
David: 
She wants to just have fun. 
 
Igor: 
She wants to just have fun. So you‟re sitting there doing your emails, 
and she might even have half a thought about the stuff in your case 
that you want to get out of the way. But that‟s no fun, is it? So you‟re 
just not getting along and having fun, right? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               232                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
David: 
Yeah. 
 
Igor: 
Now, we‟ve found it. As far as I‟m concerned, I think we‟ve pretty 
much found nothing there. The conflict is having fun versus doing the 
notes. Do you see how it has nothing to do with procrastination? That 
was just the outside thing. 
 
 
Here‟s how you can go with this, and this is a great little mind-bending 
spin you can put on it, you can say okay, how much fun are you 
having when you have all this workload adding up day after day, week 
after week that‟s not getting done? 
 
David: 
Not fun at all. 
 
Igor: 
It‟s not fun, is it? It‟s not fun at all, is it? It really isn‟t fun having with 
all that work backing up. How much more fun will you have when all of 
that‟s gone? 
 
David: 
Quite a bit, actually, then I can do what I want to do. 
 
 
Igor: 
Right. Quite a bit. So would that be enough fun for you to actually get 
the work out of the way before you did the Internet?  
 
David: 
Yeah, I think so.  
 
Igor: 
Do you see what‟s happened? Now maybe that will do it, and maybe it 
won‟t, who knows. I‟m not there in front of the real person, but do you 
see just by looking at the thoughts behind the problem – in this case, 
its procrastination.  
 
The objection in this case is an excuse or rather a rationalization, 
excuse is too hard a word. It‟s a conscious rationalization of a behavior 
that‟s not fully understood, because it‟s more or less unconscious. Do 
you see how the mind-bending language automatically fits into this 
now? 
 
They‟ve led me to it. Did it sound like I made any crazy drug-like 
comments? 
 
David: 
No. 
 
Igor: 
But you could hear the little spins happening inside it. And the real 
leverage comes from what‟s going on inside the other person and 
we‟re using their emotional logic exploiting the flaw that comes up. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               233                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
The flaw here is very clear, it‟s the desire to have fun versus the desire 
to do work.  
 
 
By switching them against each other, by contrasting them, it‟s like 
how much fun are you having when this is happening instead of that, 
the neurology can‟t cope with that concept anymore, it has to get 
larger somehow. 
 
 
Don‟t be too surprised if laughter comes out or some bigger issue 
comes out as a result. Typically, it‟ll be laughter or something like that 
and then you have to start drilling in the result and so on, but we 
won‟t get there just yet.  
 
 
Does that make sense? 
 
David: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Do you see how much more involved this thinking starts getting? 
 
David: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Do you have any questions so far? 
 
David: 
No, I can see where she goes with this because I know where she is.  
 
Igor: 
Because you know the actual individual? 
 
David: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
This is something I really want to emphasize. I could give you thought 
experiments to do, think of a person that wants to do a sale but hasn‟t 
got time, because that‟s how we got started today. 
 
 
Do you see how weak that is, because you have no instinct about a 
person that has no face? When you think of a specific person with a 
specific problem or objection, it can be an objection in terms of if your 
field is sales, or whatever, or it could be of a loved one such as in this 
case.  
 
The content is irrelevant, the mental process is exactly the same thing 
and it always comes down to some unconscious logic going on. I want 
to have fun, which is hidden behind a whole bunch of emotional stuff 
or confused logic, as a result of which, the pattern of behavior gets 
locked in, in this case it‟s procrastination, which has a rationalization 
as some form of an excuse, which comes out in the form of an 
objection, reason or something else. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               234                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Now because these two to some extent have hooked up, you can spin 
around on the reason and that might well end up penetrating the 
center of it, but you have to do a lot more work that way. Why? 
Because you have to rip this whole curtain apart in one fell swoop, 
which means you‟ll need much more spin to do it.  
 
It can work, I‟ve seen it work, but what if you just find what the 
thread is on the inside? Then all it takes is the smallest little nuance– 
like how much fun you‟re having when you‟re getting all this stuff 
backing up– which suggests itself anyway, doesn‟t it, and suddenly it 
becomes easy. 
 
Your spins are minimal and to anyone watching they‟re going, they‟re 
just having a conversation, he‟s a caring person trying to figure out 
what‟s going on, but you‟re doing so much more, does that make 
sense to you? 
 
Here‟s the irony, and I feel you‟re already sensing this because you‟ve 
actually had the experience now. Now that you‟ve done this once, how 
much easier is it to do it again with other people, or with the same 
person with other problems? 
 
David: 
I think it‟s going to be easy, because I‟m going to be talking to her 
tonight. 
 
Igor: 
Right. But now, if you do this with enough people and start thinking 
like this, so when someone says something you‟ll get a flash of insight 
and say, I might as well try this version of the mind-bending language, 
because I‟ve got a good guess what this might be because your mind 
is already going to something similar. 
 
 
So either you present a mind-bending language pattern that blows it 
all out and you look like God; it‟s true, it‟s like wow how‟d you do 
that?! Or, they‟ll come back with a rebuttal that tells you more about 
this, either way you‟re closer to resolving the problem aren‟t you? 
 
 
Everyone give David a nice round of applause. 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
Thank you David, I really appreciate that. 
 
David: 
One of the things, a memory that came back to me while we were 
going through this, is something she said to me about her growing up 
which was the fact that she could never go out to play until all the 
work was done. So now I know where to start with her to help her get 
where she wants to go. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               235                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
You‟ll love tomorrow, because I‟ll show you how to do an indirect 
regression using this. 
 
David: 
Yes, thank you. 
 
Igor: 
I realize that this isn‟t necessarily the easiest thing to do straight off 
the bat, so what we‟ll do is this. We‟ll get you used to the thinking 
process behind this. What I want you to do is find a partner, as you‟ll 
be switching partners with each exercise, and you‟ll spend 10 minutes 
apiece helping the other person the same way as I was helping David. 
 
 
You, as the hypnotic coach, will be curious about some things that 
they‟re saying, which they may not think about. Between you, you‟ll 
see if you can navigate a pathway and get as close to this as possible. 
Whether or not you hit it, I don‟t care, after 10 minutes you‟ll switch 
places and do it again. Think of a genuine person, do not use your own 
problems for this. 
 
 
I want you to learn how to think through these things, not get stuck in 
your own loops. If you think about a problem that you have, you‟ll be 
stuck in this thing and whilst this may be resolved, the problem is that 
you‟ll never know how. Therefore, I want you to be able to think 
strategically rather than resolve your problems.  
 
 
This is not a therapy training, it‟s a training for you to learn how to be 
influential. Do you understand the difference? You‟ll coach your 
partner the same way I helped David. Whoever is going to play David‟s 
role is going to think of a third person that you know pretty well, so 
you can take good guesses as to how they‟d respond. 
 
 
You may get lost and go in circles, which I honestly don‟t care at this 
point, because we‟ll come right back and do this again. You‟ll go off 
and we‟ll do it again. So we‟ll do a few of these cycles until you start 
getting the hang of it, enough that you can do it on your own inside 
your own minds. 
 
Audience: Give us two or three examples of drill down questions with spin on 
them to go by. 
 
Igor: 
The answer is I can‟t. It depends on what the problem is. I‟ll tell you 
what we‟ll do instead. Can everyone think of a specific person that 
they want to do some of this mind-bending stuff with? Put your hands 
up if you want to do this.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               236                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
We won‟t do the whole works, but we‟ll ask the first two questions and 
then go from there, that way it‟s much easier to show if there‟s a 
pattern. Hopefully I‟ll find out because I don‟t know, I just do it. 
 
Connie: 
What would you like me to say right now? 
 
Igor: 
So you can think of a specific person that has some kind of problem 
you want to get through to the center of, or an objection? 
 
Connie: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
A little detail, who is this person and what is the problem? 
 
Connie: 
It‟s my sister, who is having arm surgery. She believes it will be 
extremely painful and a long time healing. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent! My first question is, how do you know? 
 
Connie: 
She‟s had one before. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, you‟ve had a surgery before and what happened? You felt so 
fantastic that your arm healed instantly and you didn‟t even notice it 
happening. Is that right? 
 
Connie: 
It was not successful so she‟s having another surgery. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, I see, so you‟ve had a surgery and that didn‟t work out as well, so 
as a result you think the next one is not going to work the same way? 
 
Connie: 
Correct. 
 
Igor: 
Is that what you‟re saying? 
 
Connie: 
Sure.  
 
Igor: 
So why are you even doing the surgery if you think it‟s going to fail? 
 
 
Stop…do you see what just happened? Does that make sense?...I don‟t 
know what the question is going to be until I get a result. All I‟m 
looking for is that point where there‟s a disconnect in what their logic 
is.  
 
 
Have I gone through the nub? I‟m pretty close I would imagine, maybe 
not all the way there, but close enough for a big spin like that to 
happen. Now either that will resolve it, I doubt it, but it could very well 
happen since we‟re so close to it anyway. Or I get more information 
back so that I know what the next step will be. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               237                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
Does that make sense? Is this valuable for you? Are you finding this 
useful? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s enough for over here let‟s move to the other side, Mickey, who 
are you thinking of? 
 
Mickey: 
My wife. 
 
Igor: 
Your wife, and what‟s the problem or situation? 
 
Mickey: 
Fifteen minute temper tantrums. 
 
Igor: 
Like everyday along with the clock like oh, it‟s 8:00 o‟clock honey lets 
go for it, is that what happens? 
 
Mickey: 
Almost. 
 
Igor: 
Pause- did you notice what‟s happening here? We don‟t have enough 
information so I‟m going to use the contrast principle and exaggerate 
it, to make him push back to give me something more tangible to work 
with. 
 
Mickey: 
Usually after work, sometimes on the weekends… 
 
Igor: 
After work. So what happens just before the temper tantrums? Ask 
her, not at the time the tantrum is happening, because that‟s not a 
good time, as timing is an issue, but if you‟re having a genuine 
moment, then that might be worth asking. 
 
 
Can you think of a specific time the temper tantrum came up? 
 
Mickey: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
When? 
 
Mickey: 
Probably a month ago. 
 
Igor: 
A month ago, and what happened just before that. Like, everything 
was going fine and it suddenly just happened? 
 
Mickey: 
Then it‟s (exhale-sigh) 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               238                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
Stop right there, excellent. So just before that moment ask her, say 
just before that exhale what was happening then? It doesn‟t matter if 
this is real or not, we‟re just going to throw something in there. 
 
Mickey: 
She was thinking about housework probably, and doing it alone. 
 
Igor: 
Did you see the difference here? Thinking about housework and doing 
it alone. Now if I was talking to your wife, and all I‟d gotten was, I was 
thinking about housework, I‟d say yeah damn it, I‟d throw a fit as well. 
I need my cleaner to do my stuff, where the hell is the cleaner to do 
my stuff…housework, I‟d rather shoot myself in the head, no wonder 
you‟re having a temper tantrum. Here‟s a gun, shoot yourself. 
 
 
Now, notice what‟s happening, I‟m going to push to get more 
information. The operative element I suspect is the idea of alone. 
Alone means something, and I‟m going to give you where my mind is 
going, although I‟ll have to test this, but alone probably means that I 
have to do all the effort, no one else cares, I‟m being abused and used 
as a doormat. 
 
 
There‟s one thing I know about anger, which we talked about in the 
last course, it‟s designed to protect the boundary when someone is 
violating it. If you‟re being used like a doormat is your boundary 
violated? Sure!  
 
 
So now we have a pretty good sense of where this is leading us, even 
though I‟m still going to test, but the anger is basically a feeling that 
your boundary has been violated and you have to push back to re-
establish it. 
 
 
Therefore, if we‟re going to drill even further, we end up finding a 
crossing point where she may end up violating your boundary by 
accident about something else that‟s going on, or there‟s a conflict in 
values in terms of being used as a doormat, or something like that, 
versus actually having company because, after all, it‟s not about being 
alone. 
 
 
So you might have a possible mind-bending language pattern to 
emerge from that, but I‟d need more information before doing that. It 
might be something like, how much company are you getting when 
you‟re throwing a temper tantrum? 
 
Mickey: 
That one has already occurred to me. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly! But, you do not throw it out straight away. It has to be 
something that they come to the conclusion of themselves, so it‟s 
almost like you get to the point where they say yeah, I hate to do it on 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               239                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
my own because I feel so alone when I‟m doing it, like no one is there 
to support me. 
 
Mickey: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
How much support are you getting when you get angry? 
 
Mickey: 
A lot less then if you‟d have just asked me. 
 
Igor: 
I‟m not asking you I‟m asking her. Remember, don‟t get confused, 
you‟re asking her directly, how much support are you getting, but 
before you do that, you want to set them up by saying oh, so you feel 
alone when this happens, right? Yes. So this feels alone and that‟s why 
you get angry, right? 
 
 
You don‟t want to feel alone do you? No. You want to feel like someone 
is there to support you, right? Yes. So I‟m just curious, how much 
support are you getting when you blow up like that?  
 
Mickey: 
Almost zero because everybody leaves the house. 
 
Igor: 
Right. Is that working for you? Is that what you want?  
 
 
Do you see what I‟m doing right now? Again, I‟ve gone to the nub and 
I‟m twisting around on it now. But, I‟m not just going straight for it 
because that sounds like criticism. I‟m taking their position and first, 
I‟m using the consistency principle to lock them in. 
 
 
So, you‟re telling me it‟s this, this is the problem, this thing here, this 
is what you‟re telling me, is that right? You‟re telling me it‟s this and 
you want that, right? Well, how much of that are you getting with this? 
I‟m not. And then –boom- that‟s when it all happens. Does that make 
sense? 
 
Mickey: 
It totally makes sense. 
 
Igor: 
Let‟s do another. 
 
Diana: 
I have several real estate agents and loan officers that work with me. 
 
Igor: 
Choose one. 
 
Diana: 
One of them. 
 
Igor: 
What‟s his name? 
 
Diana: 
Scott. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               240                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
Scott. When did the problem occur? 
 
Diana: 
Many years ago. 
 
Igor: 
Many years ago, and what is the actual thing? 
 
Diana: 
He‟s only worked for me for five years. 
 
Igor: 
Pause- by the way, this will happen with clients, as they will give you 
way more details then you need. You want to be able to drill straight 
through what‟s going on, once you have the rapport. Sometimes some 
people just need to talk, which is another scenario. 
 
 
There‟s Scott, what‟s the problem or the objection? 
 
Diana: 
I can‟t come to the training sessions. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent! So he had an excuse, he couldn‟t come to the training 
sessions. When did he say this? 
 
Diana: 
Last month. 
 
Igor: 
Last month. So there‟s Scott last month, you want him to go to a 
training session and he‟s saying I can‟t make it. 
 
Diana: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
What prevents you? 
 
Diana: 
I‟ve had 14 surgeries, I have to go back at 1:00 o‟clock because I have 
to smoke my medical marijuana. 
 
Igor: 
Great, I like that! That seems pretty reasonable to me, so just carry 
on. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
What prevents you from smoking marijuana when there‟s a session, I 
don‟t understand? 
 
Diana: 
I just love marijuana. 
 
Igor: 
No, I understand and don‟t have a problem with that. It‟s just, how 
does you smoking marijuana mean you can‟t come to a session, I 
don‟t get that part? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               241                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Diana: 
Because I smoke it at 1:00 o‟clock and I have to do that, therefore I 
have to miss the training sessions. 
 
Igor: 
Then to ask you as Diana, is the training session at 1:00 o‟clock, is 
that right. 
 
Diana: 
It‟s usually in the afternoon. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. So, you have to smoke it at 1:00 o‟clock? 
 
Diana: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Because smoking it at 10:00 wouldn‟t do the right job would it? 
 
Diana: 
That‟s true. 
 
Igor: 
Because if you smoked at 10:00 you‟d be stoned for the whole day 
and you‟d get no work done, would you? 
 
Diana: 
Right. 
 
Igor: 
What would happen if you did it at 3:00? 
 
Diana: 
Then John, my brother-in-law, won‟t be there. 
 
Igor: 
And he‟ll steal it all, he‟ll smoke it for himself and say I‟m going to 
have it all for myself, are you being selfish is that what you‟re telling 
me? 
 
Diana: 
No, we just have so much fun together. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, you have fun with your brother-in-law… 
 
Diana: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
…at 3:00 o‟clock that‟s why you have to smoke at 1:00, how‟s that 
work? 
 
Diana: 
No, we smoke at 1:00, so from 1:00 to 4:00 until my wife comes, 
we‟re just having a party. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, I see. So you‟d rather party than get ahead in life, is that what 
you‟re telling me? 
 
Diana: 
Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               242                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
Right, great. By the way, we just give them a choice. If he wants that 
choice then you as an employer make another choice as to whether or 
not you want that person. 
 
Diana: 
Absolutely. 
 
Igor: 
Remember, when we talked about influence, my thing is not to try and 
influence him to change his habit, it‟s simply to find out what it is. Why 
are you working here in the first place? 
 
Diana: 
So my wife thinks I‟m coming to work and doing… 
 
Igor: 
Oh, so the only reason for you being here is because your wife wants 
you to be here? 
 
Diana: 
Correct. 
 
Igor: 
Now, at this point you really want to concern yourself as to whether or 
not you want this person working for you. 
 
Diana: 
He‟s not. 
 
Igor: 
He‟s not.  
 
Diana: 
No. 
 
Igor: 
So why is it you‟re trying to influence him, I don‟t understand, I mean 
he seems perfectly happy with his life. He‟s not infringing on you or 
working for you. 
 
Diana: 
Because he calls me every day asking me if he can come back, and 
I‟ve told him no. 
 
Igor: 
In that case, I‟d say why do you want to come back? Do you see how 
we have a different problem now? 
 
Diana: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Before we had no leverage because he‟s quite happy to let his life 
waste away and just pretend to work. Now, of course, we have a 
totally different problem because he wants to come back.  
 
 
Why do you want to come back? 
 
Diana: 
I don‟t know. My wife is really upset that I‟m staying home now. 
 
Igor: 
Why don‟t you send her back, I‟ll employ her, no problem? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               243                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Diana: 
Because in the afternoons when I‟m with John and we‟re having a 
good time, my wife thinks I‟m doing housework. 
 
Igor: 
And? 
 
Diana: 
So when she comes home the lawn is mowed, and dinner is cooked.  
 
Igor: 
So you‟re telling me you want to come back just so I can provide cover 
for you, is that what you‟re suggesting, that I employ you just for 
cover? How does that work? 
 
Diana: 
Could be. 
 
Igor: 
How does that work, seriously, you tell me? Is that what employees 
do, they just cover up? Is that why I want you? 
 
Diana: 
Is that why I want you and then… 
 
Igor: 
Why would I want you to work for me if all you want to do is cover up, 
explain this to me, I don‟t understand? 
 
Diana: 
Then he would probably say I don‟t know.  
 
Igor: 
Well, when you figure it out call me back. 
 
Diana: 
Good idea.  
 
Igor: 
This is a great example by the way, notice how you‟re not going to 
influence or change everyone‟s life. That‟s not my role. My role is if he 
makes a reasonable request, I‟d like to work for you, great. Are you 
actually going to work for me or are you going to pretend to work? It‟s 
a very different scenario, because now you‟ll either have leverage 
because he really wants to get his act in gear, in which case he‟ll stop 
doing the smoking stuff and whatnot. 
 
 
Or, he really doesn‟t care, in which case why would you take the call in 
the first place because he‟s wasting your time, he‟s just wasting your 
time, so say when you figure it out, call me. If he says no, no, no I 
need it. Then say, give me a reason, you haven‟t given me a reason, 
thank you very much, bye-bye. 
 
Diana: 
He left three voice messages saying, Diana I need to come back to 
work. I haven‟t called him back. 
 
Igor: 
If there‟s enough leverage you‟ll be able to get it, but ultimately you 
need to have leverage. He may have real reasons like he‟s losing his 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               244                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
house and he really wants that versus getting doped with his friend 
John. Then at that point, you say which is more important to you, to 
have a house or have a party with John? It‟s up to you.  
 
 
So now you‟re putting the same crux in the same position. If you don‟t 
have leverage, there‟s nothing you can do at that point, I mean I‟m 
sure there‟s something, but that‟s going down the forced route a little 
bit and that‟s not our job. At best it‟d be his wife‟s job. 
 
 
Is this giving you ideas? Do you want more examples or are you ready 
to try it and then we‟ll do more examples after? 
 
 
Find a partner. Do this for 10 minutes apiece. Then, we‟ll come back 
and do more examples and it‟ll be a little easier at that point. Off you 
go. 
~~~  
 
 
So to the extent that what you find here not being as easy as you 
want it to be, is it okay for you to let go of it and just enjoy the playing 
of it? Think in terms of this…when you‟re asking people the questions 
you‟ve been dealing with right now, think of them as opportunities, as 
subtly messing with them by putting mind-bending language stuff into 
what you‟re doing. 
 
 
It‟s really the same thing you did first thing this morning when you 
had a little chat with some spin on it did you enjoy that?  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
You don‟t seem very convincing.  
 
 
So you‟re having the same kind of chat with a little more purpose, 
because you‟re going after what might be going on over here. Whether 
or not you reach it at this point is completely irrelevant, don‟t put 
yourself under the pressure of having to nail it down. 
 
 
Simply enjoy the process of totaling messing with someone‟s mind 
whilst doing absolutely no good at all. Because then, when you‟re so 
busy not doing any good you might actually end up doing some by 
accident. 
 
 
So only to the extent that you‟re willing to do some good by accident, 
are you going to let go of trying to do any good at all and just enjoy 
the process. Is that worthwhile doing? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               245                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
Yeah, not that I‟m putting any spin on this… 
 
 
What I want to introduce you to, and some of you will be familiar with 
this from Conversational Hypnotherapy, is a model of how you can use 
all the stuff, put it together as a simple persuasion formula and by that 
I mean, how to clear objections, overcome problems and all this sort 
of stuff. 
 
 
So whether from a hypnotherapy point of view, coach or salesperson, 
I‟m thinking about it in the same sort of context. Does that make 
sense? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Would you be interested in a formula that‟ll help you do that? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
There‟ll be no surprises on this one, hopefully, it‟ll be just the little bit 
of stuff we can do around it.  
 
 
Does anyone care to guess what the formula might be? 
 
Audience: No microphone, general voices. 
 
Igor: 
Based on what you‟ve been doing for the last three days, people have 
been through the Conversational Hypnotherapy Program, do you 
understand this formula at a different level now? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Can you see things in here that you haven‟t necessarily seen before? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Because you‟re coming at it from a different level, right. For the rest of 
you, you‟ll be seeing the same things way before they did, so well 
done. 
 
 
Let‟s run through these very quickly first and then we‟ll see how that 
applies. This will help you a lot, in terms of what we‟ve been doing in 
the last exercise.  
 
 
‘P’ stands for the parameters 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               246                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
For this, essentially, we‟re looking at what the problem is and what‟s 
their goal, their outcome, and what they want. Does that make sense? 
It‟s like asking where are you now, and where do you want to be? 
 
 
You don‟t have to be as direct about it or you can be if you want, but 
this is as true in a therapeutic context as it is in a sales context, isn‟t 
it? A classic example is you‟re selling cars, where are you now? I have 
no car and I need one. 
 
 
Do you have a problem? Where do you want to be? I want to have a 
car that does these things. It‟s cheap, runs well, etc. So you have your 
context which defines the nature of the entire interaction, does that 
make sense? 
 
 
Any idea what‟s next? 
 
 
‘C’ stands for critical factor bypass 
 
 
You want to get past the conscious mind, past the rationalization, past 
the excuses and past the objections that will keep them stuck where 
they are. In this case it‟s past the procrastination and why it‟s 
justifiable, past their being late and why that‟s justifiable, past the 
anger and why they‟re reasonable to be angry, past the it‟s too 
expensive and past their no time objection. Does that make sense? 
 
 
This is essentially what mind-bending language excels at, because it 
does this and the next step at the same time.  
 
 
‘A’ stands for access resources 
 
This is all about putting the person into a state of mind where they 
have choice again, including the choice you want to offer to them. If 
we were going to be ethical influences, that choice may include not 
buying or doing whatever you want them to buy or do.  
 
So if you believe in your product and your ability to match up 
something they need to something you have to offer, then great, 
you‟re a winner. If on the other hand, what you have is of no value 
whatsoever to that person, then you have no business selling to them, 
and do not ask me to teach you how to do that because I won‟t; 
there‟s no point in it. 
 
There are so many people out there that will want what you have, or 
want what you could offer them if you actually thought a little about 
what to put value on, that there‟s really no point in going down that 
road.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               247                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
I‟d be doing you a massive disserve by teaching you to sell stuff that 
nobody needs or wants, because it actually puts you in a worse, even 
scarcity mindset; a more, the worlds going to get you, type mindset 
and I don‟t want to do that. 
 
Do you see how mind-bending language gets you into those two things 
at the same time? The conscious mind can‟t quite hang onto the 
problem the same way anymore and, they‟re feeling more resourceful 
about the whole thing. 
 
 
‘T’ stands for transform 
 
If you‟re doing therapy, you‟ll of course do some testing as well, 
although we‟ll de-emphasize that in terms of this course.  
 
To transform them, all you do is make sure they‟re empowered in the 
context where they have to make the decision, or the context, where 
they had the problem, but no longer do. 
 
So basically attaching this to this, which makes their goal easier to 
achieve. Another way of looking at it is that you‟re attaching the 
resource to their current experience, so it‟s easier to go do the things 
they need to, to get their goal. 
 
Does anyone here sell anything? When you think about the reasons 
why people don‟t buy, oftentimes, have you ever come across clients 
or potential clients who talk themselves out of buying something that 
you know would be absolutely amazing for them, and just what they‟re 
looking for? 
 
For example, they‟re getting skittish, find it hard to make a decision, 
they feel bad so they make the transition of feeling bad and they can‟t 
quite conclude on something. Do you see where I‟m coming from with 
this?  
 
As far as I‟m concerned there is no such thing as selling, there‟s just 
making it easy for people to make decisions, and that‟s it. Part of the 
sales process is to make it such a no-brainer to buy whatever it is 
you‟re offering, that the decision is easier to make. 
 
It‟s the same when you‟re dealing with problems, whether it‟s that I 
have a social anxiety, I‟m afraid my cousins don‟t let me talk to them 
properly and so on, it‟s more to do with them and what‟s going on in 
their inside as opposed to what‟s going on, on the outside. 
 
It‟s a simple model. Now, let‟s turn our attention into actually using 
this, wouldn‟t that be something? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               248                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
The diagram I‟m about to use isn‟t mine, I borrowed it from John 
Overdurf, I think it‟s an amazing diagram. I‟ve just adapted it slightly 
to fit the PCAT Formula.  
 
At the bottom, we have regular reality, that little red dot we‟ve talked 
about so much. It‟s where the problem exists. Above the line we have 
this chance of infinite possibilities which, would it be fair to say that all, 
if not most of you have reached, at least at some point over the past 
few days. Would that be fair to say? 
 
That point where it kind of feels good and you know something is 
happening, you can‟t really tell what it is, it‟s a confusing mess, but it‟s 
a good one. 
 
The key thing about a chance of infinite possibilities is that anything is 
possible, it is genuinely infinite, so we need to figure out where do 
they go.  
 
First, you start with your little unhappy man down here going oh, 
lopsided, not happy, bad. 
 
Then, in terms of the PCAT Formula, where is that? This is where your 
starting point is. Then you start asking them questions like, when does 
it specifically happen? As you‟re doing that, how do you know it‟s time 
to do this and put some spin in?  
 
So all things that aren‟t happening whilst you‟re doing that, what‟s all 
that about? Then you start seeing steam coming out of their ears. So 
you‟re basically asking questions with spin and mind-bending 
language, which gives you both information and spins them out at the 
same time. 
 
So either you get to the root of the problem or you get them into a 
trance of infinite possibilities. And either way is better, right?  
 
Once they‟ve been hanging around here for a while, they‟ll pop out 
somewhere, now it might be a happy place, neutral place, or a bad 
place. Are there any other options? That‟s about it isn‟t it, if you tell 
me I can‟t think of anything else they can have as an experience. 
 
If they come out somewhere negative, what do you think you do? You 
send them back up. Then they‟ll come back down and have the same 
three options again, and so on. Is that fair? 
 
If they come down somewhere positive, where are you?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               249                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: No microphone, inaudible. 
 
Igor: 
Are you? You‟ve accessed their resources haven‟t you? They‟re in a 
good state. So the journey into the tip of infinite possibilities, would it 
be fair to say that would be your critical factor bypass? There‟s not 
much analysis going on at that point, is that fair to say? 
 
 
So this is your resources here, then you can attach that back to the 
problem and we have your whole PCAT cycle pull through. Do you see 
how that smoothly runs through?  
 
Now if they come out somewhere neutral, all you do because you have 
enough space there, is to get them somewhere more positive. How? 
With regular reframes, remember, that‟s 1000 cents, which is only $10 
to you and me. 
 
That‟s a little more positive, right, it‟s like, oh yeah, I can do that, it‟s 
only $10, whereas if they come out neutral and you say, when you 
have the car of your dreams how will you feel? Amazing. Then you say 
amazing enough to get this car? So when you look at this car, do you 
have that amazing feeling? Chances are they will look because they 
already have it and if they don‟t, it‟s because something is missing. 
 
Then I go well, what‟s missing. Oh, it hasn‟t got a stereo. Now we 
know what you want. Whether you‟re doing therapy, sales or influence, 
it doesn‟t matter, does that make sense?  
 
 Once they‟re in a happy place of course, you do exactly the same 
thing. So really no matter where they end up, you have somewhere to 
go. The key here is the kind of questions you ask, especially around 
the problem, because you want to lock them into something very 
specific. 
 
You have to imagine that you‟re going to make a movie of the exact 
event that causes them to screw up. I mean so perfect, that if 
someone who was there saw the movie they‟d tell you yes, that was 
absolutely perfect.  
 
If I tell you, for example, I hate crowds, I‟m really bad in crowds. Can 
you make that movie? Who can make that movie? What do you need 
to know?  
 
Audience: 
What kind of crowd? 
 
Igor: 
What kind of crowd…okay, it‟s a really large crowd, all made up with 
baited people with long hair, and only happens in all malls…do you 
have enough to make the movie? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               250                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Audience: 
No. 
 
Igor: 
Do you know which mall, because mall‟s I know have a generic 
pattern, but they don‟t look exactly the same? Do you know where it‟s 
happened? How can you find your location to make the movie?  
 
Audience: 
Give me a specific example of when it happened. 
 
Igor: 
Right, because now you have somewhere specific. If I tell you exactly 
when and where it happened the last time, can you make a movie of 
that? It was Tuesday, 1974, the mall round the corner, I was walking 
in…you see where we‟re going with this don‟t you? You can set the 
scene.  
 
It‟s a date, a location, a space, certain people, only certain stores 
existed at that time and each store only had certain products at that 
time. Whether or not those products are relevant for the stories or 
irrelevant, the point is that you can now make an exact replication of 
that scene because you found out the details. 
 
You can find out the size of the crowd, who they were, where they 
were, what happened first, second, when did it move, when did I begin 
to behave this way, when did I begin to feel this way and so on. Do 
you see where we‟re going with this? 
 
 
Audience: 
When you say bad bearded people, is that just a random example, not 
to be generalized? 
 
Igor: 
No. Make me go there, go ahead. Does that make sense in terms of 
what we‟re looking for when we talk about the problem? We want to 
be very specific and that begins to, in terms of your own mind, start 
the process of nailing people down on something. 
 
 
Can you put your hands up for a moment if in the last exercise you 
found yourself spinning around in a circle with some problem? All of 
you keep your hands up.  
 
Only put your hand down if you realize that if you‟d asked something 
very specific on the outside in terms of, give me specific location, 
people, behavior, etc., one exact example, one slice of time and 
nothing else, who believes if that had happened, the entire exercise 
would have been easier, if not the whole resolution if the cycle would 
have gone? We have a few hands still up.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               251                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
So that‟s how the bulk of the problem occurs right from the get-go, 
when you don‟t nail a specific situation down like that. That‟s 
something very simple to do, isn‟t it, if you just think of it in terms of 
that movie director thing?  
 
If there‟s any chance of you mis-timing your movie, in other words, 
the person says or does the wrong thing, moves too quickly or too 
slowly, or the wrong people are in the crowd. Now you know at least 
where to begin, in terms of your questioning, don‟t you? 
 
What would happen, do you think, if in the process of asking those 
questions that‟ll give you that precise scene, you start getting a little 
less fair about the whole thing and you put a little spin here and there, 
just to amuse yourself because you can, because you‟re this hot shot 
director, and if people come into your office then they‟d better leave 
confused. 
 
What if you added a few little exaggerations and things just to see if 
you can tease out some more details they may have forgotten? Now, 
from random curiosity, what are the chances that you‟ll either get a 
full set of problems, in other words get to the real problem, or they 
spin into a state in which they accidentally resolve the problem 
anyway? 
 
Is it 100% guaranteed? Hell no! But, it‟s better than what you‟ve been 
doing running around in a circle biting your own tail, isn‟t it? Would 
that be worth exploring a little bit and something fun to do? 
 
Audience: Yes sir. 
 
Igor: 
This is one for tonight; it‟s crazy isn‟t it? I keep switching on you 
what‟s going on. You have 20 minutes and all I want you to do is 
exactly what you did a moment ago, only see if you can fit in the PCAT 
Formula. 
 
 
Feel free to use a genuine problem or role-play the problem through 
the other person, I don‟t mind. Choose something small or minor to 
get some easy one‟s under your belt. You can still use the same 
situation, sales, therapeutic or influence situation, I don‟t care. The 
same model works all the way around.  
 
You‟ll bust through, when someone is in objection, do you know what 
the real objection is? When and where does it happen? How is it 
happening? What‟s really going on inside that? Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               252                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
The tried and tested routine is yes. To make it more obvious, it can be 
there. You can either have the person hallucinate someone they know 
and do the whole coaching process before, or you can actually ask 
them for a genuine problem in their life and resolve that, which tends 
to be more therapeutic.  
 
 
If you‟re interested more in influence like sales or something like that, 
then they‟ll have to do some type of coaching situation and hallucinate 
someone; otherwise, you can have a sales context created, does that 
make sense? You‟ll be doing a little of both on that person anyway. 
 
 
Easy? Just spend 10 minutes with this. Here‟s the key folks, and keep 
this in the back of your head. Your job is not to resolve the problem. 
Your job is not to overcome the objection. Your job is not even to get 
to the root of what‟s really going on, in terms of their thinking.  
 
Your only task is to explore their thinking, so you have the detail you 
want and you nail them down to something consistent. In other words, 
when you feel them escaping somewhere you ask them, where did that 
happen and you nail them down, do not let that happen. Practice a bit 
of mind-bending spins and that‟s about it. 
 
That is your only task.  
 
Audience: We‟re not even going to find out what the goal is at this point? 
 
Igor: 
Sure, you can ask the goal, I have no problem with that. The only 
thing I‟m concerned with is you practicing your mind-bending spins 
whilst asking questions about a problem to get more specific and 
nailing them down to something very specific. Whether or not anything 
is resolved, whether or not you get to the root of anything, I don‟t 
care. 
 
 
If you find yourself running and chasing your own tail, then find 
something to nail down and drill into that. That‟s the only skill I want 
you to have. Can you nail something down and drill deeper? Can you 
put some mind-bending spins around what you‟re doing, just to see 
what the hell emerges, just for the fun of it? 
 
 
That word, the fun of it, I think that‟s the real attitude to take with 
this.  
 
 
Is everyone good? Off you go, 10 minutes each. 
~~~ 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               253                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
DVD 11 
Full Transcript  
 
 
Igor: Not quite as simple as it looks is it? 
 
Audience: No. 
 
Igor: 
It‟s pretty involved. Please, rest assured I am not expecting you to get 
instant results. What I‟m getting you into the mode of is to start 
thinking about the issues, so you start developing possibilities. 
 
 
Here‟s what happens. When you start talking to people, mentally 
rehearsing these scenarios, you‟ll have sometimes a half dozen 
different possibilities they could answer, don‟t you? So you just choose 
one, it doesn‟t matter which.  
 
 
One they‟re more likely to answer, and you go down that road. Then 
you have other choices and you get another one, and go down another 
road. Does that make sense? This is not about resolving the problem 
yet, it‟s about how you think strategically at this point. 
 
 
So before we come up with your questions, comments and answers, 
there‟s one really important thing that‟s a theme I see developing as I 
listen in on some of these things. Did anyone feel as though they were 
being given the run around repeatedly? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
It‟s pretty common. What you‟re experiencing is this very same cloud 
that‟s going around here. Incidentally, one or two I noticed dealing 
with a tricky situation where lies are likely to be involved, where 
people might not give you a truthful answer if you were to ask them 
directly.  
 
For the purposes of this exercise, do not use those people. Imagine 
those people would give you straight answers, purely because lying 
gives an extra layer of complexity that you don‟t need right now. Does 
that make sense? 
 
Make your life easy. Imagine talking to people who are either going to 
give you straight answers, or if you know they wouldn‟t, imagine if for 
whatever reason they have a fit of honesty, they have the honesty bug 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               254                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
for just half an hour, so you can ask them a straight question and get 
a straight answer for the purposes of the mental exercise.  
 
What‟s going on when you‟re getting the run around here is part of the 
problem, right? They‟re constantly introducing new factors, which 
gives them wiggle room to get out. How do you prevent that? 
 
 
Audience: Ask better questions. Consistency. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, consistency. What you do is nail them to an answer. In David‟s 
case it was…so you‟re telling me that you want to…this is about having 
fun. So you‟re telling me you‟ve done your emails and you want to 
have fun, is that correct? So this is about having fun, is that right? 
 
 
Notice what I did. It‟s technically known as the echo effect, which 
many of you are familiar with because we‟ve been doing that 
sometimes here and in other programs. What you‟ve done is they have 
committed to a position. This is about having fun, nothing new to 
introduce. 
 
 
If you then start saying something else and go oh, actually no, it‟s just 
because I had to do this instead. Well, they‟ve just broken their 
consistency and their commitment. Very few people will do that, so 
either they stick on this, or if they break the commitment, it‟s only 
because something more real has come up, a genuine thing.  
 
 
In David‟s case, it was that I do my emails, the switch goes and then I 
feel like doing the Internet, etc. So what do I do? I nail it down and 
don‟t let it escape loosey-goosey. I don‟t say oh, when the switch goes 
on, what else is going on that isn‟t this, because that gives them other 
things to think of. 
 
 
Then they‟re thinking oh no, all these other things are going on and 
they‟re introducing new variables they never brought in the first place. 
You have to cut that out. How do you do that? You say oh, it feels like 
a switch gets flipped in your mind and you have to surf the Internet, 
right?  
 
 
You‟ve done your emails, flipped that switch and then you do the 
searches, so it turns on in your mind, you don‟t even know what 
happens. Emails are done, instantly the switch is flipped, and you have 
to do this other stuff. 
 
 
Only one of two things can happen then, either say no, which is 
exactly what ended up happening where you get better information. Or 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               255                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
they go yes, in which case you have them locked into a position that 
you can alter.  
 
 
I can‟t over-emphasize how important that is, because if you do not, 
you will get massive run around. I remember doing this with someone 
during the coaching session, which is part of the mentoring program, 
and they had a great run around.  
 
 
Someone was coming late to meetings. Then it was like, what happens 
when you‟re getting late to meetings? We had a nice locked position 
and then, of course, this person they were thinking about says oh, it 
happens when I‟m asleep as well, so sometimes I oversleep.  
 
 
We were talking about how they have to do little bits of work before 
they go to the meeting and that‟s why they‟re late. Then when you 
start locking them down they say oh, but it happens at other times 
too. It happens when I oversleep too.  
 
Do you notice how that‟s an attempt to escape and add more variables 
in? So whenever I try to pin them down, they can escape down a 
narrow road. You can‟t be right because if it happens whilst I‟m asleep, 
then it has nothing to do with me, the problem is outside my hands. 
Do you see how that works? 
 
So you pin them down and say, we‟ll deal with that one later, but for 
the moment on this one, is that what‟s happening? Is that what you‟re 
telling me? Is it that you have to do this task and as a result you 
arrive late, is that right? You have to do this task, so you come in late, 
is that what you‟re telling me? 
 
Well, sometimes I do it because I oversleep and I don‟t even think 
about it. We don‟t care about that. In this specific moment…do you see 
what I‟m doing…I‟m moving it to one side I cannot deal with it yet, 
because that gives them room to slip out.  
 
This is why you‟re being given the run around and it‟s a great thing 
that it‟s happened, because now you can recognize it. For those of you 
who felt like you were getting the run around, can you recognize 
something like that happening during your conversations? Would that 
be fair to say? 
 
So the consistency principle is so important and the other one, of 
course, is the contrast, so you can contrast what they‟re telling you 
with some exaggeration to force them to give you a more honest 
answer. This works great with teenagers, as you basically annoy the 
hell out of them into telling the truth. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               256                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
No, you don‟t understand it‟s this. You go oh, there we have it. (Little 
side note). 
 
Who wants to talk a little about what happened or has a question? 
 
Audience: Would you say the founder of mind-bending language is Socrates? 
 
 
Igor: 
They all interrelate. They‟re woven together. I have a lot of stuff from 
reading Socrates. Remember though, Socrates doesn‟t just ask 
questions he does a lot of leading as well, it‟s just that it‟s very subtle. 
 
Audience: Just when you do the contrast, so what you‟re saying is some kind of 
ridiculous thing, he would exaggerate things like that too. 
 
Igor: 
For sure. It was part of his style. So if you want to get a very basic 
way of doing this or nice instinct on some of the levels, read Socrates, 
I strongly recommend it. He was great. Don‟t believe anything he says 
though. He‟s the first person that‟ll tell you that.  
 
He basically pokes people into thinking by making them think such 
extreme things that they can‟t possibly be right, but their logic seems 
flawless, which forces them to think through their own faulty logic.  
 
So he did it differently than what we‟re talking about here, but 
definitely, reading through his dialogues and figuring out the frames 
and subtleties he‟s changing, it‟s helped me a lot, and I‟m sure it‟ll 
help you as well. 
 
That‟s why it‟s part of the Power of Conversational Hypnosis course, 
because there‟s a lot of value in that. How many of you got the 
course? How many of you bothered reading the Socratic thing at the 
end? Wow, more than I expected! 
 
Now you see when you go back, that there‟s more to read in it, 
because you have something to look for. That was my hope for 
including it, so people would read it, not only out of curiosity but to 
start figuring out what the maneuvers are that are going on and you 
have it right here, so thank you for that.  
 
Audience: One of the things I noticed, was I was working on channeling a 
prospect, that is a deal which is at an impasse, and I had made many 
assumptions about what I thought he was thinking, that is the reason I 
think I‟m stuck. But now, going through this process and being 
coached to say it could be this, this or this…I‟m like yes, it could be all 
of those things, uh oh! 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               257                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
Now you have leverage in terms of which way to go, because you 
don‟t even know, do you? You can start challenging your own 
assumptions, and by them giving you more answers, you may not 
have actually been stuck at all. 
 
 
It‟s just that you want one thing and he wants something completely 
different, but they both work, as opposed to you thinking they want 
something that‟s in opposition to what you want. 
 
Audience: Right. 
 
Igor: 
This is very useful. Do you get a sense that you‟re now getting more 
sensitive as to how people are thinking, feeling and doing things? Yes. 
This is an important part, so thank you for noticing that. 
 
Scott: 
I‟m curious who we were working on.  
 
Igor: 
I hate it when I train people like this, because they start seeing all my 
tricks, damn it! 
 
Scott: 
I work with couples and I‟m so looking forward to advertising, come in 
here and fix your partner. Everybody wants that, and in this, when I‟m 
working with someone who‟s channeling their partner…as I go through 
this and find out what their partner‟s strategy is and get the specifics, 
then they break out in their generalizations thinking they‟re fixing their 
partner… 
 
Igor: 
But in the meantime, they‟re doing what he did, which is to realize 
that they‟re putting all kinds of stuff in there that doesn‟t even exist. 
 
Scott: 
Yes, so it‟s actually this indirect way to work with the client that 
loosens up their whole point of view, where they have compassion for 
what‟s going on, and when they talk with their partner about that 
issue, they have a whole different frame of reference. 
 
Igor: 
You just used a word which I think is very important, and hopefully 
you‟ll back me up in terms of your experience on this, and that was 
compassion. Do you not find as you‟re doing this, things that used to 
annoy you about other people suddenly become much more 
understanding, making you more passionate towards them, right?  
 
 
They‟re not so bad really, their behavior might still be annoying, but if 
you stop assuming what it actually means and start considering what it 
could mean, you don‟t even know, do you? 
 
 
Then, by trying to figure out what it is, it‟s like okay, what‟s really 
going on here. Personally, I happen to believe this and those of you 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               258                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
who did my hypnotherapy training will be familiar with this. I 
ultimately believe that people have positive intentions, it‟s just that at 
some level their behaviors get messed up. 
 
 
Therefore, things that may upset me, in terms of behaviors, and things 
do get to me all the time, if you take time out to figure out what their 
intention is, you can go oh, they mean well, it‟s just I wish they‟d do it 
some other way than the way they‟re doing it.  
 
That gives you the scope for allowing some flexibility in being more 
compassionate, more accepting of the person, not the behavior, and 
you understand there‟s a difference, right? Accepting a person, going 
you‟re okay, but that isn‟t. There‟s a big difference, so thank you, I 
appreciate that. 
 
This is important, you‟re learning to think strategically now; this is an 
advanced hypnosis program, it‟s not about here are some things you 
do by rote, memorize these and say them, and people fall under 
trance each and every time. You‟re beyond that level. 
 
There is that level of hypnosis and it‟s a valuable level to get to, but 
until you start thinking through these things and start working things 
out, you won‟t reach the level of mastery, because you‟re not inside 
people‟s heads yet and you have to be able to get inside their heads to 
figure out what‟s really going on. 
 
Isn‟t this a cool exercise for that? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Mo: 
I was working with Gunnar and his friend was in a situation in which 
he was always wanting to help other people. I tried several different 
approaches but finally found out that his friend was always coming 
from a place of good intention and love, and because it was based on 
that, it was hard for me to understand how to solve the problem and 
go out… 
 
Igor: 
What was the problem, I can‟t see one right now? It sounds good. He‟s 
nice to people and helps them out, he comes from a place of love, so 
far he seems quite idyllic doesn‟t he? 
 
Mo: 
It does, but he overpowers other people with his advice. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, he overpowers people with advice. Let‟s work this together for a 
second, because you now have three people channeling one which is 
going to make it very crowded in there. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               259                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
This is important because this is part of where your assumptions come 
in too, right? So he‟s overpowering people with his advice, right? 
 
Mo: 
Seemingly. 
 
Igor: 
Does it happen or not? 
 
Mo: 
That‟s what‟s been told. 
 
Igor: 
Did you see what happened right there? Seemingly is an attempt to 
create wriggle room. Do you see how subtle it can come in? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Because he can turn around and say oh, no it wasn‟t really that, it was 
something different. You have to jump on those things straight away, 
so is it, or isn‟t it? It doesn‟t actually matter what the real person 
does, what matters is in your perceptions together, or individually. 
Does that make sense? 
 
Mo: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Does he or does he not overpower people with his advice? 
 
Mo: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent! So now we have consistency, so you‟re telling me he 
overpowers people with his advice, right? 
 
Mo: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
By the way, feel free to cut out the middle man and invent another 
person because this is inside you now as well. If you were to ask him, 
what makes you want to give people advice in the first place, what‟s 
that about? 
 
Mo: 
I did ask that. 
 
Igor: 
What did he say? 
 
Mo: 
He has a feeling of wanting to make sure that they don‟t have a 
failure. 
 
Igor: 
[Pause] Ok great, so you want to make sure they don‟t fail, right? 
 
Mo: 
That‟s right. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               260                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
You want to make sure they don‟t fail, that‟s important to you, right? 
 
 
Mo: 
And also, not be harmed. 
 
Igor: 
And not get harmed, right? 
 
Mo: 
Correct. 
 
Igor: 
How much are you harming them by forcing your advice on them? I‟m 
just curious. Did you see what just happened? That‟s the mind-
bending moment, because we know that forcing advice doesn‟t work. 
At some point, then he goes what, I don‟t harm them. Oh really, tell 
me, how is your advice working? Well, it‟s not, they‟re ignoring it. 
 
 
So you‟re telling me that despite what you‟re doing, they‟re getting 
harmed anyway, right? Yes. So despite what you‟re doing they‟re 
getting harmed anyway, so perhaps what you‟re doing is allowing 
them to go charging into somewhere and get harmed, whereas, if you 
did something different that wouldn‟t happen, right? 
 
Mo: 
Right. 
 
Igor: 
Then why are you being so selfish and harming them, bastard? 
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
Can you see the temperature going up? Can you feel that happening? 
Because he is generally caring, I have no doubt about that, but he‟s so 
over enthusiastic in terms of how he‟s presenting the ideas that he 
ends up doing some form of harm, even if that harm means that the 
other person doesn‟t listen and carries on anyway. 
 
 
Did that make sense? Do you see where the mind-bending moment 
came then?  
 
Mo: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
I‟m not attacking his intentions I‟m actually utilizing them. Does that 
help? 
 
Mo: 
That helps very much. 
 
Mickey: 
This reminds me of standing behind the bar when I‟m at work, when 
I‟m the bartender. This exercise reminds me very much of being a 
bartender. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               261                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
In what way? 
 
Mickey: 
In the way that people say one little thing and you know by looking at 
them that they‟re shining you on, bullshitting you and usually after the 
first Scotch, you can loosen them up and get to the real root of the 
thing. 
 
Igor: 
So you have a great amount of experience for doing this stuff, now he 
needs to take it outside the bar so when it‟s in front of the bar, rather 
than behind, you‟ll be much more influential, won‟t you? 
 
Mickey: 
Get in line bro. 
 
Igor: 
There you go, great job. 
 
Audience: When I listen to you, and the experience I‟m getting, you‟re validating 
a lot of things that I observed before. When I used to supervise 
psychologists and the hours they were receiving for their ticket, you‟re 
doing things now that we couldn‟t do then. 
 
 
The problem that they got into was the drama of the case, but you 
separate that, and you don‟t even go for it. They‟re living that problem 
and they‟re telling the psychologists. 
 
 
And there‟s another observation I‟m also making, which is that as we 
were starting to go through this process I was thinking, when are you 
going to get to the integrity that you must have with that individual? 
You proved it in the last few people you‟ve had up there. The integrity 
is that you can see where they‟re going and how they‟re getting there.  
 
You allow us to observe that and that integrity comes out as, I don‟t 
believe you, I don‟t see what you‟re saying. But then you‟re able to 
twist that into a belief they can see and their integrity comes out with 
your integrity. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. Hopefully, this validates where we started from in the first 
place. 
 
Audience: Yes, exactly. 
 
Igor: 
Can you see how we‟re doing this with respect rather than as an attack 
on the person? This is not an assassination on a character. What we‟re 
looking for is to figure out what‟s going on and very often, when you 
get to the center of this thing, the green curtain gets unveiled in the 
wizards palace and it‟s just like oh, is that what it is, that‟s silly. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               262                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Very often that‟s it, you don‟t even get a chance to do anything crazy, 
because they resolve themselves once the curtain gets withdrawn. 
 
Audience: There are several metaphor‟s that have come to me, and that is, when 
I started getting into the process of mind-bending language I saw it as 
a journey or as an opportunity to be with them.  
 
I‟ve used a whitewater rafting process, going down the Grand Canyon 
I‟m able to do things, but what I do not want to do is get close to the 
edge where I can get snagged and stop. I want to stay in the center of 
what they‟re doing and you‟re bringing that to my attention. You‟ve 
given me a real value that I can see, in how to do it. 
 
Igor: 
The way I think of it is, when someone gives you an objection, either 
in a sales objection, negotiation problem or even a problem as a 
therapist, they‟re lying to you, it‟s complete BS.  
 
They don‟t realize they‟re lying, they‟re being very genuine and serious 
about what they‟re talking about, but they don‟t realize it‟s a big fat 
illusion and it can‟t be anything else, because they‟re stuck in the 
middle of something, and all the rest is so much bigger than that. 
 
They don‟t realize it. Now, if you joined them in a tiny little square that 
they‟ve built for themselves, then you‟re just as screwed as they are. 
Your therapeutic instinct goes down the tube and it‟s a little bit of what 
happened over here with Mo and his partner.  
 
Their intention was great but they got so wrapped up in the content–
as you say, the drama– that they forgot to realize that there was 
something else going on and paying attention to that, and that‟s the 
key piece. 
 
Audience: One other observation, and that is, when I start talking with 
individuals or my wife, I‟m able to see different metaphors I can use, 
like let me waltz with you imaginatively and as we start to waltz, 
you‟re starting to go around and spin around.  
 
I‟m able to put myself into a metaphor or language that allows me to 
have them consciously with me, where subconscious is also available 
in that same process. 
 
Igor: 
I think that‟s a very elegant metaphor, the idea of spinning around in a 
waltz because you‟re not forcing them round, dragging them by the 
hair, but it‟s a smoothly fluid movement and the more you do it the 
easier it becomes for everyone. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               263                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: The fluidity you have stretches way beyond what I‟ve been trained to 
do and now I train my people to do, and where I‟m into something 
that gives me a sense of relaxation, I‟m able to be with them staying 
out of their drama, yet allow them to keep going on with their drama, 
which gives me more information.  
 
Igor: 
Please turn off the cells phones people. Someone‟s cell phone is going 
off right now. Oh, it may even be mine. 
 
Hello, I‟m in the middle of a seminar. 
 
Caller: 
Oh, may I speak to Megan. 
 
You could but you called the wrong number for Megan, she‟s in the 
back. Say hello everyone. 
 
Audience: Hello. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s 180 people saying hello to you. 
 
   Caller: 
Oh my goodness, well I apologize. My name is Geri and I wanted to 
share…… 
 
Igor: 
Okay.  
 
   Caller: 
Can I get Megan‟s number please? 
 
Igor: 
I‟m sure Megan will call you back in about 20 minutes, don‟t you 
worry, that‟s fine. 
 
   Caller: 
Okay. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you, bye-bye. 
 
Audience: Bye. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s too funny. It‟s the first time it‟s happened to me, but at least I 
eat my own medicine, right? British Airways wants you to talk to them, 
Megan. Why they called me, who knows? 
 
Audience: I‟m not entirely sure what my question is. Sterling and I were going 
round and round trying to elucidate and I think there were a couple 
things going on.  
 
One thing I want to ask about is the relationship between the person 
who is channeling the problem person, and the problem person. I think 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               264                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
that part of the issue that was going on for us is that we were unable 
to pin down very specifically what was happening in the issue itself. 
 
Igor: 
Let‟s do a couple things.  
 
1. First, when you‟re doing this imagination game, you do not have 
to get the genuine answers the person will actually say. Just 
imagine what they might say and you‟ll have different decision 
trees you can go down. 
 
2. Second, very often the reason people get stuck is because they 
themselves can‟t pin down the issue. 
 
 
Who was your partner? 
 
Audience: Sterling. 
 
Igor: 
Sterling, is it okay if we talk about this briefly? 
 
Sterling: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Who are you channeling? 
 
Sterling: 
My daughter. 
 
Igor: 
What was the problem? 
 
Sterling: 
She has a problem when her cousins are all together. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent, give me an example.  
 
Sterling: 
She feels that she‟s not part of the group. 
 
Igor: 
A specific example, when did it happen? 
 
Sterling: 
It happens quite often. 
 
Igor: 
Do you see what happened there? He‟s giving part of the problem. He 
says it happens so often, all the time. I don‟t care. I care about one 
specific thing I can pin down and go into. That‟s part of the run around 
she‟s giving herself and you‟re giving yourself as the channeler, and so 
on. 
 
 
Does that make the first step clear? 
 
 
Carry on… give me a specific example. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               265                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Sterling: 
They‟ll meet up at one family‟s house… 
 
Igor: 
When did this happen? Last week, last month, last year…? 
 
Sterling: 
Last week. 
 
Igor: 
What day Sunday, Saturday, Friday…? 
 
Sterling: 
Friday. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent, so your daughter goes around someone‟s house, everyone‟s 
there, she‟s having a great time, big party and comes home with big 
smiles saying that was the most amazing event ever, right. 
 
Sterling: 
No. 
 
Igor: 
Really? 
 
Sterling: 
Yeah. 
 
Igor: 
What happened? 
 
Sterling: 
She felt she wasn‟t integrated with the group. 
 
Igor: 
Okay, how did she do that? She was there, but they were so inferior to 
her that she was feeling so amazingly good that everyone was 
embarrassed to talk to her, they‟re too shy, is that right. 
 
Sterling: 
No. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, what did happen? 
 
Sterling: 
She felt she wasn‟t part of it. 
 
Igor: 
How? She just walks in and says okay, everyone hates me, that‟s it. Is 
that what happened? 
 
Sterling: 
No, she goes in and tries to mingle. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. Give me a specific example, who is she trying to talk to? [Pause] 
 
Sterling: 
Her cousins. 
 
Igor: 
Did you see what happened? He‟s giving me a general environment of 
something that happened over several hours, but I want to pin it down 
to the second; otherwise, I have nothing to work with. Its 
generalizations, beliefs, abstractions, but nothing concrete. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               266                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
So she walks into the house and tries to talk to one of her cousins, 
which one? 
 
Sterling: 
Not necessarily one, it‟s just becoming part of the group. 
 
Igor: 
Which ones were talking to each other and wouldn‟t talk to her? 
 
Sterling: 
They‟re all talking together and she wants to be part of that. 
 
Igor: 
When? What time was this roughly? 
 
Sterling: 
She seems to be pushed to the side. It could be any time, I don‟t 
know. 
 
Igor: 
Specifically. It‟s happened more than once, hasn‟t it? 
 
Sterling: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Do you see what‟s going on? Do you see how he‟s giving you the run 
around? This is not personal to you, by the way, this is just part of 
how the problems get constructed. We are smack in the middle of this 
cloud and you‟re constantly being popped out towards the edge. That‟s 
the run around you felt. 
 
 
I want to be able to see what the interaction is at a behavioral and 
emotional level, as well as an intellectual level. I do not want 
abstractions, because they mean nothing. They are the conclusion 
people get to that have nothing to do with the actual problem. Does 
that make sense? 
 
 
Let me make a couple guesses as to what‟s going on. She walks in, 
sees this group of people having a great time. She somehow feels 
something negative, maybe talks to herself, has some self esteem 
issues along the way and so she approaches hesitantly. 
 
 
The group may not even hear her, it‟s not that they don‟t like her they 
just haven‟t heard her properly, she assumes they‟re ignoring her so of 
course her feelings get worse and the cycle continues spinning and so 
on. 
 
 
Does that make sense? Now, I do not know this for a fact. Until I 
actually speak to her, I could not know this. I could get a reasonable 
sense by speaking to you about this and getting to specific details of 
behavior, of reactions, actions, thoughts and feelings, etc. 
 
Sterling: 
I wasn‟t actually there so I don‟t know exactly what happened. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               267                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
That‟s fine. Why, because you get to hallucinate and pretend that you 
do know. That‟s the point of the entire exercise.  
 
 
Now what happens, you run this exercise four times on exactly the 
same moment, she walks in to the exact same crew at the same time 
and four different things happen. Now when you get home you‟ll go, so 
honey what happened? It might be one of those four scenarios, in 
which case, you go I am good. 
 
 
Or, it may be something else, in which case you go, well at least I‟m 
prepared. That‟s what you‟re doing here. Does that help a little more?  
 
 
Do you see how we‟re doing the same essential mechanism it‟s just 
that we have to be really precise. We cannot allow any wriggle room. 
 
Audience: So what I‟m hearing you do is actually regressing the person into the 
situation. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, you‟re regressing, although of course, now you‟re channeling the 
person, so you‟re doing a double edge, weird trance identified 
regression. 
 
Audience: And the way you‟re doing that is by floating a proposition… 
 
Igor: 
It‟s either by doing it that‟s extreme so they give me more information 
or by going back and then over and over again where more 
information comes out. If more information isn‟t coming out, I‟ll 
exaggerate again to force something to come out. If it‟s still coming 
out that‟s fine, I might just go back and say so you‟re here, you do 
this, you say this and this happens. 
 
 
So you‟re here, you do this, you say this, what happens next? Okay, 
so you‟re here you do this and say this. Oh, I just remembered, this 
happened first, so you are doing the same process it‟s just on a more 
conversational level. 
 
Audience: Thank you. 
 
Matt: 
I came to a realization after working with Ken, I asked him and he said 
I could share this. I tried pinning him down in his situation, as far as 
what a relative was going through. I kept focusing on the behavior and 
strategizing behavior incongruency, as far as how it‟s working against 
each other, but I never got to the feeling that the behavior was 
creating.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               268                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
I felt as though I could have gone deeper, but I didn‟t realize that until 
I got back in my chair. If I would have focused on the feeling the 
person was getting from that behavior and show how it was self 
sabotaging, I probably couldn‟t have gotten there better. 
 
Igor: 
Now you know something else to try in any event, because you never 
know. Plus, he‟s as much the coach as you are so who knows, but the 
point is you have new ideas to try in the second, third and fourth 
round, each time getting a little closer to it. 
 
 
This is not something you will master overnight. I wish it were. I wish I 
could figure out a way of teaching this in the way that you have it just 
like this. But this is where you earn your stripes. This is where you 
earn the title of being a master of your craft. 
 
 
You‟re thinking along the right lines already, so just keep doing more 
of that and being more curious. It will come in time if you keep doing it 
and checking with real people from time to time as well, so it has some 
reality tone left. 
 
Mark: 
My partner Jack, and I, had the same problem in that we got lost in 
the problem. Mine was the same thing about getting a person to keep 
their word and his was an acquaintance who is angry all the time, 
complaining they have no friends and are in a downward spiral. 
 
 
Would you work with him a bit? We got lost. 
 
Igor: 
Is it okay to have a chat? 
 
Jack: 
Sure. 
 
Igor: 
Isn‟t it great how people volunteer others. Who are you thinking of? 
 
Jack: 
It‟s a guy I know that I see after mass at church. 
 
Igor: 
What‟s the problem? 
 
Jack: 
The problem for me is that he‟s really angry all the time. 
 
Igor: 
Not for you, you‟re the coach. This has nothing to do with you. It‟s not 
therapy for you, you‟ll be his coach, therapist, counselor or 
salesperson, so I want you to ask him what‟s the problem? 
 
Jack: 
He‟s angry. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               269                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
So he‟s angry all the time. He wakes up angry. He goes to bed angry. 
He has angry dreams. He has angry sex with his wife. He has angry 
food, angry shoes, etc. 
 
Jack: 
Not quite that far. 
 
Igor: 
Okay, so what does happen? 
 
Jack: 
When I see him he‟s angry. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, so he hates you, is that what you‟re saying? 
 
Jack: 
No, he wants to tell me about his problems. 
 
Igor: 
So if you were to ask him what‟s happening, what does he say is he 
angry all the time or not? 
 
Jack: 
He‟s angry…I don‟t know about all the time… 
 
Igor: 
Ask him. 
 
Jack: 
No, he‟s not angry all the time.  
 
Igor: 
Okay, when is he not? 
 
 
Did you see what happened there, by the way? We just popped one of 
Jack‟s assumptions about this other person, which is part of the reason 
you were running around in circles. If you ask him when is he not, 
what might he say? 
 
Jack: 
He‟s not angry when he‟s at mass. 
 
Igor: 
Great, so he likes mass. 
 
Jack: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
But when he comes out of mass, if I understand you correctly, he‟s 
angry again, is that right? 
 
Jack: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So he‟s so pissed off that mass is over, he can‟t enjoy it anymore that 
he gets hopping mad. I get mad too. I watch a film and when it‟s over 
I‟m like no, I want the sequel right now or I‟ll throw a tantrum. Is that 
what‟s happening? 
 
Jack: 
No. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               270                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
Ask him. 
 
Jack: 
No, it‟s his life.  
 
Igor: 
His life. 
 
Jack: 
He‟s alone. 
 
Igor: 
By the way, we‟re not all the way there yet, but do you see how much 
closer we are? We‟re right on the cusp of it, can you sense it? Does 
that help you? 
 
Mark: 
We got that far. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, you got that far.  
 
Mark: 
We figured out he‟s alone. 
 
Igor: 
So what‟s the problem? 
 
Mark: 
He complains he doesn‟t have any friends because he‟s alone and he 
doesn‟t have any friends because he always complains. 
 
Igor: 
So you‟re alone. 
 
Jack: 
Yeah. 
 
Igor: 
And that pisses you off, does it? 
 
Jack: 
Yeah. 
 
Igor: 
So what would you rather have? 
 
Jack: 
Friends. 
 
Igor: 
How would that make you feel? 
 
Jack: 
Good. 
 
Igor: 
It‟d make you feel good, right?  
 
Jack: 
Yeah. 
 
Igor: 
So you‟re alone but you want to have friends, right? 
 
Jack: 
Correct. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               271                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
And you‟re so alone that you end up having a huge temper tantrum 
and get angry. How‟s that working for you? You‟re done, but you‟re not 
done-done. You just pinned it down right. 
 
Jack: 
Right. 
 
Igor: 
And if he doesn‟t get it, it‟s just like I just get so frustrated. Do you get 
frustrated enough to stay alone? What? Think about it. People find 
anger such an attractive quality, I‟m surprised that the Playboy 
mansion hasn‟t brought a busload of bunnies in to come swoon at your 
feet when you come out of mass, because that‟s so sexy. 
 
 
Angry rebel…that‟s what happens for you, isn‟t it? 
 
Jack: 
Not the bunnies, no. 
 
Igor: 
No, so what does happen? 
 
Jack: 
Nobody wants to be around him. 
 
Igor: 
Now, you have to be careful here because we‟re touching on 
something that‟s very sensitive. Nobody wants to be around you, but 
you want people to be around you, don‟t you? 
 
Jack: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Yet you have this anger thing that happens instead, right? 
 
Jack: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
How does that work? 
 
Jack: 
How does it work? 
 
Igor: 
You want people to be around you, and then suddenly you have this 
anger. What happens in between? 
 
Jack: 
Confusion. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. That confusion is that you‟re on the cusp of popping 
through to what the problem is. I suspect what‟s going to happen. I 
suspect it‟s going to be some kind of regression. In other words, he‟s 
alone. He‟s angry about how people should be treating him better.  
 
Possibly something happened to him when he was younger that caused 
him to have a defense mechanism of being angry towards people by 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               272                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
pushing them off. And now he wants people to be there, but they‟re 
not there, so he‟s getting stuck in a loop. When he has that feeling, 
you can do a conversational regression, and for you that‟ll be possible 
because I know you‟ve done the hypnotherapy training.  
 
If you haven‟t done the hypnotherapy training and don‟t know how to 
do regressions, do not touch that sort of content, because you‟re going 
into some heavy duty therapy at that point. Can you sense, as you‟re 
interacting with him, how close you are to popping that whole situation 
open? 
 
Jack: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
We won‟t go any further, because it goes beyond where we were. 
Mark, you were right on the button, you just need a little extra step 
that‟s all. 
 
Mark: 
Mine was getting a person to keep their word and be on time.  
 
Igor: 
It‟s the same deal. I don‟t want to rehash the whole content, but you 
can see where we‟re going in principles. 
 
Mark: 
We got stuck. 
 
Igor: 
It comes down to consistency, not in terms of, oh I‟ll be able to hear it 
this time, but consistency in that this is how you‟re thinking, is that 
right? Yes. So, you‟re telling me the situation is like this and as a result 
this happens? Yes. So how much of this is that? 
 
 
So for example, I haven‟t got enough time to go do all these things. 
You haven‟t got enough time, you‟re doing all these other things and 
as a result you come late. How important are these things? Not very.  
 
Oh, so they‟re important enough to miss this other thing that‟s 
important, are you telling me that? Or, is this other thing so 
unimportant that these trivial things are more important than 
something that‟s not? 
 
Mark: 
It‟s all important. 
 
Igor: 
Everything…everything you‟ve done in life is so spectacularly great that 
it‟s all important? 
 
Mark: 
This one more thing is as important as getting there, and we can get 
there, there‟s no problem.  
 
Igor: 
Is there a problem or not? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               273                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Mark: 
No problem for me. 
 
Igor: 
So there‟s no problem for you? 
 
Mark: 
No, as long as my husband drives while I meditate, he‟s rushed 
through traffic and I don‟t have to bother. He‟s all frazzled but I‟m 
okay. 
 
Igor: 
 So you‟re telling me that you‟re quite happy for your husband to get 
frazzled, is that what it is, you must really love him. 
 
Mark: 
That‟s his problem. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, so when you‟re late that‟s his problem, is that what you‟re saying? 
 
Mark: 
Well, we‟re not really late, we arrive on time, we just scoot in okay, 
but he likes to be there a little early. 
 
Igor: 
So you‟re telling me that you‟d rather have your husband be stressed 
because of something you‟re doing than to let him arrive a little early, 
is that what you‟re saying? 
 
Mark: 
He just has to get over it. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, it‟s his problem all along? 
 
Mark: 
Yeah, he needs to lighten up and not bother so much about it. 
 
Igor: 
[Pause] We have two possibilities here.  
 
 
On the one side, there may be truth to what she‟s saying, I 
don‟t know, I‟m just saying. 
 
 
On the other side, it‟s defined leverage in terms of, if she 
doesn‟t really care about being late then be late, give her 
something to care about.  
 
 
Right now, you‟re taking up the slack right? 
 
Mark: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
If you stop taking up the slack like if you were to leave to be on time 
and she‟d say hey, what about me. Say I didn‟t think you had a 
problem being late. Oh, that‟s because you were doing the driving. I 
did, I was there on time.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               274                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Do you see now that you‟re creating leverage and that‟s more in the 
situation that you‟re in at that point? So either you have someone 
where it‟s a problem for them, whereas in this case it isn‟t. In other 
words, you have to create a context in which they realize that it is. 
 
 
I‟m not necessarily recommending that‟s the only solution. I don‟t 
want the divorce rate to go up because of a seminar I‟ve created. It‟s 
the thinking I‟m going through. 
 
Ed: 
I think you‟ve answered the question. As Don and I were going 
through our session, we were done, we figured out what the problem 
was for that person, etc. we were curious to know, if the person who‟s 
describing the problem also has a problem with the person who has 
the problem, do then you have to fix that problem, while you‟re fixing 
the person who has the problem?  
 
Igor: 
And very often, it‟s exactly that. That makes it a little trickier in terms 
of doing it, because you‟re part of the equation, versus just being 
external from it. The closer you are to the situation, like working with 
friends and family, the more part of that problem you become.  
 
 
So you can‟t point the finger and say, if only I can fix that person life 
will be better. I know it‟s a temptation, but you have the choice to 
influence them just by what you‟re doing anyway, so you don‟t even 
have to do mind-bending reframes to take Mark‟s example. 
 
 
If it‟s appropriate in terms of the context of the whole marriage and so 
on, something I might do just to see what happens, is to drive off 
early, get there on time and make excuses for her being late. Maybe 
she misses the whole event. She‟ll be furious right, but you left on 
time.  
 
 
So now, suddenly time means something doesn‟t it? Do you see how 
that works? That‟s not the only way to do it, but you‟re part of the 
equation, so you don‟t have to do any reframes, you just change your 
behavior and then the whole thing changes with it.  
 
 
This is an important principle as a rule. The longer you have a 
relationship with a person, not just an intimate relationship, I‟m talking 
about business, a work colleague, business partner, client, etc. the 
longer you have a relationship with someone, the more you are 
training that person‟s behavior. 
 
 
Therefore, how they treat you is how you have trained them to treat 
you. If it‟s really bad, it‟s because you‟ve accepted it and allowed it to 
happen and in some indirect way encouraged it. Does that make 
sense? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               275                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
That doesn‟t take any responsibility away from them. If they‟re being 
abusive, obnoxious, even violent, they‟re still at fault and they can still 
be punished for all those things. They‟re bad human beings. But you 
have something to do with that.  
 
 
I‟m not saying you‟re to blame for it, I‟m simply saying you have some 
power over the situation by changing what you do. At that level on its 
own, you have a lot more empowerment in your own life, in terms of 
influence. 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
The longer you‟re in a relationship with a person, then this rule 
becomes truer. „The way that someone treats you is a direct 
result of how you have trained them to treat you.’  
 
 
That happens with every relationship you have, bar none!  
~~~ 
 
 
The previous session was a little bit on the technical side, right? Who 
thought, just when I was starting to get this my head starts spinning 
out of control again? Not really…some yes and some no…please do not 
concern yourselves about this; this is one of the hardest things you 
can get a grip on, in terms of the stuff we‟re doing.  
 
How 
many 
people 
here 
are 
psychologists, 
psychotherapists, 
psychiatrists, hypnotherapists and so on? Would it be fair to say that 
what we did in the last session is about as difficult as it can get in that 
type of profession? 
 
 
Unless you‟re specializing with schizophrenia, what have you, which is 
a whole other kettle of fish. It‟s about as hard as you can get and you 
all after two and a half days are already engaging with those thoughts. 
This is way beyond many masters programs, even PhD level ideas and 
I‟m not saying that to brag, except to brag about where you are. 
 
 
You‟re at a very advanced level here. You‟re doing some very 
advanced things, and you‟re coping pretty well. I do not expect you to 
have this absolutely right the first time, how could you possibly? There 
are people with their little DR and, I‟m not talking about drive written 
next to their name, and it would even be difficult for them. 
 
 
Wouldn‟t it be fair to say that it would be difficult for them?  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               276                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
You are doing a good job and I want to emphasize this, and that is, 
just because I make something look easy doesn‟t mean it necessarily 
has to be instantly there. Once you‟ve connected the right pathways 
inside your own brain, it‟ll be just as easy for you. 
 
 
When I say easy, by the way, it‟s actually not easy for me either. The 
key difference is that I‟ve given up caring as to whether I‟m right or 
wrong. Half the stuff you all came up with regarding issues I have no 
idea what to do with it, I‟m just asking questions and hoping that 
something will lead me somewhere. 
 
 
Then suddenly, I notice a maneuver or something happening like a 
little escape mechanism and then I‟ll pin that down. After a period of 
time I get a little better at that and something else happens, so you 
start creating a richer model. Does that make sense? 
 
 
The way to get good at this is… 
 
1. Partner up with some of the people in this room, keep in contact 
with them via the phone, Skype or something like that and do 
this coaching process, externalizing other people‟s blocks and 
blockages be it objections for business or personal work, helps 
immensely in getting out of your own head and your own 
assumptions. 
 
2. I strongly advise you to not use, shall we say, people in your life 
that you have a very personal connection to, in terms of what 
their problem is, because the more involved in the problem you 
are, the tougher it is for you to deal with because you‟ll bring in 
stuff you don‟t even realize. 
 
 
 You‟re part of the problem, and I‟m not blaming you for that, it‟s just 
the way problems co-exist so the easy way to do this is to choose 
people who you don‟t care about whether or not they get better. 
 
 
I don‟t mean this in a callous way, this way you‟re not attached, so 
you are relatively an unimportant role in the whole dynamic of how the 
problem gets created. 
 
 
It‟s like your example of the man who gets angry at church. If he dies 
an angry man it won‟t necessarily destroy your life, will it? But if you 
can turn him into a happy man, that would be a nice thing to do. So 
now he‟s not attached and adding to the problem with his own 
attitudes, experiences and so on. 
 
 
Now, if he‟d been trying to change him for the last two years and was 
getting frustrated with it, then he‟s too close. Does that mean he can‟t 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               277                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
do anything about it? No, there is lots he can do about it, it‟s just that 
those aren‟t the cases you start working on, in terms of your thinking. 
 
3. Externalize yourself so that you have someone else reflecting 
back on you to remind you or mind-bend you, if you start 
yourself getting too attached in one assumption or other. 
 
4. Do this a lot. 
 
You can do this inside your head, that‟s how I like to do it. I know 
people who like to type out conversations. A client comes in, its 
problem (x). How do you know? I do this. Well, what about that. I do 
that, etc. If you type them out and find yourself typing round and 
round in a circle, it‟s great.  
 
Simply go okay, I see what‟s going on here delete-delete-delete, I‟m 
going to cheat. You know those chess programs you can get to play on 
your video machine and something like that. I hate losing, so if I get 
taken it‟s like damn it, I didn‟t see that coming. Go back, I‟m going 
there instead. 
 
You can do that with your own mental rehearsals. Start with simple 
things and then build up to the more complex and difficult things. You 
don‟t have to do it all at once. This is about as difficult as it gets. 
Maybe one day in the future, what we‟re talking about here will be 
child‟s play. 
 
Everyone knows it and then there will be other things that are more 
sophisticated hopefully, because what I know didn‟t come from 
anywhere, I picked it up from other people who are way more 
intelligent than me and do way better stuff than me. 
 
It is my hope that one day you‟ll be saying the same thing about me to 
other people.  Saying that guy doesn‟t know anything, look at this.  
 
Take it easy. Give yourself time to play with this. The whole mind-
bending stuff anyway, think of it as an exercise in playing with mind-
bending language with a softer spin, so either you bend their minds or 
get to the root. Either way is better, isn‟t it? 
 
Scott: 
The question about the guy at church who has anger…I can relate in 
my life, there are people who do little things that I look at that are 
minor annoyances and inconvenient to me…I look at them and think, 
boy their life would be better if they weren‟t angry. You can see the 
trap, I‟m going to start to step into here right? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               278                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
Of course, because you‟re part of the problem. You‟re saying if only 
they were different I‟d be better.  
 
Scott: 
Exactly.  
 
Igor: 
You can work your way out of that loop, by the way, but if you‟re in 
that loop, I strongly recommend you don‟t start there when it comes to 
this exercise, because you‟re bringing too much baggage along. 
 
 
If on the other hand, for example, I know you have a lot of students as 
well, so if it‟s just a student that has anger issues, you‟d want for that 
student to get better, but you don‟t need for him to get better. Do you 
notice how the theme comes back again? 
 
 
I want for them to heal, change and improve for their own sakes, but I 
don‟t need it. If this guy turns out to have an unhappy life the rest of 
his life, I‟ll be pretty happy still. I‟m dating a fantastic person. I have a 
great career. I have lots of fans and people saying nice things to me; 
I‟m not going to lose any sleep over it.  
 
However, if on the other hand he ends up resolving, feels transformed 
and has an amazing life, I‟ll feel good about that. So I‟m not attached 
to it and don‟t need it to happen, but would like it for that person.  
 
Make sense? 
 
Scott: 
Right. It makes perfect sense. It‟s easy if someone comes to me and 
says I have this problem. Then I could say on a scale of one to ten, 
how much do you want to solve it? They say 10, then I have huge 
leverage right? 
 
Igor: 
Absolutely. 
 
Scott: 
On the opposite side, I notice something going on and I think to 
myself, boy if they weren‟t so angry they‟d have such a better life. 
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Scott: 
Now, I want to not step into that trap and then attempt to fix them 
when they‟re not asking for it. 
 
Igor: 
Right. There are some times when you can fix things indirectly by 
doing some indirect maneuvers, mind-bending language, spin them 
out a bit and see where they land, but do it softly.  
 
However, if you touch on something bigger, then it‟s a question they 
have to decide about whether or not they want to resolve it. If 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               279                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
someone is having a bad day, you make an off-hand comment with a 
little spin on it, and add a little suggestion by saying, when you think 
about it life‟s pretty good, isn‟t it? And their response is like, you know, 
you‟re right, that‟s just what I needed to hear today, thanks. 
 
Sometimes it‟s as easy as walking into a shop, where the teller is all 
depressed and miserable because life sucks, but you smile and say 
hey, how‟s it going? They say thank, you made my day just by smiling. 
 
I have no issue in terms of influencing the people around you, it‟s just 
do you need them to respond or not, that‟s the big difference? 
 
Audience: What you‟re teaching us is the ability to make a difference in 
somebody else‟s life.  
 
Igor: 
Hopefully yes. 
 
Audience: As we go through those miracles there‟ll be some that are not and if 
you take the time to try and heal those that you can‟t, you‟re not 
there, you can‟t be with them because that‟s their problem. 
 
 
If you get lost in it you‟re not doing your work. And as I see it, as we 
start to go forward with these new tools, we can make a lot of 
difference. But the purpose of our lives is to make the difference. 
 
Igor: 
I agree.  
 
[Applause] 
 
John: 
My question is, when you were talking with somebody up here in the 
last issue, you started saying this for that, this is the situation so 
change this for that…is that an outline that you follow in your head 
when you‟re running through these scenarios? 
 
Igor: 
It very well may be. You‟re asking me a very difficult question, 
because much of this stuff I do intuitively and it‟s simply from years of 
making mistakes. 
 
 
What I do recognize that I do is I find a contrast that‟s impossible to 
resolve. I‟m looking for a paradox, where my end of the lever is much 
bigger than theirs, or what they‟re currently doing. 
 
 
The classic example was a lady who wanted to have fun, but ended up 
ignoring her paperwork, as a result. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               280                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
I know that when I get to the right point I can use fun as a lever that‟s 
on my side rather than hers. How much fun are you having when all 
this work‟s piling up? So basically, I‟ve stolen her thunder.  
 
Can you feel the fundamental conflict that I‟m offering to her? She 
wants to have fun but she‟s engaged in behavior that‟s going to 
detract from her ability to have fun. So what she‟s doing is swapping 
little bits of fun for a big headache instead, instead of having big bits 
of fun because that big headache is gone. 
 
John: 
That‟s where you say this causes that. 
 
Igor: 
Right. I‟m just switching it around. So if this is doing that, well how do 
you classify that when you want this? How does that work? I‟m looking 
for something…when you hear that, can you not feel the leverage 
happening there…? 
 
John: 
I‟m trying to organize this into linear thought… 
 
Igor: 
I rarely have a clue what I‟m doing up here, do you realize that? 
You‟re paying a man to talk to you about things he doesn‟t know 
about. Luckily, I someone else, I‟m channeling stuff and I don‟t know 
where it comes from, honestly. 
 
 
Essentially, in terms of the structure, I‟m looking for a juxtaposition, a 
paradox to exploit. You say you want this and you‟re getting that, so 
how much of that is this or, something like that. Or, can you do this to 
the extent that you get that? Or, can you do that to the extent this you 
get that?  
 
 
Who knows which way it‟ll work until they start bending their own 
minds? That‟s roughly what I‟m looking for, I‟m looking at that 
juxtaposition between things that in their universe are totally 
disconnected, and I‟m re-connecting them in a way that the one they 
want dissolves the actual problem they‟re having. 
 
 
That‟s the best I can give you at the moment, because I don‟t know 
much more about that myself, it‟s in here somewhere. Please don‟t 
break my head open and pull out my brains because I‟m attached to 
them, in more ways than one. 
 
 
Are you all enjoying yourselves? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Was it a good day? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               281                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: Yes! 
 
Igor: 
Do you want more? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Now you have to come back tomorrow. 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
Any questions at all regarding what we‟ve covered? If not, the only 
thing left to do is remind you that all of you have unconscious minds, 
do you not? It‟s true. That‟s right. It‟s time for those books to go down 
but hey, who am I to say when that‟s going to happen?  
 
 
How do I know when you‟ll fall asleep? It could be in here. It could be 
out there, or in your own bedrooms late at night when you sleep and 
dream. One thing is for sure.  
 
Every one of you will have dreams sometime in the next 24 hours, and 
when those dreams come, your unconscious mind has an unparalleled 
opportunity for learning, integrating all the things you‟ve experienced 
here today, and over the last three days. Things have been making 
sense, confusion, sense, confusion, sense, confusion… 
 
And that‟s just a natural part of learning. Just when you think you 
know it all, something will come and remind you that you don‟t. That‟s 
just how it should be. It keeps you on the path to genuine mastery, 
constantly improving, learning and growing. 
 
That cycle will never end, but you will go beyond it. All the things 
you‟re confused about right now will be things that are so simple and 
clear. Just as all the things that were confusing on the first day are 
now simple and clear.  
 
And all the things you don‟t yet know about, you know nothing enough 
about to be confused, will be confusing when you know enough about 
them to know, but you don‟t quite know what‟s going on there yet. So 
you get the pleasure of discovering all those moments where you‟re 
just confused enough to realize you‟re learning. 
 
In your dreams, confusing things can happen and you can awaken with 
clarity. Enough clarity to function throughout a day, to navigate and 
when the confusion strikes again, you can smile, relax and realize it‟s 
just a dream.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               282                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
It really isn‟t that important. It may be the most important experience 
of your life and it‟s just a dream. All the things you think you should be 
doing are confusing you about the things you actually can, so you 
might as well forget about what you should and just do what you know 
you can. 
 
Let the rest take care of itself. Tonight you will rest. You will dream. 
And those dreams will lead you through wonderful journey‟s, far and 
beyond any experience you‟ve had in here, and they will be in here 
inside you, out there begins in here and everything you dream about 
becomes part of what you experience in your day-to-day reality. 
 
Now, as you rest there comfortably, anticipating moments of enough 
confusion to have clarity and success, all the things you think you‟ll fail 
in, are simply the successes you haven‟t recognized yet and when you 
do you‟ll realize that you know much more advanced covert hypnosis 
then you ever realized and that‟s something worth waking up to, is it 
not? 
 
So as you consider all the wonderful things that can happen in your 
dreams, you might find yourselves coming back into this room, getting 
ready for the experience you‟ll have out there. So that experience 
prepares you for the special experience you‟ll have tonight, when you 
do sleep and dream, in your own way, at your own time.  
 
And who knows when that‟s going to be? The only thing we know is 
that whatever it is, is going to be good, isn‟t it?  
 
Thank you very much for paying such careful attention, all of you. I‟ll 
see most of you later on tomorrow. If not, I‟ll see you later on today. 
 
DVD 12 
Full Transcript 
 
 
Igor: 
Let‟s have a little review of where we‟ve gotten so far. In the first 
couple of days, we focused on just speaking like a covert hypnotist and 
some of the advanced language – the mind-bending language.  
 
 
Yesterday, we focused our attention on thinking like a covert 
hypnotist. In other words, learning to maneuver inside someone‟s 
mind so that you can actually have the fine feeling for what you need 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               283                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
to say in order to persuade them in a context, either therapy or sales 
and so on. 
 
 
What I want to focus on today is how to put them together in a 
strategic way. In other words, you have a good sense of how someone 
is thinking. You have a good idea of how to speak using mind-bending 
language.  
 
How do you put those two together in a very strategic way so 
you can plan like an advanced covert hypnotist would?  
 
 
First, have a look at page eight of your notes. You‟ll notice that there 
are a bunch of maneuvers that you should already be familiar with.  
 
 
For example– 
 
 
In terms of just maneuvers, you can shift people‟s awareness 
around, can you not?  
 
 
It‟s easy to add negation, is it not?  
 
 
You‟re familiar with the idea of the systems question‟s and how 
they can spin you out in different directions.  
 
 
You‟re familiar with the different kinds of spins we put on, the 
two or three different phrases that you can add in different 
ways, which allow you to accentuate the spin that you‟re 
creating.  
 
 
We can move through time by using predicates or tenses. You 
can shift through time.  
 
 
You understand the importance and the value of pausing at the 
right time, partly so they can process what you‟re saying, and of 
course, partly so that you can change the meaning after the 
pause, so that they have a little unexpected moment.  
 
 
 
The other thing we covered so far are the systems predicates.  
 
 
A couple of quick things I want to just throw in there in terms of what 
else you can do. This is more to give you some feeling as to where you 
can go with this. This is not an exclusive list, but to give you an idea 
that this is a starting point. Even though this is an advanced covert 
hypnosis program, it should be a platform from which you build 
whatever you want out of it.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               284                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
You can add all kinds of things. For example, we‟ve been playing with 
language and spinning people out in terms of the building blocks they 
use to make reality. If you start changing the sequence of that 
sequence, it changes the meaning, doesn‟t it? It‟s the same building 
blocks, you just change the meaning, from the dog wags the tail to the 
tail wags the dog, the meaning changes significantly, doesn‟t it? 
 
 
So when you reverse the syntax, you can actually change the impact 
something has in a way that can be quite mind-bending because the 
person starts going, what‟s going on here?  
 
 
For example, we used one of those maneuvers yesterday when we 
talked about the lady who‟s not doing her paperwork. How much fun 
are you having when it‟s all stacking up? We changed the syntax. As 
far as she‟s concerned, stop work, then have fun. Now we change the 
syntax to having fun before you work, and how does that work?  
 
 
Do you see how that works? 
 
 
Metaphors of movements are interesting. They are metaphors that 
people use constantly and usually have to do with systems predicates. 
I can‟t stand for this. I won‟t stand for this. I feel stuck. There‟s no 
movement. I need to calm down. Everything is still. There‟s like a 
crazy storm going on. 
 
 
Do you see how people use metaphors in things that they say that 
have to do with the systems predicates, in terms movement, in terms 
of time sequences, in terms of little analogies of their own experience? 
Well, you can feed those into your mind-bending formula in the same 
way, and it makes even more of an impact. 
 
 
On the previous training with the Conversational Hypnotherapy, there 
was a lady there – I don‟t think she‟s here anymore – who had a 
particular issue come up. For her it was this whole darkness, afraid of 
going forwards and so on. That‟s what she felt like, it‟s all dark and I‟m 
afraid to move forward.  
 
 
When the solution came guess what it was? Lighten up. How many 
times have you said to someone, why don‟t you lighten up a little?  
 
 
Do you see how these little metaphors are constantly in what we do? 
So I‟m just going to give you some ideas of places you can go and 
expand this stuff into further, so don‟t get the idea that this is it. This 
is not where you end. This is just where you begin. Does that make 
sense in terms of the maneuvers you have available to you? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               285                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
What we‟re going to do now is start thinking in terms of strategy. In 
other words, how do you know what you want to say and when you 
want to say it? 
 
 
I‟m going to warn you. Initially, this is the stuff you do long before you 
engage with a person. When you‟re with a person, you won‟t be 
thinking this way because the very act of thinking this way will 
interfere with what you‟re doing.  
 
 
So you do this stuff when we do the kind of exercise we did yesterday, 
when we walked through people‟s minds. Either to walk through their 
mind in a sales process, in a therapeutic process, to clear an objection, 
or to walk through their mind to influence and persuade them into 
some kind of behavior.  
 
 
It‟s the same process, isn‟t it? You do realize that? The same process 
you go through mentally to walk through someone‟s mind, like you did 
yesterday, will let you do better sales, better therapy, better influence 
and better teaching; the whole works. It‟s just a question of getting 
used to the process.  
 
 
Who understands what I mean by that? If you have a question, now is 
the time to ask, otherwise we‟ll move on. 
 
 
When you‟re going through those exercises, in time you can bring in 
the nuance of saying okay, as I‟m asking these questions I would like 
to create a certain affect inside their mind, which will be useful for 
what I want to achieve. 
 
 
Who‟s familiar with the idea of power loops? A power loop is basically a 
hypnotic process, a strategy you have inside your mind to take you 
from A to P.  
 
 
The PCAT formula, for example, is an example of a power loop. You 
start with a problem, clear the slate and bypass the critical factor from 
the problem, get a resource, associate it and you transform the entire 
situation. 
 
 
I want to show you different ways of using the PCAT formula for sales, 
covert changes, therapy and even for just giving people amazing 
experiences. Would you like that? 
 
Audience: Yes! 
 
Igor: 
In order to be able to use those things or to think in those ways, you 
have units within that. In other words, between the P and C, you want 
to do certain things. You want to move them certain directions. You 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               286                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
want to make more of the problem, less of the problem and how do 
you maneuver through those experiences? 
 
 
Here‟s an example, and I know this hasn‟t ever happened to anyone 
here, but what if someone you ever came across someone else, whose 
mind was so closed that new ideas just wouldn‟t go in. I know this isn‟t 
going to happen to you, but can you imagine this crazy situation where 
you‟re trying to talk to someone and their minds shut?  
 
 
Wouldn‟t it be useful to open their minds up? What if someone is stuck 
in a rut and they can‟t see choices, their mind is stuck, wouldn‟t it be 
useful to open their mind up to give them more choices? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So how might you use the systems predicates, mind-bending language 
to create that impact in someone‟s mind? 
 
Matt: 
In my opinion, you‟d start with an agreement to get rid of any 
resistance. 
 
Igor: 
Perfect. 
 
Matt: 
Then you‟d start a mini loop into negating where they are, create 
exaggeration by following the same formula we did yesterday. 
 
Igor: 
Okay, that‟s absolutely correct, in terms of the formula, that‟s the 
process and power loop. 
 
 
I‟m thinking much smaller pieces now. I‟m thinking in terms of what 
language, what specific words can you start using which will have the 
effect of opening up their mind when it‟s closed? 
 
 
By the way, what you said is absolutely correct. 
 
Audience: If they have a locked mind, I‟d ask them if they have a key to unlock 
it. 
 
Igor: 
Okay, so now we‟re talking in terms of metaphors. 
 
Audience: Yes, and once it‟s open, can you keep hold of that key in case you 
want to close it again? And, if we do open it wide enough, can we see 
what we‟re looking at? 
 
Igor: 
You‟re very close, the metaphor element is good. It‟s not what we‟re 
looking for, but you actually said it in what you were doing, although 
you didn‟t quite realize it‟s happening, but you‟re in the right place.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               287                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Audience: Maybe use the awareness, like in imagine. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. That starts getting them into their other space a little bit, that‟s 
a good start. 
 
Audience: You might ask them, aside from the answers that you have that aren‟t 
working for you… 
 
Igor: 
Now you‟re very good. It‟s not quite what we‟re looking for, but you‟ve 
actually come to the next point.  
 
 
Clearly, something like aside has an affect, doesn‟t it? Keep that in the 
back of your mind, we‟ll come back to that. You‟re thinking along the 
right lines.  
 
Audience: A closed mind seems to, in my mind, indicate that there‟s fear and I 
want to go after where the fear is. 
 
Igor: 
So, in terms of just the language itself, what would you do? 
 
Audience: Well, I‟m going to look for… 
 
Igor: 
What you‟re thinking about right now is correct. Shall I make it easy 
for you? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
The language you‟re using will have certain impacts. For example, 
everyone look at your own hand for a moment. You see this hand in 
front of you, don‟t you? That hand is over there. Consider that hand 
over there and how far that hand is. 
 
[Stirring in the audience] 
 
 
What‟s happening? 
 
Audience: Disassociation. 
 
 
Igor: 
Do you notice the disassociation? Your experience of this hand, which 
is actually your hand, look at your hand again would you. Remember 
we talked about space, for example, this and that, here and there. 
We‟re using those markers that have been embedded in us since we 
were small children, to tell us how to relate to things. 
 
 
This is close; therefore, it‟s more personal, whereas that is distance.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               288                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
Everyone think of a car inside your mind. This car inside your mind is 
different from that car, isn‟t it? What‟s the difference between this car 
and that car, in terms of the pictures you make? One‟s closer and 
one‟s further away, isn‟t it? 
 
 
We‟re going to start using that affect to create different effects, 
depending on what kinds of things we want. For example, a closed 
mind is somewhat of a narrow mind, isn‟t it? It‟s a narrow focus, it‟s 
focused on one idea, and so on. What we want to do is open the mind, 
we want to send them in different directions. 
 
 
What opens the mind? What about things like more than, beyond or 
above? Think about whatever you‟re thinking of right now and go 
beyond that. More than the thoughts you‟re having right now, are the 
ones that are coming, aren‟t they? Above all, keep enough of the mind 
on the ideas that are coming that you weren‟t aware of. 
 
 
Do you see how words like more than, beyond and totally; these are 
opening words, words that encompass more things as a bigger picture.  
 
 
What is the reverse? Less than, only, this and maybe inside as well, 
that tends to bring the mind down.  
 
 
You might think, we don‟t want to close minds we want to open them, 
wouldn‟t that seem fair? What happens if someone is sitting there and 
they‟re stuck with all these choices going I could do that, I could do 
this and then they sit there happily contemplating their choices, but 
never get anything done. 
 
 
At that point, what do you want to do? You want to hone their mind 
down into specifics, so one is inductive, which basically gives the 
unconscious mind permission to find more and the other one is 
deductive, which tells them to hone in on one. 
 
 
So now we have a little pattern developing, don‟t we. Consider all the 
choices you have, all is an opening word, isn‟t it? Beyond the choices 
there will be one that only fits you, above all, find that one and totally 
consider it now, but only to the extent that you can do something 
about it. 
 
 
What‟s the first thing that comes to mind? Do you see how I‟m 
stretching your mind, closing it up, stretching your mind, etc? It‟s a 
kind of fractionation.  
 
 
This doesn‟t at all match your experience of over the past few days 
does it, opening up so big and confused, then closing down thinking 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               289                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
that you get it. Opening up again, thinking oh, my God this is a roller 
coaster and closing it down, thinking oh, my God I don‟t get this 
anymore. 
 
 
There‟s so much choice oh, this is clear. There‟s so much choice oh, 
this is clear. Do you see how that‟s working? Meanwhile, you‟re 
stretching their minds. So you can open or close their minds. You can 
create more abstraction, you can create more concreteness, depending 
on what you need. 
 
 
You can create more induction, which creates more choices or you can 
hone them down through deduction to one or two simple things they 
can actually do. You can overload or you can simplify, do you see how 
that works?  
 
 
And, of course, the vocabulary is very simple to track isn‟t it…all, 
every, each, only, one…? Do you get that level of things? 
 
 
Now, something Mickey came up with is very interesting here. As a 
rule, where you start from is where you tend to go. So if someone 
says I‟m depressed and you say well, deep inside that, how are you 
that‟s this? What‟s that likely to do? 
 
Audience: Shift them. 
 
Igor: 
Right, because what you‟ve done is taken their experience and 
augmented it with your words. If they start with something like fear, 
sadness or depression, something negative and you suddenly go 
inductive, like all the experiences you have right now it‟s going to be 
all the experiences within depression, so you‟re actually making more 
of that. Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
It‟s because your starting point will tend to define the journey. 
Therefore, if you don‟t want to get stuck in that, you have to basically 
shift the starting point enough to define a different journey, and that‟s 
just what Mickey was doing intuitively. 
 
 
Aside from that, not aside from this, aside from that, what else are you 
that‟s so much more? 
 
 
Think of it in terms of a special process, aside from that– here‟s the 
problem, we‟re not going on that journey– what else are you – we‟re 
starting a clean slate – that‟s more. We‟re not talking about that 
anymore, we‟re talking about this.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               290                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
You actually get to shift the context. This isn‟t useful in sales at all, is 
it?  
 
 
I don‟t know if this is right for me. I understand, you really don‟t know 
if this is right for you, because you have thoughts, right? Aside from 
those thoughts, what else makes you want to talk to us about 
changing your life? 
 
 
This is especially useful, for example, if the objections you‟re getting 
are minor objections. In other words, they‟re objections where they 
have to give you total resistance rather than something they really 
feel. You do understand the difference between the two, right?  
 
 
It‟s the emotion they present. If there‟s a lot of emotion attached, you 
have to do what you did yesterday, go in, clear the emotion to the 
objection and come out. Like, I don‟t know if this will work for me…at 
that point, you can pretty much guess that there‟s a lot more attached 
to it than a little doubt. 
 
 
So unless you go in and clear out whatever‟s going on there, the 
objection will remain, they can‟t make the decision to come see you 
because they‟ll either be too afraid, too confused, or whatever. This is 
at sales level. Of course, you can see the obvious therapeutic 
application too. 
 
 
If, on the other hand, they‟re going like yeah, I don‟t know if it‟ll work 
for me, are they particularly attached to that, or do they just throw it 
out there to see what happens? At that point, you simply move it to 
one side and say I understand that. 
 
 
Who was it saying agreement reversal? You agree with it and then you 
reverse it. Say I understand that, of course, you have doubts it‟s only 
natural isn‟t it? Now aside from the thoughts you‟re having now, how 
do you want to think that‟s so much more, so when you will have had 
whatever you came here for, you can look back and go that was worth 
it? 
 
 
Aside, start again, open up, hone down, look back…do you see how 
we‟ve created a loop, a whole process just based on the language and 
what it does to the mind?  
 
 
 
 
We can also change the end point. Where is it they‟re going to end? 
So, we‟ve changed the starting point. We can also change the end 
point, how might I do that? Any ideas on how you might change the 
end point? In case you‟re wondering, you‟ve done it already. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               291                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: Time predicates. 
 
Igor: 
That can be useful. How about this…you‟re all here for some reason 
and I know you don‟t know what it is…the more you think about it and 
go beyond whatever you thought was there, you begin to have so 
much more choice and you can totally consider all that only to the 
extent you feel good now. 
 
 
Open up, create choice, hone down, only and then you create a target, 
feel good. So in other words, you‟re saying going into a trance of 
infinite possibilities to find out what‟s there, select one of those things 
only that happens to conform to the whole category of feeling good. 
 
 
I don‟t know which one it‟ll be, but it‟ll be one of them, right? And even 
if it isn‟t, I can spin back and do it again. Do you see how that works? 
So you get to choose where they start and where they end up. You get 
to choose the journey they take, to open or close their mind. 
 
 
Are you beginning to get a sense of what you can do with these 
things? 
 
 
How might you un-stick someone when they’re stuck in a 
particular point of view or position?  
 
Connie: 
Take an abstraction like a relationship and turn it into a process, into a 
verb, something they‟re doing, how you‟re relating. 
 
Igor: 
My decision is final. Have you ever heard that? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
I had an executive I was coaching earlier in my days, who was about 
to lose a big account. He got an email that said this is what we decided 
to do, this decision is final now, it‟s been approved and we‟re going 
forward.  
 
 
He sent them back a two line email…something along the lines of…as 
your deciding that, what else…whatever, he put in some reframe 
around what they were missing in terms of working with his company. 
 
 
Ten minutes later, he got a phone call from the CEO of the company 
that was just dumping him saying you know what, you‟re absolutely 
right, let‟s talk. 
 
 
It‟s not always going to be that cut and dry, but do you see how you 
can take people‟s minds when they think they‟re stuck, but they‟re 
not?  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               292                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
Has anyone here ever made a decision?  
 
 
 Believe it or not, you are still making the same decision now to keep 
going with that decision. You can change your mind about it at any 
time, so decisions do not exist. Relationships do not exist, you relate, 
you decide and you keep relating and keep deciding every moment of 
your life, until you don‟t. That‟s when the relationship is over. You stop 
relating, or stop relating in that way. 
 
 
The decision has been broken. It hasn‟t broken really, it‟s not like a 
little toy where you can whine and say oh, mom I broke my 
decision…it‟s simply that you changed your mind. Do you see how that 
works? 
 
 
How do you stick something together and make it more real? 
 
 
You go the other way. There‟s something you can do that‟s actually 
very subtle in both directions that has nothing to do with language. It 
has to do with attention. Remember, where our attention goes, our 
energy flows.  
 
 
If someone keeps looping back to the problem, where‟s all the 
attention going? Where‟s all the energy going? What‟s becoming more 
real?  
 
 
If you distract people away from the problem, where is the energy 
going now? To something else. So, if you want to build something, you 
put attention on it. For example, let‟s say someone says I‟ve wanted 
one of these toaster ovens forever now. Really, how come? I don‟t 
know, I just feel it‟s going to be amazing to have one of these, it‟s 
going to be awesome! 
 
 
Really, you really think it‟s going to be awesome? Yeah. How do you 
know? It‟s just awesome I saw it on TV and so on. Really? Yeah! Are 
you sure? It‟d be awesome to have this thing.  
 
 
What am I doing? 
 
 
 
I‟m spinning his attention back over and over to his feeling of how cool 
this thing will be and I‟ll do it in different ways, but the point is, its 
building attention on how positive and awesome it will be to have this 
thing. It‟s becoming more real. Do you see how simple that is? 
 
Audience: Before you started talking about this active thought process of almost 
turning things into verbs, I was thinking and about to say almost the 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               293                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
opposite, that what we were talking about earlier is like the technique 
of witnessing your thoughts and meditation.  
 
 
What you‟re essentially doing is starting to view your thoughts, not 
quite as things, but as concepts or things that exist in a space and 
time, energy and matter, etc. I thought I had hit upon something 
that‟s the essence behind all of this.  
 
 
Then you said what you said a minute ago, and it spun my thoughts up 
to think, wait a minute, that‟s not true because in that case a decision 
would be a decision, then you can move away from it and view it as an 
object. Then you said it was an active process and I realized they‟re 
both right. 
 
 
The key is that as a hypnotist, you‟re aware of the fact that you can 
move people‟s awareness and completely change things from solid 
ideas to moving processes and back. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s exactly right. 
 
 
And you give me so many things. What if you dissociate yourself from 
a decision, you‟ve made a decision, haven‟t you? This decision you‟re 
thinking about is, as far as you‟re concerned, final. Now that decision, 
when you look back at it on some other time, may or may not be the 
right one. 
 
 
So the question is, will that have been a decision that you want to 
make or not? Do you see how much choice you have? What we‟re 
talking about now is getting you sensitive to the impact that this 
language can have. You‟re moving people‟s experiences in terms of 
distance, location, time; how much energy is inside it. 
 
 
Do you want a few more examples of this and show you how to use it 
in a more practical way? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
You can associate and dissociate people from their experience, can you 
not? What kind of experiences do you want to associate people into? 
 
Audience:  Positive ones. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, ones that re-enforce whatever changes you want, in terms of the 
sales process, therapy, whatever. How might you do that? What kind 
of language associates people?  
 
Audience: Do you remember when you felt this way, that you will feel now? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               294                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
So you‟re shifting time sequence to the present tense. Things that 
happen now tend to feel stronger than things that aren‟t happening 
now. Excellent! What else? This and that. 
 
 
Like this car, that car, from the earlier exercise. Oh, I want that. You 
really want that, don‟t you? So when you have this thing that you want 
right in front of you, how will that make you feel? Do you see how I‟m 
bringing it closer?  
 
 
How about here and there? Look at your hand for a moment. Over 
there, look at that hand over there and realize that that hand is 
actually here in the room. That hand is here and it‟s your hand. There 
here, your, that this mine, so when you create ownership, that creates 
more association. 
 
 
So you have language to distance things and bring them together. 
Above all, look over there at those memories that had happened to 
that little kid a long time ago. Can you see a regression happening 
here, but like the dissociated version? 
 
 
And as you think about that toy, you know you have feelings, because 
it‟s always been you. As that experience happens to you, what‟s going 
on? As you remember this now, how do you feel inside? Do you see 
how we plugged them in?  
 
 
Now above all else, recalling that memory way over there in the 
distance in the past, you know something that he didn‟t know. So that 
when you are there knowing this, the whole experience has to be 
different doesn‟t it? 
 
 
Can you see how you can do a whole regression now, based purely on 
your language, such as in conversation? They think they‟re going on a 
trip down memory lane just having a few thoughts, but you can do a 
whole regression therapy if you want to in this way.  
 
 
I‟m just throwing ideas out at you. We‟ll put them in solid processes 
later on. 
 
 
Do you see how that works? 
 
 
The same is true of the sales process, isn‟t it? Oh, you want that TV 
over there. Sure you can have that, that is available for sale. Is that 
going to help you? No, because it‟s so distant. Unless, of course, you 
want to use a psychological principle, that people want what they can‟t 
have, but you have to see where your client is. Where does that take 
you? Back to yesterday. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               295                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
What is the mindset they have? If this is the kind of person that 
absolutely has to have things they can‟t have, they‟ll talk about that 
TV and how people want that and it‟s over there. But they‟re thinking, 
it shouldn‟t be over there, it should be here with me, but it‟s over 
there. Look, its right there. It‟s a long way away. 
 
 
It‟s really high up on the shelf. We may have to get a ladder, but I 
don‟t know if we can reach it. That doesn‟t make any sense though, 
unless you‟ve taken a trip inside their mind to figure out if they‟re the 
kind of person that responds that way.  
 
 
Do you see how the value of the exercise we did yesterday, in all 
context and we‟ll start playing more with it as we go through. 
 
Audience: Can you figure out who that person is in 30 seconds? 
 
Igor: 
Maybe. It depends. Here‟s what will happen, as a rule. You‟ll do this 
exercise and you‟ll find different kinds of people. Then you‟ll start 
noticing things about them. You‟ll have to create reference experiences 
about enough people to know that some respond this way and that.  
 
 
You‟ll have a certain profile that builds up in your mind over time. For 
example– I‟ll say this as a gross generalization, I‟m just trying to 
present the model I have in my mind without being able to give you 
the nuances– people are going to be a bit more brash or impatient, 
want things now. As a rule, if you deny them things they‟ll go stir 
crazy and say no, I have to have it now. 
 
 
They‟ll tend to be more demanding. They‟ll ask for more. They might 
even try to control the process more. So the more you take control out 
of their hands– and you know pretty quickly, have you met people who 
are controlling in conversations and so on– you know within a few 
minutes its happening? 
 
 
Within a few minutes of meeting these people it‟s like oh, what‟s going 
on here. So with a person like that you go great, if we remove the 
control element a little bit they‟ll run after it it‟s like a cat with a shiny 
thing, like ahhh, shiny thing, shiny thing, where‟s the shiny thing… 
 
 
However, this will not come overnight, you have to start playing with 
the exercise we did yesterday so you can have different types of 
people and you‟ll realize, when someone thinks in a particular way or 
doesn‟t think in a particular way, it results in certain behaviors, 
conclusions and certain ways of being. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               296                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
So suddenly the behavior you see in front of you, in terms of what 
people display, starts making more sense.  
 
 
If you‟re interested, we have a master class on hypnotic profiling that 
will show you how to take simple behaviors and language people tend 
to use and be able to predict how they‟re thinking and how they‟ll be 
behaving under the circumstances, just based on their thoughts. 
 
 
Does that give you some ideas on where to go with this? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
You see how there‟s a lot of stuff that feeds into this. I‟m giving you as 
clean a formula as I can, but you have to run with it and plug in your 
own life experiences along with all the other things. I am not negating 
your experience.  
 
 
If you want to be a great salesman, this is not the only course you go 
on, you learn salesmanship. If you want to be a therapist this is not a 
course about therapy, you have to learn therapy and keep learning 
other stuff on top of it. 
 
 
So hopefully, this is just a starting point that when you plug into other 
systems, other sales systems, therapy systems, other influences and 
teachings, you become much more effective in using those. It‟s like 
turbo charging, you just screw into whatever other system you‟re 
playing with and explode it even further. 
 
 
Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Don‟t worry I‟ll give you some examples of what I mean by this. I‟ll 
give you a therapeutic and sales example today, so you can go away 
with actual techniques. But you realize it‟s not about the techniques 
right, it‟s about the principles you have right now which will make 
everything else you do more powerful. Whether covertly or overtly is 
irrelevant. 
 
 
I hope you‟re getting excited, because for me, it‟s the most exciting 
thing I‟ve done so far. 
 
Audience: So we could actually say that all language is predicate language 
leading someplace? 
 
Igor: 
Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               297                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: Everything that someone says has both a meaning, which is where we 
normally go. 
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Audience: And it also has, if you like, an experience. 
 
Igor: 
Yes. 
 
Audience: Which is inherent in the word in and of itself? 
 
Igor: 
Yes, and what the predicates actually do is create that meaning 
through the experience. If you change a predicate, the meaning and 
experience changes. It‟s the journey. It‟s the path that connects the 
dots for you. So if you change the path connecting the dots then you 
connect different dots. 
 
Audience: So we‟re looking at both levels simultaneously. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. Now, you are thinking at a very advanced level now, and I 
appreciate that for some of you it‟s like, what the hell? I totally 
understand that. You have your notes, you have the exercises, so as 
you weave these things into what you normally do every day (this is 
key) you start using this in the things you normally use every day and 
suddenly, the nuances start jumping out at you. 
 
 
You go, oh I get this now. It will not happen overnight. I‟m still getting 
insights as to what we‟re doing with this stuff that I didn‟t have last 
week or last month. If you recall, I learned how to do mind-bending 
language two years before I could teach it properly. 
 
 
I hope that in the next few years, more stuff will come from this. So 
I‟m really excited because as far as I‟m concerned, we‟ve just found a 
whole new playground to play in and all we‟re doing now is saying 
look, there‟s a swing, there‟s something else, what does that thing do? 
Let‟s have a go. 
 
 
I‟ll happily share with you the ones that I‟ve found, but I‟m sure you‟ll 
find more toys than the ones I‟ve seen. 
 
 
How do you separate and integrate experiences using these 
predicates? 
 
Audience: As you feel this… 
 
Igor: 
What does that do? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               298                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: It puts it into the brain how things are. 
 
Igor: 
It brings together, right? So as you feel this, what happens to that? Do 
you see how they come together? Inside of both what‟s the same? 
What‟s the only thing that drives that? See how that comes together. 
 
 
Aside of those, between those what else is going on? Aside from that, 
what‟s this? Do you see how I‟m separating or bringing together. 
Together with this, that can be this, can it not? Do you see how your 
language can separate or integrate?  
 
 
Now you can have separation, for example, you can do how are you 
doing right now? I‟m feeling bad. Between the bad feeling and what 
you know, you realize there‟s a space that you can think in, isn‟t 
there? Do you see how I separate it out?  
 
 
So when you look at that memory way over there, something that had 
happened to you, you can think about that little boy or girl and all the 
things that happened to him. And you know that he made it through, 
don‟t you? Do you see what I‟m doing now, separating. 
 
 
At the end, of course, is…as you consider that boy and all the stuff 
that‟s happened to him, you realize that this is just one experience. 
That little boy became this young man and that‟s really you, isn‟t it? 
Inside you, you‟ve always had that, so as this grows up inside you, you 
realize that was just a memory and you are more than that, aren‟t 
you? 
 
 
Do you see how we‟re cycling through these things? How do we start 
using this stuff and putting it together? This is what we‟re focusing on 
here, what we‟re interested in.  
 
 
Power loops are basically a process where you take people through 
little steps that gets you to an outcome. If someone is feeling an 
intense feeling that‟s negative, before you can handle that feeling, 
they have to be in a position where they can interact without being 
overloaded by it. 
 
 
So what is it I already imply as the first step? Separation, right, which 
you can do by dissociation or by a different language like between and 
so on. 
 
 
But that doesn‟t solve it all, does it? You may have to move to other 
experiences that they can then bring together before they‟ve 
integrated it. Do you see how I‟ve created a little journey here? I‟m 
here, I‟m overloaded. I separate. I jump to a different point of view.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               299                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
I come up with a resource. I bring those resources together and re-
integrate. So I‟m here now, feeling much more positive about the 
whole thing. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
Do you see the loop that‟s gone through which allows you to 
transform? By the way, the PCAT formula, as far as I‟m concerned, is 
pretty much the key to everything you‟ll do, you‟ll just be able to do 
variations whether it‟s… 
 
 
Sales,  
 
Teaching,  
 
Therapy,  
 
Giving someone a pep talk,  
 
Sports, 
 
Breaking through objections,  
 
Presenting an idea, or 
 
Influencing your colleagues to accept your new plan 
 
 
You‟re running through the same loop, we‟re just putting different 
variations and spins on different things. 
 
 
Here‟s an example of what I mean by that.  
 
 
(Writing on board) 
 
 
Who recognizes this pattern? Problem- spin- resource- and spin again. 
Anyone? What is the pattern? Do you see the PCAT formula? Let‟s do it 
this way. We have a problem, a critical factor bypass, access resource 
and this spin which will allow you to re-attach it to that. 
 
 
Technically, it‟s between the two, the spin allows you to bring this into 
the question which brings it back to that and so on. Now, isn‟t this 
something you did on day two? Look at page six. Do you remember 
how much trouble you used to have with page six when you first did 
it? 
 
 
The second time you look at it, isn‟t it so much easier? Why? Because 
your minds are at a different level now and you understand the 
process behind it. Doesn‟t it seem like child‟s play now? Becoming 
aware of the problem, as you consider the problem, above and beyond 
all that, who are you that‟s small, then feeling calm, inside of all this 
now? 
 
Problem? Clear the mind, critical factor bypass. Find a resource. Attach 
it. Back to the situation- to the original starting point. Do you see how 
simple that is now? Yet, whilst you were just focusing on the language, 
wasn‟t that massively confusing? Wouldn‟t that be fair to say?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               300                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
It‟s like oh, I don‟t think I can deal with this, what sort of question was 
this? It‟s child‟s play now because you‟re thinking strategically. Do you 
see the difference? This is why I said to you from day one, it‟s not the 
language that matters, it‟s the mindset. This is why we spent so much 
time developing the mindset, and the language itself comes up on its 
own. 
 
 
Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
This will be as true of a sales process, teaching process, therapy 
process or relationship thing you do. It really doesn‟t matter where you 
do it, it‟s how you think about it that matters, how you step inside 
someone else‟s mind and track their own thought processes that 
matters.  
 
 
And how you choose to, shall we say, spin around the PCAT formula to 
fit that situation.  
 
 
Allow me to give you another example of what I mean. Would a sales 
example be useful at this point? This is somewhat therapeutic, let‟s go 
all the way, the opposite direction, something sales oriented would 
that be useful? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. (Writing on board) Who recognizes this? It‟s exactly the same 
thing, isn‟t it? Here‟s your problem, the objection…I can‟t afford 
this…or I don‟t have time I‟m too stupid for this thing. It will never 
work for me it‟s for other kinds of people.  
 
 
Spin…reframe (resource)…and spin again to be able to allow the two to 
establish together. 
 
 
When did you do this? Does anyone recall yesterday? Wasn‟t this what 
we were doing yesterday? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
How many salespeople do we have in the room? Isn‟t this the hardest 
bit in the whole sales process, when someone comes up with an 
objection, just to turn them around? Isn‟t that supposed to be the 
hardest part? Would that be fair to say? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               301                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
So what I want to do with you, after the break, I want to go into a 
sales process. Then we‟ll go into a covert therapy process and we‟ll put 
it all together. 
 
 
What I‟d like to do before that though, is spend 15 minutes in a group 
of three or four people. How many people here are primarily interested 
in sales and things like that? How many people are interested primarily 
in something like covert therapy, change and so on? 
 
 
If you haven‟t put your hand up yet, how many people are interested 
in something different? What is that something different? I need to 
know what it is. 
 
Audience: Dealing with difficult people. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent! We‟ll put you in the sales process because that‟s practically 
the same thing. Here‟s why I ask. I want to ask all the people 
interested in sales and difficult people, handling that sort of thing, to 
go on this side. All those interested in therapy and covert changes go 
to this side.  
 
 
You‟ll both get a chance to do both anyway, but for the moment, I 
want you to start engaging your brains first before we start filling it up 
with something.  
 
 
Once you‟re on the side of the room you choose, I want you in groups 
of between three and five people and I want you to brainstorm how to 
use a PCAT formula for a simple sales process, and a more complex 
sales process. 
 
 
And how can you use the PCAT formula for a simple bit of covert 
therapy like this, and a more complex bit of covert therapy, like a full 
regression technique, or something like that. 
 
 
I‟d like you to discuss it in the group, maybe draw up little plans, 
throw in some notes as to what language might be useful here and 
there, what the affect of the language is, why you might use it and so 
on. 
 
 
Here‟s a hint. If you don‟t have any experience as a salesperson, make 
sure the people you‟re in the group with do. If you have less 
experience as a therapist, in other words, you‟re more of a novice 
starting up, make sure you‟re in a group of people who have more 
experience, that way you both learn from each other.  
 
 
Does that make sense? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               302                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Is everyone clear on what you‟re to do? Would you like 15 or 20 
minutes? 
 
Audience: Twenty. 
 
Igor: 
All right, 20 minutes per group. Together, as a group, you‟re going to 
design a simple sales process and a complex sales process, a simple 
bit of covert therapy and a complex piece of covert therapy. Do you 
understand what I mean by that?  
 
 
This is a simple bit of covert therapy, isn‟t it? A more complex one 
might be to do a full regression, or full NLP type pattern, something 
totally covertly. This is a simple sales process. A more complex version 
would include the whole set-up value proposition and all the other 
things on top of that. 
 
 
Rest assured, I‟ll give you examples of both once you come back, but I 
want you to start thinking about this before you start actually being 
spoon fed anything. 
 
 
At least that way you realize how to come up with your own ideas. Is 
everyone good with this?  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Okay, split up into groups. If you don‟t have a group, just sit down 
with a group already together. 
~~~ 
 
Did you enjoy that? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Let me ask you this and I know we‟ll be formally dealing with these 
processes, in terms of the kinds of things I might use to give you some 
examples. But in terms of what you did on your own, did you find that 
a useful exercise? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Who surprised themselves with how much better they did with it than 
they thought they would? A little easier then you thought it might be?  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               303                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
Some of you find this a little bit difficult as well, of course. Remember, 
this is just practice. The more familiar you become with the 
foundations, the easier it gets to apply it. There‟s a reason why we 
spend three days building foundations, only when they‟re applying it 
because applications become really complex if you have no foundations 
to work through. 
 
 
So to the extent you go off and apply the foundations even more, 
you‟ll find this even easier once you leave here. It makes sense, right? 
 
 
You all know my tricks now, it‟s not fair. Let‟s hear about your 
experiences or questions and comments you might have. 
 
Mickey: 
I was just going to say that as we were formulating stuff, it sounded 
really overt, but the finished product, if you were doing what we were 
doing to somebody and you used our language, even though as we 
were sitting there practicing totally sounds like hypnosis, NLP or 
something, but when we were done and had the finished product, 
nobody would have known that‟s what we were using. 
 
Igor: 
Were you in the sales or therapy group? 
 
Mickey: 
Therapy. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent! That‟s actually a very important principle you‟ve come up 
with here, which is that whenever you do your stuff, especially power 
loops, you start off very blatant. If I was going to do it step-by-step, 
regardless of which group you‟re in. 
 
1. Step one, make the client excited. 
 
 
Are you excited client? No. Get excited. Okay. 
 
 
I want to think of it in childish steps like that because then it‟s easier, 
and very clear what it is you‟re trying to achieve.  
 
2. The next step is to layer over that a little bit of sophistication.  
 
 
So it‟s a little more fluid. Consider a time that make you feel more 
excited and how does that feel now? That‟s a little more fluid and 
smooth, but still pretty obvious what you want. 
 
 
3. Then, the final stage is to make it covert, so you present it in a 
way that no one sees.  
 
 
As you‟re looking at this, I noticed you had an experience, what was 
that? All the things you‟re thinking right now, I want you to realize that 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               304                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
rest assured, it‟ll only give you more than that. I know that‟s exciting, 
I understand. 
 
 
Do you see how I‟ve now moved them toward the same place, using 
my spins and all the other stuff and doing it increasingly covertly? So it 
doesn‟t matter on what end of the scale you‟re standing, because you‟ll 
get to the end eventually, it‟s just a question of how fluid you are with 
the tools as you go along.  
 
 
Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: In the sales aspect, we explored something we closed the door on and 
I just want to make sure we did the right thing.  
 
 
A commodity item, a notebook for $.99 from Office Max and $.99 from 
Staples, it‟s the same thing. I‟m a purchasing agent so I want the best 
price, done, give me your best price. 
 
Igor: 
What is it you‟re interested in? 
 
Audience: I‟m interested in 500 notebooks, what‟s your best price? 
 
Igor: 
Before we go there, there are many types of notebooks. There are big 
ones, small ones, what is it you‟re actually trying to offer at the other 
end, just so we know what you want. 
 
Audience: Looking for a one-subject, 70-sheet, wide-ruled notebook. 
 
Igor: 
Excellent, who‟s your customer? 
 
Audience: Silence. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s right, you are planning to sell these at some point, right? 
 
Audience: No, I‟m the purchasing agent. 
 
Igor: 
I understand, but you‟re not just purchasing them to put them in a 
warehouse, ultimately your company will end up them selling them… 
 
Audience: No, they‟re for my office staff. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, for your office staff. What kinds of things does your office staff 
need to do a good job? 
 
Audience: They need 500 notebooks right now, what‟s your best price? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               305                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
Excellent! Take a step back. If someone asked me three times in a row 
like that what the best price is, then I‟d give them a price. Why? 
Because otherwise you end up annoying them. Other than that, you‟ll 
find out what is it they actually want. 
 
 
In other words, very rarely will it be a pure comparison, here‟s 500 
notebooks, here‟s 500 notebooks what do you want? There are 
different types and quality. For example, if your staff is like a legal 
office, you‟ll need a much higher quality rate then if you just want to 
make random notes, you throw away afterwards.  
 
 
If these are notebooks that you‟ll be using to actually file reports and 
keep, then you want to make sure the paper is less acidic, for 
example, so the ink doesn‟t dye, because if you buy a cheap notebook 
now and you want to keep records later, you can look back on this in 
five years time and find out all your notes are destroyed because the 
paper was too cheap. 
 
 
I don‟t know what you want to use them for, but if you tell me what 
you want, I‟ll happily make sure you get the best price on those 
notebooks that will give you what you want. Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So now, if you can tell me, what is your office staff going to be using 
the notebooks for? 
 
Audience: To take notes. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, but it‟ll be more than just taking notes isn‟t it? Are these notes 
they‟ll be using in the future? Is it something they‟ll do now and throw 
away? In other words, will a cheap notebook do or do you want 
something they‟ll be able to keep for the future in order to go back and 
refer to their notes? 
 
 
Is it part of a learning experience, for example, because we know for a 
fact that the more aesthetically pleasing an item is, the easier it is for 
someone to learn. So, if your whole staff is going to learn something 
with these notebooks, I strongly advise you to do something that they 
can actually learn from.  
 
 
Whereas, if it‟s just something they want to take notes on that‟ll be 
thrown away the next day, we‟ve got a much cheaper line that will 
work for you. So you tell me what it is that you actually want to do 
with the notes, other than just taking notes. Who will be using them? 
How and why? Just out of curiosity. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               306                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: Excellent! I see where you‟re going with it, so there were quite a few 
areas that we didn‟t explore. 
 
Igor: 
Yes, and by the way, you‟re still in a very hard industry at that point. 
I‟ve never sold notebooks so who knows, but do you see where the 
mind-bending maneuvers come in and it goes right back to what we 
did yesterday, doesn‟t it? 
 
 
I have no idea about notebooks. I‟ve never sold a notebook in my life. 
The only thing I was doing there and it took me a little while to adjust 
because I don‟t know anything about notebooks, is going right back to 
basics. Do you know what the basics are? It‟s what we did yesterday. 
 
 
I had to step inside your mind to find out what you were thinking to 
then conclude, I want the best price, because all he thinks about is a 
notebook. 
 
 What is he not thinking?  
 What is the use?  
 Who‟s going to be the customer?  
 What do they want?  
 What do they need?  
 Is it for something official?  
 Can you walk into a courtroom with a cheap-ass $.20 cent 
notebook which looks like your kids been writing in it?  
 What kind of impression does that have on the judge or those 
you‟re negotiating with, right? 
 
Audience: Right. 
 
Igor: 
On the other hand, if it‟s just for a quick note and then you throw it 
away, that‟s a totally different use. Now, until I can go inside his head 
and know what he wants, how the hell do I know what I can give him?  
 
 
But, of course, that gives me more scope. If all he wants is a cheap 
nasty notebook to take notes to throw away afterwards, I‟ll either 
know that what I have in stock will suit him or not. I can say well 
honestly, you probably don‟t want my notebooks. They are quality 
notebooks, the things that when you walk in to a room people notice 
and go that person is someone I want to do business with. 
 
 
But all you want is something you can take notes on and throw away. 
The price I can offer you on the quality notebooks isn‟t the quality you 
want. So I recommend you go find someone else, but it‟s up to you. I‟ll 
happily talk you through what we have if you want that. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               307                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
This goes back to the idea of choice that we talked about before, to 
walk away from things that don‟t suit them. Does that make sense to 
you? 
 
Audience: Exactly. Thank you. 
 
Igor: 
You‟re very welcome. 
 
Audience: I just wanted to comment on how that impacted me in regards to what 
you said. I‟ve actually paid more for your product, because now they 
have peace of mind. It‟s shocking, because in hearing that I realize 
that there are certain things I want, but way underneath that I want to 
know that I didn‟t make the wrong decision.  
 
 
I want to know that someone has my back. I want to know that 
somebody won‟t come after me and that I looked at all the things that 
I didn‟t think about before. So I know, when I can ask those questions 
like you just did, people will want to do business.  
 
Igor: 
Here‟s the thing. In terms of the sales process, as far as I‟m 
concerned, you‟re not selling anything. I‟m trained as a therapist, 
hypnotherapist primarily, with all the other stuff on top of that and 
that‟s how I look at things. I‟m solving problems, I‟m not doing a sale. 
 
 
If I can help you solve your problem better than anything else, then 
you‟ll do business with me. You may have noticed we have a ton of 
products in the back of the room. Am I selling you them? No. I‟ll 
happily tell you, if you have this problem that this product will solve it 
and this is how it will solve it. If you want that go get it, if you don‟t 
know, big deal. 
 
 
That‟s how I view the whole thing. It‟s not about enforcing your 
opinion on someone to buy this now. It‟s about serving them in a way, 
to help them solve a problem that they have.  
 
 
His problem isn‟t that he‟s got $100 to get 500 notebooks. His problem 
is that his company needs to keep a certain type of note for a certain 
situation and so on, but I don‟t know what that is so how can I help 
him solve that problem?  
 
 
It goes right back to what we said yesterday remember, the problem 
people come in with is usually so indistinct it rarely has anything to do 
with a real problem. He thinks he wants a cheap notebook. What he 
actually wants is something for his company to take notes on and it 
might be in the context where they‟re going to see a client and they 
want to keep notes of that conversation. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               308                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
In that case, will a cheap notebook do? Not really, because how 
impressed are you going to be as a client if you‟re spending a million 
dollars with this company and they show up with this cheap nasty 
notebook with dog eared pages and the notes are falling apart because 
it‟s nasty paper. 
 
 
Or, if you‟re keeping notes for records and you come back two years 
later, let‟s say you‟re being sued for $10 million dollars and the answer 
is in one of those notebooks. You go through them and you find that 
you can‟t even read this anymore, the ink is faded.  
 
 
Do you remember those old fashioned faxes with the old fax paper, 
where you come back six months later and it‟s like was this actually a 
fax, or was this a magic trick? But because he‟s not thinking about 
those things, he‟s imposing a standard on me that he doesn‟t actually 
need. 
 
Audience: And then at the end, when you took away the sale, reframing it for 
something like, if you want to do this, all of a sudden I would have no 
resistance to that reframe, where I might have earlier if I thought you 
were pressuring to up-sell me. 
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Audience: You took it away and said but if you want this instead, then we can 
talk. Awesome! 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. Appreciate that. 
 
Scott: 
The thing that struck me about that interaction is the aggressive 
stance of the purchasing agent. I‟m wondering how you managed that 
and part of the answer is perhaps, don‟t change the mind, change the 
state. 
 
 
How do you go about that? 
 
Igor: 
It depends on the individual at the time. Sometimes you‟d be very 
understanding and go through that, whereas, other times he was 
getting a little bit bossy so I actually pushed back quite hard, whilst 
still taking it away. 
 
 
I said I understand. I‟ll happily give you the price, but consider this. I 
have no idea what you want. You say you want the price and I‟ll give 
you the best price I can possibly give you. It may or may not be better 
than what you have, but what I don‟t want you to do is go away from 
here and actually make such a big mistake that it‟ll be on your back 
side. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               309                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
Because when you‟re buying this stuff, your boss is going to be looking 
at, I want this, this, this and this. I want these kind of people to use 
this kind of thing, and if you‟re not thinking about that stuff, a long 
time after you‟ve been here you all have been looking back on a career 
choice that might actually have harmed you. 
 
 
Now, I don‟t know if you‟re thinking of that already, so I‟m pushing 
back a lot harder because that‟s what he‟s coming back at me with, 
but I‟m also watching him. If he starts getting defensive, I‟ll have to 
switch.  
 
 
But as a rule, in terms of energy levels, I‟ll come with the same energy 
level but I‟m not going to be as imposing. Do you understand the 
difference between lifting your intensity to match his versus being 
aggressive with it?  
 
 
If someone is angry with you, you don‟t necessarily go okay, fine. 
What can I do to help you? There‟s a mismatch in terms of the energy 
level that you‟re coming in. If someone is angry at you, you come in 
with the same energy but not with the same content or the same 
anger, because anger will escalate anger. 
 
 
So let‟s say he was getting angry at me, saying I understand you‟re 
angry with me and I understand that this is a real big problem, you do 
not want to have this. I‟m really sorry you‟re feeling this way right 
now. I‟m not being aggressive with him, in terms of escalating his 
anger, but I‟m matching the emotional level, enough to be on the 
same plane and starting to spin a little bit away from that. 
 
 
As that starts happening, it‟ll be easier to de-escalate it and add the 
other stuff into it. Make sense? 
 
Scott: 
It does. Do you actually have to enter that state yourself, in order to 
do that? 
 
Igor: 
You don‟t have to enter the same state he‟s in, you have to enter the 
same level of energy in the state, the intensity of the state. Otherwise, 
how can I do it?  
 
 
I can‟t say okay, we‟re going to do this in a really hard core way. I 
can‟t do it this way because my mannerisms are already trying to 
express themselves…so what I‟m not doing is getting to anger if he‟s 
angry with me.  
 
Mickey: 
I was just going to say in relation to that. If somebody‟s pissed at you 
and you‟re calm, that tends to piss them off even more. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               310                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
It‟s a mismatch. How many times have you been angry with someone 
and they said just calm down, it‟s okay? How patronizing is that? The 
adage is correct, but you‟re not leading them anywhere, you‟re not in 
the same playing field. 
 
 
You have to at least enter the ball park to be able to lead them out of 
it. Does that make sense to you? That‟s a little of what‟s happening 
here, but in a different way. 
 
Audience: I volunteered a specific situation for our complex sales process that 
was a big problem I had about a year ago where I created one system 
to solve a big chunk of it and one to solve another chunk of it, but I 
still had this one little chunk I‟m still struggling with. 
 
 
I described the situation and this mastermind group, it was almost like 
the channeling exercise from yesterday, that came up with great ideas. 
The end result of which was the thing that I‟m still struggling with, was 
the manifestation of a problem that I didn‟t recognize that I could 
solve and just hadn‟t yet, for the people I work with. 
 
 
It was a very cool experience.  
 
Igor:       This is what I mean about thinking as a true master hypnotist. Now 
you‟re going well beyond the regular problem-solving strategies, 
regular sales and therapy things and so on, and I do encourage you to 
stay in touch because aren‟t the hypnotists you‟re working with pretty 
cool. 
 
 
And, if nothing else, if you‟re stuck usually what happens is, being 
stuck isn‟t just a problem in the unit there‟s often a problem in your 
perception that interacts with that and maintains it. 
 
 
Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: Yes, that‟s exactly what it was. It was an assumption I was making, 
getting projected out. It was like that was my blind spot that they 
helped me see where I do have the solution for that, that I can provide 
for them, I just hadn‟t been able to see that I have it yet. 
 
Igor: 
And this is why, as far as I‟m concerned, the fundamental exercises, 
the coaching process we did yesterday. This is not about therapy, 
although of course, it‟s applicable to therapy, but it‟s about the person 
being coached through the situation because, there‟s an interaction 
between you and the person you want to change, or you and the 
problem you want to change. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               311                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Oftentimes, you‟re actually causing the problem without realizing it, 
either by an assumption you‟re making, by not thinking something you 
should be, or by thinking something you shouldn‟t think. Do you see 
those same maneuvers we talked about yesterday? 
 
 
Just by having another hypnotist doing some mind-bending spins for 
you so you‟re not stuck in the same dynamic, but in a different 
dynamic, and suddenly go, hang on a second what‟s this? Of course, 
now your dynamic changes, which means something that used to be a 
problem never will be. 
 
Audience: Right. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you.  
 
Tim: 
Actually, my question disappeared during that interaction. 
 
Igor: 
Oh thank you, you‟re welcome. I‟m good aren‟t I? 
 
 
You know there‟s a rule of thumb. As a hypnotist, if anything positive 
happens within a mile radius of you, you‟re responsible. Do you realize 
this? 
 
[Applause] 
 
 
But there‟s something very important for you to realize. When you 
become a master hypnotist, it‟s 10 miles. 
 
Audience: Can you give us examples or what stages you use strategies when? 
When you go through the process… 
 
Igor: 
How do you mean that question? 
 
Audience: Like, we went through a therapy example. When is it more impactful to 
you, for instance, open-close or cement, unstuck…? 
 
Igor: 
It goes to where you need their mind to be. If their mind is stuck then 
you need to un-stick it. If their mind is floating around but they can‟t 
really come down on anything in particular, like what choices do you 
have? Oh, so many I don‟t know what to do about them all, then you 
have to bring them down to something.  
 
 
As a rule, wherever they‟re not is where they need to be. But then 
there are other things you can start reading into it, which is where in 
therapy some therapeutic experience helps you and it‟s the same thing 
in sales, having sales experiences helps you be a better salesperson, 
because you start noticing the sticking points.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               312                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
Here‟s an example. Someone is terrified, so would it be fair to say 
they‟re associated to that experience? Yes. How easy is it to get them 
to go through something where they actually witness what‟s going on 
whilst being terrified? 
 
 
Who likes being terrified, anyone? So then perhaps you need to be 
able 
to 
separate 
the 
emotions 
first, 
so 
they 
have 
enough 
empowerment to do something about it. That then already talks about 
a separation, or maybe a dissociation to get some distance from that.  
 
 
So wherever they are, that already tells you something that may need 
to happen so they‟re not there, and they have more choices, or 
actually sometimes fewer choices.  
 
 
I remember one guy, I didn‟t actually work with him, in terms of the 
initial bit, it was at a seminar and he had one of these like kundalini 
awakenings where he was like, the whole world is amazing, I can hear 
an ant crossing the road. I swear he did not take drugs, but suddenly 
every sense became highly tuned and it happened for days. 
 
 
There were a couple corollary‟s that probably weren‟t the healthiest. 
For example, he said I can look out this balcony and I just know if I 
jumped off, I could land perfectly and wouldn‟t hurt myself. I was 
thinking to myself, maybe you don‟t want to test that one out just yet.  
 
 
Then I asked him what he was going to do when he got back. He said 
I‟m going to quit my job, I can do anything. I said great, what are you 
going to do? He said I can do anything. Sure, but what are you going 
to do? I can do anything.  
 
 
Do you see a little problem with this? He has so much possibility, he 
was so enthused about life and the choices he has he ends up doing 
nothing, it‟s a paralysis of choice. So sometimes, having less choice is 
more.  
 
 
By the way, did you notice the mind-bending spin happening here 
already? It‟s exactly what we did with him. Do you realize that 
sometimes having less choice is more, and having too much choice is 
none at all, because how much are you going to achieve when you 
only have everything to do? 
 
 
As opposed to having everything about one thing that you‟ll really 
achieve, wouldn‟t that be something worthwhile? Yes, well what‟s that 
one thing that you think is worthwhile doing? I‟ll start a company that 
does this that and the other. Do you see the process we‟re going 
through? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               313                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
So, I can‟t tell you a hard and fast rule, when clients have problems 
you need to expand the horizons and then bring it back down. As a 
rule, that may very well be true. So for example, when you‟re doing 
the spin, as a rule you‟ll be spinning them and opening stuff up. 
 
 
But sometimes, as in this case, the problem isn‟t that he hasn‟t got 
choices. The problem is that he has too many choices, so then the spin 
might be around focusing in on something so that rather than going 
out, he just lasers in on something.  
 
 
So I guess the battle in the back of my mind is, where are they now 
and what is it they‟re not doing enough of, so they can actually resolve 
a problem or something like that? Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: Does that make sense? 
 
Igor: 
To add a little bit, in terms of what we‟re doing again, whether it‟s 
sales, therapy or anything else it‟s totally irrelevant. What we did 
yesterday, remember the self-coaching mindset where you‟re writing it 
out on your own or you‟re actually talking with someone else and 
you‟re projecting or hallucinating your potential customer/client.  
 
 
That is the heart of this for me, because that‟s where you really 
practice your maneuvers and figure out, if I expand this at this point, 
what‟s likely to happen? That‟s not good, let‟s try the other way 
around. 
 
 
In your mind you have an infinite choice of experiments of things you 
can do, so that‟s how they correlate to each other. Does that make 
sense? 
 
Audience: Yes it does. 
 
Igor: 
Do you have a follow up? 
 
Audience: If I understand this properly, in terms of a phobia, it is recommended 
to disassociate or separate, that‟s one approach. 
 
Igor: 
Yes. You start by disassociating to allow them the freedom to do other 
stuff.  
 
Audience: But for instance, increase/decrease, that‟s something I didn‟t quite 
understand. 
 
Igor: 
Don‟t worry about the notes as being the only way of doing things, I‟m 
just trying to dispel your thinking a little bit.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               314                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
Increase and decrease – if someone is happy do you want to increase 
or decrease it?  
 
Audience: Increase. 
 
Igor: 
If someone is stuck with a belief, like money is bad but their business 
is falling apart, do you want to increase or decrease that? 
 
Audience: Decrease. 
 
Igor: 
Do you see how simple that is? These are just my words, which are 
unimportant, they‟re just to notify you that there are different 
directions you can take people in. Start thinking strategically on your 
own and you won‟t know this abstractly, it doesn‟t happen, there‟s no 
abstraction. 
 
 
You‟ll only know this in concrete senses, so only look at that list to the 
extent that you can focus in on a specific person with a specific 
problem and think about what you can do in that case, as you see 
them. 
 
 
You can do that now right. 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Audience: We had a great session in my group with helping someone stop 
smoking. 
 
Igor: 
Great. 
 
Audience: Something interesting, unrelated to that outcome that we realized is, 
knowing all these techniques, metaphors, resources and being able to 
identify that, you have to be really careful not to introduce it yourself. 
 
 
All of us kept saying things that we realized were coming from us, like 
oh here‟s a clever way to think about it, if you do that it‟s not that 
you‟re giving them the answer that can help them, you‟re basically 
taking away their opportunity to do the thinking which is where the 
work happens. 
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
Audience: Because we know all this right now and we‟re focusing on learning it, 
it‟s really easy to go there yourself. 
 
Igor: 
For sure. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               315                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
That‟s actually a very good point. The only caveat I‟ll make around 
that is that sometimes, if they‟re spinning in the void for too long and 
they don‟t come down anywhere, I like to give them a selection of 
choices.  
 
 
You could think of it like this or like that, or so much more, because 
what you‟ve done is, we take this whole universe that we had before 
and they‟re drifting through space going oh, space…and you‟re going 
okay let‟s focus a little bit. There‟s planet (x), (y) and (z), check out 
the direction over there and see what you find.  
 
 
Oh look, there‟s a green planet, I like that one. So you can give people 
direction whilst not limiting their choice at the same time and I would 
definitely encourage that, but overall you‟re correct. You don‟t want to 
over force someone‟s hand. 
 
 
Did you have fun with that? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Was it interesting? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
After the break, I‟ll run through a couple processes. 
 
1. One as a sales model and how to do this in a sales situation. 
 
2. Two as a covert therapy model so you can do changes with 
people and plug all kinds of things in. 
 
 
Again, they just assimilate your thinking so you can go off on your own 
to do this with whatever things interest you. Does that make sense? 
 
 
We‟ll have a chance to practice both elements so you have the whole 
range inside your own experience, actually doing it rather than just 
talking about it. 
 
 
It‟ll be a lot of fun. 
  
Audience: Yeah. I was just talking about the exact tools we were using, first of 
all. I really felt that. That was pretty cool there.  
 
Igor: 
You‟re welcome. Write it down. Keep it. Buy a videotape, and you‟ll 
have it. This is where we‟re heading towards now. I don‟t expect you 
to be as fluent, easy, and natural at this stuff yet. You‟ll get there. If 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               316                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
not on this course, when you practice at home and start applying it in 
practical situations. You will get there.  
 
 
I‟m giving you tools now. We‟ve spent two days preparing our minds 
to be able to use them, and now we‟re going to start easing our way 
into using them in a practical step-by-step sort of manner.  
 
 
So, do you see where we‟re going? We‟re starting to escalate things a 
little bit now, and all the questions about talking like you‟re on drugs 
are, hopefully, starting to erode or fade away a little bit, as we start 
applying the crazy stuff that you‟ve been doing for the last two days. 
 
 
Anyone else? I‟ve done that good a job, have I? Wow. Have a nice 
break. 
 
DVD 13 
Full Transcript  
 
 
Igor: 
So, before the break we started doing all those things you haven‟t 
done yet, which is to put it together in a way that can be useful, right? 
You all are learning all my tricks, now I have to come up with 
something new. 
 
 
How am I going to be able to do dirty tricks hypnosis to people, if you 
know what I‟m doing, that‟s just not right! 
 
Audience: We won‟t tell anybody. 
 
Igor: 
But the camera will. 
 
 
What I want to do now is to start working through some simple 
processes to take away with you. 
 
 
One for a sales process. 
 
 
One for a covert hypnotherapy process. 
 
 
Just so you have something stable that you can pull out of the bag any 
time you need it and you can adapt to fit the situation you‟re in. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               317                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
I want to give you one on both camps, because when you have that 
range, you can pretty much work out you can do anything with it. 
They will both conform to the PCAT formula to some extent. In other 
words, there‟ll be variations on a theme. 
 
 
Shall we start with the sales process and then move on to 
hypnotherapy? Is that okay with everyone? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. The thing I‟d like to do is start up piece by piece, so when you 
go off and actually practice this, do this with each other, you 
understand each element.  
 
 
So rather than give you a list of things to do, we want to break it down 
in terms of the strategy, where the loop is that you‟re trying to run 
through, the power loops. But also in terms of the language you‟re 
trying to fit in, and the mindset you‟re trying to fit in to.  
 
 
In terms of sales, what are you doing when you‟re doing sales? What‟s 
happening?  
 
Audience: Solving problems. 
 
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
 
If you don‟t have a problem to solve can you sell anything? Right, 
because if they don‟t want it how can you sell something? So either 
you find a problem that‟s worth solving or you walk away. Now luckily, 
in most sales type situations they will come to you with a problem.  
 
 
Is anyone here a hypnotherapist? Don‟t they call up and say can you 
stop me smoking, can you help me lose weight? Isn‟t that a problem 
already?  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Anyone in business? When a client comes to you and says can I have 
500 blocks of paper, isn‟t that a problem? They don‟t have it, of 
course, it‟s a problem but here‟s the thing, whatever problem they 
think they have is not really the problem they have, and that‟s 
something you always have to keep in the back of your mind.  
 
 
You‟ll want to explore that as part of the process. Does he want cheap 
paper? Maybe, maybe not. What he actually wants is the end result, 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               318                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
which is certain types of notes being taken and certain types of 
situations.  
 
 
So in terms of the sales process, the first thing we want to do is to 
activate whatever the real problem is, or the pain is. Problems have 
pain don‟t they, otherwise they wouldn‟t be problems, would they?  
 
 
If a problem isn‟t painful it‟s not really a problem, it‟s just like 
whatever it is, right? Has anyone here ever experiences some random 
event, we‟re curious, that they don‟t really care about? Was it a 
problem? No, because it didn‟t feel painful in any way. There was no 
motivation for you to change the situation.  
 
 
If anything it was kind of funny, it‟s like that‟s weird, let‟s move on. If 
it happens every day you‟re going, still weird, but it‟s nothing to 
change, right? In order to do any kind of sales process, you have to 
know what the problem or pain is, otherwise there‟s no motivation for 
change. 
 
 
By the way, this doesn‟t necessarily mean that you can‟t have positive 
problems. Does anyone want to go on holiday to enjoy a nice exotic 
location somewhere, have someone rub you down with oils and 
massaging a little bit, spoon feeding you your cocktail, etc? Isn‟t that 
nice? 
 
 
Do you have that right now? How painful is that? Do you see that the 
absence of something is as much of the problem as the presence of 
something? Does that make sense? 
 
 
So the first thing we want to do is identify what the problem is and 
stimulate it and there‟s a couple way‟s you can do this. If they come to 
you with a problem already, then you just run with what they have 
don‟t you? Or you can begin to explore what they‟re talking about to 
find out.  
 
 
By the way, this is an ingenious sales strategy for more the one-on-
one type process. Not necessarily in terms of groups or doing a sales 
pitch. Do you realize there‟s a difference in terms of sales pitch, 
because there‟s less interaction involved? But if someone comes to you 
and says can you stop people smoking? You have a rough problem 
don‟t you? 
 
 
But if you start digging into it, saying do you want to stop someone 
else? And they say it‟s me. So you ask them what they‟ve done that 
has failed. What‟s the only thing left to you right now? Do you feel the 
spin going on? Once you‟re exploring the problem, you want to start to 
intensify it.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               319                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
You‟ll drop them right in the middle of it so they realize damn, this is 
something I really want to resolve. As you step inside your identity as 
a smoker, what are all the things you‟re not capable of that you really 
want to have? Can you see the intensity being built up at this point? 
 
 
What kind of language allows you to identify the problem and intensify 
it, in terms of the predicates we have? Feel free to look at your list, 
this isn‟t a test. Awareness language right, so if you turn awareness 
onto the problem and keep using different kinds of awareness 
language to get it back on the problem, will it escalate? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Everyone think of a problem you have in your life, I don‟t care what it 
is, just something minor. 
 
 
Put your hand up if you‟re actually thinking of a problem right now. 
Now consider that problem for a moment, in all its aspects. You know 
you feel certain things when you‟re thinking about that don‟t you? The 
more you do the more you realize that deep down inside, that problem 
is something you want to fix, isn‟t it? 
 
 
Beyond all the things you‟ve done it‟s all failed hasn‟t it? That‟s why 
it‟s still here. And it‟s here right now, isn‟t it? And it will continue all 
the way, until something happens.  
 
 
 Do you see the first two steps in action?  
 Who started feeling a little bit?  
 Who was thinking here, you bastard now you put me into it 
again?  
 Can you sense the motivation for change building? That‟s your 
leverage.  
 Can you hear the language? All, more, inside, deeper…those are 
your systems predicates aren‟t they.  
 
Remember those, space, time, energy and matter. Beyond can be 
beyond whatever they‟ve tried, they‟ve still failed, so you have to 
make sure you‟re doing mini loops within that to keep them plugged 
into the problem. Does that make sense, or am I over-emphasizing 
this? 
 
This is important, isn‟t it?  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               320                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
So, you get to this stage here and now, just out of curiosity, in terms 
of the PCAT formula where are we? Here‟s a hint folks…it‟s in 
sequence. We‟re pretty much in the parameter stage aren‟t we?  
 
 What‟s the problem? 
 Where are you now? 
 Where do you want to be? 
 
 
Notice, I can ask them where they want to be and intensify the 
problem at the same time can‟t I? So, when you think about that 
problem you thought about a moment ago and really consider it, you 
know what it‟ll be like when you don‟t have it, don‟t you? It‟ll feel 
pretty good wouldn‟t it? But you know you don‟t have that yet, don‟t 
you? 
 
 
You‟re not there yet and, to the extent that you‟re not there yet, you 
really want something to change don‟t you? So when you think about 
all the things you do want and you realize you don‟t have it yet, now 
we can start moving on to the next segment. 
 
What I‟d like for you to realize is that today we‟ll be focusing on you, 
to make sure that things you don‟t have are the things that you do. 
Would that be something worth exploring? Do you see me pulling you 
into the whole process here? I don‟t even know what the hell your 
problems are, this is all based on the systems predicates, can you see 
that? 
 
I‟m creating a loop for you to find their own thing. Now, when you 
actually have content it gets even more covert, because it sounds like 
you‟re talking about the problem. Does that make sense? 
 
This is exactly what I used to do with the executives. Remember, I 
told you I was a useless salesperson, useless in marketing but I had 
this one thing, I could plug people into problems until their eyes were 
lit up and they had thoughts about chewing furniture if they didn‟t find 
some way out of it. 
 
Then I could do the rest of the process, in terms of getting to the 
point, but I just thought of it as coaching. When you do therapy what 
do you do, you plug them into the problem. We‟ll come to that later. 
It‟s the same thing, isn‟t it? Do you see that there‟s no difference? If 
you‟re making a difference inside your mind, then you‟re not getting 
the whole sales process. 
 
It‟s not shoving something down someone‟s throat ,it‟s them grabbing 
you by the collar and saying fix it now! Isn‟t that a much better client 
to have? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               321                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Right. I don‟t know.  
 
 
The next stage, you do not want them stuck inside the problem 
because all that does is depress them and they‟ll be stuck there 
forever. Great, you‟ve just made another miserable person, well done. 
The only purpose is to clear their mind and spin. Basically, you use 
your mind-bending language to spin them out of whatever the problem 
was. 
 
 
The only purpose of plugging into the problem is to create a launch 
pad for them to realize the solution is actually worth having. How 
many times either, as a hypnotherapist or a salesperson, has someone 
come to you, you present them with your idea and they go oh, I don‟t 
know if it‟s worth it?  
 
 
And you go, are you kidding me, a better life?  
 
 
A friend comes up and says he has insomnia, can‟t sleep at night. So 
I‟m going through the whole spiel of how sleeping is easy, it‟s no 
problem at all, etc. Then he finds the fee. At that time it was 120£ an 
hour, which now would be $240. So he looks at the fee and gasps, and 
says I don‟t want it that much. 
 
 
What‟s he thinking? He‟s thinking about the money, right? I say, oh 
really, how good are you sleeping? He says not very good. Are you 
enjoying that? No. So are you enjoying that as much as that pair of 
jeans you‟re wearing? Two hundred and fifty dollars for that, wasn‟t it?  
 
So what would you rather do, trade those pair of jeans in to be able to 
sleep comfortably for the rest of your life or to keep the pair of jeans 
and just be so tired you can‟t even do anything with them? It‟s up to 
you. Do you see the difference? 
 
You have to plug them into the problem for them to have a sense that 
there‟s something worth solving in the first place. Then you clear their 
mind of that, why? Because, you‟re going to start accessing resources, 
you‟re going to give them a solution, but the solution never works if 
they‟re in that depressed state of mind. 
 
Have you ever given someone some advice whilst they were 
depressed? How will that work? The sales process is giving advice isn‟t 
it? Here‟s what we have to fix, that. But, if they‟re so depressed that 
everything sucks then your advice will be included in that. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               322                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Your thing just can‟t work because they don‟t feel it working right now, 
so in order to create hope and inspiration for them to change, you 
have to be able to create a dividing line between what was and what 
will be, and they‟ll be stuck right in the middle. You‟re then going to 
say to them, which way do you want to go? They‟ll take a deep breath 
and say, I‟ll go over there. 
 
Now, do you understand what we‟re doing with this stage right here? 
Yes. Where are we in the PCAT formula?  
 
Audience: C 
 
Igor: 
Clearly right. What kind of language fits at this stage? Let me make it 
easy for you.  
 
In terms of the system predicates you have on page seven, what kind 
of language will assist you in spinning people out of the problem and 
creating enough of a trance of infinite possibilities that they can 
actually open up to the possibilities you‟ll be offering them? 
 
Any ideas? How about, aside from all the things that have failed, isn‟t 
it worth considering all those things you haven‟t yet, that could 
actually help you go past this? (Past, aside from) 
 
Above all, thinking of all the things you haven‟t done yet, doesn‟t it 
help you realize that that problem can only be temporary, it‟s just that 
you haven‟t solved it yet. Now, shall we look at some things you can 
do to make all that so far and gone that you don‟t even care anymore? 
(Far and gone, yet, now)  
 
Do you see how I‟m distancing myself from the problem and creating 
an open space for something else to happen? Do you see that 
working? Do you notice how their systems predicates allow you to do 
this very strategically like we talked about this morning? 
 
Any questions so far? I really want you to get this, because this is a 
very strategic process we‟re going through. Would it help if we lined 
out some actual words that fit here and here so you could write them 
down, would that help? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
I figured as much.  
 
 
The problem– for these two stages here we wanted to have a problem, 
identify the problem and intensify it. So, we want to have some kind of 
awareness, think, feel, consider and look at.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               323                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Audience: Wallow in. 
 
Igor: 
Oh yeah, wallow in your pity. Feel free to write those down to the 
extent that you actually want to have a vocabulary. It‟s not the only 
one, there‟s so much more, but if you need one example of it that 
would be it. 
 
 
Let me know, by looking up or something, when you‟ve written them 
down so I know it‟s a good time to continue. I can give you some 
alternatives if you need them. (Think, feel, consider, become aware of, 
contemplate, recall, remember, experience, look at, see, hear or 
notice) 
 
 
It‟s classic awareness language. 
 
That brings them into the problem a little bit. Then you can do some of 
the systems questions… 
 
Audience: How can you maintain your idea of H+ if you‟re pushing them deeper 
into a problem? 
 
Igor: 
Consider it this way. You‟re about to help them resolve something. 
Let‟s use an analogy, which actually happened to me when I was a 
teenager.  
 
We had a cat and one night she didn‟t come back. We were a little 
worried, so the next day we hear this meowing and she‟s in the 
flowerbeds. She somehow got her paw caught in her flea collar and all 
night long had been carving up, literally almost up to the bone, and 
cut all the way through her shoulder and was not a pretty sight. 
 
She was crying something pitiful. Here‟s a problem. We need to get 
her to a vet and she needs to be cleaned up, sewn up and all the rest 
of it. But, if I‟m going to take the collar off, is it going to cause more 
pain or less? Every touch is going to make this thing tighten, and she 
was not a happy cat, by the way.  
 
Luckily, it was a small cat. So we had to cause a little bit of pain to 
create enough space to clear stuff out so the healing could begin, 
because she couldn‟t heal whilst that was still there.  
 
This is how people work with problems, they put an isolation thing 
around the problem so they can cope and get on with life. You have to 
strip off the coping mechanism enough that you can clean up what‟s 
inside it. Otherwise, you‟re not cleaning anything up, it‟ll bounce off 
the shield they‟ve put around it to be able to cope. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               324                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
So you‟re only intensifying this to the extent that you can actually help 
them resolve it afterwards. Because, if you don‟t, what‟s going to 
happen is they‟re going to be safely protected by their coping 
mechanism and they‟ll never deal with it, so they‟ll keep having the 
problem.  
 
So if you don‟t do this stage, what you‟re guaranteeing is that you‟ll 
have the problem for longer. Do you want that?  
 
Audience: No. 
 
Igor: 
So then the only ethical thing as far as I can tell would be to put them 
into the problem enough that they realize that they want a solution, 
and that you can actually help them. 
 
 
Now, it would not be ethical to do that if you didn‟t actually have a 
solution for them, because then all you‟re doing is creating a pity fest 
and that‟s no good. But to the extent that you are convinced that what 
you have to offer can actually help them.  
 
How could you be ethical any other way than to plug them into 
the problem enough to change it?  
 
 
Am I missing something? 
 
Audience: Then you can solve it once you get into it. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s exactly right and that‟s where experience comes in a little bit. 
If, for example, you‟re a starting hypnotherapist, with a stop smoking 
session, you‟re a safe bet. Sexual abuse, you may not want to go 
down that road too much.  
 
 
If you‟re in business you have a whole set of business experience, say 
you‟re working for a corporation, they already know what they can do. 
So if you don‟t know what your company does then you have no 
business selling it yet. That‟s why, when you join a company as a rule, 
you tend to go through a process of training to be able to sell the 
product, so you understand what it can do. 
 
 
So when someone says to you, well I need this, then you go, you 
know  what, that‟s not us. Does that make sense?  
 
 
That‟s the difference between selling something ethically and 
unethically.  
 
 
Unethically, all you care about is a sale.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               325                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Ethically you actually solve a problem. 
 
Which either your industry already knows how to do, and you‟re 
creating that process, or in terms of therapy, you have the experience 
to do that level of work. Somewhere you‟ll be in a gray area and it‟s up 
to you to decide how hard you‟ll push because you don‟t know how far 
I can take it, so I might go this far but not further. 
 
This is something where you have to find your own boundary.  
 
Audience: If you get a sense that the person‟s motivational strategy is more 
towards the negative, do you still take them into the problem more? 
 
Igor: 
Enough to plug them into it, otherwise you can‟t remove the coating 
that they protect themselves with, because some people are motivated 
by pleasure and that‟s a great thing, but they may actually be coping 
in life by hiding and putting shields up around their problems, which 
allows them to have more pleasure.  
 
And that‟s great, but how are you solving anything if it‟s hidden? 
 
So yes, I would still plug them into this, but only to the extent 
necessary to be able to resolve it, that‟s it.  
 
So we have awareness language to get them into the problem don‟t 
we, now we need to intensify it. What things intensify it? 
 
 
More 
 
Totally 
 
Completely 
 
Enough 
 
Now 
 
Inside 
 
Deeper 
 
All 
 
Each and every 
 
 
What else  
(With this, you‟ll say it and then go back on to the problem 
rather than a solution) (This can go two ways, so what else 
have you done that‟s not the problem goes away from the 
problem. What else is going on inside you that‟s more than the 
problem you‟ve been thinking about, that deepens it) 
 
 
Only  
(Only think about that problem enough to realize that this is 
something you really want to change, isn‟t it? You tell me. But 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               326                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
of course, how can they not, when I‟ve led their mind down that 
particular path?) 
 
Do you get how that works? Is that enough on the pea pod, in terms 
of the language? So we‟re all clear on some examples of the language 
you can use and you can find other examples like it, right. 
 
Audience: Basically, right. 
 
Igor: 
The energy words are very useful for it, but you also have spatial 
words like deeper and inside. You have time words like now, through 
and during, because you‟re building it up as a current experience.  
 
You can have matter words like all, each and every, what else inside 
this and only. So they do have the whole systems predicates, it‟s just 
that you‟re using them strategically to keep focusing the attention 
back on the problem over and over again to build it up. 
 
Are we all clear on that stage? Give me some feedback. 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Clearing the slate, do you want some language for that? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Aside from…do you see how you‟re moving yourself away from that. 
Beyond, above all…so you‟re getting physical distance. 
 
After, until…until creates a dividing line. But… is a dividing line. 
 
Ago…puts it behind you…later perhaps 
 
 
You can also go before time, it‟s like before this, like the problem 
hasn‟t even happened.  
 
 
You might say, for example, so before you started smoking you 
realized you were a non-smoker and quite happy don‟t you? Do you 
see how I‟ve gone before it now to still clear the slate.  
 
 
To the extent is a useful one…can you think about the problem only to 
the extent that you can go beyond that now? It takes you up to a 
threshold and then uses some of the other system‟s predicates to pop 
you through the threshold. Do you see how that works? 
 
 
In terms of matter again, they all work in terms of where you focus 
the attention. All the things that are not that. Here negation becomes 
very useful doesn‟t it? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               327                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
So if you think about the problem you‟ve had and consider all the 
things that are not that, they‟re the same things that allow you to be 
more then you used to think. So when you will have the ability to look 
back on yourself a long time after this is over, won‟t you feel proud of 
yourself that this is something you‟ve overcome, right? 
 
 
Do you see how that language works? Are we clear on clearing and 
spinning words, in terms of the „C‟ part of the formula? If you want 
more buy the DVDs and listen. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
Igor: 
Are we clear? 
 
Audience: No, we‟re good. 
 
Igor: 
What‟s the next step of the formula? 
 
Audience: „A‟ 
 
Igor: 
Now we‟ll start going into the solution elements.  
 
(Writing on board) 
 
 
The two stages here, presenting or offering your solution and very 
importantly, presenting the benefits or value of that solution. So you 
present your solution, this is what we do. That‟s your classic pitch. 
That‟s what people think about regarding the sales process.  
 
All they think about, this is what we do; this is our solution they don‟t 
bother with starting the whole process off or with finishing the whole 
process off. They just present information and hope for the best, which 
is really no sales progress at all.  
 
So you‟re going to offer your solution and then the benefits of the 
solutions. What is the value of this to that person?  
 
Let‟s consider the problem you thought about a moment before, and I 
know you‟ve been thinking about it some time now, which means it‟s 
probably a little weightier then it used to be. Aside from all those 
things, all the things you‟ve failed at, you realize that there‟s still hope 
for somebody to change, otherwise you wouldn‟t be here, would you? 
 
There‟s so much more to you than that, that it‟s really a question of 
finding that, isn‟t it? So to the extent that I can show you a process to 
go inside and find something that will totally demolish that problem, 
isn‟t that something that would be valuable to you?  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               328                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
How much better will you feel? Beyond how much better you‟ll feel, 
how much more will you be capable of? Won‟t you be a success in life, 
or should we say a greater success in life, when all those things that 
used to be a problem no longer are, isn‟t that fair to say? 
 
And if you‟re feeling the way you want to feel, most of the time, 
because there‟s no guarantees for everything is there, but if you‟re 
feeling the way you want to feel most of the time, how much more will 
you get done that makes you a true success in life? 
 
So isn‟t it worth exploring something inside you that‟s so much bigger 
than the problems you‟ve had, so they no longer have to follow you? 
Wouldn‟t that be worthwhile doing?  
 
 Do you hear the entire process up to this point?  
 Did we start with some kind of pain? Briefly, just to reactivate it.  
 Didn‟t we intensify it slightly? Yes.  
 Did we clear the mind a little bit to move a little separation from 
that? 
 Did we offer a solution, which is to go inside and find a 
resource? 
 Did we tell you about the benefits and the value of it? 
 Or, did I just hope you would work it out for yourself? 
 How did I show you the benefits? 
 
Audience: No microphone, indistinct. 
 
Igor: 
Partly, the idea was to take them to the state they want to be in. The 
way I showed you the benefits is to actually tell you what it‟ll mean. 
You‟ll be more successful. You will be happier. You will feel better. 
You‟ll get more done. You‟ll be a greater success in life. You will no 
longer feel bad.  
 
 
These are all benefits, aren‟t they? These are things you wanted are 
they not? They‟re valuable to you. Is this making sense to you? 
 
Audience: Yes, it is. 
 
Igor: 
Do you see how the strategy we‟ve been building up so far plugs in 
very naturally to all this stuff?  
 
Scott: 
It‟s great, because rather than telling me how good I‟ll feel, you asked 
me how much better will I feel and while I‟m considering that and 
whether I want to debate you, you say beyond all that so I put that 
aside and take it into consideration that oh, that is true. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               329                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
But take one extra step from that. This is how we get more technical. 
By considering how good you feel and you started that loop going 
thinking maybe I will, maybe I won‟t…beyond all that, what else will be 
happening? Where‟s my launch pad? Did I launch from depression or 
from feeling good? 
 
Audience: From feeling good. 
 
Igor: 
If I‟m launching from feeling good and open the frame up, where are 
you going to go? 
 
 
All the other positive things that are possible, aren‟t you. I‟ve sent you 
into a positive spin inside that trance of infinite possibilities and you 
don‟t even have a chance to argue about it because the thing that‟s 
worth arguing about is already behind us. 
 
 
So I use that as a launch pad into that space, great and there‟s 
nothing to argue about at that point.  
 
Scott: 
And, I noticed how the word beyond captures my childlike imagination 
where I wonder what‟s beyond, so I put this aside and just want to 
keep going for it. Then it spins more and more of how much more I‟ll 
be able to do, how much better you‟ll feel about yourself, that‟s true, 
and to keep stacking because everything just slides back into true, 
true, true.  
 
Igor: 
Precisely. 
 
 
Do you see why we selected the words, the 12 mind-bending power 
words the other day? They‟re not the only ones, but in my opinion, 
they‟re some of the most useful ones. They take you in many different 
directions. 
 
 
Of course, I think all the things on the list are valuable, and there are 
more only to the extent that are useful to you though. 
 
Audience: When you go to the point beyond all that, what‟s truly possible, to go 
back to what you don‟t have now or do you continue popping them up 
into what is possible? 
 
Igor: 
What you‟re essentially doing here is you have two positions. What is 
happening now, and where do you want to be? You want to put them 
smack in the middle so they can make a choice. So do you want to be 
there, or there, it‟s up to you? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               330                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
So to the extent that they forget the problem, you may want to plug 
them into the problem enough whilst you‟re doing this to remind them 
that they‟re not there anymore, or that they don‟t have to be there. 
 
Audience: Gotcha. 
 
Igor: 
So to the extent that you‟re feeling really good about the possibilities 
that are open to you, just think about all those problems that you 
don‟t have to have anymore. See how I‟m referring back to this now, 
but in a dissociated way, so they can remind you a little bit that if 
you‟re not careful this will come back. 
 
 
It‟s not dealt with yet, does that make sense? Is this making sense as 
far as the sales process, in terms of what we‟re doing? There‟s 
something missing here. Are we ready to move on or do you want 
more examples of solution-type systems predicates. 
 
Audience: More. 
 
Igor: 
Let‟s look at the list. Essentially, by the way, the same language that 
applies to here, applies to here, it‟s just your focus is on something 
different, does that make sense?  
 
 
Be aware 
 
Think about it 
 
Consider 
 
Recall 
 
 
Recall all the things that make you greater than you were, because 
right now you‟re older, wiser and have many more experiences then 
you did way back then when you were a child. So to the extent that 
you had the ability to grow then, you have the ability to keep growing 
now. 
 
 
So beyond wherever you think you are right now, there are things you 
have yet to achieve that when you look back on yourself you‟ll realize 
that you had it in you to do something amazing. That‟s fair to say, isn‟t 
it? Only you don‟t know what that is yet.  
 
 
So essentially, I‟m opening them up, looking at all the possibilities, 
consider all the possibilities, greater, bigger, larger, more than…only 
you‟re not there yet. You‟re shutting them down. And which one, 
shutting them down into something positive, of those would suit you 
the most? 
 
 
We can only work to the extent that the one that suits you is the one 
that we end up getting through. And how can we possibly know that 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               331                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
ahead of time. All we know is what you don‟t want don‟t we, but in 
knowing what we don‟t want, we have a hint of where to go to find 
what you do. 
 
 
So, to the extent that you want to find that and make the things that 
used to be a problem disappear in the distance for you, are you willing 
to actually engage in a process with us to do some hypnotherapy, to 
buy blocks of paper or whatever it is. 
 
That will allow you to actually have that, so that you get to look back 
on this moment sometime in the future when you will have overcome 
all these things and you know this is just part of your history now, isn‟t 
that something worth doing? I don‟t know, you tell me. Is that what 
you want, because if it‟s not I can happily walk away, I don‟t want to 
take up your time? 
 
Does this make sense now? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Enough examples.  
 
Audience: No. 
 
Igor: 
Tough. 
 
 
This is something that when you actually do it will make more sense, 
so I‟m going to get you to do an exercise with this very shortly. 
 
Audience: As I listened, it seemed like you already entered „T‟. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. I have just moved into „T‟ at that point, and the „T‟ here is 
make your offer, but you‟re not going to close or ask for the sale yet, 
you‟re going to test for the sale. 
 
 
Do you understand the difference between asking for the sale 
and testing it? 
 
 
What do you think I mean by that? 
 
Audience: Trial closes. 
 
Igor: 
What is a trial close, in terms of normal everyday language, because 
not everyone here is a salesperson? 
 
Audience: If I could, would you… 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               332                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
So if I could do (x), would you do (y)? What you‟re saying is that 
you‟re testing the person to see whether or not something is missing.  
 
 
For example, if I could show you how to sell anything that you have 
that‟s of value, would you like to sign up for the course that‟s an 
extension to this one? Who would want to do that? 
 
 
There are about a third of the hands up. Guess what just happened, 
my test close failed. Why? Because I don‟t have enough of you on 
board. Make sense? Do you see how that works? 
 
 
The purpose of the test close is to see if your offer is good enough yet, 
and if it‟s not good enough, either you have to go back and think 
about what your offer is, or there‟s an objection that you haven‟t dealt 
with yet. 
 
 
For example, if I could show you how to use these things every single 
time to make a killer sales presentation where people would really 
want what you have and it was absolutely, free, who would be 
interested in that? Look at those hands go up. 
 
 
So now it‟s just a question of discovering how much that‟s worth to 
you, isn‟t it? Does that make sense? Is it worth $1000? Maybe, maybe 
not. How about $10, who would do that for $10? Most hands have 
gone up, a few less though, so now I get a sense of where the value 
is.  
 
Why? Because I haven‟t even given you enough of the offer yet, notice 
how my offer, I started with my offer, did I solve a problem yet? 
 
Audience: No. 
 
Igor: 
No. Did I intensify the problem? Did I clear your mind? Did I offer a 
solution? Did I give you the benefits of that solution? No. All I gave 
you was an offer and I hoped that you would work out the rest. And, 
of course, you‟re not going to because I‟m asking way too much of you 
and that‟s why most sales fail. 
 
 
Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: It may relate to something I see that I just realized, what you do and 
how you do it, and you do it so well on your website. You basically 
take them through a PCAT, ask for a registration and if they‟re still not 
convinced you basically, do that through 40 some odd pages until they 
finally want to register. 
 
Igor: 
Yep. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               333                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
[Applause] 
 
Audience: Give yourself a hand, that‟s awesome. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s actually all Cliff; we bow to master Cliff. 
 
 
But you see what we‟re doing here is, and in sales this works exactly 
the same way, it‟s just what do you do if your test close fails, any 
ideas? What do you put in at that point? 
 
 
You do another PCAT formula. Do you know which one you do? Any 
ideas? If your test close has failed, the only reason it‟ll happen is 
because there‟s an objection. In other words, you haven‟t handled 
something yet. Maybe because you haven‟t done this properly, 
whatever the reason is, but somewhere there‟s still an objection in 
their mind, isn‟t there? 
 
 
We know how to deal with objections don‟t we? We did it yesterday 
didn‟t we? Did we deal with objections yes or no? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Put your hand up if you realize we‟ve actually dealt with objections 
yesterday. I just want to make sure you are on the same page with 
me, because if you missed that that‟s kind of a big piece.  
 
 
So now you‟re putting a PCAT inside the PCAT to resolve the problem 
that comes if the test close fails. So you‟re now going PCAT, oh the „T‟ 
failed, another little mini loops inside and now we‟ll go back to see if 
the „T‟ will work this time.  
 
 
You can see that inside of this „T‟ here, you can have lots of little 
PCAT‟S. If they don‟t access the problem properly, you might go 
through a bunch of little PCAT‟S to carry them into the problem 
properly. If the benefits of your solution aren‟t immediately clear, you 
may do a couple spins around the PCAT formula to make it clear. 
 
 
Do you see how you can have loops within loops? That‟s why they‟re 
called power loops, because they build into something bigger. You can 
get very elaborate with this, but this is just a simple process we‟re 
looking for. 
 
 
Does all this make sense? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               334                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
The close is the one thing the fewest people make. If you don‟t 
actually ask for something, chances are they won‟t do anything. It‟s 
like that awkward silence during a date whenever you go so…check 
please, and that‟s where it tends to happen in the sale as well. 
 
 
You don‟t have to be a pig about this, like now is the right time to sign 
this and leave right now and give me your mortgage too. 
 
 
When you‟re asking for the close, it‟s very natural after you‟ve done 
the test close. 
 
 
Let‟s assume that we‟ve talked about the whole new seminar on sales 
and whatever and you all wanted it. Does that sound like anything you 
want? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Great! It‟s happening next Tuesday, we have 20 slots left, who wants 
one of those? Okay, you all come to the front right now and we‟ll sign 
you up. Have I asked for the sale? Is it in your face? 
 
Audience: No. 
 
Igor: 
Who wants it? Well, we‟ve got these things available do you want it or 
not? Do you see how simple it is?  
 
Once you do a test close it naturally leads into a full close and if it 
doesn‟t lead to the full close it‟s because it‟s an objection, so you spin 
through the objection until that‟s resolved, in which case resolving an 
objection is your test close that leads into the close. 
 
Do you see how this works very elegantly as a sales process?  
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Would you like to have a go at this now? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
I would like you to find partners. You‟re going to sell your partner 
something that is of importance to you. If you‟re a hypnotherapist 
guess what that‟ll be? A hypnotherapy session, whether it‟s weight loss 
or to stop smoking, tell them what you like to specialize in and they‟ll 
role play for your client that wants that. 
 
 
If you‟re a salesperson already, in other words, you run a business or 
something, just tell them what your business is and why they would be 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               335                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
interested in it and then run through this process. Does that make 
sense? 
 
 
If you know there are certain objections that normally come up in your 
line of business, do you know what you do? You tell them ahead of 
time to object when it comes to this point right here, so you can 
handle your objection doing that. 
 
 
This is simple stuff isn‟t it? So you‟ll do that for 10 minutes, then you‟ll 
switch roles so the other person becomes the salesperson and you 
become the client or potential customer. They‟ll tell you what they 
want to sell to you and whatever objections might come up so they 
can handle those too. Simple process. Are you ready for this? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Twenty minutes, off you go. 
~~~ 
 
So, who‟s been a great salesman? Do you enjoy this process? Is this 
something valuable you can take back and use in your daily practice, 
living, business, etc? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Audience: I am planning on using this in a therapy sense and switching this over 
to the sales side was fun, because it‟s the exact same thing and it 
flowed naturally. I was a little afraid of it at first, because my mind 
always wants to sit and analyze what‟s going on, but it flowed easily 
both the result and the sale, which was easy to close on. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you. This is something I want you to realize. In my mind there‟s 
no difference between sales, influence, therapy or coaching, all these 
things are actually the same thing and honestly, when I think about 
these things, I think in terms of PCAT and what steps I can break PCAT 
into that will fit that context. 
 
 
Does that make sense? Use whatever you‟re good at. If you‟re a good 
sales person, you‟ll sell them change. If you‟re a good therapist, you‟ll 
therapize them into the program.  
 
[Laughter] 
 
 
It‟s a new word I know, I like it. Let‟s have a campaign to get it into 
the dictionary. 
 
Audience: That was an amazing experience, because I have no experience with 
this languaging and the things we‟ve been learning. But I‟m a yoga 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               336                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
teacher, so I thought I have my notes and I wouldn‟t normally sell 
yoga class, but I thought that‟s what I would do.  
 
 
With just a few glances down at my notes all of these things just rolled 
off my tongue, I couldn‟t believe it. I wish I‟d recorded it so I could go 
back and look at it. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
Igor: 
I‟m glad you didn‟t, because the next time will be even better. 
 
Audience: It was spontaneous and that‟s what was nice. Once it got rolling it kept 
going, but it was using those words. 
 
Igor: 
Do you see how all your hard work over the last three days is paying 
off? All the confusion suddenly starts to make sense, doesn‟t it? I did 
warn you it‟s going to happen, but you have to go through the building 
blocks before this can actually start making sense. 
 
 
We could have started this way, but it would have been hopelessly 
confusing. I‟d much rather have you do this instinctively then have to 
work too hard at it.  
 
 
Thank you; I really appreciate you saying that. 
 
Audience: I don‟t smoke, but I‟ve never enjoyed giving up smoking more easily 
than I just did. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
Igor: 
Fantastic, thank you. 
 
Audience: It was fascinating to me to see how easy and quickly, in that short a 
time to completely re-contextualize the whole problem and at least 
begin to have resolution about it. 
 
Igor: 
This stuff works really quickly doesn‟t it? So would it be fair to say that 
we‟ve lived up to our promise to give you one of the fastest hypnosis 
systems in the world? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
We‟re not talking about instant trance‟s, that‟s easy, we‟re talking 
about practical persuasion and influence. You can see we‟re hitting 
hard core quickly and really fast.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               337                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Now just a warning, don‟t get too carried away and think that all this is 
the only thing you need to do, because you‟re still talking about having 
the relationship, creating context and all those things which are still of 
great value. So your more classical conversational hypnosis routines 
make a lot of sense. 
 
 
This is just the flagship. This is the seal team that goes in, takes them 
out then lets the rest of the army come in and roll through with their 
tanks. The tanks still have value, if you want a military metaphor. I 
can use a My Little Pony metaphor if you want. 
 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
No!  
 
Phil: 
Actually, my question was quick. I ended up finding like I felt my plan 
was to go a little longer than I ended up needing to. So in the middle 
of that, is there a way to mentally make things more concise for 
yourself?  
 
Igor: 
Are you saying you thought you had to do this big spiel and halfway 
through you realized you‟d already gotten there, so you may as well 
drop it, is that what you‟re saying? 
 
Phil: 
Exactly. 
 
Igor: 
It‟s very simple. Each one of these stages can be scaled up or down, 
so when you notice that they‟re in their pain, their problem, go all 
right, I don‟t have to turn the heat up anymore and torture the poor 
bastard. 
 
 
I can now move on and clear the slate. If they follow along nicely 
great, if they don‟t follow yet, you do more and then you go to the 
benefits and resources. 
 
 
If they‟re sitting on the edge of their seats ready to just go…wallet, 
credit, right here…at that point just move on to the next phase. So the 
phases are totally scalable. Does that make sense? 
 
Phil: 
Absolutely. 
 
Igor: 
That‟s why I like this, in terms of a process, as a power loop, because 
it‟s infinitely scalable. You can make it huge or tiny, depending on how 
much time and effort you have and how well the other person is 
responding, as opposed to creating a tele-sales script. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               338                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
I hate scripts. Tele-sales scripts are fantastic and they do great stuff, 
but you‟re so rigidly limited, because when the person has already 
moved on, you still have to roll through this thing.  
 
 
Have you ever had a tele-sales person call you up and you try to mess 
with them and they go right back to the same pattern? So anyway, 
what I was saying about so and so, then you‟re like oh, how much 
more was that than this? Anyway, back to…they can‟t get off the 
script, but you can. 
 
Phil: 
That was my first time trying to sell something. 
 
Igor: 
Awesome! Good job. 
 
Audience: My partner and I discovered a new way to deepen the pain. We started 
with a specific incident, then generalized it to all the other times this 
has happened and when you put all that together, it‟s the opposite of 
the solution you were using before and OMG! 
 
Igor: 
That‟s actually how people created problems for themselves as well. 
You‟re using the same pattern, which is there are specific patterns in 
here, and they‟re going to look at it so much that suddenly the whole 
world looks really messed up. 
 
 
Don‟t do too much with that, because we don‟t want cripples running 
around there. 
 
Audience: No, but when there‟s a real solution and the thing I normally come up 
against is people saying yeah, I don‟t need it. It‟s for other people and 
it‟s not that big a deal, I‟m living fine without it and this is the great 
way to… 
 
Igor: 
So you‟re talking about stripping the shields away from those things 
that they don‟t want to deal with saying look, we can deal with this 
and if you don‟t want to do it we‟ll put the shields right back up again, 
packed nicely away, have a nice life.  
 
 
Are you happy? 
 
Doug: 
My sales situation was very strange in the context of what we‟ve been 
doing here. I had no idea how this will fit in this pattern. But as we got 
into it in the course of what seemed like a normal conversation, all of a 
sudden I spotted the entry point for the pattern. 
 
 
Then I knew there‟s where I could introduce the pain and from there 
on, I was able to follow the script, even though going in I was thinking 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               339                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
I didn‟t have any idea where this thing is going to work because it has 
nothing to do with this. 
 
Igor: 
Just to add something…this, I do not consider this a script where you 
give someone a full pitch. The only reason I did that with you all is 
because there‟s less interaction with an audience than with an 
individual.  
 
 
I consider this something as a maneuver within the conversation. You 
spend a few minutes talking about their problems. Then you spend a 
few minutes clearing their mind from their problems, but it‟s still part 
of the normal chat. 
 
 
All this stuff can be done so conversationally that no one, other than 
those in here right now, will ever realize it‟s happened until it has. And 
they‟re just thinking oh, just had a chat and the guy decided to buy 
something. That makes sense, it happens sometimes. Only you‟ll know 
different. 
 
 
Are you all excited? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Has this been fun? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Would you like to be able to turn the same process essentially, into a 
really powerful covert therapy system, which you can plug anything 
you want into whether it‟s regression or something else, to the extent 
that you actually want to make positive changes in people‟s lives? 
 
 
Would that be handy to you? 
 
Audience: Yes! 
 
Igor: 
Then you better come back after lunch. 
 
 
Folks, let‟s get down to business. This is the last run of the day, so you 
may as well get the most out of this. 
 
 
The sales process and the PCAT formula makes sense doesn‟t it? Is it 
relatively straightforward? It is just a specific application of the same 
process. Now all of you can do this. If you combine what you did 
yesterday, in terms of navigating inside someone‟s mind. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               340                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
And you think in terms of the PCAT formula, you‟ll have a formula for 
persuading anyone any time any place, but it will require effort on 
your part. Why? Because I can‟t sit up here and go through every 
single scenario that could possibly exist and give you a solution for it.  
 
 
Does that make sense? 
 
 
What I can do is give you two widely contrasting positions. 
 
i. Sales 
 
ii. Covert therapy 
 
 
 
 
That way, when you see the distinction between them, you‟ll actually 
realize that they are examples of the same process in action. Does 
that make sense? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
The idea is that you then go home and wherever your stumbling blocks 
are, objections, wherever you have someone you want to influence 
and persuade and you‟re not, you‟ll be able to go through the same 
process you went through yesterday, figure out the different pathways 
that exist and fit it into a similar formula for persuasion. 
 
 
Something more…if you don‟t quite know how to deal with a situation 
yet, you can run multiple scenarios and see how they work out, in 
terms of on paper or when you‟re being coached by someone else if 
you stay in touch with each other. 
 
  
The idea is to go okay, if I said this how might they respond? How 
might they respond like this? How might they respond like that? 
Therefore, you end up having many choices and by the time you reach 
the actual situation, your mind will be ready for the different variables.  
 
 
I cannot do that work for you. I can prepare you to do that work, but I 
can‟t do it for you.  
 
 
Does that make sense? 
 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               341                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
DVD 14 
Full Transcript  
 
 
Igor: 
With that thought in mind shall we have a look at how to use the PCAT 
formula as a therapeutic process. Would that be interesting? 
 
 
The first point is to realize you've already done it. Seriously, the simple 
version is already done for you. You have a problem, which is really 
the „P‟ state right.  
 
 
It appears that our problems are disappearing on us. So you have a 
problem, you do some spins which spins the mind out of the problem, 
you find some kind of resource, you spin around until the resource 
ends up mixing up with the problem and out comes - with the question 
here - you test whether they too have attached properly. 
 
 
Will you be able to solve every problem like this? No, it's a process, a 
simple process. For those of you that just want to help out; you're 
sitting on a park bench with someone who is a little bit miserable. That 
will work fine. 
 
 
A friend of yours is having a bad day. That will work just fine. 
Someone who has come back from a war zone? I don't think that'll 
work out fine, there's going to be a little more that you'll need. 
 
 
Shall we have a look at what that might be? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Let me just do a little pre-frame here, which is to say we'll only go 
through the idea of covert therapy on the following understanding: 
 
1. If you are not already a hypnotherapist, in other words, you 
don't have all the other trainings and skills that plug into this, 
please do not work with big issues with people.  
 
Deal with small things like a study aide, exam stress where they have 
a test coming up, or they feel a little blue and you want to pick them 
up and so on. Those things are fine. 
 
2. If we're talking about real therapy, deeper emotional issues and 
so on, please do not go there unless you have the skill set that 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               342                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
allows you to manage those things that may come out if you 
start digging around bigger stuff.  
 
Does that make sense to you? 
 
 For those of you, who aren‟t interested in therapy in that sense, please 
treat this model more as a contrast to what you did earlier on today, 
so you can see the range of how you can have the same formula and 
actually apply it in different ways, so you can start applying it to 
whatever you want. 
 
 If you're already trained as hypnotherapists then go nuts, have fun 
with it.  
 
1. The first thing we need if you want to do covert therapy. 
 
You can do this very overtly as well, right? But this is an advanced 
covert hypnosis training isn't it, not an advanced overt hypnosis 
training. 
 
 We expect we'll be able to do things at the end of this that no one else 
other than you will actually realize you've done, right?  
 
Would you be interested in having a very simple vehicle? 
 
 Most of you will be familiar with this so we may as well throw it out 
there. There are many different versions of this vehicle, but this one is 
the simplest one so we may as well throw it out there. 
 
- 
My Friend John technique – who‟s familiar with that?  
 
Essentially, the My Friend John technique is you telling a story about 
someone else who had the same problem but went through a 
particular process, at the end of which he no longer had the problem. 
 
In describing what happened to him you're actually guiding the other 
person through the same experiences so they can resolve their 
problems. Would you like a very quick example of what I mean? 
 
I had a friend called Jim. Jim had a problem. It was a real issue. You 
know those kinds of problems that follow you around? The more you 
think about that thing, the more annoying it gets. It was a small thing 
but it was really blown out of proportion to the point that even 
considering it used to just wind him up. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               343                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
You know those feelings you get when you think about things and you 
just can't get past that? 
 
The interesting thing about Jim was that he's sitting there thinking 
about that problem, he's really considering that problem, and at some 
point Jim said to himself; this is silly, because above all, all those 
things I haven't thought about whilst I was thinking about this problem 
are all things where I could feel good, but I wasn't. 
 
To an extent, he realized that all he had to do was look beyond the 
problem at the whole of his life, and he suddenly realized this was a 
tiny thing compared to everything else, isn't it? So there's Jim looking 
at those things going - wow, really? I've been doing all this stuff to 
myself. Why should I bother? 
 
Of course, then he begins to recall. Once you can look back and realize 
that it's not you, you can begin to recall and remember all those times 
that are so much better than that. 
 
There's Jim sitting on his park bench thinking through some pretty 
deep issues. He's beginning to remember amazing times in his life, 
inside of those memories. Experiences begin to grow to remind him 
just how much more he is than that.  
 
Of course, you know what happened to Jim, don't you? He starts to 
feel good, doesn't he? He sits there, he's smiling and he's 
contemplating all those things that he's not - or at least used to be - 
and he can be again, to the point, that when he looks at all those 
things that used to bug him he is so far beyond them that looking at 
the problem he actually realizes hey, I can deal with this. 
 
He only has to look at that one problem one step at a time and realize, 
every single thing he's had in his life, all those experiences have 
prepared him to look at that and go wow, I'm far beyond that now. 
That's why I like Jim, he's a real thinker. 
 
Have you all followed the same process in a simple story about a friend 
called John? Do you see how the vehicle works? You can choose 
anything. My recommendation is you actually use real people because 
it's easier for you to keep the reality frame.  
 
How do you use it in sales? It's the same process, you talk about 
clients that did certain things, that wanted certain things and this is 
how they reacted, how they thought, how their own objections got 
overcome, and as a result of which how happy they are. It's the same 
process really.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               344                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Does that make sense? 
 
Do you understand the My Friend John technique everyone? 
 
This is just a vehicle, so at this stage we're pretty much in the same 
position, aren't we? We're in the problem or the general parameters. 
We're really in the same position we're just going to elaborate on the 
language until you've intensified the problem enough that they're 
actually plugged into it. 
 
 There's no point bringing their problem up or going beyond that point 
until they're in it. If they're just like - yeah, I guess, whatever - they're 
not there yet are they? 
 
Think of it in terms of having the neurology light up. When the 
problem lights up there's enough charge there that when you steal the 
electricity, it drains it out of the problem so there's no longer a 
problem.  
 
Does that make sense as an analogy? 
 
So far, we're in the same position here, number two.   
 
2. Once you've plugged them into the problem you need to get 
them out of the problem enough that they have choices. 
 
So aside from whatever the problem was, Jim had to realize that he 
was much more than all those things. You have to rise above it all, and 
look down and think hey, those things are so small, I'm beyond that 
now.  
 
This scene makes sense, doesn't it? So far we're really in the same 
mode, we've just a little more of a sophisticated version than what you 
did on the second day. 
 
The next one gets very interesting.  
 
3. We're at the access resources stage. We're going to have them 
start searching for solutions. 
 
Here's the thing. You do not need to know what the solution is, they 
will. They don't know it yet, but they will. To the extent that you let 
them find it not only does your life get easier, so does theirs. 
 
How can you help them find a solution? The simplest version of all is to 
spin them around until they naturally fall into a trance of infinite 
possibilities.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               345                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Remember, this is where anything good or bad can happen. Once 
they're in it, you can steer them towards one thing or another.  
 
Does that make sense? 
 
I'd like to introduce you to some other ideas. This is what we've been 
doing the last few days anyway, so you're pretty familiar with that, it 
works very well. 
 
I'd like to introduce you to some other things so you can realize that 
you can do the same stuff but follow different processes.  
 
Who here is familiar with the idea of regression therapy for 
example?  
 
- 
How might you do a regression purely linguistically, given the 
model we just set up? 
 
Audience: Go ahead and ask them to think of a time when they had a similar 
feeling. 
 
Igor: 
So you get a feeling coming through and that's the beginning of it, 
carry on. 
 
Audience: What was happening at that point, and then take them back into 
another but really get them into that. 
 
Igor: 
So we're still thinking about doing this covertly, right? The idea of 
feelings is right, and we'll just come back to that in a little bit. Your 
instinct is correct, by the way, we'll be following through on that. 
 
Mickey: 
Just have John feel the feelings that he felt before. 
 
Igor: 
There are many ways to do regression, let me just use the simplest 
form.  
 
Do you know what the simplest way of regressing someone is, 
anyone?  
 
You follow the affect bridge. Basically, a strong emotion comes up 
and you're already halfway there at that point. Those of you who have 
done the conversational hypnotherapy training, you know what I'm 
talking about, right? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               346                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Let's say we are doing a regression. There's John sitting on the park 
bench and he's feeling terrible. All those emotions are welling up, 
really welling up. He feels it intensely inside himself. He's feeling all 
those things and it's growing stronger, so much more than before.  
 
 
We're really taking the idea of the problem and rather than spinning 
too soon, we're letting the problem itself develop the emotion we'll 
regress on.  So there he is with the emotions and suddenly he asks 
himself; John, where are you in your memories?  
 
Do you remember the questions from before? Where are you going 
inside your memories? 
 
 
Beyond the present moment, his thoughts were racing back, because 
he's felt this before. When did you feel this; John asked himself? When 
did you feel this? Suddenly, he stepped back from himself and he 
looked right down there and saw, oh my God, I was that young? Look 
at that little boy, he told himself, so young all the way down there. He 
felt a real wave of compassion because that kid was suffering. 
 
 
Do you see where we're going with this right now in terms of 
regression therapy? We have the emotion, do we not? The affect 
bridge? We've gone back on the affect bridge, have we not? We've 
done the dissociation to give him some distance to be able to do 
something and we've begun the coaching process from adult to child.  
 
Are these not classic maneuvers in regression therapy? 
 
 
You work out how the whole story can actually run someone through 
these maneuvers totally covertly. You're just talking about John and 
his poor messed up childhood, but really everyone else, as long as you 
track, are they keeping track with you, are their emotions welling up 
with you, are they distancing themselves - if they're not distancing 
enough you might add something. 
 
 
He was looking at that and he was still welling up, so he thought far 
and beyond this, above all else, let's look at the whole of life in 
perspective and realize it's just one little moment. That poor little kid 
way over there, so you're really emphasizing those movements until 
the person pulls themselves together enough, which tells you they've 
just dissociated.  
 
Do you see how that works? 
 
 
Let's take another example. In fact, why don't you guys give me an 
example of some kind of technique, and if I‟m familiar with it I'll 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               347                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
happily show you how you might transform that into something 
completely covert.  
 
Audience: I‟ve done a similar technique with children, especially with my 
granddaughter.  
 
Igor: 
You have puppet therapy almost, right? 
 
Audience: Yes.  
 
Igor: 
What I'm actually looking for is can one of you come up with an actual 
therapeutic process like a swish or something, so we can throw some 
other processes in? If not, I'll happily give you some other ones. 
 
 
Dynamic mental imagery– Who is familiar with the symbols 
induction of dynamic mental imagery? I'll just give you the quick 
overview so you know what we're doing. 
 
 
Basically, you send someone to a calming relaxing place, from there 
they go somewhere else, have a symbol come up, they interact with 
the symbol to the point they get a resolution so that the symbolic 
change with the symbol changes them, and you've all seen how 
powerful that is when it's done well, right? 
 
 
There's John sitting on the park bench and he's feeding the ducks. It 
kind of reminds him of that warm comfortable place he used to go as a 
kid. The water shimmering, the sun is shining down, not a care in the 
world. It was a beautiful day in Jim's life, a really beautiful day. 
 
 
One of those days when nothing can go wrong; do you know what I 
mean? There's Jim thinking back and really enjoying that beautiful 
day. Of course, this is how daydreams work, isn't it? In his daydream 
his mind begins to wander.  
 
It wanders down a path one way or another, he doesn't quite know all 
the different directions it could take but as he wanders this path he 
has a feeling something is happening and it's something very 
important. Something is happening that relates to that problem that 
he was thinking about and it's very important.  
 
He doesn't realize that as his mind wanders the highways of his 
daydreams, he's walking towards a place inside his mind where 
something is going to happen, where that problem will just disappear. 
He doesn‟t realize this yet. All he knows is that he's wandering and it's 
kind of an interesting site. Some past memories, some experiences, 
some heartfelt thoughts - and there it is, that other place. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               348                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
The interesting thing is, just when he gets there, he discovers a 
symbol, a dream symbol. Much like you can have dreams every night 
and you can dream of someone that represents someone else -it looks 
like a friend but it's really a relative, you know that kind of dream I 
mean. 
 
 
He has a dream just like that. He sees an actual symbol, something he 
did not expect to see. He actually sees a symbol. He tells himself John 
- look at that. What is that? The one thing he knows is he did not 
expect it to be there, he doesn‟t even know what it means yet. Yet 
there it is, right in front of him. 
 
 
The strangest thing occurs - in the back of his mind Jim gets the sense 
that it means something. It's so important, if only he could put his 
finger on it, it would totally resolve the problem he was thinking about, 
but he doesn't know what it is yet. How could he? He's having a 
daydream, and yet there it is right in front of his eyes. He can feel it, 
the pressure is building it almost makes sense, but not quite yet. 
 
 
Do you see where we're going with this? Can you follow the whole 
process of the dynamic induction based on that? It's kind of a dramatic 
story anyway.  
 
 
Let me give you one more process, because I want you to actually do 
this in a moment.   
 
Audience: A like to dislike pattern switch. 
 
Igor: 
Can you tell me a little more about the technique? I'm not quite sure 
which one you're referring to. 
 
Audience: You use it when it's something somebody likes but they don't want to 
like, like pizza or ice cream. 
 
Igor: 
Great. There are many different versions with this technique, just give 
me a five step plan for it. 
 
Audience: I take you to the characteristics of that thing you like… 
 
Igor: 
So you want to switch something that they like and dislike, like 
chocolate for example. Like chocolate, and they want to not like 
chocolate as much. 
 
 
Can we use a specific content? We can talk about John not liking 
chocolate, no big deal; or we can make it vaguer, talk about one thing 
and make it something different. I don't care either way. We'll do it 
the hard way, why not? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               349                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
There's John sitting on that bench. Let's say you guys want to change 
your approach to chocolate, and use something different to make you 
change chocolate. 
 
 
He starts thinking about this. There's his ex-girlfriend, and he loves 
this girl. That's a problem for him because he knows that this is no 
good for him anymore, but he loves this.  
 
 
It's like one of those things that you know you shouldn‟t have but you 
just can't help but say yes. There's Jim sitting on his park bench and 
he really loves her, but when he looks at her he suddenly realizes it's 
not the thing that he loves, it's how it makes him feel. 
 
 
It can't be her; it‟s all about him. As he looks at her, the strangest 
thing begins to happen. That image of her seems to recede into the 
distance and all that's left is this strange kind of shimmer in that place. 
 
 
Remember, he's just spacing out thinking about stuff. In his 
daydream, he's thinking about that girl next door in the office, the one 
that really does care for him the one that's good for him. So he thinks, 
this really is good for me, I know it. This is good for me. But he 
doesn't feel it yet.  
 
So he begins to wonder - I wonder what happens if? What if I saw that 
person with these qualities right here the shimmering, that position 
right there? I wonder what would happen if I could do that now? But 
you can do anything in a daydream, can't you?  
 
So inside his mind he just sends that other person in, the one that is 
good for him, shimmering just in the right way, just in the right size, 
just in the right place. Do you know what happened? It felt exactly the 
same way. He looks at this new person, it feels like a new person, 
she's good for him and he likes it. He thought to himself; I might just 
keep this.  
 
Does that make sense? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
I'd like to give you one more thing just to expand your horizons a little 
bit, in terms of what we're doing. Has this been useful so far? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               350                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
I'll give you one more thing in terms of expanding your horizons. It's 
one I really like I call this the Dream Machine. The Dream Machine is 
awesome because you can change anything.  
 
Everyone here has had a dream, have they not?  
 
 
In dreams crazy things happen don't they? And, of course, have you 
ever had a dream that when you woke up from the dream - like say 
something bad happened in the dream, and when you woke up you 
still felt the aftershock of that so it kind of ruined your day? 
 
 
You've also had the other kind of dream haven't you, where something 
so good happened that for no apparent reason you wake up and you 
feel great. In fact, your whole day goes well, doesn't it? 
 
 
There's Jim, and he's lying in bed at night and he's wondering what 
kind of dream will I have? One thing is for sure, he's got a machine 
inside his mind that knows when to dream. He doesn't have to plan 
them.  
 
 
Who sits there before going to bed and plans out the first thing that'll 
happen is this person will come up - who does that? Jim certainly 
didn't. He went to sleep and he realized anything can happen in your 
dreams. It can, can't it? Anything can happen in your dreams and it 
can be good. 
 
 
You can dream of a problem and realize that you are so much more. 
By the way, do you see this? The Dream Machine now does this. You 
go through the whole process because it's a metaphorical resolution, 
it's an extra step and it's simple and easy. You don't even have to tell 
them what the resources are. 
 
 
Inside their dream who knows how he's going to solve that problem. 
He doesn't have to, the Dream Machine knows. All he has to do is kick 
back and fall asleep, let the dream come and resolve it for you. That's 
what he said to himself. Just let that dream come and resolve it for 
you.  
 
One thing is for sure; you are so much more than you've ever realized. 
Jim must've been right. He knows he's had all these experiences in his 
past that have made him the person that he is. He has succeeded so 
wildly in ways that he didn't even notice. 
 
 
Something inside him must know much more about how to grow and 
change as a human being then his conscious mind ever could. Jim‟s a 
smart fellow. He decided to do some sleep therapy. He went to sleep 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               351                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
and allowed those dreams to come – healthy dreams, healing dreams, 
dreams that took him far beyond his wildest imagination, because the 
Dream Machine is where that is all created. 
 
 
Of course, that's where it can be solved; can it not? He had an 
amazing dream. When he woke up in the morning guess what? He felt 
far and beyond better than he's ever done before, only this time it 
stayed with him for the rest of the day. That became a pattern for the 
rest of the week and that set a trend for the rest of his life. 
 
 
Who wants to learn to do a little bit of sleep therapy?  
 
Do you see how the Dream Machine works? We're really doing the 
same thing, but we're now using a language to spin them through a 
different situation and different complexes. 
 
 
Do you understand how in this stage, the „A‟ stage, the search for 
solution stage, you have so many resources available to you it‟s 
unreal, is that fair to say? 
 
 
Finally, we come onto the transforming stage, where you just attach 
the solution to the problem. The same thing is there. Essentially, 
you're saying as you think about the problem take the resources with 
you and change. 
 
 
This is not difficult now, is it? Jim thought about the problem, and it 
was changing. This is not rocket science, although it may seem like it 
at first. 
 
Now, because we are doing covert therapy, we need to have a test in 
there somewhere and we need to know that it's worked. Any ideas 
how you might test covertly? 
 
 
There's a very simple device that allows you to test things covertly.  
 
Audience: How do you think Jim felt after that? 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. That is called is a rhetorical question. It's a question that you 
don't really need an answer to. What you're really doing is you're 
asking the other person's unconscious mind to give you a 
demonstration of where they're at. 
 
 
At the end of this dream, Jim wakes up. How do you think he felt? You 
watch them.  
 
Audience: No microphone, inaudible. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               352                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
And you watch them, if they go ugh, then they‟re not there yet. If they 
say - tell me - they've already told you, haven‟t they? 
 
 
You have to watch your audience to see their reaction to the rhetorical 
question because that's what the unconscious mind is doing. By the 
way, does this seem ingenious to you? It's not, this has been around 
for thousands of years. Do you know where this exists? 
 
Audience: Fairy tales. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. There's been an interesting trend of late where people have 
basically cleaned up fairy tales, all the bad stuff. Think about what 
they're doing. You had a context in which children have the 
opportunity to face difficult moments and come out resolving them.  
 
You now take away the difficult moment, how are they ever going to 
know how to react when the actual event happens? There‟s no safety 
mechanism left for them to deal with it. There's a theory that says this 
is exactly why some of the kids nowadays are a bit more - than they 
used to be. 
 
 
You don't necessarily have to subscribe to it but just look at it like this, 
depending on how you tell that story, can you not see how a simple 
fairy tale while emphasizing the PCAT formula, because all fairy tales 
have a PCAT process in them, do they not? How that could allow 
children to resolve their issues without having to think about them? 
 
 
Versus, if you clean it all up, there's no problem. All it is, is Billy was 
happy. Yay, Billy is still happy. Yay, Billy will carry on being happy. 
Yay!  There is no transformation going on.  
 
Does that make sense? 
 
 
Personally, I think it's a little bit ridiculous to clean up fairy tales. You 
guys get to have your opinions on this sort of thing but I look at it like 
a covert hypnotist. Are you liking this process? 
 
 
Based on that, do you understand the process and how simple 
it is, but really how sophisticated you can get in all these 
stages? 
 
 
The point of this is you don't run through it like a script, you stay on 
each stage until you watch the response occurring inside the other 
person.  
 
Does that make sense? Easy enough to do 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               353                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
 
 
Let's spend 10 minutes apiece with each other. If you have no 
particular problem you can think of as the client, that's great. Do you 
know why? Because your unconscious gets to select one for you and 
surprise you with how much better you feel when you don't have those 
things anymore. 
 
 
It really doesn't matter what you think you know, you just let the 
other person tell you a fine story about his friend called Jim, John, 
James, Billy Goat, whatever; and just observe how your own body 
naturally responds to the transition of the story. 
 
 
That means you get to do covert therapy. You get to change things 
that are so secret you don't even know you have them. Pretty good, 
isn't it? Do 10 minutes apiece, we'll come back and we'll finish up for 
the day. Off you go. 
~~~ 
 
How was the exercise did you enjoy it? Isn't it powerful? Easy? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
It's easier by the way if you've learned hypnotherapy, because that's 
what you were doing. The purpose of the exercise is not for you to be 
good at it, yet. The only purpose of the exercise is for you to learn 
more about the process. 
 
 
Do you notice how these stories become easier to tell when your mind 
can go to where it went yesterday, which is inside theirs?  
 
 
The thing is all I'm saying to you makes sense today. It took you three 
days to get it, didn't it? It‟s crazy stuff, isn't it? We just want to get a 
couple of experiences before we wrap up.  
 
Audience: I just found it interesting that I had no idea where I was going to go 
before I started, at all. I didn't know who I was going to access or 
where it was going to go, I just had a problem in mind and I accessed 
a friend, somebody I knew quite well and the story just rolled. It was 
very cool.  
 
Igor: 
Are you doing it spontaneously now? 
 
Audience: Amazingly. 
 
Igor: 
That's the point folks. If you have to sit there and script it out you've 
missed the point.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               354                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
There's nothing wrong with you going right back to the very basic 
exercises; who are you, what are you, what will you have been? 
Anything but only this; those are your training wheels and if you're not 
comfortable yet with being spontaneous with all this stuff, then go 
back to just some of it, the bits that are easy. 
 
 
Bit by bit you start integrating it, because we've pushed you through a 
pretty intense journey the last four days, haven't we? It's been an 
intense journey, hasn't it? You should feel like you've really been 
working hard at this, because you have been.  
 
So to the extent that you take that journey slower at your own pace 
you'll get a destination without any effort. If you try to run to the end 
before you've actually got to the beginning, how could you possibly 
finish that race? 
 
Audience: Initially, I thought I wanted to go the slow route, I knew that I had the 
resources to go beyond that. The key model that worked really well for 
me gave me the courage to jump in, and part of it trusts in my own 
instincts. 
 
Igor: 
That's where it comes from. Either way its better, isn't it? Start slow, 
go fast, start fast, go slow; either way you win. Just find whatever 
works for you. 
 
Audience: When I first saw you do this it seemed so simple and I thought it 
wasn't going to have much impact, but I was amazed at how deeply 
you go into trance without them spinning that much.  
 
 
Once I was engaged, dissociative because we got to my problem and 
my tail started wagging.  
 
Igor: 
Notice how this has gotten to the point where you can actually start 
doing this stuff without sounding like you're on drugs. Wasn't that a 
promise we made on the first day? 
 
 
You had to go through your drug addiction for a while in order to come 
out of it, but now you're better aren't you? You've seen the sights and 
you know where this can go. 
 
Mark: 
Scott and I had a wonderful experience. He asked me if there was 
something I wanted to work on. I said I'd like to just let my 
subconscious bring something up, whatever it wants me to know. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               355                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
He said but if you tell me something specific, I can weave something 
around that.  
 
 
I said I just trust that my subconscious is going to bring me 
something. He paused for a moment, he went inside himself and he 
had to trust himself that he was completely modeling the experience. 
The story he came up with got him emotional. 
 
 
When it did, I went right there with him but he totally modeled the 
experience and it's like you said, you have to go there to the outer 
reaches to take somebody else there. We both had a symbiotic 
experience through his story right there. 
 
Igor: 
Do you know what the irony is? He probably got therapy and you paid 
him for it. It's true, because you can't do this unless you go to the 
outer space of inner space on yourself, so you're going to get paid to 
do therapy on yourself; this is great stuff, isn't it? 
 
 
The perfect dream, exactly. 
 
Audience: I don't even work; I'm a homemaker. I never was exposed to any 
hypnosis except for one listen through to Street Hypnosis and that was 
here because I wanted to get involved in sales more seriously. 
 
 
We came to this part in therapy and I was scared instantly, because I 
don't like people with problems, to deal with them, or to have anything 
to do with them. 
 
Igor: 
I understand. 
 
Audience: Now I had to come up to be in the situation of trying to work through 
somebody's problem, or to be in the position of the client. 
 
 
Olga here that I worked with, came up with an idea that we exchange 
a couple of fairy tales. She spun her own first, which I was very 
surprised with, I thought she already had it. She said no, I just made 
it up as I was going along.  
 
This was a story I could feel through, and when she asked, what do 
you think the little boy feels - asked the rhetorical question - I knew 
the answer because I was in the story. 
 
Igor: 
Do you see how easy this is when you get the right vehicle? Beautiful. 
 
Audience: When it was my turn, I just lifted my eyes to the sky because my mind 
was totally blank. Then I zeroed in on her, I made up a story right on 
the spot and I think there were even a couple of loops in it. It all came 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               356                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
up with a resolution of something and a lesson and a transformation, 
so your idea of doing it as a fairy tale helped. 
 
Igor: 
Let's give her a round of applause.  
 
[Applause] 
 
Good job. You did an awesome job. I can honestly say I'm pleased at 
how far you have come. This has not been an easy journey, has it? In 
a moment I'm going to ask Cliff to come up here and help me hand 
out some attendance certificates, you guys have earned it with all the 
hard work you've done. 
 
 
All that remains for me to say is first, congratulations all of you. You 
have pushed yourselves right to the outer limits of inner space and 
beyond, have you not? 
 
 
Those limits are different for each one of you, and your skill set will be 
different accordingly. Why? Because some of you are on a different 
path of that journey. It doesn't matter where you are, what matters is 
that you're here now.  
 
From here is where you'll get to there. This is where you begin. The 
beginning means that you start at the beginning of this whole course 
and begin those cycles until you're comfortable with those, then that's 
your beginning. 
 
 
If your beginning is beyond that, at a point where you have to trust 
and let go enough you don't know what's going on until it has, you can 
trust that, can you not? You won't know what you're capable of until 
you do it.  
 
With that thought in mind, I want to thank all of you for having such a 
great course and sticking with me through a pretty tough process. 
 
 
You have gone way beyond any other course I'm aware of, because I 
don't think anything else exists. I don't know if you have found 
something else like this. So my ambition was to give you the cutting 
edge when it comes to advanced covert hypnosis, and hopefully I've 
fulfilled those promises, have I? 
 
[Applause-whistles] 
 
Igor: 
Thank you.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               357                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
The same thing goes for each other, for you. As I say with the wood 
cutter, I'm only as good as the materials I get to work with, and that's 
your minds. 
 
 
Anything you just gave me you should give yourselves 10 times in 
return because I cannot do this without you being willing to follow 
along the way and going through your own hurdles, because this was 
not an easy process, was it? 
 
 
Was it worth it? 
 
Audience: Yes. 
 
Igor: 
In recognition of how much that was worth, we have some certificates 
for you. We want to bring you up, thank you and recognize the fact 
that you have worked hard. 
 
 
I could sit here and talk to you all day, but if you aren't doing it, if you 
aren't engaging with this stuff and doing it, there is no seminar, it's 
called a lecture. 
 
 
I want to thank you for allowing me to present a workshop, a seminar 
and actually see 150 odd hypnotists with amazing skills going out 
there to make this world a better place. That to me is very exciting. 
 
 
We're going to read out your names three in a row, so come on up as 
we do it we'll give you a big shake and whatever else. We'll give you a 
certificate, you give me cash and we'll both be happy. One day it'll 
happen. 
 
[Handing out certificates] 
 
 
Get off my stage. I know, it's terrible, isn't it? Poor Roger.  
 
 
Watch the clapping Cliff, let's actually have a reason, which is that you 
all wouldn‟t be here unless he had been up until 4:00 a.m. for literally 
a month or two every single night to make sure this was arranged so 
you could come here and the whole thing would work out.  
 
 
Let's give him a real heartfelt round to thank him for that. 
 
[Applause for Cliff] 
 
 
And, of course, the lovely young lady with blond hair in the back 
arranged all this from the back, made this whole thing flawless and 
seamless so please, thank her for that also. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               358                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
[Applause for Megan] 
 
 
 
Then we have our delightful training team– James, Dave and Joshua –
please put your hands up and thank them for helping out so much. 
[Applause] 
 
 
In the back in the kingly chair we have Mark Ryan who is going to 
make the most amazing video you've ever seen. 
[Applause] 
 
 
Of course, next we have the bearded Viking and other than being a 
really cool guy, you may as well applaud him just for the hell of it. Off 
you go. 
[Applause] 
 
Settle down folks, because we are almost done. What a journey. That's 
it - take a deep sigh of relief.  
 
Breathe in, breathe out, and relax. That’s right, because you came 
here with a dream, an ambition, something that you wanted to 
achieve. Inside each of our dream’s lies ambitions and those 
ambitions get fulfilled by what's even deeper than they are. 
 
 
Only go as deeply inside your ambitions that a dream can come out 
in which you can be fulfilled. You thought you came here to learn a 
certain skill and beyond that skill is everything you are yet to 
become. 
 
 
You can find that inside yourself as simply as recalling the memory 
of a dream. Dreams are the most interesting of human experiences 
because we do not know what dream will come. 
 
 
Every single experience you've ever had can be formulated into a 
dream, grown, strengthened, and become more positive with time. 
You've had a collection of very intense learning experiences here, 
which means when you dream at nights comfortably and peacefully 
your mind can begin to assimilate all the pieces. 
 
 
I had a dream once, of an amazingly complex machine - cogs, 
whirls, things that turned and spun. Every item meticulously 
crafted, like the most elaborate clockwork mechanism, precious 
jewels embedded in each item, and the machine worked perfectly. 
 
 
When I dreamt that dream, I did not know what this machine was 
capable of. I just observed it moving meticulously, carefully, 
smoothly and elegantly. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               359                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
I did not realize at the time, that I was observing my own dream 
machine. The dream machine merely processes experiences. 
Experiences go in one end dreams, and changes come out the 
other. 
 
 
I said to myself; what if you took all the experiences you've just 
had and placed them into the machine? Let it sort everything out, 
let it clean, polish, refine and use it. I wonder what will come out. 
 
 
Such an elegant machine could only possibly produce amazing 
artifacts, real works of art. I realized that every experience going 
through this can cause someone to awaken with great changes, the 
capacity to experience a richer life and produce greater successes.  
 
Now I don't know how long that dream lasted, it seems to me it 
may have been weeks, even months. Each night the mechanism 
ticking, whirring, moving, changing, every night and perhaps it’s 
continuing. What I do know is that amazing changes take place 
when the dream machine works through your experiences. 
 
 
I'd like to thank you and the experiences you've had for being here 
and going beyond what you are used to, into a territory that's so 
alien that it became familiar now. 
 
 
To the extent, you take that journey each and every night, 
polishing, refining, creating greater elegance in what you do and 
how you think and behave. Your skills as a master of hypnosis will 
so far exceed those that have gone before you that you won't even 
realize just how good you really are. 
 
 
You only get to enjoy the benefits of being more influential, more 
charismatic, and a greater force for good in everyone's life. That 
makes you a very decent person, a good person. 
 
 
So you might as well consider that tonight, when it's time for you to 
really dream. I wonder when you'll discover the dream machine for 
yourself? Will it be before you have all these marvelous changes, or 
will it have been working for you silently in the background long 
before it reveals itself to you? You really don't know, do you? You 
get to find out.  
 
With that happy thought I'll welcome you all back to this place, in 
which case, you get to take everything that's happening inside this 
room, outside and make it work. Isn't that something worth thinking 
about? 
 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               360                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
 
Audience: Yes.  
 
Igor: 
Folks thank you so much for making this an amazing experience.  
 
[Applause] 
 
Thank you. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               361                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
DVD Bonus Transcripts 
 
DVD #1 
 
Igor: 
How is everybody doing? Do we have everyone in the room? If you're not here, 
once again, put your hand up. It's been quite a week, hasn't it? Rest assured this, is 
the beginning of the end, which means it's an end to all of the things we were 
doing before so it's going to be a chilled out day today. 
 
First, let me welcome all of you to the Group Covert Hypnosis and How to Make 
a Lot of Money Two day, get it. I have my moments. Thank you, Ed you can 
come again. 
 
Ed: 
Is it free? 
 
Igor: 
No. Let me just check because I know we've got a lot of new faces here. Who 
here is brand new, just turned up today? Put your hands up so I can see. Welcome 
to you for coming down. Hopefully, I'll be able to share some things with you that 
will be of use. 
 
Who here has been here before? Put your hands right up. Welcome back. You are 
a glutton for punishment aren't you? 
 
Some of you have been with me for almost two weeks now. This is my third week 
of training back to back as I was saying to some of you, so today is going to be 
like a big fat party because as far as I'm concerned we're on easy street. 
 
 
No mind bending stuff, no hypno ju-ju. The purpose of today is to expose you to 
as much information as we can get through in order to help you use your skills as 
a hypnotist in lots of different ways. 
 
My primary purpose is to show you how as you're thinking as a hypnotist, it 
doesn't just apply in small scale like one on one or large scale with groups and, of 
course, we'll come onto that today, but really the mindset of a great hypnotist. 
 
Who thinks right now we're in the middle of a recession, anyone? Some of you 
are learning. 
 
I personally don't think recessions exist. I'll explain to you why when it comes to 
that. If you switch your mindset, if you can actually look at the world a slightly 
different way, you'll see why it is right now, that there are people making more 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               362                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
money than they've ever made in their entire lives guaranteed, but it's not 
everyone. 
 
It’s because most people are looking in the wrong place. One of the things I hope 
to share with you today is to help you find out how to look so that you can 
recession-proof yourself.  
 
Would that be something worth doing? 
 
 
We can skip it and play hopscotch or marks and crosses on the wall. No rest for 
the wicked, right. 
 
This is where we're headed today and we'll be using this in terms of applying the 
same mindset with bigger groups.  
 
 Who here works with groups in terms of sales presentations or could be working 
with groups in terms of standing in front of them to present ideas in terms of your 
hypnotherapy practice saying hey, come to a hypnotherapist or things like that? 
 
If you're not already working with groups and you have anything of value to offer 
in terms of service, a product, or anything like that, even an idea, I strongly 
recommend you get in front of a group at some point because you have a lot more 
people that might be interested. 
 
It's a lot more effective and efficient then working one-on-one in terms of getting 
people interested in the first place. If you're not already working with groups like 
in evening seminars and that stuff, I strongly advise that you do because it will 
help your business immensely. 
 
Here's how the day is going to run today. I'm going to run the morning session 
and we'll be talking about the money mindset. 
 
I'm not talking about the law of attraction, like how to sit there, watch TV and let 
checks come through the doorway. I've tried that and I almost got arrested for not 
paying my tax bill. That's not a good thing. That was a joke by the way, the tax 
bill thing. I pay my taxes when I have to. I don't pay when I don't have to. 
 
This is more about what can you do in your thinking and switching your 
perceptions so that making money is an easy thing.  
 
Today is not going to be about is the usual workshop format, where you do 
exercises and so on; it's going to be an information day. It’ll still be interactive, if 
you want to ask questions and so on that's fine, but it is more about presenting 
information and ideas than it is on developing skills. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               363                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
We only have one day. Those of you who have trained with me, you've been here 
for two weeks now, you realize that the first day in terms of any seminar is a 
warm up for skills, so it would be kind of annoying if I warmed you up with 
something you have no idea how to use and then sent you off and said that's all 
we have time for. 
 
We're going to focus on actual practical ideas that you can use so you probably 
will want to have a notepad and pen ready. If you don't have one please knock out 
the person next to you and steal theirs, it'll be worth it. 
 
Hypnotize them. A room full of over 100 hypnotists trying to hypnotize each 
other at the same time - that's going to be an interesting phenomenon I want to get 
that on tape. 
 
I'll just give you a minute to organize yourselves for that. The very first thing that 
I would like to cover today - and rest assured this is going to be a gentle day for 
your minds rather than a crazy day - in terms of the ideas that we'll be presenting 
please feel free to take as many notes as you want to, and don't feel like you have 
to remember everything and do it all at once. 
 
This is not a skill, there's not going to be any pressure for you to deliver anything 
or know that, this is more food for thought so that when you leave here you can 
go through your notes again and say oh, I'll try this little thing or I'll add that little 
thing. Does that make sense to you all? 
 
Whatever happens don't feel yourselves under any kind of pressure to suddenly 
say I've got to know all this at once and do it straight away and so on, because it's 
not that kind of day. It's going to be a very straightforward day. 
 
If at any point you don't quite understand something, feel free to put your hand up 
and so on. The only thing we're not going to get into here is like therapy, 
especially since we're talking about money and some people have issues around 
money like I don't know if I deserve it, if I'm good enough or if I can ask for it. 
 
Feel free to voice those ideas if you wish, but do not expect me to do anything 
about it because, that's not the kind of training we're here for. Does that make 
sense? 
 
What I want to do is present to you the attitudes and mindsets of those people I've 
come across that for want of a better word are filthy rich and very happy about it, 
and they've done it in a way that hasn't actually harmed anyone. They've actually 
done good stuff with it. Does that make sense to you? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               364                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
I want to share that mindset with you and to the extent that it clashes with your 
own, I'd recommend you be happy about it. Why? Because you get to figure out 
how you can switch from where you are to where you want to go. 
 
If you don't like those mindsets, that's okay you don't have to adopt them. This is 
just information. This is not something about getting things, or a debate about the 
merits of this versus that, it's just information that I've picked up along the way. 
 
I'll happily share it with you I'll happily clarify my thinking around these things 
with you if you want to ask. Beyond that, it's up to you to take it or leave it as you 
wish to. Is that fair? 
 
When we're talking about money, it can sometimes be a loaded topic and it's kind 
of a weird thing, especially in our society because we're a society that's actually 
very wealthy– North America and Europe– we're probably one of the wealthiest 
societies in the history of this planet, yet there’s a surprising amount of people 
that run around and are dirt poor and it's bizarre, isn't it? 
 
Opportunities are around us all the time to do amazing things and yet people are 
barely making a living. I wondered for a long time how that could be. Why is 
that? 
 
I have a cousin who is a little younger then me. He's a very interesting chap. 
When we were young, like five or six years old, he used to have a passion for 
money. If anyone was ever going to grow up to be a banker and be filthy rich, this 
was the one. 
 
He would beg and wheedle every adult we'd come across, since our family was 
from all over Europe, and when they'd come in they'd give him their change. He'd 
say I'm more interested in what the notes look like, just to have one for my 
collection. He was very good. 
 
He had a change jar almost the size that he is stuffed full of coins. And, you 
know, banks don't exchange coins, they exchange notes but not coins, you know 
that right? 
 
Somehow he managed to persuade the local bank to take all these coins from like 
a hundred different currencies and exchange it for him. At the time, he lived in 
Germany, so he was deutsche marks, which are now Euros. 
 
So, he managed to persuade them to do that. We always thought wow this guy is 
going to be a tycoon when he grows up. Of course, I made sure to be extra nice to 
him whilst he was young so he'll remember me when he's old right? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               365                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
In many ways, he followed the path that everyone expected him to follow. He did 
an economics degree. He actually ended up at MIT doing a PhD in economics 
which is impressive, isn't it? I was impressed as hell when I heard that. 
 
I bumped into him during my brother's or sister's wedding, I forget which because 
they were both in the same place so it was a wedding in that place. I bumped into 
him I was sitting there saying wow this is great, I hear you've been doing your 
PhD and so on. When are you going to start your own company? When are you 
going to be filthy rich? 
 
I want to have a filthy rich cousin, that would be really good for me, right and he 
said the most surprising thing. He told me I don't know I might just get a job as a 
lecturer at University. I said really why? He said I don't know I'm just looking 
around. 
 
I thought that was so bizarre, that bugged me, and I thought about it for such a 
long time. I began to realize that something happens in our educational system 
that actually flips us around.  
 
I call this the academic's dilemma. These are people who know so much about 
things that they can't do it. All the knowledge is up here, but there's nothing in 
here. They have no experience. All they can do is reflect on other people's 
experiences. The more they know the harder it is, because as hypnotists you know 
about the conscious and unconscious/ conflict, right?  
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Therefore, the more he knows about the principles of making money the more 
scared he is to do it, just in case he makes a mistake, his ego gets on the line and 
maybe people laugh at him. 
 
What's he going to go for? He's going to go for the easy option, the path that's laid 
out for him. You go through academia, you make a PhD, well there's going to be a 
door open for you, isn't there? It's waiting for you, waiting to welcome you in. 
 
As far as I can tell, this is why there are so many people, who should be wealthy 
but are not they've lost the spirit of adventure, haven't they. How many risks do 
people take? Not stupid risks like getting drunk and driving a car. I'm talking 
about risks in terms of going for a certain job, starting their own business or 
having an idea about something and actually following through on it; whether it 
fails or succeeds is irrelevant. 
 
 How many people do that nowadays?  
 
 What kind of risks do people take? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               366                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
There's the one where oh, someone rode on my foot, now I'm going to take a free 
lawyer to sue them, because if I lose I don't lose anything, I don't have to pay him. 
If I win, they take part of the proceeds, no big deal. Is that a risk? 
 
 Do you understand the mindset we're coming from here? 
 
When you have people who lose that spirit of adventure, that sense of opportunity 
and being willing to take a risk and lose in order to win, how can they expect to 
go anywhere other than where everyone else is going? Is this making sense? 
 
I learned this lesson the hard way, because I was pretty happy about the idea of 
making money myself, I thought I'll make my way in the world and I'll be 
wealthy. All through university everyone was like, what are you going to do for a 
living? I thought those people are going into the rat race, I am not doing that.  
 
What did I do? I joined the rat race, very high at the top. By the way, the top of 
the rat race smells just as bad as the bottom. It's true. I became a lawyer. Most of 
you know that. I worked for one of the top law firms in the UK, an international 
law firm and it was awesome. 
 
I had my power suits, I walked in, everyone thought I was amazing and I could do 
anything. I was a lawyer they’re God’s, it’s like b being a doctor in a hospital, 
right. I felt pretty good about the whole thing. 
 
What's the first thing I have to do? I have to get an apartment that is appropriate 
for my standing. I have to get a car and all these other things. Of course, at the 
end of the month I look at my bank pass and say oh. Living how I think a lawyer 
should live is expensive. Sadly, my law firm didn't quite agree with my lifestyle, 
so I had to make a few drastic changes at that time. 
 
I was wondering about this, because I was in a very fortunate time because this 
was during the whole dot com boom and a lot of lawyers were heading off to dot 
com areas and so on, so we had massive salary hikes. I think my salary tripled 
within the space of six months, which is pretty good, isn't it? 
 
The irony is that at the end of those six months I was just as poor as when I 
started. Something happens when you get more money. The means people will 
carry on struggling is one of the things I'd like to talk about today. The interesting 
thing is I didn't get my wake up call until believe it or not, Valentine's Day.  
 
Do you know what happened on Valentine's Day? Hopefully, you're already in 
love by then, right? You get cards, right? Everyone sends cards around, by my 
valentine, that sort of stuff. I got zero. I was like what I'm a lawyer! I'm shocked! 
I walk out and one of these secretaries in these little secretarial bays, there's this 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               367                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
secretary and she looks like she's in the middle of Santa's grotto, there are cards 
everywhere. 
 
There are chocolates and champagne bottles- I'm going how the hell do you do 
that? I didn't get it. I smiled at her and said what did you do? She gave me the 
most charming answer and this is something that stuck in my head for a long time. 
 
She smiled up at me, she winked and said; you have to speculate to accumulate. 
Ingenious, isn't it? Of course, she meant in terms of cards. She probably sent cards 
to hundreds of people and she definitely accumulated. This is a bit of a truism, 
isn't it? In terms of the mindset that allows you to go out there and make the world 
give you what it is that you want.   
 
The whole academic machine is designed against that, isn't it? What is it designed 
to do? Exactly, it's designed to contain you. When someone tells you what your 
objective is and what risks you're allowed to take, we're great at this isn't it? 
 
As soon as that's taken away, we're standing there like lost at sea going what do I 
do now?  
 
I have a very good friend who’s in the TV industry. We were talking about some 
of these ideas and I said; why don't you go start your own TV company? She said 
I can't do that I haven't even worked for anyone yet. Well who has to, you know 
more about TV than most of the people who watch it. It's true. 
 
With the Internet, all it takes is a video camera and a half decent idea, you can 
build an audience and at the very least that means you can sell something to a TV 
company that's running out of ideas anyway. She said no, I can't do that.  
 
The mindset is one of avoid risk. We get punished for taking risks at school, don't 
we? What happens if you don't know the answer? You Billy, what's the answer? I 
don't know, sir. 
 
What happens? Everyone points fingers, everyone laughs; maybe the teacher 
makes a snide comment. Next time Billy makes damn sure he knows the answer 
or more importantly, he knows what answer the teacher wants. 
 
What happens is - this is the important thing - you're not being taught to find out 
answers, you're being taught to look at someone who is put in an authority 
position, find out what they want to hear and tell them that. 
 
Who here was ever good at doing exams, anyone? Isn't that what everyone did? 
Did you write your actual opinion about a subject or did you write down what you 
knew would get you a good mark? Which did you do? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               368                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
I could ace exams without a huge amount of study purely, because I was willing 
to suppress my own opinion. Seriously, it's easier to know what someone wants to 
know and just give them that, it's a no-brainer it's a game. 
 
What does this game teach you to do? Think about it; you're not in school for like 
two weeks, you're there for more or less all of your life before you start working.  
 
Then you go to an institution where the same rules keep applying, don't they? 
Your boss tells you to do this, and you do that. Do you see how the mindset 
begins to stifle people's creativity? One of the biggest things that happens is that 
people's willingness to take risks, that spirit of adventure, when that goes your 
whole mind and attitude has gone. 
 
The very first thing I'm going to invite you guys to think about is– how can you 
bring back to life that spirit of adventure, that attitude that says; I'll give that a go. 
I want to see an opportunity and I want to take it. 
 
Do you realize you all have a blueprint inside your mind, and that blueprint 
dictates who you’re allowed to be, who you're allowed to be with, how old you'll 
get, how wealthy you'll get, what your lifestyle will look like and the crazy thing 
is you're not even aware of it. 
 
There's some interesting research that say those people who were born while their 
grandparents were still quite young will tend to live to an old age, their 80's or 
90's. Therefore, if your grandparents were in their 40's shall we say when you 
were born, your chances of living longer are much higher than someone who's 
grandparents were in their 70's when they were born.  
 
The reason is very simple. The years from one to seven are known as the imprint 
stage. It creates a blueprint inside your mind of what you can expect out of life. 
 
When you were born, during that imprint stage, if you see your grandparents and 
they're old, withered in wheelchairs, drooling, hunched over and making nonsense 
syllables, what is your imprint, your archetype of old age? What do you expect of 
old age, any ideas? 
 
Strength, vigor or the opposite? Of course, if you're born and your grandparents 
are vigorous and climbing mountains and they're doing things that your parents 
will be embarrassed to tell people about, what is your blueprint of old age? Its 
vigor, health and strength.  
 
This is actually very important. You can trigger these archetypes, these attitudes 
very simply it's called priming. Have a bunch of students walk into a room, try to 
memorize a couple of sentences and walk out again. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               369                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
i. 
One group walks in and out and you measure their rate of walking, same 
in same out, pretty much the same speed.  
 
ii. 
The other group walks in at one speed and walks out at half the speed.  
 
Do you know what was different? 
 
The second group read sentences that had embedded within it ideas that had 
associations, just an association to old age. Things like I ate an orange today, it's 
my old hate, the wrinkled coat - wrinkle old, oranges - what does that remind 
most North Americans of? 
 
A scary place, if you go to the wrong parts, right? It activates that blueprint inside 
of us that says this is what old age behaves like. For a moment, they become 
older, weaker and feebler. Does that make sense to you? 
 
Of course, that affect wears off after a while because they're still young, vigorous 
and so on, but that's what they'll grow into. Therefore, whatever is inside your 
mind, whatever your blueprint is, that's what you're getting. The life you have 
right now is a result of two things. 
 
1. One, it's your blueprint, the imprint stage when you were young, and  
 
2. Two, it’s the thoughts that maintain that blueprint. 
 
Has anyone ever had a radical change in their life? Where literally, you look back 
on yourself and if you'd carried on the same path, you'd be a totally different 
person, right? In a room full of hypnotists, I expect quite a few hands like that to 
go up. 
 
What did you do? You had to switch your old blueprint off and put a new 
blueprint in its place, right?  
 
We all have a blueprint.  
 
 How many here are making exactly the amount of money they'd like 
to make, they don't even care if they ever make a penny more? 
 
What's going on? Why are no hands up? If you're not making the kind of income, 
the kind of wealth that you want it's because somewhere inside you your blueprint 
will not allow you to. You're doing all kinds of things and thinking all kinds of 
thoughts to support that. 
 
Allow me to give you a few examples. Has anyone heard the following phrase; 
money does not grow on trees? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               370                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Some time ago, I was talking to a girl, I was getting my visa for Thailand, she was 
a fun, spirit of adventure type girl, she had just left her boyfriend and was on her 
way to Thailand to become a kick boxer. 
 
I thought wow, that's interesting! We got to talking, we started talking about life 
and business and stuff like that. She seemed very excited by the idea of the 
seminar and stuff that I was doing. I said; why don't you do it? She said oh, I can't 
do that I haven't even been to university. 
 
If you had any idea how little anything I did at the university ever prepared me for 
this, in fact if anything, it did quite the reverse. It's actually a bonus not to have 
gone believe it or not, in some respects but she didn't believe me. 
 
 
I looked at her and said look, you probably still think money doesn't grow on 
trees, don't you? She said what and you can tell they have that glint in their eye 
that someone is messing with you a bit, and I was. You really don't think that 
money grows on trees do you? I can tell you that it does and I'll prove it to you. I 
will prove to you that money does grow on trees. 
 
At this point, the poor girl is totally confused. We're having a chat, I started 
explaining some things, and she started getting very enthusiastic about the idea 
that you can actually do anything and you don't need a big fat school to give you a 
piece of paper that says you're allowed to. In fact, sometimes it's easier not to. 
 
It's those things that, if you allow me, I'd like to take this morning to talk about. 
Would that be of interest to you? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
The first thing I want you to do is just spend a couple of minutes just making 
friends with the people next to and behind you. Seeing how our topic here is 
money, don't worry about getting up and moving around, just have a little chat in 
the circle around you, it's not one of those big milling exercises, we're not going 
there today. 
 
Have a little chat in terms of what attitudes to money might be holding you back 
and what attitudes about money might actually move you forward. I want you just 
to share ideas between you because sometimes saying things out loud will remind 
you or give you notice of how silly some of these things can be. 
 
Does that make sense to you? Just spend a minute or so doing this now, and we'll 
go from there. 
~~~~ 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               371                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Was that an interesting start to your discussion? It's brief, we don't have much 
time, I just want to get the ball rolling a bit.  
 
 What kind of themes did you notice?  
 
 What kind of themes are coming out of this? 
 
Audience: 
One of the themes that came out was in order to deserve something you have to 
work hard for it. 
 
Igor: 
Is everyone familiar with this theme? Hopefully, by the end of the day or even 
this morning you'll have more of the attitude that rather than having to work hard 
for it, you'll work smart for it. 
 
It's not a question of plowing a field and breaking your back, it's a question of 
how can you do things that'll get the same result with less effort? We'll talk about 
that. Lovely, thank you. 
 
Audience: 
One of the things I've seen in my clients and maybe even in myself is that money 
corrupts, that we would be corrupted and if not ourselves, even worse our children 
would be corrupted, because who likes rich kids? 
 
Igor: 
That's a common attitude, isn't it? Money corrupts, so people with money must 
somehow be tainted, corrupted or bad. No one has ever heard that before have 
they. 
 
 
Hopefully what we'll come onto today is a way to look at money that not only lets 
you realize that sometimes it can corrupt in some respects, but a way to look at it 
that actually allows you to use it ethically so you can never be corrupted by it. 
 
If you look at money like it's not money, and we'll come onto that, you'll actually 
realize there's a way of looking at it that actually forces you to be more ethical to 
get wealthier. Would that be something to think about? 
 
Hopefully, I'll take care of that thought stream as well. Go ahead. 
 
Audience: 
That money can only come from certain directions, certain ways and venues. 
 
Igor: 
Like money doesn't grow on trees, right? 
 
Audience: 
Like your business can only look one certain way. 
 
Igor: 
Right or you have to get a job, right? Or, you have to ask someone else, you have 
to get a hand up, you have to sue someone for it. That's getting popular now, isn't 
it? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               372                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
We had someone over here go ahead. 
 
Audience: 
Money is various things; money is power, money is freedom. If money is freedom 
and at this moment we don't have money we can't have freedom, or if we don't 
have freedom, if for some reason in our lives - in my case money is power, so let 
me just speak of me. 
 
Therefore, if I am disempowered in some area of my life, since they are 
equivalent, I must not have money. 
 
Igor: 
Right. Do you see the thought loops people run through themselves? We'll 
identify a few more of these and then we'll see if we can start bursting through 
some of them. 
 
Scott: 
If I'm wealthy, people are going to want to take advantage of me. I have to hold 
back and not get too wealthy because I don't want people to do that. 
 
Igor: 
Or just hide it.   
 
Tim: 
If somebody is making money, somebody else is losing it. 
 
Igor: 
That's a big one, isn't it? If I ask you for money, I'm taking something away from 
you, right? By the way, let's talk about some more, these are some very important 
ideas. 
 
 
Should we just write some of these down? It might be useful, right? What was the 
first one? What was yours Daniel?  
 
 Work hard,  
 We have corrupt,  
 We had equals power,  
 Freedom,  
 Taking advantage of 
 
Audience: 
If somebody wins and somebody loses. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. Time is money. Seeing as there's only a certain amount of time, that 
means no one can make more than a certain amount of money, except for maybe 
Bill Gates, but he's obviously God because he's got more time than money. 
 
Audience: 
It came up with us… 
 
 We should be happy with what we have. That brings in an element of guilt if 
we want more than that. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               373                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
Guilt - this is good, it comes up in so many different forms, doesn't it? Can we 
have the mics come around to people with their hands up as well?   
 
Scott: 
We have one. 
 
 That whatever it is I'm going to sell has to be perfect before I can start to sell 
it. 
 
Igor: 
Right.   
 
Connie: 
A lot of the clients I have seem to feel that they don't deserve it.  
 
 I don't deserve it; I'm not good enough. 
 
Igor: 
Let's just take one or two more and then we'll call it quits. Who has a microphone 
already? 
 
Audience: 
Another one is… 
 
 Even if you have money, it's not secure because you can lose it. 
 
Igor: 
Right. Who has a microphone? 
 
Audience: 
Here’s another one… 
 
 Something about those who have money are lucky.  
 
There's some aspect of luck that comes in. 
 
Igor: 
Can you see what's going on here folks? Can you see a bunch of excuses starting 
to come out? 
 
Just look at this as hypnotists, because I know most of you are hypnotists or 
hypnotherapists.  
 
 Can you see the rationalization process?  
 
How can money be all these things? 
 
It's a loaded topic. People find excuses to justify what's actually happening to 
them. One of the things, I'd like to do today, is explore a different way to look at 
money so that all these excuses are taken away, they're no longer possible. 
 
Would that be worthwhile doing, spending some time doing? Yes. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               374                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Why don't we spend a little time just looking at what money really is, in terms of 
how I think of it.  
 
 Where did money come from?  
 
The world turns, a bit of rock has dust, water comes along, creatures come 
crawling out of the ocean and they all have a pocket full of change, saying I want 
a Mars Bar. That's what they did, isn't it? It's just the way the world works, isn't 
it? 
 
Would it be fair to say that at some point humans evolved, they developed a layer 
of intelligence and they realized hey, you have a goat and I have a pig, I get bored 
of eating pig all the time, how about we swap? 
 
You can make pots and I can make gun-like things which aren't really guns, 
spears and bows or whatever. I'll give you a spear, you give me a pot and we're 
both happy, right? It's the basic system of human interaction. Its exchange, it's 
barter. We do it all the time, don't we?  
 
I'll give you information you give me information. I'll treat you in a way that 
makes you feel good you treat me in a way that makes me feel good. That 
exchange is happening constantly outside the realm of money, isn't it? We're 
perfectly happy with that, aren't we?  
 
Occasionally, people take advantage of our largesse, right? They're the needy 
people that keep trying to take- take- take – approve of me, please say nice things 
to me, or do me a favor, another favor and another favor. 
 
After a while we say, you know what, there's no exchange going on here. What do 
you do? Unless you have some weird codependency thing going on you cut those 
ties, because there's no interaction, no exchange. 
 
At some point, we have a natural understanding inside of us that for everything 
we give we need to receive something in return. It's called the law of reciprocity. 
Are you familiar with that idea? Put your hand up just so we know. Its part of how 
virtually every society is built and it's educated into children. Share your toys and 
they'll share theirs. Share your food with your brother and one day he'll share with 
you. 
 
It's how societies are built and it's a very valuable thing. Its part of what makes 
human beings not descent down to, I'll take whatever I can and fight to the death 
for it. I'm sure there's a period in human history where that was more the 
prevalent norm.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               375                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Therefore, this law of reciprocity, this exchange of values is part of how we 
operate. Of course, as time goes by, people become more sophisticated. You find 
some precious little stones that look pretty and are hard to find. No one else 
knows where the hell you got them from and you say no they're mind. 
 
You say I'll give you a goat for it. No, it's mine. I'll give you two goats. No, it's 
mine. Eventually, I have my whole harem of goats and I say okay, it's worth it for 
these. That process becomes, shall we say, more institutionalized. As a society, 
we begin to value those little red rocks or those little bits of golden metal, and we 
begin to set a standard of value. 
 
In other words, one little bit of metal is worth 10 goats. This is very useful, isn't 
it? Why? Because, if I only want half a goat it's very difficult to say, I'll give you 
half a pig for half a goat because now both are dead. 
 
What I can do is I can give you a little piece of metal, you can give me half a goat, 
then when the other person gives you metal you give him the other half of the 
goat, and everything works fine. You don't have to kill a goat and lose half of it 
just to give me the half I want. Does that make sense? 
 
We have this exchange of value going on. The problem is as time goes by and we 
get more sophisticated, human beings are very good at abstracting things, right? 
 
We have concepts that do not exist in nature. Can you put a bucket of love inside 
a wheelbarrow? Can you go to the butcher and say I'd like to have an ounce of 
pride, and a suitcase full of courage? No? 
 
You can buy a house and you can put that house in a wheelbarrow, if the 
wheelbarrow was large enough, can you not? You can buy shoes, you can buy 
clothes but you cannot buy abstractions. One of the things we do is we invest in 
an abstraction and begin to believe that it's real.  
 
Country, nation, pride, love, history - none of these things exist, they're all inside 
our minds as an abstract concept. 
 
We live inside a world of ideas and money is one of those ideas. The problem is, 
those ideas become so confused sometimes that we don't even remember what it 
is we believe in. 
 
 
For example, money as we know it– 
 
 What do people usually think when you say I'm going to give you 
some money?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               376                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Little green bills, cash, it's a symbol of money, isn't it? It’s bits of paper; I'll give 
you a whole toilet roll in exchange for your house, how about that, it's still paper.  
 
The difference of course is inside your mind. You're making a whole bunch of 
assumptions about those green bits of paper that aren't necessarily true. It used to 
be the case that when we had these bits of gold that you could exchange for half a 
goat or a full pig, that the exchange was natural. 
 
You could weigh it and say okay, this is good gold and it's worth the whole cow 
for this one. Of course, after awhile it gets a bit dangerous running around with 
pockets full of gold and it makes your trousers go all baggy. It's not good. 
 
If for nothing else for your fashion sense to improve, you stick your gold inside a 
safe place, where people with guns or crossbows at that time. What do they do? 
They write you a little piece of paper they give you one of these things, an IOU. 
 
The first IOU was the Bank of England saying this piece of paper guarantees that 
whoever holds it can come to my house, and I will give you a pound of gold. 
That's why it's called a pound folks did you know that? You get some gold, you 
put it on your scale you put a pound thing next to it and say okay that's a pound of 
gold here you go sir, thank you very much for that piece of paper. That's what it 
was. 
 
Of course then some clever person decides to use the same money twice, and 
that's where the whole banking industry begins. 
 
I don't want to get into the whole financial industry because that's not what this is 
about its just understanding that whatever clever tricks are being done with 
money, those are just higher levels of abstractions and that includes the whole 
stock exchange. They're useful levels of abstraction, but none of it is real. 
 
Fundamentally, money is a symbol to symbolize something of value. Whenever 
we exchange money with someone, we are exchanging value. I want that notepad. 
I will swap you a small unit of value for the small unit that I value that notepad. 
 
I value this holiday, so I will swap you a larger unit of my value for that. It's just 
an easier way of making exchange, but its monopoly money.   
 
Audience: 
Of course, at this point, at least here in the United States and in most developed 
countries, its only value they're promising. We went off the gold standard. Nixon 
was the one who finally took us entirely off the gold standard, its Fiat currency. 
 
It means that congress, the one’s that you all trust so much - maybe I'm projecting 
here - just promises that it's worth this much. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               377                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
Right and this is very important. I don't know if you realize this, but right now, 
there is more money in the world then can be justified by the gold reserves that 
used to be linked to it.   
 
In other words, it's not that inflation there's more bits of paper out there, there's 
actually more value out there. This is one of the secrets to being wealthy.  
 
Do not think of it in terms of this is money and I'm asking for money. Think of it 
in terms of value. You can create value anywhere, can you not? 
 
If your shoes are dirty and you can't be bothered to shine them and I shine them 
for you, is that valuable? If your shoes are dirty, you don't care and I shine them 
for you, is that valuable for you? Of course, it's ridiculous for me to be a shoe 
shine if you don't value that.  
 
It's not that I'm asking for money, I'm offering you something of value. Whilst 
you can't think of something better to do, you might as well give me symbolic 
value in return so I can go off and choose my own thing. Does that make sense?  
 
If you think about it, when you think of money as a value, most of this starts 
disappearing. 
 
 How does money corrupt?  
 
It can't corrupt if you're thinking of it as an exchange of value. The corruption 
comes when you want to take value but give nothing in return, or give less in 
return that's the cheating part, isn't it? 
 
I want all your goats I'm going to give you this cow. What I'm not telling you is 
this cow is sick. That cow will die, you cannot eat it or drink its milk and a week 
from now it will be dead and buried. That's cheating isn’t it? Am I giving you 
anything of value?  
 
That's the corruption. It has nothing to do with money. It has to do with a mindset 
that says I want to take and not give in return. Does that make sense? 
 
If you stick to the mindset that says, that's of value to me and I'm prepared to give 
massive value in return, it's just a question of fair exchange isn't it? If you don't 
value it enough, you don't have to have it. 
 
My prize goat is the most beautiful goat in the world. You don't care. All you 
want is to eat some meat. How handsome the goat is makes no importance to you 
whatsoever. Of course, the next person might say I want a handsome goat I want 
people to admire the beauty of my goat. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               378                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
You will not pay as much for that goat as the other person. Why? Because you 
don't value it, in the same way and you don't have to.  
 
This is the second thing you need to realize in terms of money. 
 
Value is a flexible standard. It depends on the people you are with and the context 
you are in. I would like to sell you this slightly used bottle of water for $100. Is 
anyone going to go for it? Why not? It's perfectly good water, gives you life. You 
don't value it that much do you?  
 
Exactly right. Put yourself in a desert. You've not been drinking for two days. If 
you don't get a drink of water in the next 20 hours, you will not make it. I'm there, 
and I have this, only $100. How quickly are you going to reach into your back 
pocket? 
 
Am I cheating you at this point? No. It's the only water there for miles. This is 
going to keep you alive. Is it worth $100? Easily. The value is not in the water, 
the value is in what it's doing at a specific moment in time and in a specific place.  
 
Does that make sense? 
 
That's why there are times, when something is worth more and times when the 
exact same thing is worth less. When you start thinking in terms of value, the 
whole money equation starts changing. 
 
Can you hold onto the idea that money corrupts? No, it doesn't corrupt anymore 
than doing favors for people or giving people love.  
 
Does love corrupt? Only if you take and don't give back; it's the attitude that 
corrupts. 
 
 
Do you want to know what the attitude is? It's very simple it's called scarcity.  
 
The attitude is there's not enough. Incidentally, that's what the current recession is 
about, right? There is not enough. I'm going to keep a hold of mine and not 
exchange. Value grows when it is exchanged. If I give you information, you 
have something more… The interesting thing is; you can do something with that 
to grow it, evolve it, shape it and give it back to me in a better form. 
 
If my neighbor gave me the idea in the first place, I would never get back the 
better idea in return. The thing about value is, the more you're exchanging it, the 
more valuable it tends to become. That's one reason why people say you have to 
speculate to accumulate.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               379                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
You give money and it circulates and comes back to you in some way. It's not 
necessarily a metaphysical thing it's just a physical mechanism. 
 
When you present value to the world, it can do something with it. It can grow and 
when it comes back to you, of course, it's going to come back to you in an 
elevated form. Sometimes you lose it. Sometimes you give someone an idea and 
they come back making more stupid that happens, right? 
 
 
You can give someone a goat, they feed it up, and six months from now it's this 
stomping strong hulk of a beast, and you're great. You can give someone else a 
goat. Six months from now if it's this emaciated meager little thing because it 
hasn't been looked after, that's the risk you take, isn't it? 
 
Your choice is what risks do you take? Who do you give your goat to so that 
when it comes back, it comes back better?  
 
The thing that allows people to be here is the idea that there's not enough in the 
world. It's ridiculous when you look in terms of value because value keeps 
growing. As long as you're looking for ways of offering value, it will keep 
growing. 
 
It's something that made America the wealthiest country in the world. Why? For 
two centuries, you constantly looked at; how can we offer more value to other 
people? That's part of your whole business culture isn't it? Rather than how can I 
take value, its how can I give it? When that recedes, that's when the wealth starts 
going away. 
 
The whole scarcity mentality and you can see this in larger corporations because 
the whole institution breeds scarcity - I'm fighting for one job with these 10 
people, I'm going for an interview against 100 people - there is not enough; that’s 
the mindset that's already there. 
 
I'm not saying that all corporations are evil, let's break them down, burn it down 
and raise the ground. I'm just trying to get you to understand where those 
mindsets can come from. It's inculcated in the culture, so only those people who 
have the mindset there's not enough and I'm going to make sure I get mine before 
they get theirs, if they're the ones rising to the top that mindset is going to 
penetrate into all the things they're doing. 
 
That's one of the reasons I personally believe that the world needs entrepreneurs. 
Entrepreneurs flip that script upside down, don't they? They don't care what 
everyone else is doing they know there's plenty. They'll go, you guys go fight for 
that job. I'll sell you the taxi ride that's going to get you there, and I'll make sure 
you buy the suit from me and the shoes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               380                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Now, you sold 10 pairs of shoes, 10 suits and 10 taxi rides, whilst they're all still 
struggling for the one job only one might get. He's actually offering value. Does 
that make sense?  
 
Therefore, the lifeblood of a nation in terms of its wealth, in my opinion are the 
entrepreneurs, because they're the ones who are constantly re-generating value. 
That's the opinion you have, isn't it? When you think of it in terms of value, how 
easy is it to let go of this idea of scarcity that there's not enough?  
 
 Can you come up with something valuable, anyone? 
 
 Do you have anything that you know can do, that could be of value to 
somebody else?  
 
I'm not saying that it has to be valuable to everybody. Incidentally, would you like 
to know how to recession-proof yourself? How to make sure you never get 
screwed by a recession again, would you like to know that? 
 
It's very simple it comes down to value. The reason people think there's not 
enough money running around right now is because they're looking in the wrong 
places. Right now, there tends to be a bit of a fear culture being generated, right? 
There's fear because of the war, fear of terrorism, fear of banking, fear of collapse, 
fear, fear, fear. 
 
 What happens when people are afraid?  
 
The things they used to value are no longer valuable. Here's the thing; things they 
never used to value now are.  
 
I grew up in the 1980's, this is of course, the era where everyone thought that any 
day now someone was going to drop a nuclear bomb on our heads and that's it it’s 
over. I don't know if you watched those TV programs and got scared witless, I 
did.  
 
Buying a radioactive proof bunker seemed like a great idea at the time. Does 
anyone want a radioactive proof bunker with 50 years supply food and water 
stuffed inside? You might want one just for the hell of it right? They're cheap 
enough now. Why are they cheap enough now? It's because we don't value that 
enough now, the threat has gone so the value has gone. Therefore, we're not going 
to pay $50,000-$100,000 for something that we don't care about. 
 
This is what happens in a recession. It's not that there's no more money left, it's 
that people's attention shifts. Things that used to be valuable no longer are. People 
don't think anymore about oh, that's a lovely bracelet, that holiday or whatever; 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               381                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
they don't value that anymore. Why, because they're afraid. They sure will value 
those things that'll make their fear go away, won't they? 
 
 Do you know what the one industry is that is counter recession?  
 
In other words, the worse the recession is the better this industry does? 
 
Audience: 
Pharmaceuticals? 
 
Igor: 
I hadn't even thought of that one, but that's probably true. 
 
The entertainment industry. You're familiar with the golden age of cinema, 
Hollywood? Hollywood was built off the back of the Great Depression. Think 
about it; everyone is running around afraid. Everyone is terrified from day to day, 
they have no money and things are getting worse. Every morning they get up and 
that happens. 
 
You can pay $.10, go see a movie and at least forget about it for a while. Your 
pain is taken away for a moment. That's why the movie industry did so well. Does 
that make sense? 
 
Incidentally, the golden age of stage hypnosis was the same sort of time. This year 
Hollywood exceeded all of its budgets, whatever it is; its revenues are higher than 
at any other time in history- coincidence. 
 
If we start looking at the world in terms of how much value is there. How can I 
contribute more value to the world, you begin to see that in terms of 
entrepreneurial spirit it suddenly becomes easy, doesn't it?  
 
You're not looking at how can I force people to give me money, which is really 
just taking advantage, it's the win lose scenario here, maybe even part of the guilt 
scenario there. It's about how can I enhance the world? Who wouldn't want that? 
When you present someone with something of value, of course, it's only fair that 
they give something valuable in return. It's an exchange, isn't it? 
 
Sometimes sure, you'll do people favors out of friendship and you don't expect 
anything in return, but in a way you kind of do, don't you? You don't want 
anything back right now, and if they go away and never do anything again that's 
fine, but you do it a second time, a third time and a fourth time, eventually you get 
fed up. 
 
It's like; what's going on here? Its give- give- give- but where is anything for me? 
I’m not suggesting that you can't be generous, but in the back of our minds, we're 
always looking for an exchange. This means it's ridiculous for you to give 
something away and not expect something back. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               382                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Once is fine, twice is fine, but if you're doing it over and over again you're 
violating the rules of your own society, the things you've been brought up to 
respect, aren't you? 
 
Has anyone ever given you a gift or done an important favor for you? When that 
person did a favor for you, did you just say oh that's great, and walk off and forget 
about it? Do you get a sense or feeling that you have to give them something 
back?  
 
You're in their debt somehow and until you do something nice for them, until you 
show them somehow symbolically how much you value what they did for you, 
you don't feel quite right do you? It may be that you bring them an old bottle of 
whiskey. It might be that you invite them out for a meal. It might be that you take 
them out for a show. 
 
It's not that you're going to reach in your pocket and give them cash, but you are 
showing them symbolically how much you value what it is that they've done for 
you, don't you? 
 
Only once you have done that do you feel like the relationship is back in balance, 
don’t you? Has anyone here had trouble asking for money? Think of it this way, 
when you're doing something for someone else and you don't ask for something in 
return, you're making it hard for them to get back the balance point with you. 
 
They will feel in your debt and have no way of settling it. Do you want to do that 
to them? That's kind of mean, isn't it? Of course, the other side is possible, which 
is you de-value what you do which means they don't even know how to value it 
it's nothing. 
 
If I gave you a tissue and that was it, you'd say oh, whatever. Do you feel 
particularly in my debt at that point? I have a lot of tissues. Unless you're 
sneezing, in which case that's another story, right? 
 
If I just gave you a bit of paper, it means nothing to you unless it has value. If I 
was about to give you an idea that will make you a million dollars and I'm going 
to give you a pen and paper so you can write it down and keep it, is that paper 
more valuable now?  
 
Is it worth paying $10 for that piece of paper, which otherwise you wouldn't even 
look at twice? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               383                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
We go back to the idea of value as a question of context, not just a question of the 
item. You are a part of that context. Whatever it is you're offering, if you don't 
know the value of what you're offering, don't offer it. 
 
More importantly, if you cannot make them see the value of what you're offering, 
how can you ever expect them to pay for it? You see, in terms of sales and so on, 
you're not selling; you are demonstrating the value of what you have to offer and 
that's it. 
 
 Has this session so far been valuable to you?  
 
 
Don't worry I'm not asking for any money, but knowing what you know now, 
would you have paid $10 to be here if it was a question of a man said hey, would 
you pay $10 to come back and learn this? Would you pay $10? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Who would pay $50 for this? Who would pay $100 for what they've heard? Who 
would pay $500 for what they've heard? Maybe- so far- just for what you've been 
learning so far. Who would pay $1,000 for this? 
 
Do you see how we have a sliding scale going on here? Let me put it the other 
way now. If I showed you the secret of adding at least another zero at the end of 
whatever you're currently earning, who would pay me $10 for that? 
 
That's a little bit easier, isn't it? Who would pay me $100 for that? One thousand 
dollars? Ten thousand dollars? I know your income just by your hands by the way 
now.  
 
This is important. What we're doing right now is actually both those offers I made 
you, they sound different don't they? It's actually the same offer, but why did 
more of you put your hands up for the second round and not the first one? You 
could not see the value for yourself beforehand, until I showed it to you. 
 
Think about it; just knowing that one little thing about value doesn’t knowing that 
one thing, about value something that if you address that to your business right 
now can actually help you put a zero at the end of what you're currently earning 
and transform it? 
 
In terms of your sales, I guarantee anyone who has had okay sales that you can 
double if not triple your sales overnight just by doing what you saw me do there. 
That's it. If you do that for a year, how much more, will you be earning? Double, 
triple, four times even five times, as you get better at it? Do you see where we're 
going with this? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               384                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Part of your job is not to figure out ways of taking money from other people, your 
job is two-fold. 
 
1. Number one, can you offer something valuable?  
 
2. Number two; can you demonstrate the value so effectively that they 
recognize it's just as valuable as you realize it is? 
 
That's it, that's the secret to making money. Keeping it is another story. Is this 
making sense to you? 
 
 
I'd like to look a little about the scarcity mindset.  
 
 
 Why is it that people don't think there's enough?  
 Why is it a question of luck?  
 Why is it a question of corrupting?  
 Why is it a question when you take someone's money, the other person is 
losing or when you give money you're the one that's losing? 
 
What it comes down to ultimately it goes back again, to your blueprint there is not 
enough. 
 
My grandmother was in World War II, she was that generation. For her it's a 
massive scarcity mentality. She'd be quite happy to cook a meal with meat that 
was slightly off, but it made sense. 
 
In the middle of a war when there is not enough to eat you eat the meat that's 
slightly rancid, you just spice it up a little bit. That's by the way where most 
national dishes come from, isn't it? Pizza, chili, all these other things; it's trying to 
not waste food because there was not enough. 
 
We live in a time now where there's more than enough, especially food. I mean 
you've seen this - $3.99 for a whole burger meal. In fact, there's way too much 
food now if anything, right? 
 
But, because she was in that time period and it just impregnated in her 
consciousness, logically she can see there's more than enough but emotionally she 
cannot. She was stuck in a scarcity mindset. 
 
There's a problem with a scarcity mindset. The problem is, when we're looking at 
things in terms of value, if you offer value you get value in return, so you 
accumulate by speculating. You give something.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               385                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Those of you who have been here for the last week or two, you've paid to be here. 
You've paid me in terms of the course. You've paid the venue in terms of the 
accommodations and you've paid the flight company to get you here. 
 
I presume nobody actually walked down? You valued all these things and in 
return, you're getting something that you value hopefully, yes? Was that a 
valuable exchange, worthwhile? I should hope so otherwise I'm doing something 
very bad in terms of what we're offering. 
 
Consider this, consider you are stuck in such a scarcity mindset, you are so 
dominated by fear you thought whatever I have, I must hold onto. You're in your 
little silo, your bunker under the ground, waiting for the nuclear fallout to 
disappear for the next 150 years. 
 
You have your water. You have your cookies. You have your videotapes of 
whatever you like to watch and you're not coming out. What's happening to value 
now? Whatever you have will continue to diminish because you're not interacting 
anymore, are you? You're not building anything. It will continue to diminish until 
you run out. 
 
Value only gets created in an exchange. Does that make sense? I'm exaggerating a 
little bit, you could have your little private vegetable patch and you exchange with 
the ground.  
 
By the way, that's where the attitude comes from that you've got to work hard to 
make money, because plowing your own field, sticking seeds in the ground, 
watering it every day and milking the cow, that's hard work. 
 
That's where the idea of time is money comes from because there's only so much 
time in the day, only so much energy that you can put into it. If all you're doing is 
putting it in the ground hoping the ground will give you something back, just 
enough to live - no wonder you're stuck in a loop.  
 
Does that make sense? 
 
The value of living in the modern society as far as I'm concerned is, is that you 
can exchange value. You have mega corp out there plowing the fields for you. 
You even have your micro-farmers who love sticking their fingers in the dirt, 
figuring out the grubs and microbes that will make better carrots without pumping 
extra hormones into them. 
 
They enjoy that, its part of what they value, which means you can exchange 
whatever they value - their time - for whatever you're doing. Notice how value 
only grows with exchange; otherwise, it’s a question of, you've got to work hard, 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               386                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
you have limited resources and it's only a matter of how much time you can put 
into it. 
 
If you want to be filthy rich, happily so, ethically so, as far as I can tell the only 
way you could possibly get there is to make an exchange, an exchange of value 
with other people. Does that make sense? 
 
It starts inside yourself, in other words you decide what can I offer that is of value 
to you? You can do a trade. You can do a barter. You can purchase. You can sell. 
They're all the same thing, aren't they?  
 
It's all in the mindset. With scarcity, scarcity makes everybody poorer. In scarcity, 
you're so afraid that you hold onto your own. You're in your little silo and you're 
saying I'm not sharing. Of course, by not sharing, how can they grow? The only 
way it can grow is if you stick it in the ground and work hard to make it grow.  
 
Then you get into a cycle of I'm not sharing because it's still not enough, I work 
hard for this. Do you see how the cycle continues? That's why recessions are so 
dangerous, because everyone is sitting there so afraid, saying I'm not sharing, and 
all the value that's been created starts deflating. 
 
The other side is true also. If people start going nuts and over valuing things, 
because they've come down to this idea of corruption or greed - in other words if I 
buy this house and flip it I'll make so much more, and I'll do it again and again, I'll 
be a billionaire and I'll be really happy and rich. 
 
 What have they missed?  
 Where is the value they're adding?  
 What they're thinking about is the cash.  
 
That's where the dot com boom came from. I was sitting there, actually doing the 
IPOs for the dot com companies. I was looking through a business plan, I had no 
business experience and I'm thinking these guys are nuts. How the hell do they 
expect to make anything back? 
 
These people are cowboys they have no idea what they're doing. The business 
plan is just pie in the sky and yet everyone was buying it. Why? They weren't 
looking at value, what they were looking at is if I buy this, some other idiot will 
buy this off me for more and I'll be richer. 
 
As far as I'm concerned, to a great extent, the people who lost money in that kind 
of deserved it, because they weren't looking at what they were actually doing. 
They were jumping on a bandwagon, and jumping on a bandwagon is never a 
good idea. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               387                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
When you evaluate something don't go with the scarcity model, but don't fall into 
the greed model either, because both ways you get burned. Does that make sense? 
 
The place where you are solid, the place where you can really make a difference 
in other people's lives but more importantly in your own and in your family's - I 
mean who doesn't want their family to be wealthy and be able to afford all the 
things they want to do? That's where the power and freedom side comes from. 
 
If you want that, then stay right in the middle of the whole thing. Offer value take 
value in a fair exchange. That seems fair, doesn't it? 
 
Has anyone been conned by someone in a con trick, anyone? They're 
sophisticated aren't they, these folks? Do you know what the fundamental 
principle behind every con trick is, and the one thing they need without which you 
can never be conned? Do you know what that is?  
 
Audience: 
Greed. 
 
Igor: 
A con man essentially offers you something for nothing and gets you so excited 
about getting that, that you end up giving something for nothing instead. That's 
what a con trick works on. If you stay in the middle, if you look for the value 
you're getting and are willing to exchange value of your own in return, you cannot 
be conned. 
 
It cannot happen unless you get carried away and you let a little bit of greed slip 
in, and you want to take value without getting anything in return. At that point, 
you're wide open, and personally, you might even have deserved that as a lesson. 
Just take another risk and say you know what? That was my bad. 
 
The same is true of scarcity. People who are stuck in scarcity, who don't want to 
exchange and are too afraid to exchange, those people are locked in inhibition and 
may end up losing things because they're not letting things grow, they're not 
circulating things. Does that make sense? 
 
Is this valuable so far? 
 
Let's start addressing some of these questions. Why people won't allow 
themselves to make money. Let's just address some of these ideas based on just 
what we did today. 
 
1. The idea of number one, can you offer value?  
 
2. Number two, can you take value in return?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               388                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Would that be worth doing? If someone says I don't deserve money, where the 
hell does that come from? If you think in terms of value exchange, can you 
possibly think this? Who here does not deserve to have friends? I agree, get out. 
 
Who does not deserve to have other people respect them? Who does not deserve 
the right to be able to do something kind for a friend, and at some point expect 
them to do something kind back? 
 
I'm not saying insist on it, but expect that it's going to equal out at some point 
over the relationship. Is that fair?  
 
In terms of deserving, can this still possibly exist when all that you're doing is 
offering something valuable and if the other person happens to find that thing 
valuable at that point in time, at that moment, at the kind of value level you think 
its worth, you have a fair exchange don't you? Does deserving even come into it? 
It can't, can it? Have we busted one myth? 
 
Working hard– that one is dead isn't it? Let's look at working hard. 
 
If you're offering people value and they give you something of value in return; do 
you have to work hard to do things that are valuable? Sometimes yes sometimes 
no, right? You can offer someone something of great value to them that you don't 
have to work hard for at all, can't you?  
 
Let's say that someone is going for their dream job and you know the one thing 
they need to know to set them above everyone else so they can get to that 
interview. As far as you're concerned, its two sentences that you have to give 
them, write it down, and if they know this that's it; they are virtually guaranteed 
this job.  
 
Is that hard work for you? Is that valuable for them? 
 
Of course, if you're plowing the ground with your own fingers and you're 
breaking your own back, as long as you enjoy it that's fine, but that's hard work, 
isn't it?  
 
Can you work hard to make money? Yes.  
 
Do you have to work hard to make money? No, not if you're thinking of this in 
terms of offering value. 
 
Money corrupts–  
 
 If you think in terms of value exchange, can you be corrupted by that?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               389                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 If you're thinking about it in terms of greed and taking as much value as 
possible without giving anything in return, can you be corrupted by this? 
 
 If you think in terms of scarcity, there's not enough I better get mine whilst 
I can, is that corrupt? 
 
 If you're thinking quite firm in terms of what value, can I give and what is 
that value I receive in return, could you possibly be corrupted by that? 
That's not very convinced is it? 
 
Audience: 
No, in fact based on what you're saying here it's exactly the other way around. 
The more money you have is a demonstration of how much value you've given to 
the world. 
 
Igor: 
That's exactly how I see it. I realize there are people out there who are corrupted, 
who look at money in a different way. They've got some weird attitudes toward it. 
 
As far as I'm concerned the richer I become the more good I've done in the world, 
and that's how we like to run our business. Hopefully, you agree, in terms of what 
you've gotten from us so far. As far as I'm concerned, this one dies before it even 
gets a start. Would that be fair? 
 
If you're hesitating, it's purely because you're thinking of other people who might 
themselves be corrupt, in terms of playing the greed model, but you can tell that, 
can't you? They push too hard and they don't actually demonstrate the value or 
they don't actually follow through on their value.  
 
Therefore, the question is not what you see in others, the question is what do you 
do inside yourself? Can you offer value and get value in return? In which case, 
you protect yourself from being corrupted. That helps with the whole guilt thing 
as well, doesn't it? 
 
Do you feel guilty if you're giving someone something they value and they give 
you something in return? Can you feel guilty about that? Of course, if you're just 
taking something, that's very different isn't it that goes back to the greed model, 
doesn't it? 
 
 
he win/lose model; if I ask you for money I'm taking something out of your 
pocket, it disappears you don't have it anymore. Is that possibly true? No, because 
what's happening is I'm giving you something of value in return. 
 
My ambition, my job is to make you win more. In return the money that I get, I 
can use to get things I need to win more, and that's how it travels through.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               390                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 Can you possibly be stuck in a win/lose model, if you think of it in 
terms of value? 
 
In terms of being taken advantage of, that can happen anytime can't it?  
 
 Whether you're wealthy or not, can people take advantage of you?  
 Can people ask you for more favors than you want to give?  
 Can people use you as a doormat?  
 Can people abuse you emotionally, physically or intellectually? 
 
Has money anything to do with that? If they're going to abuse you, it's going to 
happen one way or another anyway, so it’s not a question of having people take 
advantage of you, it's a question of realizing that people take advantage of people 
anyway. 
 
Those problems will be there whether you like it or not. Was there a question up 
here? 
 
Audience: 
I was just going to say oftentimes it seems like those with less money are more 
taken advantage of. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. Isn't that fair to say? Now, you don't have the bargaining power, because 
all people think of in our society is money, as the thing of value, but real value 
exists everywhere money is just a symbol of it. 
 
In terms of power and freedom, can you have more power with money? Sure. Can 
you have more freedom with money? Sure. If you think about it in terms of value, 
its value that gets the freedom. You value something. I value the freedom of being 
on your boat, of eating your food or whatever it is, so I'll exchange it.  
 
Do I have to give you money for that? No. It's simpler, it's easier, but I can do all 
kinds of things. I can do hypnotherapy with you, is that valuable? I can teach you 
hypnosis, is that valuable? I can show you some cool party tricks, is that valuable? 
Maybe not. 
 
 
The point is, you can have as much power and freedom as you want when you 
start thinking about what can I give you in return? What is the value I give you? 
 
Even if you don't feel empowered right now or any particular freedom right now, 
if you think of it in terms of what can I offer you that you currently have, it 
doesn't have to be cash; you can still get that what have you got left– time and 
money– that's dead, isn't it? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               391                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Things have to be perfect. How many of you have been through the Advanced 
Covert Hypnosis course? If we never got that videotape out because it would 
never be perfect, would you be happy? 
 
If I offered you to have a rough cut right now - I won't by the way, just wondering 
- if I was going to offer you the rough cut and the alternative was you never get a 
videotape of that at all, ever, because it's never going to be perfect, which would 
you rather have; nothing or the rough cut? 
 
Is it fair to say that perfect has nothing to do with value, nothing to do with 
money? You can improve things absolutely, but if you're trying to be too perfect, 
you are taking away value, aren't you? 
 
Do you see how this dream happens? That's why you exchange value. The more 
you give the more you receive. It's all about value it's nothing to do with money.  
 
Money is just a symbol of that, does that make sense? 
 
 
DVD #2 
 
Igor: 
Would you like for me to show you the kinds of ways that I think about it, in 
terms of when I present something, the structures I like to use in order to first, be 
able to give people a good experience but secondly to be able to demonstrate the 
actual value of what it is, information or the skills that we have to offer?  
 
Would that be of use? 
 
This is the group Covert Hypnosis part of what we’re doing. When we go into 
what we’re going to be doing today, I want you to keep this idea of value in the 
back of your minds, because that’s really, what’s driving everything that we’re 
doing. 
 
We use this example a lot because it’s a natural example.  
 
How many of  you have tried to give someone advice at some point and had it 
thrown right back in your face? 
 
You know the advice is good don’t you? It could work if that person were to 
actually follow it in the spirit with which it was intended, and yet it’s being 
rejected. One of the reasons for that is because their mind has nothing to do with 
it; it doesn’t know how to interact with it. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               392                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Would you like to see a simple process that will allow you to format 
someone’s unconscious mind, in other words, prepare it so by the time you 
actually come up with the advice or ideas that it has somewhere to fit?  
 
Wouldn’t that be useful? 
 
Here’s what we’ve got. As with most things we like to do we’ll start simple and 
make it a little more complex.  
 
Who’s heard of the four-mat system? 
 
A couple of you. Whenever I present anything, whether it’s a 10-minute skit or a 
21-day course like I’ve been doing, that is always in the front of my mind.  
 
That is the structure that everything I do goes through, but it’s not mine it’s called 
the four-mat system because there are four questions and it actually comes from a 
school teacher in the US somewhere, who noticed in her classroom that there 
were different types of children with different needs in regards to learning. 
 
Of course, when you’re providing information whether it’s a sales process, 
teaching, education, advice giving, you’re still transferring information across. 
Therefore, we need to make sure it fits in a way that a group can actually accept.  
 
There are four types of people, all of whom have certain preferences– 
 
The ‘why’ people need motivation. 
 
They need to know why they should be interested in something; otherwise, they 
lose interest, get bored and move on. Once they know why this is important to 
them that’s it they’re there, they’re happy and they’ll start looking for other things 
inside of that information. 
 
But if they never get a ‘why’ they’re wondering what the heck they’re doing 
there. Have you ever been at a seminar or some type of situation, and wondering 
what you’re doing there, what’s going on or why is this happening? 
 
That’s one of the reasons we start with the ‘why’ and we’ll show you a lot of 
things we can do with this to actually prepare the unconscious mind to accept 
your ideas. Wouldn’t that be something? Well, we’re not there yet. Although, it 
does seem as though Jurassic Park is around the corner. 
 
If you can deal with the dread, you know it’s coming closer, watch the shaking, 
do you see the glass it’s starting to shake… 
 
[Laughter] 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               393                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
The more you hear that the more wonderful this lecture will become. 
 
The ‘what’ people are those that are interested in data, facts and information. 
 
That’s when you actually do what most of us think of doing when we talk about 
giving some type of presentation. We give information, details and facts. This is 
the intellectual process right here.  
 
The ‘how’ people, what they like is to roll their sleeves up and have some kind of 
a practical experience, or whatever it is you’re talking about, in action.  
 
Does that make sense? 
 
They want to have a demonstration and actually do something. They want to feel 
something, to be hands on and do it, something practical.  
 
The ‘what if’ people are those who, once the information has been presented, 
need to make connections to it by projecting. 
 
There are two types of what-if people.  
 
There are the negative ‘what ifs’, which is what if it fails. What if it goes wrong 
here or there and expect those, then you can handle it its simple. 
 
The others are the positive ‘what ifs’, which is a little of what I am which is can 
you use it here or there?  
 
Can you use it here or there? What about if you do this bit here and this bit there? 
It starts adding more connections. Of course, you can add some ‘what ifs’ of your 
own. Build future memories so when people hear you speaking about whatever it 
is you’re presenting, they actually start thinking oh, I can use this in so many 
more places then I originally thought. 
 
So, this is a rough structure in terms of how we create the process. Would you like 
me to break this down to give you more detail, in terms of how to use this as a 
practical tool? Would that be useful? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
What did I just do? 
 
Do you see the ‘why’? I’m asking for you to notice some value. I’m getting some 
feedback, in terms of you committing and investing in it, so when I come up with 
‘the what’, it fits somewhere. It’s a very simple thing you can do that way isn’t it?  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               394                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Excellent! So, before we get to the ‘why’, if I just stand on stage, you haven’t 
seen me before I come up and say, so why are you all here; that’s a dramatic way 
to start? It can actually work, but if you don’t have a more traditional style, pace 
where the people are, the traditional way is to give them a little bit of what? 
 
Why are we here? What is the topic we’re here for? We’re here to figure out how 
to make a lot of money, whilst hypnotizing a lot of people. Ethics may be a 
problem here. You might do your introduction at that point.  
 
Give people a set of expectations of what’s going to come, but only a small 
amount. Why? Because, you don’t want their conscious mind overly engaging on 
a conclusion before you present them with an experience. 
 
Has everyone heard the term ‘premature cognitive commitment’? 
 
It is this, imagine you have a jar full of flies and you cover the jar of flies with 
plastic wrap, poke a few holes in it so they can breathe and don’t die, but they 
can’t get out either. What do flies do then? They buzz around. They’ll find where 
the edges are, they’ll walk up and down the glass and across the thing a little bit.  
 
The interesting thing that happens is, after a period, and it depends on what kind 
of fly you have, the flies stop bumping against the ceiling. They’ll fly around 
inside the jar, but they won’t bump against the ceiling anymore.  
 
If you now remove the cellophane, those flies will stay inside the jar. They’ve 
created a mental map of their environment, so as far as they’re concerned there’s 
a force field they can’t get past, so they won’t even try anymore. 
 
This is what happens when people reject ideas. They have, through experiences in 
life, thoughts they’ve had or false conclusions they’ve come to, they’ve made a 
decision that says here be dragons, you can’t go there, you can’t do this; this can’t 
work. 
 
Therefore, if you present your information too soon, they may jump up and be 
like the flies in the jar that says I can’t get out of here so this can’t work. Imagine 
if one of those flies was a person and he said hey, if you keep flying straight up, 
eventually you’ll be out in the countrywide where you’ll see beautiful flowers, 
etc. 
 
And, the flies go oh, no I’ve tried that and failed. That’s how advice giving works 
doesn’t it? One of the things we want to do and this is right at the beginning.  
 
Once you’ve done the general introduction just so the people have a sense of what 
they’re here for, you want to start your frames and expectations in such a way, 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               395                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
that they can hold off on their conclusion until there’s something there worth 
concluding on. Does that make sense? 
 
Who here has seen me present a seminar before? 
 
Isn’t that where we start either, overtly actually saying, just relax a little bit, don’t 
worry about it, have the experiences first and make up your mind afterwards and 
sometimes a little more covert about the whole thing. 
 
Either way, I want you to delay your responses until you have something worth 
responding to.  
 
The first thing is that we need to take care of the intellect, so let’s look at the 
‘why’ in a little bit more detail shall we? We want to take care of the conscious 
mind. We want to give it some reasons for being in the room.  
 
Who here would like to make more money? 
 
Who here would like to speak to larger groups of people and make money more 
easily that way? 
 
Would it be useful for you to have a simple process that you can follow any time 
you speak or present that makes it easy for you to be more influential, would that 
be useful? 
 
What have I just done? I’ve given you logical reasons for being interested in the 
material. I haven’t told you how that’s going to happen yet have I? I haven’t fit 
the pieces together yet have I? If, when I sit back and start talking about elephant 
taming, what thoughts are going to go through your mind? 
 
You have to start thinking, how is this relevant to making money? But already, 
your mind is looking for the connection because I’ve set the context up ahead of 
time, does that make sense?  
 
So first, we have a conscious why, which is giving them a reason to be there, just 
tell them the logical reasons. Here’s why you might be interested in this, like for 
example, the stage hypnosis training we have. When we open that up I’ll probably 
start along the lines of…here are a couple reasons you might not have thought 
about for being here. 
 
Who here is a hypnotherapist? What if you could sell your practice more easily? 
What if you could fill it out in just one night, wouldn’t that be something 
worthwhile? Who here is a professional presenter? What if you could actually 
mesmerize a crowd with what you do? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               396                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Who here would like to have more kudos at a party and be the life and soul? What 
if you understood people well enough that you can draw a crowd and then provide 
whatever that crowd is looking for, entertain them, please them and have fun at 
the same time, wouldn’t that be something worthwhile? 
 
So, whether or not you want to be a stage hypnotist professionally, you’re in the 
right place aren’t you?  
 
Do you see what I just did? I’m giving your conscious mind logical reasons, 
usually more than it’s thought of itself, to be here. Why would I want to give you 
more reasons to be here then you thought of yourself, any ideas? It’s partly in 
terms of value, but there’s a bigger reason.  
 
Tim: 
It has you processing things in a different way. 
 
Igor: 
It opens your mind up. Remember, what we do not want is premature cognitive 
commitment, correct. If right from the get go I remind you, or give you reasons 
for being here that you may not have considered yet, what does that do to your 
program that says I know this all? It puts it on hold. 
 
It’s like, hang on a second this isn’t in the program what’s going on here. Does 
that make sense? 
 
We’re doing two things here we’re getting yeses, so we have a yes set. We’re 
showing the logic and reasons for being here, and of course, part of that logic is 
presenting value for what it’s about to learn. For those of you that have the yes 
stick its perfect for that, because it has value, logic and reason built into one 
simple set of routines. 
 
It’s not difficult is it, in terms of what you’ve seen here already, you can copy that 
easily enough can’t you? So that’s the conscious side of things, but we’re here as 
hypnotists aren’t we? We’re less interested in the conscious mind as in the 
unconscious mind, because that’s where the reality gets shaped and transformed, 
so part of the why has to have an unconscious element. 
 
We like to call this formatting the unconscious, like you format your hard drive or 
disc so it can hold information? When I say formatting the unconscious what 
we’re doing is preparing certain structures that go into the unconscious mind, so 
when they recognize him again later on, in terms of what you’re teaching they say 
oh, yes I recognize this. 
 
Who here has been on my conversational hypnotherapy training? Do you 
recognize this? In a moment, we’ll do a little technique. Just think of those times 
when you’re conflicted, you want one thing and then the other and you know 
they’re pulling in different directions, so if only you could pull together… 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               397                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
For those of you who aren’t familiar with this, what I’ve just done is, we’re 
talking about a hypnotic technique called ‘integration’ where people have a 
conflict and will literally, use a hand to bring the conflict together and 
hypnotically integrate it so a person has resolved the inner conflict. 
 
Who here has ever had an internal conflict about something? 
 
So, it’s useful to take those conflicts, resolve them, internalize it so it’s resolved, 
which gives you more energy going in one direction. Notice what I’ve done, I’ve 
created a physical demonstration of what the other person is about to do. 
 
That is one example of how to format the unconscious mind. Here’s another 
example.  
 
Is anyone here familiar with the idea of ‘power words’? 
 
Hypnotic language, the hypnotic blitz, etc. are you talking to the conscious mind 
or unconscious mind with power words? The unconscious mind right, so now that 
you’ve given the conscious mind a reason for being here, how about giving the 
unconscious mind reasons, using the simple blitz? 
 
The more you think about the things that you weren’t considering before you 
came here today, the more you can be comfortable about learning something new. 
In those new things, that gives you the experience and talents you will require to 
be successful in life and who doesn’t want to be successful? 
 
So, to the extent that you acquire something new here, you’ll be able to go out 
there and use it in such a way that you will succeed in a much larger fashion then 
you’ve ever done before.  
 
Would you like to find out how? 
 
Do we have a solid why here? Does the conscious mind have reasons? Does 
anyone here have any idea what I just offered you a moment ago when I did my 
unconscious spiel, anyone? Success is about as good as you can get isn’t it? I said 
a lot of words, but consciously there’s no way to hang onto them, and yet, who 
here felt positive about the whole thing, like yeah I like what he’s got to offer, I 
want that. 
 
You don’t even know what it is. Of course, I’m not talking to your conscious 
mind at that point I’m talking to your unconscious, which is where the feelings 
are kept, where you make decisions, etc. There’s one more thing I’d like to do 
regarding the unconscious formatting, which you might appreciate and enjoy. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               398                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Who here is familiar with hypnotic stories? 
 
What do they do?  
Do they not format the unconscious mind? 
 
In the next session, we’ll talk a little about frame control and using stories for that 
sort of thing, but as an overall concept, if you start using your stories as part of the 
process, don’t you think you’ll have a much higher level of engagement from 
someone before you even begin with the information. 
 
You can tell stories for example, who here does weight loss sessions? Who here 
does stop smoking sessions? Who here does something completely different? 
Who knows! 
 
If you start telling stories of a client that had a successful outcome in whatever 
you do, how does that prepare the group in front of you, in terms of how they 
should respond? What if you told stories about people that acted in the way that’s 
useful in terms of the seminar and the way it runs through? 
 
Has anyone here ever presented a particular topic where you get the same 
reactions over and over, but they’re not good ones? So you know it’ll come pretty 
much. You know the particular topic you’re talking about is likely to spark off 
some issues, but what if you told a couple stories that prevented those issues from 
arising in the first place, about people who thought they had the issues but found 
out they were wrong. 
 
Maybe its people that never responded that way in the first place, because they 
were right straight off the bat. You don’t think that might begin to create a pattern 
inside someone’s mind, so when the information actually comes officially they 
say oh, how do I react? I’ll go positive. 
 
Do you see how we’re tipping things in our favor? This won’t always take care of 
everything, there’ll always be a risk that something doesn’t quite go right this way 
or the other, but we’re talking about group covert hypnosis now, so we’re using 
group dynamics, so instead of having half the group jump up and shout ‘no that 
can’t be so’. 
 
What if most of the group is sitting there saying yeah, this is pretty reasonable but 
that one person in the back goes no, this can’t be so, is it me? One of the things 
you want to have control of is the group dynamic, the energy in the room. I don’t 
mean it as a metaphysical thing, but you recognize we’re all mammal’s right, we 
have a herd instinct. 
 
Therefore, as soon as more than two people are in the same room it kicks in. 
Social psychology has demonstrated this time and time again, so what we’re 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               399                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
talking about is using that dynamic to actually enhance the learning process, 
representation effect and so on. 
 
That takes care of the ‘why’ for now. Any questions? No, all right. 
 
 
What stage are we in right now? 
 
The ‘what’ stage that’s right and that’s what we’re going to talk about. The ‘what’ 
stage is all about the content, it’s about the message and it’s the whole purpose of 
why you’re even talking to this group. Even if you’re just influencing them, let’s 
say you’re doing a sales presentation for your company, you still have to provide 
information don’t you? 
 
I hope you realize a sales pitch is not standing in the front of the room with the 
board of directors going, please buy…until we say all right, we’re buying already 
just leave me alone.  
 
The ‘why’ section is primarily about the unconscious mind and the ‘what’ section 
is primarily about the conscious mind, although you can always imbed a few ideas 
for the unconscious mind to respond to. This is the easy part. It’s the part where 
you pick up a book, a Dummy’s guide or something and you read that out.  
 
You present the information you have, show them a skill you have and present 
whatever idea you have to give them, which is what most people think of when 
they talk about a sales pitch. However, it’s preceded by that formatting approach, 
because you begin to set the context in reference to which this makes a different 
kind of sense. 
 
Who knows what I mean by frame control? 
 
Let’s talk briefly about that, because it’s an important part of the why-what 
boundary. 
 
Imagine if you can, that you are driving a car and there’s a red set of stop lights. 
Now, you’re waiting patiently and a car comes tearing past you, an ambulance 
maybe, sirens blazing and it runs straight through the light. How do you feel about 
that event? Gliding on the back of it…it’s like yeah okay fine, that’s what 
ambulances do they have to get through. 
 
Let’s compare that, for example, to seconds afterwards in the wake of this 
ambulance, all the cars get out of the way and then a big red Ferrari goes running 
through. The guy driving is wearing his gold chain, and there’s a blonde with 
augmentations sitting next to him. He blazes through the red light and you’re still 
stopped, how do you feel about that? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               400                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
You’re not having the most positive feelings are coming through are they? Let’s 
see about that. As the ambulance is speeding off at the distance, the back doors 
kick open and you find it’s a bunch of students who stole the ambulance, they’re 
having a party in the back, getting drunk, laughing, maybe one is mooning you 
and throwing Vodka at your car. Are you quite as positive as before? 
 
What if I told you, that the man driving the Ferrari is racing to the hospital 
because his wife is pregnant, she’s fallen down some stairs and he’s trying to get 
her there in time to save the baby does that change the emotion a little? 
 
It’s the same event, what’s changed is your frame of reference. No information 
makes any sense whatsoever unless there is a frame of reference to compare it to.  
 
Human beings work by contrast, even eyesight. Do you know if you wear a 
contact lens with a spot over the pupil, within seconds that spot will vanish from 
your sights, because when you look at something your eyes keep tracking, moving 
from left to right in tiny movements, so when you have a spot which actually 
moves with your eyeball, your eye literally cannot see it. 
 
We are like the T-Rex. We can only spot movement or contrast, when everything 
else disappears. Therefore, a frame provides the contrast for the information 
you’re presenting so they know how to make sense of it, which is why this is so 
important because in here, we’re presenting a lot of the frames that will allow 
them to make sense of that.  
 
Then we have the how stage. This is simple enough but not necessarily easy to do. 
The how stage is to give people an actual experience. How can you give people an 
experience? You can do a demonstration can’t you? You can have a PowerPoint 
where they walk in through the plant you’re trying to sell. You might bring a 
sample they can play with. 
 
In terms of learning experiences, this is where the exercise comes in. In fact, 
anywhere we have an interaction going on, so people have some type of hands-on 
experience of the information, that’s what the how is. 
 
Incidentally, notice how you can weight these differently. For those of you who 
have trained with me before may notice that my ‘what’ is very light, my how is 
very heavy and we rely on the what-if to come to conclusions, do we not? That is 
what the ‘what if’ is about. 
 
In a different seminar, right now for example, we have more ‘what’ then ‘how’, 
so you can weight these things differently in accordance with what experience 
you need to give the people and what your priorities are at that time.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               401                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
I’m not suggesting that there’s a magic formula for the weighting, it’s just a 
question of what you need to be doing at what and time. 
 
The ‘what if’ is when people get to assimilate the information and start using it in 
their imagination. They start making connections to it. Typically, it’s about 
having a Q&A session. Does anyone here work with big companies doing 
corporate pitches? Isn’t this one of the most important parts for whatever 
presentation you do, the Q&A? 
 
It’s actually one of the easiest parts to do, although it’s one that most people are 
scared of. Because this is where the magic happens, this is where you know 
whether your ‘what’ has worked, even your ‘how’ has worked, and if it hasn’t 
worked then this is your opportunity to fix it. 
 
So if you want to do any reframe, like for those who have been in the Advanced 
Covert Hypnosis Training and Rapid Reframes, etc. that’s where it belongs. They 
may come up a little during the ‘how’ or ‘what’ section, but this is where it’ll 
come up, so this is where you’ll be ready to roll them out and pre-frame them. 
 
Now, of course, if you’re smart and you collect a bunch of problems that routinely 
come up, you handle them here and if you like I might show you how. Would you 
like that?  
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Not yet. 
 
The ‘what if’ section is also useful because if they aren’t asking question and 
answers, you can ask them. It has exactly the same effect, as long as you don’t 
answer those questions up front.  
 
Has anyone ever heard me actually ask the audience a question in the last 12 days 
or so? 
 
[Laughter] 
 
Audience:  Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Really, how did that happen? There’s nothing wrong with you answering the 
question, but what happens, when you ask a question and you wait expecting an 
answer whether or not the answer is irrelevant. The fact that they try and answer– 
can you see a theme here for those who have been through Advanced Covert 
Hypnosis– means you’ve engaged them differently. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               402                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Their brains are firing at a different rate so the information, when you give the 
answer can go somewhere different. Then, here you add the idea of a future 
memory. NLP people know this as future-pace, but you can create a memory of 
them actually using the experience sometime in the future, so it becomes part of 
their experience and expectations. 
So, as the whole process goes, you can elaborate on any presentation you have 
and when people start thinking about what do I say, think of it more in terms of 
structure. How do I prepare them to accept what I want to say? Once I’ve said it, 
how can I give them the experience of it? After that, how can I ensure that it stays 
at the level it needs to stay in? 
 
Are there any questions? Really! If I sent you out now could you use this straight 
away? Raise your hands 
 
We’ve got the idea now, and for those who have been through my other training, 
you have content you can put into this and we’ll go down that road a little bit as 
well, but for the moment, let’s just think of this in terms of what we have right 
here. 
 
Now, a couple nuances I want to bring out. If the ‘why’ is about the unconscious 
mind, where do your emotions sit, consciously or unconsciously? That’s fair isn’t 
it?  
 
So this is also the place where you want to inspire people, in terms of exciting 
them about what they can get, telling them stories about how things will be; you 
want their emotions engaged and that tells you they’re more in the program but at 
the same time, you’re making sure they’re not committing to anything other than 
the feeling, not the actually conclusion they’re coming to yet. 
 
In the ‘what’ section we’re concerned with logic and reason, but it doesn’t have to 
be pure reason. In 79% of cases, we find that people really believe people when 
they give a statistical number. This percentage is useful isn’t it?  
 
By the way, in case you’re wondering I made the number up, so do you notice 
how even within this framework, whilst it may seem logical most people think 
they’re thinking reasonably and logical, but there are a lot of logical fallacies and 
frames that escape our reasoning process.  
 
When you’re aware of those, you can fit them in here, which is what the master 
class and frame control is all about.  
 
When we get to the ‘how’ section, this is all about the experience. If the ‘why’ is 
about feeling and emotion get inspired, this is about actually getting your hands 
dirty and feeling the experience of it in action. What is it actually like?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               403                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Let’s say you’re doing a presentation in more of a corporate setting, for an audit 
company, you’re accountants so you want to audit the company’s books. How the 
hell do you give them a ‘how’?  
 
Projectors, charts, tell them a story, give them an experience…how would it feel 
to be working with us? On Monday, we’ll call you and do this. On Tuesday, just 
when this headache is coming up we’ll be there with the paperwork. On 
Wednesday, when the IRS is banging on your door, we’ll be there with our 
folders ready to beat them right back. 
 
They now have an experience of what it’s like to work with you, as a result, of 
which they’re getting a ‘how’? Are they actually having an sense of what it’s like 
to have whatever it is you’re offering?  
 
Scott: 
I think I’ve noticed you after doing the ‘why’ to get us all excited into a little bit 
of ‘what’, sometimes even before you start the ‘how’ you’ll juice it up with a little 
bit more ‘why’. And, I’ve certainly seen at the end of sessions before lunch, you 
give us a little ‘why’ to get us to come back.  
 
I’m curious if you can talk about those other times when you salt ‘why’ in 
through the other section? 
 
Igor: 
We’re giving you a basic structure here, ‘why’, ‘what’, ‘how’ and ‘what if’. What 
Scott’s noticed, because he’s been around for the last week or so, is that I don’t 
stick entirely to the format in a rigid sequence, I go ‘why’ ‘what’, a little bit of 
‘why’ ‘how’, a little bit more ‘why’ ‘what if’, ‘why’ more and so on. Does that 
make sense? 
 
Why do we break the format? It’s very simple. Remember the ‘why’ is all about 
inspiring the person and getting the unconscious mind on your side. Now, what if 
I said to you right now, please go out and do an exercise. We’ll go outside, go 
next door, you’re going to grab people in the seminar next door, and after 
slapping them for being too loud you’ll put them all in trance. Are you ready for 
this? Off you go. 
 
 
Incidentally, if you want to be really confident in doing that, that is where you’ll 
get stage hypnosis training, with that kind of confidence. However, in terms of 
where you are right now, how ready are you to do that this minute? 
 
Where is the problem? How many of you here are hypnotists? Would it be fair to 
say you know how to hypnotize people? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               404                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
So you have the skill don’t you? Why aren’t you willing to go straight in there 
and hypnotize some people, you know how to do it don’t you? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
What’s missing? Is it in your intellect? Is it in your skills? Is it in your 
experience? No. What’s missing is in your unconscious, there is no drive, no 
motivation, so why is about motivation, make sense?  
 
So before we don’t exercise, if I sense the group is a little ah, maybe there’s fear 
involved or lethargy, I need to give them a strong enough ‘why’, especially for the 
unconscious mind and that’s what I’m looking for. I need to see them get excited 
enough to be willing to do the exercise, because otherwise, all they’ll do is sit 
there and that’s it. 
 
That’s a great exercise isn’t it?  
 
So the ‘why’ gets sprinkled in as ways of elevating motivation, which helps with 
the whole compliance and getting people to do what you need them to do, etc. 
 
Mickey:  Is there a little bit of a nested loop in this, because I see you, as Scott said, going down 
and then putting it back together later. 
 
Igor: 
In terms of the nested loop…does everyone want to know what a nested loop 
is…it’s a cool hypnotic trick. You can do this with anything, although it’s usually 
done with stories but you can do it with any experience. Here’s the basic impact. 
How would you like to actually create a very simple process, you could do 
literally, the minute I stop talking?  
 
I won’t stop for a while though, something you could do literally the minute I stop 
talking, which would guarantee a couple things. 
 
When you present some information that gets sealed away at the unconscious 
level so the conscious mind can’t interfere with it. 
 
You can create a little amnesia so they forget about it enough, that it has a chance 
to influence them, before they reject it. 
 
Would that be something useful? A structure, which in its nature, becomes 
increasingly unconscious; hence, more hypnotic would you like that?  
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Or, shall we just have a break and play with our thumbs like this? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               405                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Let’s say I give you an experience. Let’s keep it simple with stories, although any 
experience will do. You can do different hypnotic processes, all kinds of stuff and 
you can get really complex with this. 
 
I tell a story but I don’t finish it. Before I finish it I tell you another story, I start 
that, maybe a third and even a fourth. Over here, I do whatever it is I mean to be 
doing, like the content, the ‘how’ or ‘what if’ and so on, then when it’s finished I 
take up where that story or experience left off. 
 
Then I go back to my third story and finish that off. I finish the loops backwards 
until I’m back at the beginning, where sometimes I will avoid one of these things. 
Here are a couple interesting things that happen. 
 
Who has heard of the primacy and recency effect? Essentially, your memory 
retains best, the first thing that it hurt and the last thing that it hurt. If the first and 
last things are the same thing, do you know what happens? It creates a seal, 
because you remember the beginning and the end, and what does the unconscious 
mind like to do? 
 
Connect things. So, if all you can remember is the start and the end of the story, 
then that’s the only thing that could have happened isn’t it? You might be aware 
that some that something happened in the middle, but if you have no access to 
it… 
 
How many people know that they dream at night? 
 
How many of you have had a dream that you know you’ve had, but you can’t 
actually remember? 
 
 
Isn’t that weird? You know you’ve had it right, and try now to get that dream 
back, you know it’s there it’s in your experience isn’t it? You’ve had that 
experience, but where the hell did it go? It went down here somewhere.  
 
Has anyone ever had a dream from which they woke up so cranky that it messed 
up your day and the worst thing is, you have no idea why; you don’t even know 
what the dream was, yet you go through the entire day cranky? This is why. It’s in 
here. 
 
Do you understand now the idea of nested loops? Of course, with each of the set 
of stories, you create extra layers of seals, so this one is behind three different 
layers. 
 
Mickey: 
Okay, so you’re saying not just with stories but with experiences too? 
 
Igor: 
For sure!  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               406                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Here’s more advanced covert stuff, because most hypnotists won’t realize you’re 
doing this, most hypnotists, think all you have to do is tell stories. Would you like 
a way to trick hypnotists who are looking out for stories to do this with to beat 
you with it, but they’ll never know you’ve done it when you have. 
 
Mickey: 
Hell yes! 
 
Igor: 
Each of these numbers is not a story but an experience. For example, I can start 
with a story, why not.  
 
What if this was a revivification induction?  
What if this was a conscious/unconscious dissociation process?  
What if the fourth one was some type of symbolic process, like a visualization?  
Then, in the middle of that, I’m doing some work. 
At the end, I come back to the same visualization. 
Then, on the way out, we’ll do a little conscious/unconscious re-association. 
Then we’ll do a bit of revivification and we end up telling the story. 
 
The only thing you know is that I just told a story and he does some trancey stuff. 
You can do the same thing, by the way, with any experience. You don’t even have 
to do anything overtly hypnotic. Let’s say that I start by playing a game, like 
walking around pointing at things.   
 
Let’s say that after that you sit down and do part of an exercise. What if after that, 
you told them a story but didn’t quite finish it? What if after that, you had another 
experience like, you have to make something or start writing someone a letter. 
They finish the letter and you go right back to some exercise. 
 
You still nested your loops. The effect is the same, only it can be more dramatic 
because you switched systems on them from being more physically oriented, to 
more intellectual, to more symbolic and so on. Does that make sense? 
 
Mickey: 
So it doesn’t have to be a story, it can be anything you don’t finish but can finish 
later? 
 
Igor: 
Anything…provided the experience can close into a loop… 
 
Do me a favor for a moment, turn around to the person next to you and look into 
their eyes would you? Just for a moment, block their attention, look into their 
eyes…now look back again…how comfortable was that for everyone? 
 
Go ahead and look back again to see what happens. Finish up. What did we just 
do? We did a little mini loop. The thing that happened in the middle, how 
comfortable is that? It gets sealed off, so all you remember is the exercise. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               407                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Now, that was one little layer right. If I had more exercises and other things along 
with that, you’ll probably even forget the fact that I gave you a suggestion. How 
comfortable was that? Even if it was a little uncomfortable, you go it was okay, 
the suggestion remains.  
 
Over a period of time, you will remember that exercise as being increasingly 
comfortable, purely based on the fact that you stopped analyzing it and the only 
idea left at the unconscious level is the idea of comfort, because I’ve sealed it off 
with all the other experiences. 
 
These are patterns, tendency’s right, there is no 100% in anything you do, but you 
can really stack a deck in your favor.  
 
Mickey: 
I just wanted to comment that that right there was worth the price of admission.  
 
Igor: 
You mean the price of zero you paid for this?  
 
Mickey: 
Do you know what I’ll be able to do with that, standing behind a bar? 
 
Igor: 
Oh, you can do all kinds of amazing things with this.  
 
Audience: 
So, just in terms of design, if it’s a presentation whatever, you pick out the key 
(x’s) you want in there and then design it out from there right? 
 
Igor: 
Seeing as we’re at this point already, we’re actually getting into some more 
advanced stuff here, but ‘what if’ your, ‘what if’ and your ‘why’ look exactly the 
same? 
 
Who here wants to be a hypnotist, a really good one? I’d like, for you to imagine 
something for a moment. I’d like you to imagine someone who you would think 
would be an amazing hypnotist doing the kinds of things you want to be doing. 
Just imagine that. Can you think about what they would look like, how they 
would move or how they would talk? 
 
Can you do that right now? Think about a great hypnotist hypnotizing and allow 
that person’s face to change so that it looks like yours, just for the moment. This 
is what we want to do today. Is that something you all want? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Do we have a ‘why’? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               408                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
Let’s say we finish, we’re at the end of the day now. All right folks, how can I use 
this stuff? How are you going to use this? Let’s assume you’ve given me some 
responses and feedback, it’s all going well. What if you started using this in your 
everyday life? 
 
What if you started convincing more people of the things you need to convince 
them of, wouldn’t that be useful? I’d like, for you to do a thought experiment with 
me if you would. Imagine an amazing hypnotist right in front of you, a great 
hypnotist, doing what they do, breathe the way they breathe, watch how they 
move and how they say things.  
 
Let that face change, because it’s yours, that’s what you can do now isn’t it? 
Whatever that person does in their day-to-day life it’s you and what you’re 
capable of now, isn’t it? Can you see the loop closing? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So, even though it looks like a different stage, in terms of the content, just close it 
up. 
 
Audience: 
So you’re saying, with nested loops it’s not just going in the middle of something 
that can have an opening and a closing? But anything of any representational 
system or within every representational system that could be duplicated or 
repeated, if you duplicate or repeat a beginning and end, you can bury right in the 
middle? 
 
Igor: 
Provided, the mind thinks of it as a complete thing, as an item. Provided it makes 
the national association.  
 
Let me give you an example, let me use you, come on up. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Close your eyes, all the way down. Deeper and deeper into trance, that’s right 
leave it right there; in a moment, you’re going to find amazing things happen at 
the unconscious level.  
 
This is a regular trance induction right, because when you come back, you’ll have 
an amazing feeling that your unconscious mind is going to take into all your 
presentations and all your hypnosis. Only you can forget about that as much as 
you need to, to have a real comfortable experience of that. 
 
When you’re ready to come back you’ll hear applause and at that point you’ll 
come back fully refreshed, alert, forgetting as much as you need to. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               409                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
[Applause] 
 
Did you see what happened there? You’re fine don’t worry.  
 
We have two loops. 
 
The applause is part of it. 
 
But the handshake uninterrupted and by completing the handshake, that seals 
over. 
 
So yes, you can use any experience, provided in that person’s mind it becomes 
one experience. If I start one little fairytale and tell another one at the end, some 
people will think oh, he’s telling fairytales together, whereas, others will go they 
were different. 
 
Therefore, what you want is that the nature of the experience is the same, which 
creates that ceiling affect. Does that make sense to everyone? 
 
Audience: 
I was just curious. What happens if you don’t close the loop? Is there any 
usefulness in that? 
 
Igor: 
Oh, yes. That’s one of my favorites.  
 
Audience: 
Do tell. 
 
Igor: 
We’ll come back to that.  
 
How do you feel right now?  
 
Audience: 
Curious. Wondering… 
 
Igor: 
What you’re experiencing right now is called ‘the zeigarnik effect’. He was a 
researcher from Russia who found if you ask people a question, you begin a 
process but never complete it, the unconscious mind can’t help but want to 
complete it. It continues ticking over and over, so if you open enough loops 
leaving some of them open, the mind keeps looking for better answers on ways it 
could be completed. 
 
For some people, they may spend years before they come to any conclusions. In 
other words, their whole idea of premature cognitive commitment, this tends to 
limit that, because they’re constantly searching for ‘how does this end’? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               410                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Of course, you know about the one person saved their life with this, don’t you? 
Shahir Azad. It’s pure curiosity that kept her alive so that curiosity gets 
stimulated.  
 
You might recall if you have any memory of the event, that many of the stories 
told at the beginning of the Advanced Covert Hypnosis training were never 
finished. One of the reasons for that is because I want your mind to treat the 
experience as a beginning, not as an end.  
 
Sometimes it’s useful to give a satisfying ending and that’s fine, but if you leave it 
open…do you remember what we talked about in the Advanced Covert Hypnosis 
section, we can open minds or close them. Both have value. We can open them 
and create an inductive process with a search for more meaning, more things and 
possibilities.  
 
Or, we can close them down to hone down to specific behavior, feelings, choices 
and a specific way of being. Both have value, depending on what you need to be 
doing. 
 
Whether you open or close your loops, you can have a similar affect on people. 
Does that answer your question? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Scott: 
In the diagram you made with the loops, I can see that it’s different from, but how 
does it relate to fractionation? How can you use that in with your loop? 
 
Igor: 
Fractionation is a beautiful thing. In terms of fractionation, what happens is… 
when you put someone in a trance…is this useful for you by the way?  
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Is this something you can use practically? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Shall we continue? What am I doing? Why did I just start doing that now?  
 
Audience: 
No microphone, inaudible. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly and there are a few reasons. 
 
We moved off topic, so I need to make sure you’re still in the process. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               411                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
The energy level is starting to die down a little because it’s getting more 
intellectual and there are a lot of new people in the group, many of whom, don’t 
have much hypnosis experience so we have to make sure everyone, or at least 
most of you are enough in the process that we can carry on. 
 
So do you see how we strategically placed ‘whys’ along the way, to keep the flow 
going. That’s just as an aside. What we’re interested in is something that will help 
you get people into trance really quickly and without any effort? In fact, the more 
you fail to get deep trances, the more likely you’ll succeed to get them. 
 
Isn’t that something worthwhile doing? So, this is what fractionation is about. A 
long ago hypnotists found that if you hypnotize someone one day, they go deep 
into trance, they come back and the next week they go back in trance then they’ll 
go a little deeper. 
 
Then they come back the next week and go a little deeper still. Then one bright 
spark thought hey, why should we wait for a week? Let’s do it in days, come back 
tomorrow and the same pattern occurred. Then they said come back in an hour 
and the same pattern occurred. Eventually, they just said come back, go back; 
come back, go back…each time they accessed a deeper level of the experience.  
 
In terms of trance, the experience is trance and I’m using the term ‘the 
experience’ on purpose. Did you know you can fractionate rapport? Say you meet 
someone for even just two minutes, someone introduces you at a party and you go 
hi, how do you do and then move on. Not much pressure, the person seems 
pleasant. 
 
Then an hour later they bump into you and you go oh, it’s you so and so again, 
already you’re striking up a conversation at a different level aren’t you? They 
leave again and a week later, you turn up at another party and you go oh, Bob I 
remember you. What do you do? You go straight over there and have a chat don’t 
you? 
 
Suddenly, you go to a business convention and there’s Bob, then you say you 
again, are you following me? What’s happening? You’re getting friendlier and 
friendlier, and the total amount of time you’ve spent together may just be an hour. 
 
Consider the person, ‘Jill’, so there’s Jill with his pretty hair, so you have another 
person and you spend two hours with that person and you speak about 
motorcycles, because you both love motorcycles. You talk about the sprocket 
gadget in the cycle…you can tell how much I love motorcycles…but two hours of 
this. 
 
Then you go to a party, there’s Bob and Jill, who do you go to? The guy you’ve 
met four or five times for five minutes at a time, or the guy you’ve spent two 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               412                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
hours talking to about sprockets? The one you’ve met most often has the most 
memory traces, which as a result you feel most connected and tend to have the 
most comfortable relationship. 
 
Can you use this process? Absolutely! But the purpose of fractionation is to 
deepen an experience. The purpose of nested loops, on the other hand, is to make 
an experience more unconscious. Do you see the distinction?  
 
Therefore, what you would do here is actually have parallel loops where you have 
two or three nested loops, close them off, have a regular conversation again and 
start the process again, so each time you create this little wave of dipping realities 
and it gets trippy very quickly. 
 
I believe we’re doing several elements of that in the Advanced Covert Hypnosis 
Training. Did you notice yourself in clarity and confusion? That’s because you’re 
dipping and coming, dipping down and coming back.  
 
Audience: 
Going back to the relationship on the fractionation, is that also the same thing in 
associating a problem and then seeing a person’s face, then you come back, have 
a problem and see that person’s face and then all of a sudden that person flashes 
you back into that problem? 
 
Igor: 
It can be created that way, but it’s more to do with triggers. You’ve created an 
association, feel bad-see the face, feel bad-see the face, see the face, feel bad 
because your unconscious mind reasons through association. 
 
That’s more like a hypnotic trigger then a fractionation process. Of course, 
fractionation will be part of it. Think of it this way. A little boy is walking down 
the road, a dog comes barking, all scared. The next week the little boy is walking, 
dogs barking and he’s even more scared. Now he’s walking very gingerly, dog 
barks and he becomes even more terrified. 
 
The experience is being fractionated. He gets more and more scared each time it 
happens, and eventually may end up having a full blown phobia. So experiences 
do fractionate, but it’s different. You can both working at the same time, but they 
have different affects. 
 
Mike: 
My unconscious is still nagging now to find out what will happen if you don’t 
close the loop. What’s a side effect? 
 
[Laughter] 
 
Igor: 
That’s exactly right. That’s exactly what happens. 
 
Mike: 
What is the side effect to your opinion? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               413                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
It’s what’s happening right now. Seriously, I could not put it more elegantly.  
 
Mike: 
You said it would try to complete it. 
 
Igor: 
What are you doing right now?  
 
Mike: 
I’m trying to complete it. He’s trying to complete it. 
 
Igor: 
Right. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
This is perfect. How do you feel right now, like you want something extra right? 
 
Mike: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Something has to fit in there. 
 
Mike: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So, if I left right now, walked out the exit over there and never came back, what 
would you do? 
 
Audience: 
Follow you. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
Igor: 
You’d go somewhere to try to find that answer. You might say I know what this is 
it’s a nested loop. I’m going to get a product and listen to it, read a book about it, 
do a search online about it but what you’re doing is taking the initiative to satisfy 
your curiosity in the same way you’re doing right now. 
 
Because, it’s not complete until you have and it’s not complete yet, that’s why 
you’re still asking the question. Your mind is wide open and to be honest with 
you, I’m tempted not to answer any more on it, because it’ll be much better for 
you. 
 
Mike: 
Okay. 
 
Igor: 
I don’t mind you asking, just don’t expect to necessarily get the answer you’re 
looking for. 
Mike: 
 Is one of the side effects that you can make people nuts? 
 
[Laughter] 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               414                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
Have you never had a thirst for knowledge? 
 
Mike: 
I might want to use it for that. 
 
Igor: 
Never underestimate the desire that some people have for completion. The more 
you think about how people want to complete things, the more they won’t, which 
means you’ll have better results because people really want what you have, don’t 
they? 
 
Mike: 
That’s right. 
 
Igor: 
Are you happy with that for now? 
 
Mike: 
I wonder what it means? 
 
Igor: 
That’s the underhanded sales tactic let’s talk about that on the next course…by 
the way, how many of you have actually come across that as a sales tactic? It’s a 
very good one and an also very valuable one. Why? Because you don’t complete 
their learning, so don’t feel they have all the answers yet. 
 
That means they keep going.  
 
Did you know that at the turn of the last century, at the end of the 19th Century, 
physicists thought that physics was about to become a closed field. It’s a field 
where we know everything there is to know, there can be no new knowledge 
added. They only had two things they hadn’t figured out. 
 
How light works, and Gravity 
 
Just two little things, they thought they’d have it in a minute and then it’ll be 
done. But of course, in figure out how light and gravity works, we created the 
theory of relativity, the general and specific, the whole field of quantum physics 
which undermines the whole Newtonian physics in terms of principles and rules 
came from that. 
 
Atomic energy, atomic weapons, all these things came from a field that was about 
to be closed because we know everything we need to know. The Zeigarnik Effect 
prevents that from happening and I think it’s a very valuable thing.  
 
Part of the problem of our academic tradition is that we value certainty so much, 
we’d rather be certain and wrong then uncertain and right, which can lead to 
many dangerous things. If you think you have all the answers, let’s face it, life has 
a good way of kicking you up the backside doesn’t it? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               415                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
If you think you should have all the answers, you’re trying to force the situation 
more and more, that’s how you get people who are so disconnected from reality 
that they believe it can’t be happening, it’s not in my field, I’m not listening to 
you, etc. and it can be a dangerous thing if those people are doing things that will 
affect the rest of us. 
 
Therefore, the Zeigarnik Effect has a lot of value, in my opinion, especially in 
terms of making people so curious about the uncertainty that they’re willing to 
keep finding out. It’s not to find out it’s to keep finding out. 
 
Is this a valuable process to you? Do you see how this can fit into the four-mat 
system? It’s like a structure within a structure.  
 
After the break, we’ll focus on more of the unconscious stuff we’ve talked about. 
This is the Group Hypnosis, so you have a sense of the structure that you ca use to 
create a more hypnotic presentation is that fair to say? 
 
Would you like to have some of the content you can use inside that structure that 
will allow you to be more hypnotic, would that be useful to you? 
 
 
DVD #3 
 
Igor: 
Who’s having fun? 
 
Audience: 
Yeah! I just sold a program over the phone. 
 
Igor: 
You see…she just sold a program over the phone…using these skills? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
I like that. The stuff we’ve been talking about so far, has that been useful? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Can you see yourself using this stuff in the future to make some cash, improve 
your business or do some good in the world? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Would you like more? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               416                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor: 
I want to spend some time hanging round this area here, to develop the whole 
unconscious process, in other words, get a little more hypnotic in what we’re 
doing. Would that be something worthwhile? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
You may recall that before the break, we talked about the idea of frames right. If 
you could be a film director who could set the frame that makes people respond 
differently to whatever you put in front of them, would that be a useful skill to 
have? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So you can pretty well predict, how people will respond to you and, if you already 
know ahead of time what they’re likely to object to, make it so that they can’t 
would that be useful? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Welcome to the idea of frame control. The pre-frame happens at the ‘why’ stage. 
In other words, you’re going to set a framework so when the information starts 
coming out then the people who are listening to you, the audience, can’t help but 
think of the information in one way or another. 
 
Let me give you an example of a weak frame. Welcome to the Stage Hypnosis 
Program. A lot of people think they know what suggestion is and often get 
surprised when they find out what it really is. Let me take a step back, what have I 
just said, basically I’ve told you that if you agree with me you’re right and if you 
disagree with me, you’re wrong; right? 
 
[Laughter] 
 
It’s a relatively weak frame because it comes out, you’re going to think no, I don’t 
believe that I think I know exactly what it is and it’s not what you say. It’ll work, 
especially if you weave it in subtly as part of the presentation. Therefore, the 
weakest level of frames is to say it right out or imply it straight away, make 
sense? 
 
 
My favorite kind of frame is to give people an experience where they can’t help 
but have the reaction you want them to. Let me say this, there are many, but do 
you know what the easiest way is to give people experiences is? Stories, which 
are vehicles we use to transfer experiences to other people. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               417                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Storytelling is one of the most efficient methods of transferring information 
because it’s not just data that’s being transferred it’s all the stuff that data can’t 
do.  
 
For example, who here has read a book on influence? And have all these 
principles, which are correct, then at the end you close the book and go that’s 
interesting but you do nothing with it.  
 
Who has ever heard someone tell a story of how they were upgraded on an 
airplane or how they got something extra at a supermarket or something like that? 
When you hear that story you go, isn’t that a great idea I’ll do that. You know 
how to do this now, because a story gives you everything a book cannot, like 
context, reactions or thought processes. 
 
Stories are a very efficient way of transferring information and experiences. How 
can we use this, as hypnotists? Well, let’s imagine that you have an audience in 
front of you that is likely to be a little skeptical. Perhaps you’re promoting a 
subject that’s a bit more out there, like a new medicine, acupuncture, etc. it 
depends on where you sit that’ll determine whether it’s out there or not. 
 
Let’s say you anticipate there’ll be some push back, people saying no, this sucks 
what are you talking about, bah humbug. What if you could tell some stories that 
would prevent them and inoculate them from doing that, wouldn’t that be 
something? 
 
What kind of stories then, might you use? Say you have a PCAT story, so there’s 
a story where you run them through a process where someone didn’t believe you 
and end up believing you. That might be one thing to do. 
 
Audience: 
Third-party stories. 
 
Igor: 
Right, like my friend John didn’t believe me and now he does.  
 
Audience: 
Testimonials. 
 
Igor: 
That’s good…I didn’t used to believe him but now I do…these are the standard 
ways aren’t they? 
 
Would you like to know a really sneaky way? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Something that is so sneaky, no one will notice what you’re doing and they won’t 
realize they’ve been set up to agree with you, no matter what. Would you like 
that? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               418                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Here’s the thing, what if I told you about Sir Ian Fleming discovering Penicillin 
and that stupid man had the ridiculous notion that scraping mold off bread could 
help people, how stupid was he? 
 
Then there’s the Wright Brothers, they must have been real idiots to ever think 
that a man could fly. Do you know when the first train hit the tracks, the ‘why’ 
experts of the day knew for a fact that if those trains went faster than 15 mph that 
people inside the train would start asphyxiating. That was a commonly held belief 
at the time, did you know that? 
 
That scientific knowledge was something worth paying attention to. Of course, 
that crazy Frenchman who thought that by polluting people’s blood with the pox 
of a cow, basically poisoning people’s blood with someone else’s disease, that it 
would do something for them, how stupid are these people? 
 
What am I doing? I have open loops, but what frames am I setting?  
 
Audience: 
How these crazy ideas are totally acceptable now. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. There are crazy ideas, things we take as important advancement in 
knowledge, at some point they were crazy ideas but more importantly, the 
intelligence or academia of the day ridiculed these ideas.  
 
I would do some research on them and pull out some of the ridicule that was 
thrown at Sir Ian Fleming or the Wright Brothers and take the side of the people 
doing the ridiculing. Why? This is where it gets sneaky…the audience will laugh 
at you for being an idiot because they know better…who here thinks the world is 
flat? 
 
If I stood here and told you how ridiculous all those people are who think the 
world is round, you morons, you fools…what are you secretly thinking…ha, I 
know better, you are an idiot. You’re projecting onto me the very things you don’t 
want people to think of you, is that correct? 
 
Now, if I take the role in the story of those people who ridiculed the Wright 
Brothers, who said you’d never get to the moon, who said you’ll asphyxiate if you 
go too fast on a train, who said that scraping mold off bread is a stupid thing to 
do, who said that polluting people’s blood would be a crazy idea…? 
 
If I take their side, of course you’ll be ridiculing me won’t you? But notice what 
I’ve just done, if you’re ridiculing me it’s because you don’t want that ridicule for 
yourself, you’re part of the ridiculers rather than the ridiculous. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               419                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
You don’t want that to happen to you. I’m going to present a new idea to you, but 
I’ve primed you haven’t I. I’ve given you dozens of examples of ideas that were 
ridiculed at the time, but now we look back on it and we ridicule those people 
who laughed at those ideas, because we know better.  
 
Do you see a pattern forming? 
 
If I present a new idea now, where is the unconscious mind going? If I ridicule 
this, how will history judge me? Did I tell you to think that? Not directly. Do you 
see how sneaky this is?  
 
Why would people ridicule a new idea? 
 
Audience: 
Fear. 
 
Igor: 
Most people that have a closed mind, when it comes to new ideas, it’s not the idea 
that they have a problem with, they’ll happily test the idea if they’re open-
minded, the people that ridicule ideas are those people who are so afraid to be 
ridiculed themselves they’d rather attack first and go I’m not part of that crazy 
gang over there. 
 
It’s the five-year old, that goes into school and says Santa Clause exists, then 
everyone says ha-ha he still believes in Santa Clause and he goes home 
embarrassed.  
 
Therefore, the pattern of ridicule has nothing to do with the idea it has to do with 
what’s going on inside the other person’s mind and you’re going to steal that, turn 
it on its head so that now they’re afraid to ridicule something new, in case history 
judges them badly. 
 
Now, I can’t say that straight out to you...don’t ridicule my idea because history 
might judge you badly…why, because your conscious mind doesn’t get persuaded 
by these things, yet your unconscious mind does.  
 
Does that make sense? Do you like that? Isn’t that sneaky? That’s just one 
example of how to use stories.  
 
You could use stories in the way you’ve been talking about here, which is the idea 
of taking people through a whole process, at the end of which, there’s a type of 
transformation. 
 
I want to encourage you to go further than this, which takes you back to some of 
the exercises we did in the previous training where you step inside someone’s 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               420                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
mind and ask yourself the question; how does someone have to be thinking in 
order to have this result? 
 
If you’re afraid of ridicule, you have to figure out what goes on inside someone’s 
mind to be able to ridicule this idea? They have to imagine accepting the idea, 
have other people laugh at them, be embarrassed by it and become one of the 
people that are laughing rather than one of the people that are laughed at. 
 
So you tell a bunch of stories, in which people that rejected a new idea, were 
laughed at and you make them laugh themselves, because now they have the 
experience of it. Of course, now they’ll be more cautious about rejecting a new 
idea. Do you see how that works? 
 
You can set all kinds of frames, set expectations and set behaviors… 
 
I may as well do this now, although technically its bad form…but you’re here to 
learn about Group Covert Hypnosis, would you like to know why we started the 
Advanced Covert Hypnosis the way we did? Does everyone remember a story 
about a house with no doors? Any ideas what that’s about?  
 
You have an experience that limited and you can’t get out of it. In the story, the 
person in it thinks that’s the whole of their experience don’t they? You and I 
know better, we know there’s a big world outside that house don’t we? Just as the 
way that I, and you, now know that when someone thinks of that experience as, 
this is my whole life, that’s just one tiny thing that’s possible. 
 
Then, as that person leaves the house and has the experience, that it’s so all-
inspiring they can’t even put words on it, what does that prepare you for in terms 
of the experience you’re going to have?  
 
This is important, you get to the point where you’re on the brink of your own 
reality and your mind can go one of two ways. Your mind can freak out, because 
all the things are falling apart or it can be totally charmed going, this is the most 
amazing thing ever.  
 
It’s the same experience, because what you used to know has now changed. But 
I’ve prepared you for when reality starts crumbling around your ears, it becomes a 
positive experience rather than a negative one. Will that work 100% of the time? 
No, remember we’re working probabilities here this is a group thing. 
 
If we were working one-on-one there’s much more we could do to make that 
happen, but we’ve already talked about that sort of thing. Do you see where we’re 
going with this? We’re thinking about what experiences might happen, how might 
people react to them and then we give them an experience up front, which derails 
that in a different direction. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               421                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
We’ve already talked about the example of talking about a story, so here he is one 
wants to go one way and one wants to go the other, suddenly he goes damn it I 
just want to go one way. Physically, I’m acting out just what the internal 
experience is going to be about. Do you see where we’re going with this? 
 
We’re creating patterns. We are priming their minds. We are formatting the 
unconscious, so when it comes to a choice point, where he chooses good or bad, 
we’re tending to go this way towards something good.  
 
I’d like you to think a little about how you want to use the idea of Group Covert 
Hypnosis.  
 
For example, who here would like to make a lot of money, isn’t that partly why 
we’re here? Of course, you realize that to make money you actually have to ask 
for it at some point right, you don’t just sit there (physically showing audience). 
It’s like please God let them get the hint…please-please-please…fuck…please-
please-please…it’s ridiculous isn’t it? 
 
Yet, do you want to know the single biggest secret of why most people that go to 
a presentation or do a presentation, come back just as poor as they went in? It’s 
simple, they don’t ask. They think somehow that they’re imposing on someone 
else if they ask. Then, they get the one thing they’re afraid of which is nothing, so 
you’re pretty much in the worst place as it is already so you might as well ask and 
find out. 
 
Asking does not mean you take responsibility away from your audience to choose 
their life. You may have noticed that I ask a lot, I say look here’s where we have 
an offer, if you want it come to the back and get it. Why do I do that? Because I 
actually believe in all this stuff, believe it or not, I think it has real value. 
 
Is it valuable for all of you? I don’t think so. It’s valuable for most of you, but 
some things don’t fit all of you so do I care if you go back there? No, but when 
you come up and ask me the same question again I say why did you ask that 
again, I’ve already told you about it just go get it that’s all that matters. Does that 
make sense? 
 
Joe: 
Didn’t you just covertly fire your client? 
 
Igor: 
No! 
 
Joe: 
Really? 
 
Igor: 
I’m giving you responsibility. You see, I don’t want people to come to my courses 
if they have to mortgage their children to attend. I don’t want the last penny in 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               422                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
your pocket. What I want is a fair exchange. If you think what I have is valuable 
then please take it.  
 
That’s what I want. I don’t want you to come to me and say fix my life please, I 
came with the hope because I just had to sell my kids to come to the program and 
it’s not being fixed and it’s all your fault. I don’t want that responsibility. 
 
Joe: 
Here’s the pressure I felt. I certainly don’t want to be one of those people who 
said the materials that I value and have gotten value out of, couldn’t be helpful. 
Therefore, I want to be part of the people who you’re talking about who will 
receive value from the materials, so now I’m emotive to be there which feels to 
me like…I remember in Seattle you were speaking about firing your clients. 
 
Igor: 
Oh, for sure! That kind of firing your clients, sorry I agree with that. That’s a 
different principle. It’s not that I’m trying to dissuade you from getting anything, 
unless it’s bad for you. I’m trying to show you a decision point. 
 
The decision point is to get in or get out because the boat’s leaving and it’s going 
to leave. By the end of today, I will go get horribly drunk yes, a hypnotist getting 
drunk oh, no what mayhem. 
 
[Laughter] 
 
Do not come on this trip tonight you’re in for a real messy night. In any event, 
once this is over I will not be here I will be gone, so this is my one and only 
chance to offer you something that I think will be valuable to most of you. 
 
I have enough stuff back there that something will be valuable to everyone, not 
everything for everyone. I don’t want you to sit there and wonder ‘what if’. Is this 
for me or not for me? If it’s not for you don’t do it. If you see the value, do it.  
 
People have asked me lots of times and this is crazy right, they say which 
program should I get? Should I get everything? Why are you asking me? If you 
want to be great at this stuff get everything, it’s that simple. If you don’t want to 
get everything then tell me what you want specifically and I’ll tell you what does 
that, happily. 
 
However, if you say I want to be the best ever, which one should I get, then the 
question is wrong. It’s like going up to someone and saying hey, have you 
stopped beating your wife yet, yes or no? The question is wrong. For starters, I 
don’t even have a wife. 
 
(Someone has pointed out to me that Cliff apparently is now my wife, because he 
has half my money and he won’t let me sleep with him.) 
[Laughter] 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               423                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
If someone asks me a question that twisted, how can I possibly answer it? If you 
want to know how to be great at this it’s simple, learn everything. Go out, not just 
with me, but with other hypnotists to see what they do and it will cost you money, 
I can’t help that.  
 
Do you know how much I spent getting good at hypnosis? Over $100,000 and 
that’s just in course fees and bribes to the hypnotists to actually let me see what 
they’re doing. That doesn’t include flights, hotels, food, time wasted and not 
getting paid doing other work.  
 
If you include all that, it’s several versions of a six figure income. But then, I 
really wanted to learn this and hopefully, it’s paid off.  
 
[Applause] 
 
 
In terms of the presentation though, people can’t make up their minds that’s part 
of the problem they’ve had, so you have to take them right to the edge and say it’s 
your choice, if you want to get on now’s the time. If you don’t want to get on, 
fine, go home. Let me warn you what might happen when you go home, you 
might think back on this and go oh, I should have done this. 
 
If you think that’s likely to happen to you, my advice is to get on but don’t take 
my advice, you decide because I honestly don’t want the responsibility for your 
life, do you realize this? I have enough issues with my own, which is just what 
we’re talking about. 
 
Now, when you’re doing your sales presentation, which is part of what we’re 
talking about here in terms of Group Covert Hypnosis, plus making money, it 
kind of implies sales doesn’t it? You’re not selling anything.  
 
You’re doing a bunch of things. 
 
One, you’re offering massive value. 
 
You’re demonstrating it over and over again, in the experiences they have, in the 
stories, demonstrating the offer and how it fits that person’s life. When they see 
that, you don’t just sit back and go please take the hint.  
 
Would you like to know how to make a close so smooth, effortless and easy that it 
doesn’t even feel like you’re asking for money? 
 
Audience: 
Sure. Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               424                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor: 
We’ll do it out of sequence, but why not, because you all are cool. It’s very 
simple.  
 
First, you set frames and you set a lot of them. Set frames around every possible 
reality that you know is going to happen.  
 
Did you enjoy the guest speaker that came on this morning? Some of you 
probably hated him and some probably loved him. I honestly don’t mind which it 
is, the reason he came here is to show you what happens when someone sets a ton 
of frames. 
 
Did you not see him do this? As hypnotist’s I hope you saw just how good he was 
at that. Whether you agree with the level that he set is a personal choice, truly. 
But, I want you to at least see a contrast…would you say it’s quite contrasting to 
how I work? Would that be fair? 
 
Unless you get a contrast, how could you possibly see what’s really going on? 
 
Does that take responsibility away from you? No. Because you still decide 
whether what’s being presented is valuable to you or not and if it isn’t, then you 
have every right to say no, I don’t want this. If it is, then you would be foolish not 
to take it, but it’s something you have to decide, I can’t do that for you. 
 
He can’t do that for you, although he probably tried didn’t he? 
 
[Laughter] 
 
This, no matter what you’re doing, if you believe in what you have to offer, the 
frames can be as soft or as hard as you believe them to be. Let me give you an 
example. Does anyone here have someone they love? If that person that you love 
was about to do something very damaging to themselves like shoot themselves, 
overdose on pills, etc. would your frame setting be a little harder or softer? 
 
Audience: 
Harder. 
 
Igor: 
Would you be prepared to go at least as hard as what you saw John Childers do 
today, if it would save their life? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
So notice how the intensity of the frames that you set, have nothing to do with 
what’s right or wrong. What it has to do with is how important you think what 
you have to offer is. Does that make sense? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               425                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
If it’s important enough in terms of saving someone’s life, of course they’ll go 
harder. If you think no its ice cream, who cares, they’ll be very soft and 
somewhere in between you will find your range, but I can’t tell you where that 
range will be.  
 
That’s something you decide in terms of what value you have to offer, what 
context you’re offering it in and to whom you’re offering it. Of course, your 
personal ethics in terms of whether or not there’s enough value to push harder or 
not. Some things are valuable but people don’t have to have them, whereas, for 
some people it’s so valuable they can not have them. 
 
Do you see the difference? 
 
Audience: 
I’ve seen John do this same presentation several years ago at a Robert Allen thing 
and I wanted it very badly at that time too, and I just wasn’t in a place where I 
could switch my whole life and make that happen. I was in a different state and at 
this point, I’m ready. The big difference was my reference point. 
 
Igor: 
Exactly. So you see how the context shifts. It’s the same pitch right. You didn’t 
take it the first time, and it is the very same, although I think the ending may have 
changed a little but it’s the same process. You had the same experience but 
because you were different, your choices changed. 
 
This is part of what we do. You don’t have to give a hard sales pitch. You create 
the context so that people self select and that’s it. By the way, this is another 
reason for stage hypnosis, in case you’re interested. You’re creating context for 
people that self select to come up and be on stage.  
 
If you do a poor job of this, do you know how many people come and volunteer? 
It makes a great show.  
 
If you do a great job of setting your frames, I’ve seen literally, I had a college 
student help me at a college event once, there were so many kids get up on stage 
that there were more people on stage then there were in the audience.  
 
He did a great job setting those frames from the get-go. The expectations, the 
story, the video he flashed ahead of time, the stories being told, the set up of 
something cool happening and how amazing it’s going to be, the hypnotic gifts all 
that stuff, these are frames that are being set, aren’t they? 
 
Do you get how important this is?  
 
So, of course, we have the four-mat system, so we have our structure…this is one 
of the most important things you can add to your repertoire as a speaker. If there’s 
nothing else, you take away from here that says yes set.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               426                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
If there’s nothing else you take away from here, it’s to get people into a yes set 
state of mind. 
 
The four-mat system, have a structure to take people through, a yes set 
  
Audience: 
No microphone, inaudible 
 
Igor: 
Its part…this is not necessarily a linear system…these are the guidelines that I 
use. This is the structure for it. The set frame starts at the beginning. The yes set 
starts to start as well and then works all the way through. 
 
The frames work all the way through as well, but are heavy at the beginning and 
at the end, then they doctored it in between, so we’re not giving you a linear 
structure we’re just giving you content that goes into the mix. 
 
Think of your mind as a mansion full of rooms. Each room is a state that you’re 
in, a frame of mind. When you’re in a happy room, all your happy memories are 
there, photographs of your kids, your honeymoon and other fun things that you 
did.  
 
When you’re in the sad room, of course, all the things you messed up are inside 
that room.  
 
Now, just as you have a happiness/sad room, stay dependent on learning, you 
have a room in which you agree with ideas or disagree. You accept or reject. 
What the ‘yes’ set is designed to do is to open up the agreement room, make them 
say yes.  
 
Who likes the idea of people saying yes to them? 
 
I know I haven’t used this a lot, so I apologize for not really demonstrating it, but 
I’m using this primarily because all the ideas are easier to fit in. Also, of course, if 
along the way somewhere your yes set breaks, you ask a question and no hands go 
up you go oh, there’s something for me to fix before I go on. 
 
Therefore, it’s both a test and a warm-up for you. Does that make sense?  
 
Let’s say, for example, I suggested and so just by doing this, you can get closes 
just like that and you know what I mean by that and they go what? Then I’ve 
missed a step haven’t I? I’ve missed you along the way, which tells me that I have 
to go back and fix something, which is what the fourth step is about. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               427                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
We have the idea of setting frames up front, pre-frames take care of the biggest 
problems that you anticipate coming. Reframes, on the other hand, are about 
taking problems that arise in the mid-stream of what you’re doing. 
 
So the first few times you give that presentation, you will not know which frames 
to set. You might have an idea. By the second time, you’ll have a better idea and 
by the third time, you’ll have a pretty damn good idea. The fourth or fifth time, 
you can probably predict 90-95% of the things that might cause you a problem 
during your entire presentation, pitch, training or whatever you want to do with 
this. 
 
Does that make sense? 
 
The reframe allows you to find what’s gone wrong here and fix it. The yes set 
allows you to both, flush out things you need to fix and, prepare the mind to be 
more accepting. John Childers, who was up here earlier on, didn’t use any yes 
sets, did he? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
When I was doing my executive coaching, I accidentally fell into the yes set, 
didn’t realize I was doing it I just followed the four-mat system and kept doing 
more yeses because I liked the validation. It was totally an accident I wasn’t that 
smart. 
 
After having worked with a number of executives, I could tell where the problem 
was. It was the same issues they would come to me for, so I would sit there and 
rattle off saying I know, you’ve been doing this for this long, you’ve had these 
experiences, you’ve done risks in this way, you’ve tried these things, they failed; 
you tried these things, they failed, etc.  
 
You know what this, this and this is, but you have no idea about these things. 
You’ve tried these things to solve it and now you’re failing with no idea where to 
turn, is that right? He said yes, you know me so well. I said no, I know your job 
title so well. These are things that come up frequently.  
 
In doing so, he’s got massive validation, someone understands me. I’ve opened up 
his mind because he can’t help but agree with what I’ve been saying, so now, 
when I present what I can do for him and I’m setting my frames up here, I can use 
my frames to break every one of his problems. 
 
Why have you failed in the past? It’s not that you’re stupid it’s that the things 
you’ve been doing don’t match at the right level. When you find the right level to 
match them on, of course, they’ll resolve. So it’s given him a reason to buy into 
the process.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               428                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Just using these simple ideas, my close rate 95%, it was very rare that I’d be in 
front of an executive– by the way I didn’t get in front of many executives, but 
when I did virtually all of them would hire me on the spot– the irony was that I 
didn’t even have to offer. They’d actually interrupt and ask me how much? 
 
They might say what do we need to do, or call her, set it up and they’d close me.  
 
The importance of the yes set is several things. It gives you a test.  
 
What a yes set does with your groups, is it allows you to test to see whether or 
not, you’re getting through to them.  
 
It prepares their mind to agree with you. It’s very difficult to disagree with 
someone once their mind has been spurred up. Compliance is linked to that.  
 
It gets people used to following your instructions and as hypnotist’s we realize the 
importance of compliance don’t we? Who here did the Conversational 
Hypnotherapy Training? Instant inductions…if someone doesn’t have full 
compliance do you begin instant induction?  
 
That’s your test isn’t it, move here, stand here, could you hold your hand this way 
and if they’re a little hesitant you’re not there yet are you? So yes sets allow you 
to test for compliance as well, doesn’t it, especially when you do this kind of yes 
set; everyone put your hand up if you understand what I mean. 
 
It lets me see, not just if you’re agreeing with me, but it lets me check how 
naturally you’re agreeing with me. How much do I have? Do you have to think 
about it a little bit before it puts up? Does it happen more spontaneously? It lets 
me judge where in the process you are. 
 
This is an importance use of the yes set, to present value. 
 
I could sit here and rattle a monologue off that you couldn’t help but agree with. 
Everyone here is dressed today. You weren’t dressed at some point. You probably 
had a shower in the last week; I hope. It’s Sunday afternoon. You’re here in 
Vegas. We’re in a room. I’m talking, etc. 
 
You can’t help but agree to that. But it’s also pretty tedious and let’s face it, if you 
go in front of a group of people and try that approach, unless they have some 
mental challenges, I don’t think they’ll be very interested in this. 
 
However, if you put a yes set together with your frames, you’re actually educating 
them at the same time. Who else see’s the value in being able to get other people 
to agree with them? Do you see I’ve tested, I have compliance, I’ve got agreement 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               429                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
and at the same time, I present an idea to you that you’ve accepted, in that using 
yes sets is valuable. 
 
The person that reminds me of this, in terms of putting this more complex thing 
together was actually John Childers. When I saw him, I sat in the back as a 
hypnotist and I laughed, because the poor people in the audience around him had 
no idea what was happening to them. 
 
Of course, with your training you know exactly what’s going on right? And, even 
then, it still works but it doesn’t matter, the point is he’s demonstrating a lot of 
value by actually loading the yes set to demonstrate it. 
 
Incidentally, that’s where the yes set came from. I couldn’t resist I thought it was 
ingenious pack it out.  
 
Do you see how the yes set is a crucial part of your entire presentation? 
 
Now, if you start using it well, you can actually use the yes set to close as well, do 
you want to know how to do that? When I first started doing trainings, especially 
with novice hypnotists, they had no idea how good they were getting because 
they’d never been to a bad training. 
 
That’s the standard they expected so they had no idea and I thought man, I feel 
cheated, I worked my socks off to be better than everyone else but they have 
nothing to compare it to. So, part of the experience you give people during the 
presentation again, fits into your yes set.  
 
You have to remind people why it’s valuable to them, good for them, how they 
should be feeling about stuff. You don’t tell them, feel good about this now, you 
can give them reasons. Say who here feels good about the fact that they’ve just 
become more influential for the last week?  
 
If you weren’t doing it before, you suddenly realize yes, this is worth feeling good 
about isn’t it? Do you see how that works? Therefore, you’re actually using your 
yes set also to give them, in terms of value, a sense of immunization shall we say, 
from buyers remorse. 
 
They’ll reflect back and say yes, I had a great time and learned a lot of valuable 
things, which they might otherwise forget about. There’s a lot of content and I 
may accidentally, and in fact, it’s what I used to do, use this process to get you to 
forget the entire training and you’ll walk out going hey, that was okay.  
 
That was okay, I worked my socks off to get this in there, so you’re doing all this 
great stuff but you don’t even realize where it came from and that sucks, 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               430                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
especially when someone asks for a refund when you can see them using all this 
stuff, but they don’t realize they’re doing it. It’s like oh, man that sucks. 
 
So I’d much rather you all realize how good this stuff is and everyone’s happy. 
 
Audience: 
What do you do then? I know I have folks that come to me that have never shot a 
gun before in their lives, I get them on the range, get them shooting one-hole 
groups instantly and ask what do you think about that? They say that’s all right. 
 
I say what do you mean it’s all right most people can’t do that in a years time. 
How do you create that contrast? 
 
Igor: 
Remember, we’re here in a group setting for starters, so one of the easiest ways to 
do that is to use that part of the group with experience to educate the part that 
does not have it, so you’re transferring experience. 
 
Say how many of you here are already hypnotherapists stand up. Now, you just 
asked, for you who are already hypnotherapists, looking at what these other 
people are capable of, the ones who just started today, how good would you say 
they were? 
 
Would you rate them as highly as some other professional hypnotherapists that 
you’ve seen? I’m using the group to validate the experience, that’s one way to do 
it. 
 
Another way to do it if you don’t have a group, for example, this is more of a 
personal thing is to give them the experience. Sometimes I’ll actually set people 
up to fail on purpose, so they have something to contrast it to.  
 
Therefore, it doesn’t interfere with the process you have, but actually getting 
someone to balls up the first shots and then you take them through a process and 
they do instant amazement. The contrast is already there, so that’s another way to 
do it. 
 
Then you can tell stories and so on, but be careful you don’t install the wrong 
things at this point, telling stories about how law enforcement officers, even under 
pressure that 80% of their shots go wide, etc.  
 
Then he says how the hell do you shoot in the same hole within one hour and get 
it over and over again, when professionals are missing 80% of the time? 
 
So it’s like a non-awareness set yes set, does that make sense? Does that help 
you? Did it help everyone else as well, in terms of how you might want to use 
this? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               431                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
The thing about a yes set close is that you start with a yes set, so it’s a natural part 
of your presentation style. The audience feels it’s polite because you’re pulling 
them in and they have a sense that they’re being included. 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Then of course, you’re checking and doing all these other things. Now, your job 
of course is to demonstrate the value. This test can become a little harder as you 
go along.  
 
For example, who here sees the value of stage hypnosis training, in terms of the 
value you can offer to hypnotists? It’s a valuable thing. Whether or not it’s for 
you doesn’t matter just now. However, if I were to offer that course absolutely 
free of charge, who here would think of coming to it just for the hell of it? 
 
So now, I don’t have to establish the value of the course anymore because it’s 
valuable already. The only thing I have to do now is establish the price or more 
importantly, help you justify the price for it.  
 
For example, who here is a hypnotherapist? We have about 2/3’s of the room 
planning to be hypnotherapists as well. If I were to show you one trick, one thing 
that will allow you to fill your practice week after week, how much would that be 
worth to you? 
 
You know you can buy someone’s business. Like a McDonald’s franchise, do you 
know how much one of those costs? It’s $500,000 for a business that’s on-going 
and it’s not even your business, you have to buy their bloody burgers and stuff. 
 
People are willing to pay for it because they get a successful business from it it’s a 
whole model. So, if you had one idea which on its own, if it worked well, could 
fill your practice, how much would that be worth to you? 
 
I’m not suggesting half a million dollars but maybe at least, $50,000 would that 
be fair? You tell me. Notice what I just did. Did I get a good response from you 
all?  
 
Audience: 
No. 
 
Igor: 
No, therefore something is missing here. I’m not trying to trying to sell anything 
for $50,000, just so you realize this, but if you could take your business for the 
rest of your life, consistently, into full rather than running on half empty, is that 
worth at least $50,000? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
Igor: 
For those of you who don’t think it’s worth $50,000, what’s missing? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               432                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Audience:      No microphone, inaudible. 
 
Igor: 
Right, so it’s just a question of whether or not you can do the work. 
 
Audience: 
Guarantee. 
 
Igor: 
Do you see what we’re getting now? My test close is telling me the things that are 
missing. Do you see how that works? Now we can add a guarantee, if you don’t 
like the course, first day come back money back guaranteed if it’s useless. 
 
By the way, $50,000…I’ll give you the idea for, free but you can do it; however, 
you want to do it. I’ll give you that $50,000 idea in a way you can get it for $30, 
would you like that? I’ll give you the idea for, free who would like to get that 
$50,000 for, free, all you have to do is pay $30 but not to me, it’s very simple. 
Buy a book on stage hypnosis. 
 
Do stage hypnosis. Go to your local groups or organizations like Rotary and so 
on. Give them a talk on the power of hypnosis and most importantly, give them a 
physical demonstration of it. Impress them. Wow them.  
 
Make them think it’s the most amazing thing and then, whilst they’re impressed, 
get your book out, put it on the table and say who wants to lose some weight, who 
wants to stop smoking, who wants some other part of their life fixed? Find out 
who they are, tell them to come on up because you’re taking appointments right 
now. 
 
If you do that well, if you follow that process, that book will fill up as long as 
you’re following the process step-by-step and you’re working out all the angles in 
terms of the frames we’ll need to hear and so on. Does that make sense?  
 
That idea is 100% free you don’t have to pay me a penny for it. You will pay 
someone maybe $30 to buy a stage hypnosis book, there are plenty of them but 
it’s up to you. That’s right totally free, destroy the whole $30 idea, go to your 
local library, get a book on stage hypnosis, teach yourself and do it. 
 
Now, it may not be necessarily as easy and some of you may feel emotionally 
uncomfortable about the idea, but if you would like someone like me to come in 
and teach you those things to such a degree, drill it into you so you’re so 
confident that doing demonstrations is a no-brainer, is that worth one-fiftieth of 
the $50,000 idea? 
 
So you see how my test close has now become a soft close, so for those of you 
who think this is valuable, let’s take a break, feel free to have a chat with Megan 
and Audrey at the back; they’ll happily take your orders, if you want that. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               433                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Or, if you want to go the other route and just go to the library and teach yourself, I 
think it’s an awesome experience you can have there too. Now, am I taking any 
choice away from you? Am I forcing you there?  
 
Audience: 
No. 
 
Igor: 
I happen to believe this actually. If you want a title, get Ormond McGill’s 
Encyclopedia of Stage Hypnosis it’s awesome. It will be in most big libraries. If 
not, it costs about $30. 
 
Audience: 
You can get it on Amazon. 
 
Igor: 
But if you want to know how it’s really done. If you want someone to guide you 
through it, drill you, make sure all your questions are answered until you are 
100% satisfied, you have the hypnotic equivalent of a boot camp that drills you 
through so when you stand on stage and your mind switches off where the 
pressure is and all that’s left is to do a good show, that’s what we’ll be doing in 
Vegas. 
 
If you want that, have a chat with Audrey and Megan at the back of the room. 
This is the appropriate time for a break, so people can do that, otherwise you 
might just get some commitment and say who here thinks that’s interesting now?  
 
Do you see how more hands are starting to go up? Am I done yet? No. If I want to 
go harder, if I think this is really important to you in terms of your training, I’ll 
keep going harder. At the moment, honestly, that course will fill up anyway so I 
won’t push too hard I that sense, but I think its hugely valuable I wish I had 
known this when I first started. 
 
Did I ever tell you this story, my first day out of the law firm, I wake up, feel 
great and thinking yes, I don’t have to do the whole going into the office to work 
and all that sort of stuff. I walked into the spare bedroom that’s been turned into 
an office, sit down and say oh, Christ, where are all the clients? 
 
I didn’t even have an ad in the paper. It wasn’t an easy six months, that’s all I’m 
going to say, but had I known this I swear to you that I would have been out that 
day calling the top 20 business organizations, rotary clubs, anything that was even 
vaguely club-like, I would have gotten myself in groups of anything from ten to a 
thousand people, whoever would have me free of charge. 
 
I would give them a little talk about the power of hypnosis and I would have 
tranced the buggery out of them, shown them every cool trick in the book, so 
they’re stunned. I’ll go, if this is what happened here in 20 minutes, think of what 
can happen to your problems.  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               434                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Who here wants to lose some weight? We have a great program, come up if you 
want to sign up for that. Now, how can they not believe you, they’ve seen you do 
crazy stuff. Do you see how that works? Do you understand how the yes set close 
works? 
 
And, of course, if you’re getting weak reactions on your first few presentations 
what you do is tweak your yes sets along the way, tweak your frames along the 
way and ask the audience what’s missing. Is it the guarantee, the price, is it that 
you don’t know that it’s going to work, what is it? 
 
Ed: 
I just have one comment about stage hypnosis. We, Ian and I, and his girlfriend 
went to a stage hypnosis last night and when the guy was done with his 
performance he said we do weight loss, we do smoking, we’re here to help you if 
you have abused children, etc.  
 
He gave his own commercial to add more business… 
 
Igor: 
I know stage hypnotists who go to town, do their show, they’ll spend an extra 
week there because that week they’ll be booked solid back to back based on that 
performance and they don’t even have to be that good. 
 
How good was the guy you saw? 
 
Ed: 
It was decent. It wasn’t as good as Don. 
 
Igor: 
So not as good as Spencer… 
 
Ed: 
What was funny is that after viewing that show, I kind of went, after what you 
made all those people do, I’m not sure I want to… 
 
Igor: 
I can virtually guarantee you that he will be quite busy in between sessions doing 
his hypnotherapy, because it’s an experience. It’s the how. It’s a demonstration. 
Basically, people have paid him to be sold, to be given an great big how, in terms 
of why to come to hypnotherapy. 
 
Do you see how this thing here works? Does that answer your question in terms 
of the yes sets and the yes set close? This is probably the most valuable thing you 
can add to any presentation to increase your income out of it. 
 
Who’s planning to use this? It’s a good thing. You will only get good experiences 
from it.  
 
Do you have any questions regarding what we’ve covered so far? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               435                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
We want to now set frames. We’ll use stories and examples to set the frames. The 
four-mat system gives you the structure you’re going to use a ton of yes sets. If 
the yes sets for whatever reason start getting weak and you get weak responses, 
you’ll need to find out what’s going on so you can start reframing things.  
 
Then, when you get towards the end of your entire presentation, your yes set starts 
getting into more test closes, so you’ll find out if price is the issue and if the price 
is the issue what do you do? Add value. Price is never the issue, because it’s not 
about money it’s about value. 
 
If you don’t think you’re getting enough value then the price is an issue because 
it’s an unfair exchange. If you’re not presenting enough value for them to be 
interested, either you have to demonstrate better value in terms of what you’re 
actually doing, you change the offer by adding value to it or you lower the price 
so it equates the value that it’s being perceived at. 
 
Of course, in each context it’ll be different. If you were all looking for a new 
career because you had no jobs to go to or no business going through and I’m 
offering you a whole career that you can make between $2000 and $10,000 a 
month for working a few weekends, suddenly that has massive value doesn’t it? 
 
Whereas, if it’s a question of just helping you to fill your practice I don’t know 
maybe you’re happy in how full your practice is, maybe you don’t want that type 
of practice, who knows. Does that make sense?  
 
Therefore, your value adjusts according to context as well, which is part of what 
you have to be doing there. 
 
You understand that compliance is important right? And the yes set is one way of 
getting compliance right. Would you like to have a really nice way, more for 
training and informal group context vs. a more formal business context, but it’s a 
fun technique to add to your presentations that will get massive compliance and 
will be lots of fun for you at the same time? 
 
So, you end up changing the mood which is good anyway, you’ll get massive 
compliance and actually, you can drill in some of the most important points you 
have by using just this one little thing. Would you be interested in it? 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
It’s called ‘call and response’. 
 
Whoever has been to one of these more revival meeting type churches where the 
preacher shouts out hallelujah, etc. it’s a very motivating process isn’t it? The 
secret to call and response is this… 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               436                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Have something of importance to do a call and response around. 
 
 
 
It might be something fun or something very serious. The point is it has to have a 
purpose.  
 
You have to keep the answers simple. 
 
Who here has been to the Conversational Hypnotherapy training again? Who 
remembers the abreactions? What’s the first thing that happens? 
 
Audience: 
Stay calm. 
 
Igor: 
What don’t you do? 
 
Audience: 
Don’t touch. 
 
Igor: 
What happens next? 
 
Audience: 
The scene fades– know you’re safe. 
 
Igor: 
Then? 
 
Audience: 
Feel the chair… 
 
Igor: 
Pause right there, did you see what happened? It was easy when the responses 
were short and clear, but because you’ve been to different training’s I’ve actually 
done this two different ways.  
 
In the first training, I had the scene fades, feel the chair all in the same line, but 
for you all the call and response fails at that point because it’s too complex. For 
the others who were here in this training, we simplified it and they’re the ones that 
actually ended up calling the whole thing out, so it’s been ingrained more deeply. 
 
Now, it’s a very useful tactic anyway why, because it ingrains into you one of the 
most important patterns in hypnotherapy, which is how to deal with people that 
are abreacting. But, do you see also how the energy was straight away there? You 
know what’s expected and how to put it in, so I get a lot of compliance and 
interaction. 
 
You have an emotive experience you remember the whole process more clearly 
because it’s more important. Do you see how you have all these things pulled in at 
the same time? The key to this is…do you want to know how you train this to the 
audience so they can do this easily and you can get a good response rather than a 
bad one? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               437                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
One of the worst things you can do, and I’ve done this, is to go what is it? Then 
you have a little bit of a tumbleweed coming through.  
 
The first thing is that you have to bear in mind the group psychology, no one 
wants to stand out, so you have to make it easy for them. In other words, they 
want to know the answer before you ask it of them. If you show them one thing 
and say oh, the first thing is to stay calm remember that.  
 
Stay calm, do you remember that. Stay calm, do you remember that. Stay calm, 
what do you do? 
 
Audience: 
Stay calm. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. So I’ve already trained you and notice how quickly I get the response. So 
you’re staying calm, but the next thing you do, you don’t want to accidentally 
create a negative trigger, so when you touch them they start freaking out later.  
 
You want to make sure you don’t touch them, whatever you do don’t touch them. 
Whatever you do don’t touch them. What don’t you do? 
 
Audience: 
Don’t touch them. 
 
Igor: 
Okay. So you walk in and the client starts abreacting, what’s the first thing that 
happens? 
 
Audience: 
Stay calm. 
 
Igor: 
Then, what do you do? 
 
Audience: 
Don’t touch them. 
 
Igor: 
Do you see how much more powerful the response is now? Those people who 
haven’t even been to the training like the rest of you, you’re inside the training 
already, aren’t you? You’re part of the whole group, so use group dynamic in 
your favor does that make sense? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
At the same time, of course, you can drill in the basics. We can do the whole call 
and response with this or the call and response with the four-mat system it’s very 
easy it’s just whatever response you’re looking for has to be short. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               438                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
The longer it gets the more the rhythm of the group disappears, so you have to 
break it down into smaller pieces or you lose the rhythm of the group. Then, at 
that point, it starts deteriorating and it isn’t much fun anymore, then the 
tumbleweeds come in, someone shoots you and you say thank you, I needed that. 
 
How is everyone, are you enjoying this? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Thank you I appreciate that. Let’s go back to the basics shall we? 
 
So, you have the four-mat system – (why, what, how, what if)– in the ‘why’ stage 
you’re going to start with a little pre-frame of what this course or presentation is 
about. You’ll begin with some light yes sets to get the conscious mind involved. 
 
Oh, who wants to work with groups and make lots of money? Who wants to 
combine the two together to make it easier?  
 
Then you start having some unconscious content and formatting, which can be 
your language. So beyond all the things you know you’ve experienced, how about 
experiencing some things that have yet to come so that you have enough stuff 
inside you that you can actually make a great presentation when it’s time? 
 
Wouldn’t that be worth learning? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Let me tell you a story. 
 
One story comes out, another story and you set the context this way. Once you set 
the context this way, you can slide into your ‘what’. There is one little thing that, 
at the beginning of a training, is very useful for you to do right there, training or 
group presentation, etc. right between the ‘why’ and the ‘what’. 
 
Any guesses what it is? For those of you who have trained with me, you’ve done 
this several times already, at least three times you’ve been through all three 
trainings, just one little thing you need to do between those two stages. Any 
ideas? 
 
Audience: 
No microphone, inaudible. 
 
Igor: 
That’s a yes set thing…we haven’t actually talked about this yet, but it’s very 
important in terms of group dynamics. You have to get the whole group to bond 
with each other. This is slightly different in a corporate context even then you 
have to get them to bond with you. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               439                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
When people come in, as a rule, in a group like this you don’t know each other 
yet, so I have to create a context where you can. If you’re in a corporate setting, 
they may know each other but it excludes you, so you still have to break the ice 
between you. 
 
It’s like an ice breaking exercise, but you’re doing it so the group itself is 
comfortable with itself; otherwise, everyone’s personal issues are insecurities and 
issues around not being good enough inside a group, etc. will be projected onto 
you. 
 
If they feel uncomfortable then your ideas make them uncomfortable, they’ll 
resist the ideas and shout at you, but it’s really because they’re feeling 
uncomfortable it has nothing to do with the idea. Do you see how that works?  
 
You have to break it down. Different presenters do it in different ways. Any ideas 
how John did it this morning? How did he do it?  
 
Audience: 
He had us look at each other and say the (inaudible-not mic’d- 61:24). 
 
Igor: 
That was part of it. He does it with humor. He tells enough jokes, because he 
knows if you laugh as a group, in other words, if the entire group is laughing at 
the same time, after two, three or four laughs, the entire group is in sync. Does 
that make sense? 
 
The way I like to do it is through a physical exercise. Usually we’ll have you up 
and interacting with each other and when the entire group gets a buzz together, 
the noise elevates and everyone congregates in a certain area, then I have the 
whole group.  
 
You’re breaking down your own boundaries for me. Today we had to start that 
again, and made it much lighter because most of you already know each other 
from the previous week of training, so you’re much lighter. But we still had to do 
an element of that and only when there’s a certain buzz in the room, he realized 
the group was getting in sync. 
 
It’s a small piece that few people talk about, but it’s so important. Therefore, you 
either do a simple exercise or use humor, ideally though you use both.  
 
Does everyone now understand how the ‘why’ stage works and all the little 
bits and pieces you can put into that to make it more hypnotic, persuasive 
and more influential? 
 
Then we have that little segment in between to warm people up. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               440                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Then we have the ‘what’, which is the content, the thing they think they came for. 
Within the ‘what’ you’ll be doing lots of little yes sets. You’ll be doing little 
frames and pre-frames along the same lines also, but primarily you’re providing 
logical data and content. 
 
Then we get to the ‘how’ stage. Again, with this you’ll have some yes sets, maybe 
before to warm them up a little and afterwards to give them some reasons for 
having done that. 
 
Primarily, you’re going to prepare them for an experience. It could be that they do 
something with each other. It could be that you demonstrate something up here. 
Perhaps they watch some type of projection, but you want them to be engaged 
with the materials in some way. 
 
The ‘how’ stage could also be a story as a result of that. How will you be once 
you have product (x) in your hands? Let me tell you how you’ll feel once you 
come to our hypnotherapy program, right.  
 
In terms of using stage hypnosis to fill your practice, the ‘how’ is a demonstration 
isn’t it? Then you fill in the yes sets, like if you get someone’s personality change 
up here, turning from shy to confident, if you took five minutes for this person to 
go from ultra shy to ultra confident, can you see the value of hypnosis in your 
lives? 
 
If you can fix this like that, how quickly can it fix whatever you have?  
 
Now, let’s do another demonstration. 
 
 
Just because we’re calling it stage hypnosis, does not mean it has to be a comedy 
routine. It doesn’t mean you have to embarrass anyone on stage or be cheesy in 
any way. You can do some very psychological stage hypnosis, right like arm 
catalepsy. I like to have physical and visual demonstrations and always use them 
like a magic moment so they can attach meaning to it. 
 
Do you understand what I mean by that? 
 
Seeing as we’re in the ‘how’ stage, how would you like to be able to do a 
demonstration that instantly means people get what you’re talking about wouldn’t 
that be worthwhile in whatever thing you’re doing? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
It won’t be the same demonstration, but it’ll be a type of demonstration. These 
things are called magic moments. Let me have a volunteer. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               441                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
[Applause] 
 
A lot of you were seeing something similar already before, so we’re going to use 
this because it’s familiar to you, but for those who it isn’t it’s quick to use. 
 
Let’s say we’re doing a seminar on self empowerment. Do you want to know how 
self empowerment works? It all starts inside your mind. It feels like it may start 
inside your body like feelings, strengths and so on, but it actually happens inside 
your mind. 
 
What I want you to do is put your hand out to the side for a moment and resist 
while I push down on it. Now, we’re going to use the power of the mind in a way 
that’s going to make him stronger or weaker.  
 
Stick your hand out. What I want you to do is think about someone you really 
dislike, someone that makes you feel bad in some way. Think about that person 
and resist. Do you see how by focusing on something that is negative in your life, 
it doesn’t just change your mind it changes your entire body? It makes it less 
resistant to disease, and so on. 
 
It can happen in an instant. Do you want me to prove the power of the mind and 
how it can switch you around in one instant, seconds literally, and make you 
stronger than you’ve ever been before, would you like that? 
 
Audience: 
Yes. 
 
Igor: 
Put your hand out. Now, I want you to think about someone you really love, 
someone you care for deeply. Let me know when you’re thinking of that person 
and resist. Give him a round of applause. 
 
[Applause] 
 
This is the important part of a magic moment. It’s all in the frames that you’re 
setting; otherwise, this would be just a cheesy demo. I invite all of you to think 
about what thoughts you’re thinking at any moment of the day, which either make 
you strong or weak. 
 
If you feel weak throughout the day, what are you doing to allow that to 
happen?  
 
Who would like to be able to fix that? 
 
 
We have a program called the lifelong success program… 
 
[Laughter] 
Give him a nice round of applause, off you go. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               442                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
[Applause] 
 
 
Doesn’t that suddenly make more sense, because you’ve had a demonstration of 
it? Do you all understand how the ‘how’ works? Magic moments can be used in 
terms of conversational hypnosis, at the beginning of the interaction, to open the 
doorway as many of you have been taught. 
 
It can also be used in the middle of your presentation to validate the very ideas 
that you’ve been presenting. Does that make sense? Any questions on that? 
 
Finally, we have the ‘what if’, which is the question/answer segment. It’s the bit 
where everyone connects everything together. I’d like for you to imagine if you 
would…all of you thought you would use this somehow, you came here for a 
purpose right…put your hand up. 
 
If you thought of a specific situation/scenario where Group Covert Hypnosis 
might be useful for you, I would like for you to consider that now. What do you 
think of that situation? Instead of thinking about it the way you used to do it, 
noticing that you’ve changed, grown with knowledge, I’d like for you to consider 
how you might use it in the future. 
 
Simple things like telling stories using yes sets. Knowing that certain ideas will 
cause a certain kind of resistance and how can you present those ideas in a way 
that the resistance simply melts. I’d like for you to think about that for a moment.  
 
Notice your mind begin to engage with the experiences you’ve had here in a 
different way, perhaps a magic moment or a few yes sets sprinkled in, some tests 
along the way, an opportunity to find out exactly how that audience is thinking, so 
the next time you do this same experience again your stories change. 
 
Your pre-frames change or your yes sets change, every time you do this. Just 
consider it. It makes sense that the more you do this the better your presentation 
starts to become, does it not? So how much could you improve if you just did a 
small amount of this each time? 
 
And if you take those small changes and move them forward into the future, so 
you get to look back at some point, where at a point in time where you will have 
done this so often that it’s just natural to you, isn’t that the way you want to 
present to people, naturally, influentially and powerfully? Would that not increase 
your capacity to earn a greater income? 
 
You will be earning it, because you’ll be providing more value then you’ve ever 
done before and that makes sense, doesn’t it? Who wants to provide a bit more 
value to the world? Who would like to get paid along the lines at the same time? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               443                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Who thinks they actually have some skills that will take them significantly further 
doing that? 
 
In that case, my job is done. I want to thank all of you for paying attention, not 
just today but those of you who have been here for longer; it’s been a long 
journey hasn’t it?  
 
For the rest of you who have just been here today, I hope it’s given you some 
solid ideas as to how you can take your own business forward, how to recession-
proof yourself, how to use these skills in whatever it is you’re doing, so that you 
can be more successful and in being more successful make those around you more 
successful as well. 
 
That’s how value is exchanged isn’t it? I want you to think about that in terms of 
the last thought you have here, the closing thought of say, Jerry Springer…no 
fighting today I know, but the closing thought is simple. 
 
Can you take the idea of value and hang onto it? Think to yourself, how can I add 
more value, how can I make people see there is more value so I can ask for more 
value in return? It’s a fair exchange isn’t it? 
 
With that happy thought, thank you for giving me such valuable time. I look 
forward to being with you some other time where we can do the same exchange 
again. Until then, thank you very much. 
 
Go home, I’m done! 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               444                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Questions and Answers on Advanced 
Covert Hypnosis 
 
Bonus CD’s Transcript 
 
Igor:  
 I have a whole big mailbag, so I'll just take these in order.  
 
Marvin, you have some fantastic questions here. Let's focus on the Advanced 
Convert Hypnosis questions. 
 
 The first question is about the PCAT formula on the hypnotherapy side of things, 
but I'm going to answer it in terms of Advanced Covert Hypnosis because that's 
what this call is all about.  
 
We are working on a transcript of these formulas, and they should be based on a 
video, that's in the works. There are a lot of things that are nuances and they won't 
necessarily come out in the language. One of the keys to mind-bending language, 
this is so important for people to realize, is that it's not a linguistic trick. 
 
 People think it's the language because that's what you hear, that's what people 
focus on, where their attention goes, but it's not about the language, it's about the 
mindset. It's your mindset and their mindset. And the way you can tell their 
mindset is purely and simply their reaction. Sometimes you can read things into 
their words that are reactions, but more often it will be their tone or facial 
expression. It's going to be much more a question of paying attention to what's 
going on. 
 
The transcript will be useful, and in time we hope to bring that kind of stuff out, 
but really the more useful version will be to see it and have that broken down to 
the nuances.  Look at his facial expression now, that just tells me that this has 
happened, that's why I'm asking this question next. Does that make sense to you? 
 
Marvin:  
 Yes. 
 
Igor:   
Do you have a follow up question to that side of things? 
 
Marvin: 
  No, that's fine. 
 
Igor:   
The second question was in terms of learning mind-bending language, do you 
want to give us your question on that one? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               445                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Marvin:   
Well it was basically the same thing; I'm just trying to figure out how to make this 
more useful. I'm in some degrees learning challenged, it's not as easy to pick up 
things, so sitting there listening to them being taught and then being able to 
transfer that and use it, I'm just looking for other ways to do that.  
 
Igor:   
So first of all, let me tell you about the long way around, which is how I learned 
it, and even that was pretty good.  There's basically two people who teach a 
version of mind-bending language in the hypnosis community and one of them 
really doesn't do a great job of it. So it was very confusing when I first came 
across it. The other one did a great job, only it took him a long time, and that was 
my own mentor, John Overdurf. It took me a long time with him to start figuring 
out some of the key pieces, and really, for about eight years I struggled with it. 
Eight years is a long time to be just breaking into it.   
 
I listened to examples of it over and over again, and I got some nuances of it, but 
honestly, I had no idea how to teach it and there was no big light bulb, I just kind 
of muddled my way through for a long time. And that muddling process is useful 
because over time I got a lot better at it. In fact, I was using mind-bending 
language with clients and doing great stuff with them.  Sometimes it would hit 
and sometimes it would miss purely because I didn't have a great system to put 
into my head.  
 
The big breakthrough, the huge breakthrough as far as I'm concerned, came in the 
form of just one idea. And that idea was spatial predicates. As soon as I heard 
that, and again, that was an idea that John Overdurf came up with, I suddenly 
went "I get it now". Now I know how to do this systematically and how to fit it in 
and so on.  
 
Now we go into two split roots, because it's most important. The first root is just 
the language. It can make us crazy, I don't know if this is your experience Marvin, 
but sometimes trying to figure out what is the right thing to say now can make 
you feel crazy and stumped, right?  
 
Marvin:  
 Yes. 
 
Igor:   
So that's purely the language element, but then there's another side of things, 
which is the strategic element, which is to say what are you trying to achieve in 
the first place? They have to go hand in hand because just randomly throwing 
language out there, it wouldn't do very much. It can have great effects, and 
sometimes it'll hit, but sometimes it will miss and you won't know why or which 
direction to go in to make it start hitting again. So you need to keep your mind in 
those two streams simultaneously. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               446                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
You'll do certain things to build your linguistic ability, your ability to just speak in 
these ways, then you'll do certain things to train your strategic ability, in other 
words, to know what directions to head in. Make sense? 
 
Marvin:  
 Yes. 
 
Igor:   
So let's look at the first side first, which is what are the things you can do, the 
exercises, the drills to get just your linguistic side up. Because then, if nothing 
else you'll at least be on a 50-50 place, you know, you'll throw stuff out there, it 
didn't quite work, so you throw some more out, throw more out and eventually 
something will work. You won't necessarily know why consciously, but at least 
it's already being a little bit practical. All right? 
 
Marvin:   
Okay. 
 
Igor:   
So the simple answer to that is to basically repeat the exercises you did in Vegas 
in the live training. Do you still have your handout?  
 
Marvin: 
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
So what I recommend is, with other people, perhaps on this call, or people that 
you've swapped details with at the training, or people in the Private Hypnosis 
Club or find other people willing to work with you, and schedule time every 
week, ideally every day, for maybe 20 minutes or half an hour to just practice the 
same drills over and over. The ones that are particularly useful are the simple 
ones, like "who are you now". The ones that really have the biggest use are the 
ones that use the spins, remember, you had those different columns and you had 
one set of spins, then another set of spins and so on, right? 
 
Marvin:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
Those are the biggest use because you have a much larger variety of things you 
can do with it. So the drills for you to practice are: 
1. Where do you emphasize something? So you'll write down maybe one 
or two sentences, you emphasize different elements of your statements, so that 
you can practice on each other and get a feel for what it feels like when someone 
emphasized different parts of that sentence. It will change the meaning quite 
significantly. Make sense? 
 
Marvin:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
 
2. Where do you put your pauses, and pauses are important. 
Pauses create that reversal agreement space where people's mind starts spinning in 
one direction and suddenly you pull the carpet out from underneath their feet, and 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               447                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
they go spinning in a completely different direction much faster, because it was 
unexpected. So pauses can be very, very useful. 
 
3. Is just the different types of language, how do you put them all together 
in different ways? If you get used to this, you will get to the point where it's a no 
brainer. Do you have the Street Hypnosis Deck?  
 
Marvin:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
So do you remember how we played with the Street Hypnosis Deck?  Initially you 
had to start thinking and figuring out how to fill in the gaps in the middle, and 
how to do power words and how to use them in context and so on, but over time, 
you used it and you practiced with friends and so on, it became second nature, 
right? You just didn't think about it much, you flashed a word on the card, or a 
phrase on the card and suddenly your mind just said something, or your mouth 
said something, and then your mind caught up and said, yah, that sounds pretty 
good. Does that sound like a fair assessment of how you developed? 
 
Marvin:  
 Okay. 
 
Igor:   
And please tell me if it's not because then we can have a discussion about that. 
You're going to do essentially the same process with mind-bending language. In 
fact, when it comes out in about a month or so, the Mind Bending Language Deck 
will have three sections which pretty much track the way you can train yourself to 
do these things. The first deck is just a collection of pre-formed mind bending 
language, much as the Street Hypnosis Deck is a pre-formed set of power words 
and phrases that you can use.  That's just useful to get people used to the different 
range of expression. You use that in exactly the same way as the Street Hypnosis 
Deck. 
 
The second deck is the one where I'm asking you to focus specifically on the 
sySTEM spins. Who are you now? Anytime but here. Only there. And all the 
different constructions you can put together that way. The idea again is that you 
drill those over and over and over until your mind accepts these as quite normal.  
Part of the problem in the process in the moment is that you have to get your mind 
into the right gear. Which means you have to stretch it, it's like a muscle, right? 
 
Marvin: 
Right. 
 
Igor:   
You know how to sign your own name and how to write notes and stuff like that, 
right?  
 
Marvin: 
Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               448                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor:   
Now, it took a period of practice, of just rote practice shall we say, of writing out 
the alphabet and writing out names to get to the point that your hand knew how to 
form those letters, right?  
 
Marvin:   
Right. 
 
Igor:  
 You changed pathways in your brain, the result of which writing becomes easy 
now. Mind bending language is the same.  Part of the reason why people confuse 
themselves is because they're trying to go too far too quickly. The key is to start 
off with just drills, drills, drills to create fluency. Don't think in terms of how to 
use them practically, I'll get to that in a moment, just do the drills so that you have 
range.   
 
Think of a balloon, at first the balloon is deflated and there's not much space in it. 
But as you blow and blow and blow, the balloon expands and the plastic stretches.  
As a result it now has a much larger capacity, you can now put water in, you can 
put whatever you want into it.  So the same is what we're doing here, we're going 
to stretch your mental balloon so that it encompasses a larger area of expression.  
The sySTEMs spins is in my opinion the simplest way of doing that. Would you 
agree to say that's an easy process to go through? 
 
Marvin:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
So you just do that and just realize it's a training process as I said to you in the 
seminar, everyone will end up in a different place at the end of the seminar 
because we only have so much time to drill things. Now you start drilling at 
home, and before you know it you'll have an epiphany one day and go, oh, this is 
easy. That's part of what that drill is supposed to do for you. You can do this at 
the same time. You can take all the sySTEM predicates, the space, time, energy 
and matter ones, and initially, just write them down on little bits of paper, or on 
the back of a card or something like that. Put one or two of them in your pocket. I 
don't know if you every did this with the Street Hypnosis Deck, but you put one 
or two in your pocket with some of the power words, then for a day you challenge 
yourself to use that word or phrase as often as possible in conversation. Have you 
ever played that game? 
 
Marvin:  
No. 
 
Igor:   
No? Well, it's a fun game. It's actually a very useful way to get hypnotic language 
into your everyday language.  Well, you do the same with your sySTEMs 
language because this is going to be the heart of mind-bending language. There 
are other maneuvers, by all means, but once you get his maneuver down, those 
sySTEMs predicates, then it all becomes relatively easy. Then it's just a question 
of accumulating a nuance here, or a nuance there. So one of the ways to get used 
to this in a practical sense, again, you've got to let go of the outcome in terms of 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               449                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
sales, you can't say "now I have to get this sale, now I have to get this result" 
because that's going to inhibit you.  
 
You've got to build the neurological connections in your mind first, to make it 
easy speaking these words. One way to do that now it to take each of those 
predicate words or phrases, and challenge yourself that today I'm going to this 
one, or these two or three, as often as possible. Let's say you take the words 
'beyond' and 'whenever', so you're having a chat like I'm having with you and you 
might say something along the lines of "whenever I want to use the sySTEMs 
predicates, you're going to go beyond what you're aware of, because whenever 
you go beyond those things, you end up finding something that is far beyond 
wherever you were experiencing before" right? 
 
Marvin:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
Do you notice how now I'm using my sySTEMs predicates in exactly the same 
way as I was using my power words before. These are kind of advanced power 
words, if you like. If you use them like advanced power words, your mind builds 
facility with them and that's the crucial thing. When you're doing it, rather than 
studying it, doing is the key piece. Believe me, I have sat there for years listening 
over and over and over again, and it helped. And I've written out example after 
example after example and I just got more confused. It helps to some extent, but 
your mind has no where to put it, it needs vast amounts of examples to create a 
pattern.  
 
What we've done here for you is we've given you the pattern, which will make it 
easier for your mind to induce, or deduce, different ways of using it. Does this 
clarify what you can do just to get the language side of it? 
 
Marvin:   
Yes, it gives me something extra to start doing, and I'm going to do it.  
 
Igor:   
Excellent, that's really good. Especially if you're thinking in terms of practical 
things, start throwing sySTEMs predicates on their own, and as that gets too easy, 
start throwing in two or three at the same time into normal conversations and start 
watching for reactions. This starts moving us into that second stream. The second 
stream is the key piece. Remember we started off the whole seminar by saying 
Mind Bending Covert Hypnosis is not about speaking like you're on drugs. It's 
about thinking like you're on drugs. 
 
So you need to get your mind into the right place. Part of the linguistic exercises 
that we've just been talking about will get you there in part, absolutely. Especially 
if you're trading with people, so they'll spin your mind out as you spin their mind 
out, and it's quite a helpful little process that goes on. All the notes you got in 
Vegas will be useful in expanding your mind in different directions.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               450                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
So coming on to the strategic thing, you marry up what you can do with just a 
random skill set with what's happening to your environment.  In other words, how 
people are responding to you, right? 
 
Marvin:   
Right. 
 
Igor:  
 Because ultimately, if you want to influence people, you've got to take them from 
where they're at to where you need them to be, and you've got to lead them by the 
hand each step. Some people will race that distance along with you, some people 
will drag you because they know where you're going. Others are going to be very 
cautious and look at the ground constantly to see where the next step is, and 
you've got to take them sedately. In other words, you can't just go kidnapping 
people and throw them into the end place. You've got to take them at their own 
rate; otherwise you just get massive resistance, right? 
 
Marvin:  
Right. 
 
Igor:   
That's why; by the way, some people sound like they're on drugs. They're going 
too far ahead.  What they're saying might be totally rational and reasonable, when 
you work out the logic inside the mind-bending language, but if you are four steps 
ahead of someone else, they'll look at you like, what the hell are you talking 
about? That's the wrong kind of confusion. It's kind of like if a math professor, or 
a physics professor starts talking to you about some way difficult complex 
differential equations, and you go, whoa, whoa, let's go back to algebra, I have 
enough issues with that one. All right?  
 
So, how do you develop that? Part of that instinct gets developed when you start 
using your predicates, your advanced power words as we like to call them now, in 
everyday conversations. At the same time, you just notice the impact. Sometimes 
will just glaze right over for a moment, then come back, no big deal. Sometimes 
people will push back instantly. You don't want to make anything of those 
reactions; you just want to notice what those reactions are. Pay attention, because 
now you've got the dynamic going on. The dynamic is, you speak using advanced 
power words and they react, and you notice their reaction, which will feed into 
your next layer. This will be your next set of things to do. Make sense? 
 
Marvin:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
And this, by the way, hopefully you're starting to see a few parallels here, with 
using the PCAT formula for hypnotherapy as well. You always think in terms of 
loops, rather than one hit wonders. I don't want the magic bullet that will cure 
everything at once. You might get it, and with experience you'll get it more often 
than not, but you're more interested in the loops that get you someplace, right?  
 
Marvin:   
Right. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               451                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor:   
So the next thing is, and this is the key one as far as I'm concerned, this is the 
absolute key to the whole strategic conundrum. You can think in terms of 
expanding mind and contracting mind, dissociating, associating, all the kind of 
trickery that we talked about at the end of the Vegas training, but before you can 
get to that point, that's really icing on the cake.  The most important exercise of 
them all, bar none, is for you to do that mental rehearsal we talked about. 
Remember, where you imagine a person you want to influence, what kind of 
situations first come into your mind? 
 
Marvin:   
Well, I'm trying to be a therapy practitioner. 
 
Igor:   
Excellent. So just think of a client that might come in and have a problem, right? 
Ideally you'll think of a specific person, but it can be a fictional person at the 
moment until you get more practice, that's fine. And then they'll present the 
problem to you. Now, here's the key to developing the mindset. You want to run 
through mental rehearsals, shall we say mental scenarios. You know you have 
scenarios about how you're going to talk to someone about something, or how 
you're going to handle a certain phone call or something like that.  You have the 
same one, but this time you're constantly asking yourself, what is the underlying 
condition that allows this person to think this way. 
 
Here's the theory I'm talking about. Are you familiar with the simple syllogisms, 
you know, 'all men are worthwhile, John is a man, therefore he is worthwhile'. So 
we have two statements. All men are worthwhile, and John is a man, those are 
two statements that are given to us. From those two we can work out something 
else, right?  
 
Marvin:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
The problem is, when people come to you, what they tell you is 'John is 
worthwhile'. What they don't tell you is, what is the unconscious logic, sometimes 
they're not even aware of it themselves. What is the unconscious logic that lets 
you conclude this? And very often, that's very often two, three, five layers of 
thought behind. So there's one set of thoughts that has one conclusion, then 
another set of conclusions get put together for the next conclusion, and so on. 
What they give you has been divorced by 'n' degrees, right? 
 
Marvin:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
Your job is to make you think very strategically, to make you figure out, what is 
that basic assumption, what is the equivalent of 'all men are worthwhile, John is a 
man' that has led to this conclusion. In terms of therapy of course, it'll be more 
like 'all people are worthless, I'm a person, therefore I'm worthless'. So you now 
know where to challenge with your mind bending spins primarily on, whether all 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               452                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
people really are worthless. It's not going to have as much energy if you're going 
to challenge that they're a person. 
 
Do you see where I'm going? 
 
Marvin:  
Right. 
 
Igor:   
You actually steer your attention into what things you shake the tree on more. So 
by going through that mental exercise itself, I hope you remember the day in 
Vegas we did this, by going through it over and over in your mind, you start 
sensitizing yourself to how people are thinking. Then, not initially, but at a later 
stage, you can start throwing in mind-bending questions as part of your 
exploration. At first, it is very direct questions. If you find yourself getting in a 
loop, remember that the way you break that loop is getting someone to commit to 
a position, you repeat it, you totally emphasize it so they're completely committed 
to it, and then you ask your next question to delve into that one a little bit more. 
 
So over time, what will happen is, you go from questions like, let's say someone 
says 'I hate myself', and you ask them, well, how do you do that? Well, I just get 
up in the morning and I hate myself. So you wake up in the morning and you hate 
yourself? Yes. Well, how come? Do you hate everyone? No, just myself. So what 
makes you different to everyone else? Now notice, I'm asking a regular question 
here, right? 
 
Marvin:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
I'm getting at the pattern of why they hate them self, and conclude that you are 
worth hating. By the way, that's another question I could ask. But do you notice 
that I'm also starting to introduce little mind-bending power words like 'everyone 
else'. Everyone else, those are two different kinds of predicates, so you just throw 
them back in, and it adds just a little bit of spin. Over time you can add more and 
more spin as you go along as well. But you do this in mental rehearsals in order to 
start sensitizing your mind in terms of the process you go through. 
Now that's just going to take time.  You just have to roll up your sleeves and do 
that. Why? Because most people most people don't spend time doing that. You 
haven't spent a lifetime figuring out peoples thought patterns. We tend to take 
people very much on the surface. Taking the language on the surface is useful, but 
taking their ideas on the surface is not. There's a big difference between the two. 
One is the structure of what they're saying; the other is the content of what they're 
saying. 
 
The content is rarely important, the structure is usually very important.  Behind 
the content, there will be kind of a logic lesson to conclude that content, and that's 
what you're after. Once you can get to that point, then that' how you can do your 
therapy, by the way. That's how I do most of my therapy now a days. Someone 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               453                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
comes in with a problem; I'll start off asking them the parameters, where are you 
now, where do you want to be? Then I'll ask them about the problem, tell me 
about the problem. Well, how about this, I don't understand that, how did this 
happen, how does that work?  
 
As I'm doing this, I'm just noticing things as they start coming out, and eventually 
the 'thing' just stares me in the face, and it's easy at that point. If I don't know 
where to go at that point, if I'm stuck in a loop, for example, then anything will 
do. Just throw in a random, mind-bending question like, aside from all the 
thoughts you're not having when you're not thinking that you're worthwhile, what 
else aren't you doing that means that you're a human being, that has something 
other than being worthless? And they'll go 'what the hell did you just say?' And 
you'll go 'I have no idea', but at least you've shifted them from whatever loop they 
were getting into, right? 
 
Marvin:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
Then it makes your life very easy. You explore, if you're stuck, you throw a 
random loop in, that opens things up again, and then you explore some more. 
Eventually you'll get to some type of a nub, a crux of the problem, a bite point.  
There'll be a lot of energy in it, they'll be attached to it in some way, and then you 
can do all kinds of things.  You can reflect the problem back onto that, say 'how's 
that working for you'. You can use a rapid reframe, which is actually just a pre-
packaged form of mind-bending language. Or you can just us a bit of mind-
bending language around it to start popping things open. Then you'll see them do 
that transformation, or rush. They're in the trance of infinite possibilities now. 
Now you just wait, and use your other things, wait and see where they come 
down.  
 
Or, if you want to go into some general hypnotic, like a blitz, that's a great time to 
do it. Do you see how it all hangs together now? 
 
Marvin:   
Yes, it's good. 
 
Igor:   
Does that answer your questions?  
 
Marvin:   
It does. It answers the first two.  
 
Igor:   
Now, do you mind if we pause before we answer your third question to give 
someone else a chance to ask their question, and we'll come back to it at the end if 
we have time. 
 
Marvin:   
Absolutely. Thank you. 
 
Igor:   
Let me check who else is online. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               454                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Okay, Shane, are you still there?  
 
Shane:   
Yes, I just muted the phone. 
 
Igor:   
Great, you had a couple of questions about using covert hypnosis to help people 
with problems like tinnitus, and other challenges.  
 
Shane:   
I tried that with the story about the boiler room. Tinnitus is the challenge; I think 
weight loss is a little bit easier.  
 
Igor:  
 Let me just hold you there for a second.  This is what I 'm going to ask you to do, 
which is really the same thing I'm asking Marvin to do. The first thing, before you 
work with a person with tinnitus, never take their problems seriously. They are no 
doubt big problems, and they are no doubt suffering from this, but it's not real. 
They've created some kind of fiction around this so that it's created more of an 
issue than it needs to be and it blocks the very things that they need to forget 
about it.  
 
 
The boiler factory story, for example, is just telling the unconscious mind about 
the ways that you can block things out. But, and here's the crucial thing, until 
you've talked to the person and destabilized the problem enough, the story has 
nowhere to sit. So the story usually comes at the end of a process. This is true in 
terms of sales, in terms of teaching; this is true in terms of therapy. What we're 
doing is we're taking someone who's locked into a certain position, right? Right 
now they're locked into the position that tinnitus is terrible, I'm suffering from it, 
and there's nothing I can do about it, make sense? 
 
Shane:   
Yes, that's exactly it.  
 
Igor:   
So what you need to do before you start offering solutions and telling the stories 
to them, you have to, do you remember the PCAT formula? P stands for the 
problem. You've got to activate the problem, and then you've got to mix it up with 
the C stage, remember, to clear the mind. You've got to create a neutral territory 
where there's something where the story can do some good. That's where the 
mind-bending language shines.  
 
So in terms of what you're doing, you have the last two stages of the PCAT 
formula down pat.  You told the story, with access to some resources, and can 
transform the problem in a very beneficial way.  
 
Shane:   
Just like Marvin, we haven't had the experience you've had. 
 
Igor:   
I'd like just to pause this. I'm not actually criticizing, I think what you're doing is 
great, just jumping in and doing the work, which is the important thing. The bit 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               455                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
I'm trying to get at is how to set someone up so that final stage is easy, in other 
words, it will take. So we'll focus on the P and C part of the PCAT formula. Does 
that make sense? 
 
Shane:   
Yes, I'd really appreciate that. 
 
Igor:   
So the first set on the P part, the problem. There are two things you want to focus 
on here. Number one, you want to make sure you drop them in their problem 
enough that they feel it, but not so much that they get lost in it. Does that make 
sense? 
 
Shane:   
It does. That's what I haven't been remembering to do all the time, activate the 
problem very much because.. 
 
Igor:   
It's painful. 
 
Shane:  
Well, there's the other school of hypnosis that says you just focus on the positive 
things, you don't bring in any of the problem, and unfortunately that's my past, it's 
not nearly as good as the present experiences.  Do it the better way. 
 
Igor:   
The approach works great, the whole positive approach, I'm a total fan of it.  The 
only reason I say look at the problem is that you have to open it up enough so that 
you can put something on top of it, is all.  That's the only reason we work with 
problems in the first place. Very often, as a hypnotherapist you don't need that, 
because they come in with a problem already active. That's one of the reasons 
most hypnotherapists get away with less time spent on the problem. Make sense? 
 
Shane:   
Yes, and you cover this in your irresistible suggestion to a degree as well. It's just 
putting everything together, the tapestry. 
 
Igor:  
Let me give you a very simple format to deal with those first two stages. This will 
actually feed into parts of Marvin's question as well. The first thing you do is you 
ask them, what's the problem. First of all you'll do these things very overtly, 
because it's always easier to do things overtly than covertly until you're used to it, 
then doing them covertly will be easier because you activate less resistance and so 
on. So initially you're going to do this overtly just because it's less things for you 
to juggle.  
 
So what you're going to do is, you're going to ask them about the problem. What's 
the problem? And by the way, you know how we talked to Marvin about the 
mental rehearsals, do these rehearsals yourself. Do the same friend, and see if you 
can run through five or six different dialogues depending on which way the 
situation might go, to really train yourself to think in these patterns. Let's just do a 
five minute role play on this, is that okay with you Shane? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               456                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Shane:   
That would be fantastic. 
 
Igor:  
 So Shane, you be your friend that you want to help with the tinnitus, and I'll be 
you for a bit. So what's the person's name, or you can invent a name for a bit, you 
can keep that privacy if you want. 
 
Shane:   
His name's Tony. 
 
Igor:   
Okay. So tell me Tony, what's the problem? 
 
Shane:   
I have this ringing in my ears, pretty much all the time. 
 
Igor:   
Okay, so you've got ringing in your ear and you feel great, right? Because every 
time you hear that ringing it reminds you of just how amazing life can be, right?  
 
Shane:   
Nooooooo! 
 
Igor:   
All the gratuities of life just ringing in your ears. Yes! Pay attention because good 
things are happening. I envy you, Tony. 
 
Shane:   
What ?! No, it's not like that at all! 
 
Igor:   
Well, what's it like, Tony? 
 
Shane:   
It's distracting, I can't appreciate music like I used to. 
 
Igor:   
Ah, I see, so it's just distracting, right? 
 
Shane:  
 It's annoying. 
 
Igor:  S 
o it's distracting and annoying? 
 
Shane:   
I can't hear people as well as I'd like. 
 
Igor:   
Sure. Excellent. It's distracting, it's annoying and you can't really hear people as 
well as you'd like. I understand the idea of wanting to hear people better is good. 
But I don't understand how you can be distracted, what's annoying about it? 
 
Shane:  
 Ummm. 
 
Igor:   
Let me just pause you there a moment Shane. Notice what we were just doing 
when we asked that question, right? What I'm asking is, he's given me a 
nominalization, it's distracting, it's annoying.  Do I have any idea what those 
things mean?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               457                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Shane:   
No, because they're nominalizations. 
 
Igor:   
Exactly. So let's take this back to what we talked to Marvin about the rehearsals. 
That is a conclusion he's come to. I have no idea how he got to that conclusion, do 
you? 
 
Shane:   
No, I don't. 
 
Igor:   
So this is the P part of the whole process. I want to figure out, how does he even 
get close to that conclusion. Now, in the mean time, notice that by asking these 
questions, I'm also tripping you out a little bit. Why? Because, in order to answer 
the question, Tony has to go into an unconscious territory to get the reasoning, or 
part of the reasoning back to tell me about it. So you already have a P and a C 
happening together a little bit of the time. You're taking something, a 
nominalization, which is rigid, it's fixed, it's locked, and you're starting to soften it 
up by figuring out, how did he come to that conclusion.  
 
In the process of figuring it out, you can throw in little mind-bending spins. 
Remember when I teased you and said 'you are so lucky to have a constant 
reminder of how amazing life can be, I wish I had that' right? That's a little bit of a 
mind-bending maneuver because I'm taking a totally different read of the 
situation. I don't expect that to work as a "reframe" , I don't care if it works, it's 
totally irrelevant, in fact I expect it to not work. What I expect it to do is number 
one, start pushing back, and number two, for the edges of certainty to start 
loosening up a little bit. Rather than sympathizing with you, going 'yah, that's a 
big problem' which maintains the boundary, I'm starting to challenge the 
boundary and saying I know a lot of people who would think of it in an entirely 
different way. A lot of people would. So now, he's the odd one out, his problem is 
the odd one out, rather than him thinking that this is what reality is all about. 
 
Do you see how all that is working together Shane? 
 
Shane:   
Yes, I see that, I have to push a little bit. 
 
Igor:  
 Exactly!  
 
Shane:   
I haven't done that because I had to go outside of where I've been to someplace 
new to do that. It's fantastic going to new places in your mind. 
 
Igor:   
Here's the thing, Shane, you're a very friendly, vibrant, positive person. That's 
something I really appreciate about you. We spent a lot of time together in Vegas, 
and I think it's fair to say that a lot of people would think that of you as well. I'm 
not asking you to avoid that, I'm asking you to use that as part of what you're 
doing. You see, you can push people around with a big smile and a friendly vibe 
and they'll love it. It just mixes things up. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               458                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Shane:   
You do it and enjoy it. 
 
Igor:   
Exactly! I could push you if I wanted to and say, hey Shane, just get up off your 
ass and do something.  Just talk to him like you talk to other people. You can 
enjoy that, can't you? You notice the energy has gone up, I'm putting a little bit 
more pressure on you, but you can also hear the smile in my voice, can't you? 
You can see that it's a friendly pushing. 
 
Shane:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
That's the key distinction.  People know you're on their side. They know you're 
doing this for their own good, with them. You're not looking down on them, 
you're not calling them names, you're not trying to blame them for anything, and 
that's fine. The reason people don't like being put under pressure is because they 
feel somehow inferior. Like "you should know the answer to this". Instead if I 
say,  I know you can't figure it out yet, but really think about it, I know it's inside 
there, otherwise, how would you be able to figure out when it's time to be 
annoyed by tinnitus?  
 
They'll go, I don't know. But something inside you must, right? And they'll go, 
yes. So now I'm locking them back in a position where he has to know the 
answer, he just doesn't know he knows it yet. Then he realizes I'm on his side 
now, and it's not like a pressure saying, you stupid boy, you don't know the 
answer, which is usually what happens in schools, and that's where a lot of self 
esteem issues come from. It's like saying I know you know the answer, it's just 
you don't realize it yet, so go ahead and look inside.  And they'll go, I can't find it, 
and you'll say, that's right, but you're starting to come out and you can feel the 
edge of something there, can't you. Yah, I guess. So now you're really starting to 
evolve something. The key thing here is, think about the problem being set in 
concrete, you've got to loosen the concrete up before you do anything else.  
 
So when you think about your mind bending language in terms of the questions 
you ask people, in order to get at the formula, the logic, that lets them conclude 
that this is annoying or distracting, what that will do is start mixing everything up. 
So he's not so sure that he's made the right decision. In other words, whether it 
really should be annoying. You want that, because now the A and T part of the 
formula have something to work on. A warning on this whole thing, is that if you 
do this, the very process of asking these mind-bending questions without any 
desire to resolve the issue, will accidently resolve the issue. 
 
That's just something you'll have to live with. Can you do that, Shane? 
 
Shane:   
That'd be fantastic. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               459                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor:   
So the key to getting good at this is, again like Marvin, do the mental rehearsals. 
Rehearse, rehearse, rehearse, run through conversations in your mind. Let them 
throw little things to stump you, and then resolve those. You know the key 
features, which are pressure, locking them into a position, exaggeration for push 
back; those are the three key maneuvers to getting at the root of something. And 
then just persistence.  If you want to throw in a fourth one, it means you put some 
mind-bending spins on the questions you ask, and before you know it, they can't 
hold on to their problem very well.  
 
They might still have the problem, they may still feel the annoyance or the 
distraction, but they won't be able to hold onto it as much, now it's more fluid, 
which means that you have a space to do something, with a story, with a blitz, or 
even with some mind-bending language. Make sense? 
 
Shane:   
Yes it does. 
 
Igor:   
So for those of you who are interested in other kinds of influence, sales, teaching 
for example and so on, the process is identical. We're not looking in terms of what 
problems people have, what psychological limitations and fear and whatever, 
what we're looking at is, where are people locked? When you're a sales person 
and you try to sell someone a car, or a pen, or whatever they're selling, if they're 
saying it costs too much, they're locked. Price may very well be a consideration. If 
they say I want this quality and this price, they're locked in two positions; one of 
them is going to give. So by doing the same process, questioning around the 
quality, and how they came to the conclusion that this is the only quality that they 
want. Questioning them around the price and how they concluded this is the only 
price they want, and question about their outcome, if they can't get the quality and 
the price at all, well then they may end up running out having nothing. 
 
Which basically conflicts with whatever underlying logic that wants them to have 
the quality in the first place, right? So you're doing exactly the same things when 
you're handling people's objections, it's just called something different. You could 
use sales terminology in therapy and say, when someone tells you that tinnitus is 
annoying, well, that's an objection. So you tell them to just let the unconscious 
mind ignore it so that it can't even notice it anymore, and they'll say, but it's too 
distracting and it's annoying me. That's an objection, so you handle it like every 
other objection.  
 
In other words, you find the underlying elements, you spin something around so 
you're losing the concrete, and then you add your re-phrase. Be that in the form of 
a story, or the form of a blitz, in the form of some mind bending language, it 
doesn't really matter. Now the problem isn't a problem anymore, they're not 
locked into it anymore.  Does that make sense to everyone? 
 
Shane:   
Yes. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               460                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor:   
Shane, do you have a follow up on that question in general?  
 
Shane:   
No, that was a great answer and hopefully I'll do even better with it in the future, 
from what I know now. 
 
Igor:   
Stick with it, and everything I said to Marvin before is true for you also. Believe 
me; you are working at a very high, high level of hypnosis when it comes to this 
stuff. Very high, right? I know people who have done hypnosis and even played 
with these ideas for decades who are not working at this level yet. So don't 
necessarily beat yourself up if it's not working straight away, because you have to 
get used to the whole system and way of thinking.  You've got to train your brain 
to accept the language in the first place. You've got to train your brain to think in 
these sort of decision trees.  They say this, I can say this, I'll go this route, he says 
that, I'll go that route, and so on.   
 
As these become more instinctual over time, it becomes easier and easier until 
you're just talking to someone and you tap in.  I'm curious, what is this problem 
all about? It sounds to people like you're just being curious, but there's a much 
bigger strategy going on in the back of your head, and this is it, right?  
 
Shane:   
Right. 
 
Igor:  
 Let's take someone else from the call.  
 
Ben:  
 Igor, this is Ben, how are you doing this morning? 
 
Igor: 
I'm doing fine, Ben, how are you? 
 
Ben:   
I'm doing all right. The question I have, I took the course originally for more the 
sales perspectives, and I understand using the spins a little bit better for handling 
objections. At training you talked about a bigger process, and I wondered if there 
was an easier way to bring that into the sales process.  Since I've been back, I'm 
actually an attorney by trade, so if you don't have clients, you don't make any 
money. 
 
Igor:   
I understand. 
 
Ben:  
I just wondered if there was a better way to introduce the questions. 
 
Igor:   
Let me stop you there. The essence is the PCAT formula. It's the most versatile 
influence tool I've ever come across. Hopefully you get as excited about it as I do. 
ABS teaches you about the essence of hypnosis, PCAT in my opinion teaches you 
the essence of influence. Every crazy formula we have around it basically breaks 
down to the PCAT formula as far as I'm concerned, right? So in terms of what 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               461                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
you're doing, Ben, how do you do it right now? How does the interaction start, 
and how do you develop it into your sales process. Just give me a one minute 
summary of it. 
 
Ben:  
 Basically I give presentations, dinners; invite people in for a free consultation. 
 
Igor:   
Excellent, let's just take one of those for the moment. You have a presentation, in 
essence, you're giving a talk, or you have a free consultation where they come in 
for a one on one. Is that correct? 
 
Ben:   
Well, normally it's a presentation, then a consultation. 
 
Igor:   
So a presentation to a group, and then what happens? You invite people to come 
up to the stage and talk to you, you invite people to your offices afterwards, or 
how does that work? 
 
Ben:   
I invite them afterwards for a one on one.  
 
Igor:   
So the essence is, you use your lecture to motivate people to come to your office, 
and the real sales process occurs when they come to your office for the free 
consultation. Is that how it occurs? Is that correct? 
 
Ben:   
Correct. 
 
Igor:  
So what we'll do, we'll focus on the one to one sales interaction and we can do 
something’s with the lecture as well, but we'll leave that to the side as it seems to 
be working for you already. We'll focus more on the one to one. 
 
Ben:   
Okay. 
 
Igor:   
So let me take a few guesses. The person comes in, and you ask him basically, 
what's the problem and they'll tell you, here's the situation I'm in. Then you'll 
basically tell them, here's what I can do for you and do you want it or not? Would 
that be fair to summarize roughly how you do it? 
 
Ben:   
Generally, um hm. 
 
Igor:   
Believe it or not, that's actually a very good process. You already have the 
essence of the PCAT formula in place. How? Well, P stands for problem, right? 
When they're telling you what they've come in for, while they're telling you about 
their problem, they're activating it. When they're starting to tell you about their 
problems can you see them starting to turn, more negative, or get more frustrated 
or angry or afraid, or whatever the context applies? Can you see that? 
 
Ben:   
Normally, yes. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               462                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor:   
If you don't see that, then you need to dig into the problem until you do. 
Otherwise you haven't completed the P part of the PCAT formula. Does that make 
sense? 
 
Ben:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
So the next step is, you've got to get them out of that enough so that they can they 
can have hope, and then you represent the hope in terms of what you do, right?  
 
Ben:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
So this is where a little bit of mind-bending spin comes in.   That first stage, by 
the way, that first stage where you're analyzing the problem a little bit, well, 
everything I talked to Shane and to Marvin about still applies here. So you want to 
be able to have needling questions so a) you find out more about how the problem 
is working, and b) they really feel it, so they really understand the consequences 
of it. If they're not really fully plugged into the problem, you can’t do that, for 
example. You can ask them about consequences. What do you think is going to 
happen if you don't resolve this? Are you happy with the current situation, etc, 
etc.  
 
You don't look particularly bothered by this whole thing, so why did you bother 
coming to my office if it doesn't seem like that big a deal to you? Then of course 
they'll start cracking and say, no it's a huge deal. Tell me about that, what's that 
huge deal? I'm running a bit fast here, but do you see how I've given you three or 
four different strategies in terms of how the problem is nicely activated? Yes? 
 
Ben:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
During this state, you want to take notes of the highlights. What are the biggest 
problems? What kind of an attorney are you? 
 
Ben:   
Mainly estate planning for this part.  
 
Igor:   
Excellent. So let’s say they come in and they say, I don't want my children having 
to pay half my inheritance to the tax man. I don't want my crazy ex-wife to get a 
penny, etc. and you write that down. Tax man, crazy ex-wife. You'll need that 
later on in terms of the closing because that's the juice that gets them to close. 
Make sense? 
 
Ben:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
Next you'll tell a joke, a little bit of mind bending stuff just to lessen the tension 
slightly, there'll still be a little bit left in the background, but you want to take 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               463                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
them out of that mindset because now they're in a rejection mindset. Their mind 
set is, I don't want, get away from me. You don't want that mindset whilst you're 
talking about your solution. Make sense? 
 
Ben:   
Um hm. 
 
Igor:   
Now one of the ways I used to love doing this, when I was selling executive 
coaching, is I'd talk about their problem for ages, then I'd introduce some mind 
reading. I'd say, let me hazard a guess here, you can do this because if you know 
your clients well, they tend to have the same pattern of problems over and over 
again, right? So you say, let me hazard a guess, you're thinking, you told me you 
hate this and you hate that, that's the problem. You've probably tried this, this, 
this, and this, and it's probably had this, this and this outcome. You don't know 
how to deal with this, this and this. I think that you want that, and you think this 
will get you that. By the way, it won't, let me tell you why in a moment and so on. 
 
What this does is, it sets you up as a massive authority in their world. This person 
thinks, damn, this person really knows what I'm on about, he really knows his 
stuff. Because to some extent, you're already starting to solve their problem a little 
bit, although what you're really doing is you're laying it out more clearly and 
concisely for them, so they don't have this fog or fear around it, right? What 
you're not doing is getting into any technical jargon unless they start bringing it 
up first. Technical jargon, for most people, will start shutting them down, right? 
 
Ben:   
Um hm. 
 
Igor:   
So now they're sitting on the edge of their seat. Why? Because you've made some 
guesses as to what they want, you've made some guesses as to how they've failed, 
so they think, wow, this person really knows what he's talking about. That's kind 
of a mixture between the C and the A. You've cleared the slate a little bit. You've 
created a sequence that will let you evolve from their problem into the solution. 
And of course, hiring you is the solution, right? 
 
Ben:   
Um hm. 
 
Igor:   
So now we come onto the A part of the formula, which is the associate with 
resources section. You are the resource, your knowledge, your skill, your 
expertise, your past. Now we don't necessarily do the, I'm the best lawyer because 
I have had all these wonderful clients and they all love me, right? Because apart 
from anything else, it sounds big headed plus it sounds like a sales pitch. 
 
What you want to do is create the implication, without actually stating it. How do 
you imply it? Well, you tell stories about other clients in a similar position and 
their happy outcomes, right? I mean, it's nothing more than a testimonial, really, 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               464                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
but that does a massive amount to prove your credibility. Does that make sense 
Ben? 
 
Ben:   
Yes, it does. 
 
Igor:   
The second thing is you'll start to throw in potential solutions. For example, you 
say you don't want the tax man to get everything when you pass on, for your kids 
to lose half your estate to the tax man. Well, you have several options here. One, 
you can pass everything on to your kids now, and you can do it this way. Or you 
can do it this and this way, the advantages are here, here and here. My 
recommendation, seeing what you want it this, is that you make sure of this, this, 
this, and this because of these reasons here.  
 
Now you notice how there's already a lot of scope for hypnotic language here. 
Because, which means, therefore, whenever, do you see how that works? 
 
Ben:   
Um hm. 
 
Igor:   
You're painting a picture into the future where they are, where you're basically 
solving the problem without actually doing the work for it. You're telling them, 
here are the things we will do in the big picture, full thrust approach, as a result of 
which, here's where you will be. The resource is not what you will do, that's just 
called credibility. The resource is, where will you be at the end of this process. 
Which basically means without this problem. You've really got to paint it to them, 
right? You can be elaborate. You can paint a picture where the tax man tries to get 
their fingers on it, but we thought, ah ha, we thought ahead of this one. We 
thought of this one and we'll just send a letter saying that, that and that, and they'll 
have to back right off because there's no way they can touch it, right? 
 
Ben:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
So you've painted that victory for them. That's the resource. Where the future 
memory, where they're standing there looking glib and proud, because the ex-wife 
didn't get anything, the tax man didn't get anything. His kids are wildly, 
deliriously happy, and there's maybe some hidden benefit thrown into the bargain 
as well, right? 
 
Ben:  
Um hm. 
 
Igor:   
Does the A stage, the PCAT formula make sense so far?  
 
Ben:   
It does. 
 
Igor:   
And do all these three stages they sound like something very natural that you can 
do in what your normal sales process is anyway?  

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               465                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Ben:   
Yes, I do a little bit more rapport building in the beginning, but yes. 
 
Igor:   
That's fine, I'm going to take those things as given anyway.  But really, it's doing 
what you're doing already; we're just being a little bit more strategic anyway at 
each phase, right? So you're looking for pain, in the first phase. You're looking for 
hope in the second phase; we're not quite at transition yet.  Then the A you're 
looking for them to feel what they'll feel like when it's more resolved, and you'll 
paint them a more vivid picture for that, right? 
 
Ben:   
Um hm. 
 
Igor:   
Then you can drive the whole process, you can just throw in little mind bending 
power words to really build up the experience for them, or take the energy out of 
the problem, that's kind of like small chunk.  
 
Now the T stage is where most people get it wrong. The transformational stage is 
basically, how do you close? Because unless you collapse the resource onto the 
problem, and basically ask for the sale, well, you're asking too much from them, 
right? When I say how do you close, it depends on your personality. Some people 
like the brutal close, like, are you ready to sign right now? Or just sign here, let 
me take you by the hand and come into my office and we'll do the paperwork 
now. Some people like that, some people don't, as a rule, particularly in the caring 
professions, where you're servicing a client’s needs; my preference is to do a soft 
close, rather than a hard close. But really, it's up to you and your personality. I 
can't impose my preferences on you, right? 
 
Ben:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
The two biggest mistakes people make in closing, right, would you like to know 
what those are? 
 
Ben:   
I would love to know. 
 
Igor:  
 Number one, they never ask for it. That's by far the most crucial mistake ever. If 
you don't ask for it, you've pretty much guaranteed a no sale. Unless they're so 
enthused that they sell themselves, which can happen, you've pretty much 
guaranteed yourself a no sale. So people don't ask for it because they're afraid of 
pissing off their clients, but they don't realize that they're not going to have a 
client anyways if they don't ask for it, so where's the loss, right?  
 
Ben:   
Right. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               466                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor:   
So ask for the sale, whether it's done softly, or hard, ask for the sale, and we'll 
look at different ways of doing that in a moment. The second mistake people 
make is they don't do test closes. Now, do you know what I mean by a test close?  
 
Ben:   
I'm trying to, but I really haven't thought of a way to do that yet. 
 
Igor:   
Let me run you through it. And by the way, if you want a resource for test closes, 
I will make you the king of test closes and soft closes. That's what the Yes Set 
thing is all about, right? That's a hundred cards that is designed to build that mind 
set in you. The essence of a test close is a yes set. What you're doing is you're 
loading test sets to load all the different elements as to why they should do this. 
For example, I'll use an example you're more familiar with and see how we can 
adapt it to your situation. Is that okay with you, Ben?  
 
Ben:   
Perfect. 
 
Igor:   
Let's us the example of hypnotherapy thing, the How to Make a Lot of Money 
with the Master Hypnosis class, has the whole stop smoking program in it, from 
the program to of course, how to market it at the end as well. This is something 
you'd be familiar with if you've heard it.  
 
Someone comes in and says, I heard you do stop smoking sessions, how much do 
they cost? The very last thing you want to do is tell them how much it costs up 
front, any idea why? 
 
Ben:   
That's an objection they can say it's not worth it, it’s not going to work. 
 
Igor:   
Exactly. You actually put your finger right on the button, it's the worth it. They 
have no idea how to evaluate that sum. They have no way of placing a value on it. 
Your job in the sales process is to make them see the value of what you're doing. 
So, what's the first thing you do in terms of the problem? What I would do is ask 
them, oh great, how long have you been smoking? Is it for yourself or someone 
else, how long have you been smoking, how many, and so on. Now what's it 
telling me about all this? They're getting into the whole smoking thing and they're 
remembering how terrible it is. 
 
One of the questions I ask, and I always, always, always ask this, and I've also 
asked a version of this in the coaching thing, and for the lawyers, for the 
consultation, is why do you want to quit? Why have you come to me today? What 
do you hope I'll do for you? That tells me how to close them. Does that make 
sense? 
 
Ben:   
Yes. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               467                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor:   
So now comes the close. With that idea in mind, we'll go for the actual test close. 
So the test close is a yes set. The yes set has to focus their mind on the value of 
what you're doing. I think I have all the information in the right place. You said 
you don't want your wife to get any money, is that right? Yes. And you don't want 
the tax man to get money, right? Yes. If you were left in position X and everyone 
could have a free for all with it, you wouldn't like that, would you? No. That no is 
still a yes, we'll explain more about it. You want to be standing there with a bullet 
proof vest when the tax man asks for it, right? Yes. You said that you wanted x, y, 
and z at the beginning of this thing, right? Yes. We can do X, you do realize that, 
don't you? Yes. Now we're going to talk about Y. Do you have any questions 
about Y, or do you get a sense that this is what you're looking for? Yes it is. If 
they're saying no it isn't, right. Now your test close has stumbled, it tells you an 
objection that you have to handle before you can close. 
 
If you say, for example, I told you what we could do with Y, is that what you're 
wanting? No. I'm sorry, what was I missing? I'm looking for this kind of 
approach. Oh, I see, that was my mistake, I didn't introduce this properly. Here's 
what we actually do, here's some testimonials and so forth, do you understand 
how that works now? Yes. Do you have a sense that what we're offering is a 
really good match to what you're looking for? Yes. Now you have it. Do you see 
how that works?  
 
Ben:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
You're going through a really big problem, you're going through every desire he 
has, you're going through everything he thinks, either negatively or positively, 
you go through in your yes set. It could be a long list, right? At the end of it you 
say, now that's my executive summary, or if you want to be cheeky, that's my 
legal summary of the whole thing, did I miss anything out? No. Is there anything 
else you need to know? No. So you feel absolutely confident that we've covered 
everything you need to know in order to solve the problem you have. Yes. So let 
me ask you now, does this sound like the kind of program you're looking for? 
Yes. So, do you have any further questions? No. 
 
Well in that case, the only question I have left is how you want to proceed in 
terms of doing the work or whatever it is. So you can do a soft presumptive close 
at that point, because they basically implied it already. Does that make sense? 
 
Ben:   
It does. 
 
Igor:   
Do you see how the whole thing fits together? And then the mind-bending 
language just weaves through all that to keep their mind spinning into 
possibilities, that's where you want them to be. Especially when they're 
contemplating that future memory after having done the work with you, right?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               468                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Ben:   
Right. You know I have the Yes Set and didn't really know how to use it until you 
just put it that way. (laughter) 
 
Igor:   
So you didn't use it? 
 
Ben:   
I did, but the problem I had was between the two processes, where was the best 
place to start using the Yes Set. Toward the end vs. the beginning. 
 
Igor:   
Now at least you have a whole way of compiling it together. You can do elements 
of all of them throughout the conversation, this is not a rigid process, but these, 
whenever I think of any influence situation, whether it's therapy, or sales or 
anything like that, I always think in those four key phases. PCAT, where am I 
right now, and I might even do a little mini PCAT in the middle of one. For 
example if one of my test closes for my Yes Set fails, I'll do a little mini PCAT 
around the objection. So it's not rigid, it becomes very elaborate, but it gives you 
something very simple to think about. Does that make sense to you? 
 
Ben:   
Completely at this point. 
 
Igor:  
 Excellent. So yeah, the next thing is just to start practicing and so on. Everything 
I said to Martin and Shane still applies to you, by the way. Still do these 
rehearsals and see if you can come up with different objections, and then run 
through different solutions for those objections. You're doing the same exercise, 
just in a slightly different direction, that's all. Okay? 
 
Ben:   
Gotcha. 
 
Igor:   
We're running over a little bit, so I'm going to take only one more question from 
someone so we can keep going with this. Are you guys, generally speaking, 
finding this very useful? ( Many yes's from the listeners) 
 
So, does anyone have a question either to clarify something we've just talked 
about, or something totally unrelated, but still to do with mind-bending language 
which you'd like to have covered so we can answer it. 
 
Danny:   
I have a question. 
 
Igor:   
Go ahead Danny. 
 
Danny:   
One thing you mentioned was using client stories and so forth, like testimonials 
when you talk about how you did it. What if you don't have a history of clients 
that you can go to, you're just stepping into this business? 
 
Igor:   
Got it. So let’s make an assumption here, and please correct me if it's out of 
context, so for example someone wants to be a hypnotherapist, but they're not 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               469                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
really working with anyone yet and they can't really give any testimonials. 
Correct? 
 
Danny:   
Correct. 
 
Igor:   
Okay, a couple of things you can do. Number one, you can trade for testimonials, 
right? This is one of the biggest bits of advise I would give an novice therapist, 
work with people for free, but not on their problems. So it's not like you're saying, 
I'll cure your phobia for free, what you're saying is, your setting it up as an 
evaluation frame. You say, I have some great new hypnosis processes that I need 
to refine, I need to polish. I need people to work with those. What I'll do for you 
is, if you will come in for four or five sessions, I will work with you to 
experiment with my process in relation to that problem. We may or may not 
resolve it, but the point is that I get to work with these new processes I'm working 
out. At the end of the whole process, however, I will work with the problem for 
free with you, and I'll expect you to show up to all the sessions and at the end of 
it, when we've worked actually on the problem itself, if it all works out to your 
satisfaction, I want you to give me a testimonial. You have to agree up front to 
that. 
 
If they have some hesitation, you tell them, don't worry, I won't mention you by 
name, I won't mention any identifying features or anything like that, but I do want 
to be able to talk about you in general as one client, or client X or something like 
that. Alright?  
 
Danny:   
That's great. 
 
Igor:   
What you've done there are several very useful things. One, you've created the 
context in which you can actually practice your skills without any pressure, right? 
Because you've told them these are experimental processes, so you have carte 
blanche to do whatever you want. 
 
Danny:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
At this point, you get to experiment with all your skills. You get to do some mind-
bending language and if it doesn't work, who cares? Right? 
 
Danny:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
The reason this is wonderful is because you'll try a different approach in each 
session and you'll get a sense of which processes end up working. By the time 
you've done four or five sessions and they're having a great old time, eventually 
you'll do something right enough that it resolves. This boosts your confidence as a 
therapist and builds your instincts as a therapist and it gets you a testimonial. 
Does that make sense? 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               470                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Danny:   
Excellent! 
 
Igor:   
That's how I would handle it. The other thing to do is just be vague or skip that 
step, but that's a weaker way of dealing with it. A much better way is really, to get 
genuine testimonials, and this is the very simple way of doing it.  
 
Danny:   
Excellent, thank you. 
 
Igor:   
No worries. Anyone with any more last minute questions, I think I'll handle one 
more quick one.  
 
Bernardo:   
Bernardo here. What do you do when a client doesn't really know a sensation, or a 
feeling? For example in the training in Vegas with boredom. One of my clients 
couldn't feel hunger, how do you approach these clients? What if you don't know 
what your resources are? 
 
Igor:   
Well, here's the thing, you're assuming first of all that your client has to be able to 
have a certain feeling to help them overcome the problem or something like that, 
which is not necessarily the case. It may be, and it may not be. I'll explain that in a 
moment. This is different, the scenario you had in Vegas. Why? Because in 
Vegas, you were doing a specific exercise to do with boredom, so you needed to 
build boredom in order to do the exercise. That's actually the hard way of doing it. 
 
Now with this person, they haven't necessarily come to you to deal with hunger 
issues. I'm guessing they've come to you to deal with weight control or something 
like that, is that correct?  
 
Bernardo:   
She came and said, I know I'm not eating well, and I know I should. I may know 
how to improve it, but I don't know how to do it and I don't know when I'm 
hungry.  
 
Igor:   
Then the big question is, so how is it a problem for you? Right? Well, I'm not 
eating healthy and so on, etc. I'm going to do a little mind read into the situation 
here. So, okay great, so you're not eating healthily, so is it just a question that if 
you knew what to eat, you'd eat it, is that right? Then they might say yes, they 
might say no. He's come to you not to learn how to be hungry; he's come to you to 
learn how to eat more healthfully, right?  
 
Bernardo:   
Um, yes, sort of. 
 
Igor:   
What's the hesitation? 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               471                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Bernardo:   
He doesn't have any weight problems, for example I'm out with my partner in the 
morning we start touring around, and my partner says it's time to eat, but I'm not 
hungry. He doesn't know the feeling. 
 
Igor:   
Okay, so let's just play this along for a little bit, Bernardo. So how is that a 
problem for you?  
 
Bernardo:   
Because she wants to have better eating habits. 
 
Igor:   
So this is not your problem, it's hers, is that what you're saying? 
 
Bernardo:   
Yes, she's one of my clients, so I don't know .... 
 
Igor:   
Bernardo, be the client, what's this client’s name, or give me a random name. 
 
Bernardo:  
Haifer (?) 
 
Igor:  
Haifer? I'm just going to call you Jack because I just can't quite make that name 
out properly. It doesn't matter, anyway, so you pretend to be Jack, is that okay? 
 
Bernardo:   
Okay. 
 
Igor:  
 So tell me Jack, so you're going around with your girlfriend, you're going 
somewhere, she gets hungry and wants to eat but you're not really hungry, right?  
 
Bernardo:   
Yes, that's right. 
 
Igor:   
So how's that a problem? 
 
Bernardo:   
It happens every time. I don't feel hungry, I'd rather do something else than eat ... 
 
Igor:  
 Let me just understand this. What's to prevent you from going to the restaurant 
with your partner and watch her eat whilst you just have a nice chat?  
 
Bernardo:  
 I feel like I'm wasting my time going to a restaurant, I want to be doing 
something more productive. 
 
Igor:   
Excellent, so let me just clarify that. You've come here today to resolve some kind 
of a problem. Is the problem that you want to learn how to be hungry, so you can 
eat when you weren't hungry before, or is the problem that you just want to know 
how to handle the situation so you can use your time more productively, or at 
least be okay with spending time in other ways?  
 
Bernardo:   
(Huge sigh) starts to speak.. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               472                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor:   
Just stop there; do you see what just happened? What I'm doing is, he's come to 
you not with a problem, he's come to you with a conclusion.  He's said I have a 
problem which I'm not telling you about, I'm going to present my conclusion, and 
therefore I'm going to try and force you to fix it in the way I've concluded you 
should fix it. Which is really messed up. 
 
Bernardo:  
 Uh huh. 
 
Igor:   
That's very difficult to do, right? 
 
Bernardo:   
Uh huh. 
 
Igor:   
You may actually be correct. There may be an eating disorder in action here, there 
may be something around the feeling of hunger and not feeling it and how he 
responds to his body and so on, that you need to deal with. But your road into it is 
NOT to assume it for him. Your road into it is for him to declare it, either to say 
the problem is, I'm never hungry, I don't know when to eat and so I'm treating my 
body badly. How do you know? Because it fits. 
 
Are you telling me that you never eat at all? No, I do eat. Well, how do you know 
when to eat? You see, he's got different signals that tell him when it's time to eat. 
Whether it's healthy or unhealthy, it's irrelevant. There are different signals going 
on. Maybe he's never hungry because he grazes, just picks a little bit here, a little 
bit there and hence never has a chance to build up an appetite. Maybe he's never 
hungry because he's distracted by other things. But then he still eats at times, it's 
not like he never eats, right? 
 
Bernardo:   
He can skip meals for more than a day. He'll say, I'm at the office, I wake up at 9 
in the morning, I work late, I go home and go to sleep. 
 
Igor:   
Okay, so that's not a problem yet. It only is a problem if he's either got a health 
concern as a result of it, or he would regularly would like to have more regular 
eating habits, which is chanced are, will be more healthy for him anyway, right? 
Now you have a problem to work with. 
 
Bernardo:   
Right. 
 
Igor:   
So now you have to figure out, how is it a problem if you don't eat for a day? You 
don't seem to be worse wear of, have you had a doctor check you out? Yes. What 
does the doctor say? I'm fit as a horse. How's your digestion working? Fantastic. 
So I don't see the problem yet. Do you see what I'm going at here? 
 
Bernardo:   
Yes.  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               473                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor:   
There is no problem, yet. Now what it might be, let me do a couple of mind reads 
here. One possible problem might be that he's trying to please his girlfriend so 
they can eat together when she decides. In which case you're going to have to 
work out elements of that relationship. Is he really going to please his girlfriend, 
is there other ways to handle it? For example, the joining her for a meal but not 
actually eating with her, and so on. 
 
The problem might be something different, though. The problem might be that he 
has a sense that he's eating unhealthily and he would like to have more regular 
eating habits, which is again great. Then you're going down a different road.  
Hunger does not necessarily have to be the same thing. So for example, if you're 
playing Jack again and I ask you, Jack, it's not like you don't eat for months at a 
time, is that right? 
 
Bernardo:   
No. 
 
Igor:   
Excellent. Notice a little mind-bending stuff going on. So you do eat from time to 
time, just not at regular points, is that correct? 
 
Bernardo:   
Not regular points, but from time to time. 
 
Igor:   
Each time you eat, it's irregular, but you do eat, correct?  
 
Bernardo:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
Great. How do you know when to do it?  
 
Bernardo:   
It's when I have some time off, I eat something.... 
 
Igor:   
Just let me pause you there for a sec, Jack. Always take control of your clients, 
don't let them run on for too long. If for no other reason than it saves you time. 
Why would you eat when you have time off, are you hungry then? What happens, 
give me an example of the last time you ate something. 
 
Bernardo:   
When I finish some work, I..... 
 
Igor:   
Just wait a sec again Jack, give me a specific time, was it yesterday, what specific 
time.  
 
Bernardo:   
Around 4 in the afternoon. 
 
Igor:   
Excellent, so it's 4 in the afternoon, you finish some work. Are you at home, or in 
the office?  Where are you? 
 
Bernardo:   
At the office. My kids are all around, and they say, let's go have something to eat. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               474                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
 
Igor:   
And you go eat with them, right? 
 
Bernardo:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
Excellent. So let me just clarify something here. You had some spare time, your 
kids wanted to eat, so you went to eat with them. You weren't particularly hungry 
at the time, is that correct? 
 
Bernardo:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
So how is that different to when your girlfriend wants to eat? Because you aren't 
hungry then either, are you? 
 
Bernardo:   
No. 
 
Igor:   
So you weren't hungry with your kids, and you went to eat with them, and you 
weren't hungry with your girlfriend, but you didn't want to go eat with her. So, 
what's the difference with those two situations, I don't understand.  
 
Bernardo:   
So with my girlfriend and we're travelling, I want to do something else. So.... 
 
Igor:   
So let me pause you there a second. Your mind was somewhere else, you wanted 
to do something else, hence you didn't feel like you had much time, and you didn't 
want to spend that time on eating, is that correct? 
 
Bernardo:  
Exactly. 
 
Igor:   
So what you're telling me is not so much that you want to eat more regularly, it's 
just a matter of finding the time to eat when it's convenient and other people 
would like you to. Is that right? 
 
Bernardo:   
Yah. 
 
Igor:   
Go back to that holiday with your girlfriend, and let’s say you've done everything 
you want to do for that day, and your girlfriend says she's hungry, would you have 
gone to eat with her then? Without any problems? 
 
Bernardo:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
So if I understand it correctly, the problem isn't really whether you're hungry, the 
problem is whether or not you have time. Is that correct? 
 
Bernardo:   
Yes, sort of. 
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               475                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Igor:   
What's the sort of? 
 
Bernardo:   
If I felt hungry, I'd know I should take a break and eat something. 
 
Igor:   
Oh, okay, here we go, now we're getting somewhere. This is not even about 
whether you've got time to eat, this is about having a signal, a way of recognizing, 
that it IS time to eat, is that correct? 
 
Bernardo:   
Yes. 
 
Igor:   
So let me just take a step backwards Bernardo. That's what you work on; it has 
nothing to do with hunger. Hunger may be your signal, but let's face it, not all of 
us eat just because we're hungry. A lot of us eat because it's meal time. In fact, 
this is one of those things, if you're from a healthy family, three square meals, or 
four meals, or whatever people have. It's 12:00, at 12:00 I eat. So it might be a 
matter of using his business strategies for time management, to make sure that he 
has a to do list that includes eating at a specific time, that might be one way to do 
it. Or you might help his unconscious mind find other signals to tell him it's time 
to eat.  
 
For example, he might start thinking about food, even though he's not hungry.  
Who cares about hunger, that's just one way to know it's time to eat. Does that 
make sense?  
 
Bernardo:   
Okay, okay. 
 
Igor:   
And sometimes hunger isn't even relevant because the stuff he's doing is so 
important that he has to ignore the hunger anyway. Which I suspect is how this 
whole idea of ignoring hunger came into being in the first place. So it's not so 
much about looking at the solution he's asked for, I want to be able to feel hungry. 
Its how did he come to that conclusion? The conclusion really is, I need a more 
regular eating habit, so that I don't feel like I'm wasting my time when I'm eating. 
So now it's just a matter of finding ways to work through that.  
 
A simple strategy might be to get to the point where he accepts the simple idea of 
say, scheduling in mealtimes or where he an experience of his unconscious mind 
giving him some other signals. It might be sudden tension, it might be giving him 
something to fantasize about food, it might be hearing a voice say, it's time to eat. 
There's all kinds of ways his unconscious mind can give him a signal that it's time 
to eat, right? Why limit him to the one. 
 
Bernardo:   
Okay. 
 
Igor:   
Does that give you something more to work on?  
 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               476                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
Bernardo:   
Yah, it's giving more resources. But I have to get to more unconscious to work 
with him. 
 
Igor:   
Exactly. So the big principle for me that's important for me here is, whenever 
someone is stuck in their position, what they will tell you is how they have 
concluded this stuckness, should be resolved. Whether it's the price has to be this 
price, whether it's I have to start feeling hungry, or whether it's something 
completely different.  
 
Bernardo:   
Beautiful. 
 
Igor:   
What I'm suggesting to you is, look behind the conclusion they've come to 
because chances are, part of the reason they have the problem locked in so tight is 
that conclusion. There's an old phrase or saying that says, the solution is the 
problem. The way they've tried to resolve the problem is actually maintaining it. 
So you come at it from a different angle. 
 
Bernardo:   
Okay.  
 
Igor:   
So, if he's looking to be hungry, then my instinct to say is, the last thing I want to 
do is waste time on feelings of hunger. Now, if he starts feeling hungry 
spontaneously, so much the better, that's great. But that's the last signal I'd be 
focusing on, because he's put far too much emphasis on it, and chances are that's 
why the problem is so cemented in, right? 
 
Okay folks, we've been at this for an hour and a half now, and you've had some 
awesome, excellent questions. Did everyone feel that it helps you on your journey 
with Advanced Covert Hypnosis? How to take the principles you learned in 
Vegas, and drill yourselves until you've got the language, drill yourselves so 
you've got the strategies. Then when you're in a live environment, you can apply 
those strategies, those mental drills you went through, and actually use the same 
processes to throw in some mine-bending language and create this rich mix.  
Always having this PCAT formula at the top defines the overall maneuvers that 
you're going for. Does that all make sense to you guys?  
 
(many Yes's from many voices) 
 
Hopefully this creates a very clear and simple process that you can follow that 
allow a lot of the subtleties to hang off of it, because that's what your unconscious 
mind will do. That's the key thing for me. You know, we talked about this in 
Vegas, we talked about all those individual pieces and we put them together in 
Vegas. The only reason it didn't necessarily stick as much as it could have done is 
purely because your minds need time to process the information. Now, think of it 
this way. We actually talked about everything we talked about today in Vegas in 
exactly the same terms. If you don't believe me, get the DVD set when it's ready. 

 
 
 
 
   © Street Hypnosis Publishing               477                          StreetHypnosis.com                  
 
The key difference is not what I'm saying. The key difference is your mind, and 
where it's at today.  
 
In order for that to happen, you needed two months to assimilate, integrate, 
practice, have things crop up and have questions crop up, and precious other 
things. In other words, your mind has expanded significantly since Vegas, which 
means presenting the same ideas in pretty much the same way, makes much more 
sense now. Does that make sense to you guys? 
 
(many Yes's from many voices) 
 
That process will continue, which takes us right back to Marvin's original 
question, which is, I'm confused, how do I get a lid on all this stuff. It's a process 
of doing the same kind of loops we've just been doing now. You'll spend time 
integrating the language; you'll spend time doing the mental rehearsals.  You'll 
spend time putting the little bits of it into real situations. You don't have to 
necessarily do the whole lot yet. And you'll spend time thinking about the PCAT 
formula. Bit by bit, elements of it will start resolving itself, and until then you 
have to keep stretching your minds. 
 
Would it be fair to say that you guys had a little epiphany today in terms of how 
to use all this stuff?  
 
(many Yes's from many voices) 
 
It can be a small one, it doesn't have to be a massive one, but those epiphanies 
will continue to come along over the weeks and months if you keep at it.  In other 
words, I cannot substitute experience for you. You have to do the drills. You have 
to do the mental drills, and you have to incorporate elements of it into the live 
conversations you have.  If you do those three things consistently without being 
too concerned about the outcome, yet, you will keep on having more epiphanies 
until one day, you'll have done a great piece of change work, a great piece of 
salesmanship, a great piece of influence or teaching. It won't be until afterwards, 
when you reflect back on it that you'll think, my God, I just did that, where did 
that come from?  
 
That's where it comes from, but you need to expand your mind on the way there. 
Does that make sense, everyone?  
 
(many Yes's from many voices) 
 
Okay folks, thanks for calling in, I hope you've enjoyed yourselves as much as I 
have, and learning something in particular. Have a great day and I look forward to 
seeing you at some other events in the future. 
 

