


A Photographer’s Creative 
Companion and Workbook
Achieving Your Potential
As a Photographer
Harold Davis
~ 
Focal Press 
.. 
Taylor & Francis Group 
NEW YORK AND LONDON 

First published 2016 by Focal Press
70 Blanchard Road, Suite 402, Burlington, MA 01803
Simultaneously published in the UK by Focal Press
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Focal Press is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group,  
an informa business 
© 2016 Harold Davis and Phyllis Davis
All photographs © Harold Davis
The right of Harold Davis and Phyllis Davis to be identi-
fied as the authors of this work has been asserted by 
them in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be 
reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form or by 
any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known 
or hereafter invented, including photocopying and 
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval 
system, without permission in writing from the 
publishers.
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly 
changing. As new research and experience broaden 
our understanding, changes in research methods, 
professional practices, or medical treatment may 
become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their 
own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using 
any information, methods, compounds, or experiments 
described herein. In using such information or methods 
they should be mindful of their own safety and the 
safety of others, including parties for whom they have a 
professional responsibility. 
Product or corporate names may be trademarks 
or registered trademarks, and are used only for 
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Application submitted.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the 
British Library.
ISBN: 978-1-138-82636-6 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-68394-2 (ebk)
Editor: Deirdre Byrne 
Copy Editor: Nancy Bell 
Production Supervisor: Siân Cahill 
Book Design and Layout: Phyllis Davis

Acknowledgment
A special thanks to my wonderful workshop participants  
who have helped test and refine the concepts explained  
in Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer.

8 
Start Here
 
Why I wrote this book, and  
 
what you can learn from it
14 
In the Beginning
16 
Road Map to Success 
20 
Evaluating Your Work
32 
Iterating the Process
40 
Unleash Your Imagination
42 
Photography Is a Portal 
46 
The Power of Digital
52 
The Force behind Vision 
56 
Owning Your Creativity
58 
Playing with Your Ideas
62 
Tapping into Creativity
66 
Becoming a More Creative  
 
Photographer
68 
Telling a Story
70 
Don’t Bury the Lede
72 
Harnessing Serendipity
80  
Expecting the Unexpected
94 
Revealing the Unseen
100 Setting Limits
106 The Path to Creativity
110 Technique Matters
112 Being Creative with Technique
116 Photography Is Applied Design
120 Becoming Composition Conscious
128 Rule of Thirds
130 Playing with Shutter Speed
134 Focus
143 Aperture and Bokeh
146 Being in the Zone
148  The Complications of Simplicity
154 From Photo to World 
156 Listening to Your Inner Voice
158 Keeping at It
160 Working Smarter Not Harder
164 The Voice That Stops You
166 Five Signs It’s Time to Move On
168 Creative Destruction
172 Maintaining Balance
174 Photography Is Play
178 Integrating Personal Passion
182 What Are Your Goals?
188 Making a Portfolio
194 Artisanal Print Making
196 Creativity for Life
200 Drawing Your Line in the Sand
204 Resources
205 Glossary
206 Index
Companion Workbook
’
WHATS IN HERE


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
8
START HERE
Have you ever had the feeling that you were not being the photographer you could be? That 
you were not making the best photographs you could make? In other words, that you were 
not living up to your potential as a photographer?
I don’t care whether you are a rank beginner, a serious amateur, or a seasoned 
professional. This is a feeling that we photographers have all had. My goal in writing Achieving 
Your Potential As a Photographer, and with the companion Workbook, is to help you be the 
best photographer that you can be—and to achieve your potential as a photographer.
This leads to a number of questions: What are the tools and techniques for achieving 
your potential as a photographer? What does it mean to live up to one’s potential as a 
photographer? And, what is stopping you as a photographer?
Great questions! Let me tackle them more or less in order.
You’ll find inspiration, ideas, exercises, and challenges in Achieving Your Potential As a 
Photographer that will help you become the best photographer you can be. I will show you 
examples, challenge you, and give you directions for precisely how to proceed. The creative 
Workbook that accompanies Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer in conjunction with 
the book itself makes up a “workshop in a box.” 
Some of this comes from me and work, and more about this later. But of course, the 
most contribution to your own work is your own contribution. I won’t kid you: Following my 
examples, and doing the exercises, takes work. It takes work to become as good as you can 
be—but you can do it! Provided you really want to do it, and are willing to work at it. 
As the old joke asks, “How do you get to Carnegie Hall?”  The answer is to “practice, 
practice, practice.”
Sometimes people who think that organizational skills matter more than art and craft 
also think that we should strive for technical perfection in our work. Perfection is fine, but the 
perfect is the enemy of the good, and the quest for perfect all too often becomes a stumbling 
block to creativity. An imperfect image that conveys strong emotion will beat a technically 
“perfect” photo every time.
A related issue, if you are a serious amateur, semi-professional, or pro photographer, is 
making money from your photos. I’ve heard it said that making money from photography is 
more about business than photography. It’s even put this way as a proposition: A mediocre 
photographer with great business skills will do better than a great photographer with lousy 
business skills.
I think this is total “poo-poo del toro.” The truth is that making great images is far more 
important, and far harder, than having good business skills. Both creative image making 
and marketing require organization. But there the similarity stops, and making a creative, 



11
Start Here
How can I become a better photographer ?
significant, and unique image is one of the most challenging things in the world, while many 
people can learn to successfully market.
Let’s get back to the heart of the matter: living up to your potential as a photographer. 
What is most needful in learning to take our photos to the next level is how to create images 
that emotionally resonate. This kind of image makes the viewer feel and has an internal sense 
of narrative and tells a story even if it is a “poem” about a flower!
Even if the resulting photo is technically imperfect.
Learning to create images with emotional resonance is not an easy task, but if you 
do the work I propose as exercises in the text and workbook, follow my ideas, and use the 
techniques I show you in Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer, you can do it!
No matter what your level as an artist or photographer, you are likely to encounter the 
same kinds of “resistance.” I use the term “resistance” as a kind of catch-all, shorthand phrase 
to describe all the things that conspire to stop us from doing that which it is our destiny to  
do, which we want to do, and which allows us to achieve our true potentials.
If you think for a minute about the verb “to conspire” as I used it in the last sentence, it 
implies there is a connection between all the things that are stopping you, although they 
may seem as disparate as petty logistical details and the need to work, and as cosmic and 
self-indulgent as creative blockage. I believe there is in fact a connecting thread, and that 
resistance is the manifestation of those dark forces that are within each of us, and would  
stop us from achieving what we are potentially able to do.
Resistance to creative endeavors can show its ugly face in many ways—chores that 
need to be done, email that needs to be read, Facebook pages that need to be updated, and 
bureaucracies that need to be combated, to name just a few of the enemies to creativity that 
we all find in our daily lives.
We all need to make choices, and choices should be made with clarity, keeping in mind 
the “critical path” of your individual goals. In Achieving Your Potential as a Photographer, I will 
show you techniques and provide exercises to help you determine your goals, make the best 
choices, keep on your critical path, and combat resistance every time it raises its ugly head.
My pledge to you is that I will tell you the truth about art, photography, and the real 
world as I know it. I have lived the life as an artist and photographer, and earned the stripes, 
and know what I am talking about. 
When people learn that I am a professional photographer, it is not unusual for them to 
ask me next what kind of photographer I am. The answer is trickier than it might seem. If 
you are primarily a wedding photographer or a journalist-photographer, or if you do still-life 
photography of jewelry, then you have a recognizable specialty—and there are many others.

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
12
I like to say that I am a “Photographer as Poet.” I photograph what I am interested in, and 
I figure out a way to market my work after I’ve made it. “What I am interested in” means just 
about anything. My photos are more like poems than short stories—they have an internal 
cadence and structure, and each one can be enjoyed on its own without reference to a more 
general context.
I feel strongly enough about this “Photographer as Poet” thing that I’ve had a Japanese 
inken made for me (it’s a stamp, like a Chinese chop) that says “Photographer as Poet.” Here it is:
My inken is used as a decorative element and signature on some of the prints that I make. 
Speaking of prints, it is also fair to say that I make the bulk of my living in the traditional way 
that artists have always done: selling prints, teaching, and marketing my work as art.
The truth is that my experience in art and photography covers many bases. I’ve had solo 
shows in prestigious New York art galleries, been hired to take photos while hanging out of a 
helicopter over the World Trade Towers, hiked across the northernmost range of mountains 
in Alaska with my camera, and discussed print making with Ansel Adams. More recently, 
I’ve worked with one of the biggest foundations in the United States, licensed work widely, 
written 18 books about photography published by major publishers (and translated into 
many languages), have written a popular photography blog for almost 10 years, and hiked 
the ancient Kumano Kodo trail in Japan with my camera. I could go on… .
So I do know a bit about art and photography. I am asking you to take me along as your 
guide as you progress on your journey toward achieving your potential as a photographer. 
I hope and believe that you can use the ideas and techniques I will show you in many 
areas of your life beyond creating art and photography. If you can’t take one of my workshops 
to jump-start your work, and to reach for your goals, this book is the next best thing. In 
writing Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer my goal is to work with you and support 
you as you keep the joy, work hard, and achieve your potential as a photographer.
What are you waiting for? Turn the page and get started on your voyage of creative 
photographic discovery!
There is help—  here it is     !




Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
16
ROAD MAP TO SUCCESS
If you are reading this book you probably want to be a better, more successful photographer. 
Of course, the two concepts are related but not identical. What makes a photo or a photographer 
“better” inherently involves a subjective judgment, at least in part. Success is also in part an 
individual matter, but according to some people one can be a successful photographer without 
creating particularly distinguished work. The other way around can also be true: Not all great 
artists are honored in their lifetimes.
My view of the matter is that the two are inextricably intertwined: No matter what your 
defi nition of good photography, and what your ideas about success, becoming a better 
photographer helps you become more successful in a worldly sense with your photography—
and getting your work out there, in fact, helps you become a better photographer.
This book is meant to help you with three interlocking questions:
How do you become a better photographer?
How do you evaluate your photos so they can be improved?
How can you leverage the improvement—both psychologically and practically—as your 
photos get better?
If you are serious about the art, craft, and vision of photography, then answering these 
questions for yourself is an important part of the work you will need to undertake to become 
a better photographer, no matter what your current level is.
From a 100-mile view, the road map for success looks like this:
1:
Establish a baseline, both aesthetically and practically.
2: Learn how to improve, and work to overcome resistance.
3: Start at 1 again….
This process is shown below in Road Map to Success.
◼
◼
◼
ROAD MAP TO SUCCESS
Establish a baseline
Aesthetic
Pragmatic
Ј
Ј
Improve
Overcome 
resistance
go
 f
o
r
 
i
t
!
d
o
 i
t 
ag
ai
n
☞    See Workbook Exercises 1 and 2


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
18
A great advantage of an external structure even as basic as this high-level road 
map is that you have something to latch onto. In my personal experience, and as I’ve 
learned from talking with students in my workshops, one of the biggest things that 
hold us back is the feeling of vagueness and lack of clarity about how to get better. 
If we wander from day to day with no sense of direction or movement, then we are 
easy prey for the forces of resistance—the internal and external forces that try to 
stop us from being creative and living the life we want. 
If you’ve ever asked yourself the questions, “What should I photograph today?” 
and “Why should I even bother?” then you know what I am talking about.
We should never lose sight of the fact that becoming a good photographer, like 
becoming a good artist in any medium, involves heart and soul in addition to craft 
and technique. A technically perfect photo can be banal, and a very imperfect photo 
from a technical perspective can touch something deep within us. The images we 
care about move us, sometimes to tears, and sometimes for reasons we don’t fully 
understand.
This implies that discovery about how to improve photography is an emotional 
and transformative journey in the psychological and 
spiritual domains, and that mastering of technique is 
but the barrier to entry.
Whatever the domain, you can’t know where you 
are—and therefore how to improve—without evalu-
ative tools. So that is where this book will start: You’ll 
learn to establish a baseline.
Next, you’ll figure out goals and process for 
improving your photography. Improving photography 
will lead to practical goals, which in turn will require 
reevaluation and iteration. 
The questions, issues, and techniques for over-
coming resistance that are posed will be rephrased, and revisited, in various orders. 
Remember, no two people progress alike. You are unique. That said, all progress 
requires getting started. So what are you waiting for?
How far can you grow from 
 where you are today?
A FIRM, RECTILINEAR baseline along the right side of this image allows the more free-form trees 
and cloud on the left side to float free in the water and sky. In other words, the baseline on the right 
side compositionally anchors the image by contrasting with the less geometric shapes on the left.
How far can you grow from 
where you are now?

19
Road Map to Success

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
20
Evaluating a photo is complex and requires multidimensional 
thinking. Considerations including formal design issues, emo-
tional and narrative content, and presentation all play a role. 
When the photo is our own, it is also difficult to separate 
the emotions involved in making the image from the emo-
tional content that is conveyed to a viewer who wasn’t there 
at the time when the photo was made, and didn’t experience 
what we experienced in the moment of creation.
The difficulty of the task of evaluation is so tremendous 
that one often turns to outsiders. It’s not unusual to judge one’s 
photos via the reactions and responses of family, friends, quasi-
anonymous comments on Flickr, photo club judges, and so on.
Obviously, the quality of this kind of evaluative response 
varies, and depends greatly on who is doing the evaluating. 
While one should keep in mind the pithy epigram regarding 
the commonality of having an opinion with a certain body 
part, valid and useful feedback is important, and can come 
from many sources.
But ultimately it is extremely important to develop the 
ability to evaluate one’s own work, no matter how difficult it is 
to do so. Almost every good artistic vision is individual, and not 
the result of a committee. External opinions can be noise on 
the line, and pull one in many different directions. If you don’t 
have tools for evaluating your own work, you won’t be able  
to make your own assessment of how good it is—and how  
to make it better.
The point of this exercise is to help you learn to better 
evaluate your own work. Generally, follow the steps and 
diagram detailed on page 23.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 3
A LONG EXPOSURE (10 seconds) smoothed the water, and 
eliminated details that might have otherwise distracted from 
the simplicity of the image.
EVALUATING YOUR WORK

21
Evaluating Your Work

HOHENZOLLERN CASTLE 
is located in Swabia about 
30 miles south of Stuttgart, 
Germany. Originally, it was 
home to the family that 
became the emperors of 
Germany. The last resident 
was Kaiser Wilhelm, whose 
poor judgment undoubt-
edly played a part in the 
events leading up to the 
catastrophe of the First 
World War.
When I took this photo-
graph, it was gently raining 
as it had been all week. Mist 
had gathered around the 
castle’s towers and water 
drops were collecting on  
my camera lens. 
As grand and in some ways 
beautiful as Hohenzollern is, 
it remains a showplace for 
a kind of glorification of an 
imperial, military tradition. 
My idea in creating this 
image was to allude to  
the tragic  implications  
of the military architecture, 
avoiding the temptation 
to show a picture-perfect 
Disneyesque fantasy.

23
STEPS TO EVALUATING YOUR OWN WORK:
Step 1: Disassociate from your work.
Step 2: Formal photographic evaluation.
Step 3: Emotional, intuitive, and narrative response.
Step 4: Presentational context.
Step 5: Establish a baseline.
EVALUATION STEPS
what is the
photo about        ?
try to be 
objective with
your critique
forget
about 
photography
make your 
mind blank
let go of 
your work
Disassociate
from your work
Formal
photographic
evaluation
Emotional, 
intuitive, 
and narrative 
response
Presentational 
context
Establish a baseline
leave your ego
at the door
what steps do you need to take to 
become a better photographer      ?
now go for it      !
Evaluating Your Work
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 3

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
24
IT IS A PRETTY good bet that if someone is lining up wine glasses to photograph them, they may be 
disassociated from the party around them. Disassociation is the first step in being able to accurately 
judge one’s own work.
Forget for a moment about photography    …
STEP 1:  DISASSOCIATE FROM YOUR WORK 
☞  WORKBOOK EXERCISE 4
Forget for a moment about photography. Imagine that you’ve never even heard the word 
photography. Maybe you are a rock. Maybe you are one of those indigenous peoples 
for whom photography is a novelty that might steal one’s soul. You’ve never heard of 
photography, seen a photo, and don’t know what it is.
Have you successfully forgotten about photography—and, most important, your 
photography—yet? Yes? Good.
Wait to move on until your mind is truly a blank about your photographic goals  
and aspirations.
STEP 2:  FORMAL PHOTOGRAPHIC EVALUATION  
☞  WORKBOOK EXERCISE 5
Now it’s time to recall photography to your mind without specifically remembering any 
details about yourself as a photographer. This exercise works best if you can pick up a print 
and hold it in your hands (but a physical print isn’t absolutely necessary).
As objectively as possible, try to evaluate the photo using formal photographic criteria  
by answering these questions:
Is the photo in focus (or, if is not in focus, is this intentional, and is it appropriate)?
In a selective focus image, is the area of selective focus created with precision?
Does the composition “work”?
Is the image framed in an interesting or aesthetically pleasing way?
Are there any unintended compositional flaws (a telephone pole apparently sticking 
out of someone’s head is the classic example, but these can be much more subtle and 
still have a deleterious effect on the overall composition)?
What is your eye drawn to look at first? What are you led to look at second?
Does the eye quickly go to the most important elements of the image, and are these 
elements sized and placed related to their role within the image?
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
26
EVERY YEAR THE coastal towns of Bolinas and Stinson Beach, California, have an Independence Day contest 
to see which town can pull a rope away from the other across the narrow strait of water that separates the two 
small towns. When the Bolinas team won, I was eager to capture the celebration that ensued, using an angle 
and informal photographic approach to show the raucous and happy nature of the proceedings.

27
Is the overall composition of the image in keeping with its content?
Is there a sense of organization and purpose to the composition (or, if the 
composition seems anarchic, is this on purpose, and does it work)?
Is the use of color in keeping with the structure of the image (harmonious  
for a serene image but discordant for many aggressive images)?
Has exposure been used to creatively support the image?
STEP 3:  EMOTIONAL, INTUITIVE, AND NARRATIVE RESPONSE 
☞WORKBOOK EXERCISE 6
Understanding emotional, intuitive, and narrative response to an image is even more 
inherently subjective than a formal compositional evaluation. We all bring our history, 
background, and biases to bear every time we look at a work of art—even if we’ve 
successfully disassociated from the act of creation.
Difficult or not, it is essential to try to evaluate this aspect that every photo conveys, 
because the emotional, intuitive, and narrative response really defines a photo. The formal 
elements of a photo are the body the photo is in, but the underlying story the photo tells  
is the soul of the image.
What is the photo about?
Does the photo tell a story?
What is the story the photo tells?
If the photo doesn’t obviously tell a story, is it more like a poem?
Is there a sense of mystery related to the photo that makes you want to keep  
looking at it?
Does the photo show something you haven’t seen before?
If the photo captures an everyday object or scene, is it portrayed in a way that  
shows “secrets” that aren’t commonly observed?
How unique and original is the photo?
What is the feeling you get when you look at the photo?
Is this feeling in keeping with the subject matter of the photo?
Is the feeling you get when you look at the photo harmonious or dissonant?
Is the overall feeling of the photo in keeping with the “package”—does it mesh  
with the formal and compositional aspects?
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
Does your photograph tell a story?
Evaluating Your Work

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
28
STEP 4:  PRESENTATIONAL CONTEXT 
☞  WORKBOOK EXERCISE 7
If the formal composition is the body of a photo, and the emotional 
side of the photo is its soul, the presentation of the photo is the 
clothing that it is wearing. Clothes, as Hamlet’s Polonious noted, can 
be important, but the issues that clothing presents are hardly as 
deep or troubling as body and soul.
Are there dust, hairs, or other “gribblies” within the image?
Are there any obvious flaws that should have been 
retouched?
In a color image, is the color range and gamut good, and do 
the colors work well with the subject matter?
In a black and white image, is there a nice range from light 
to dark?
In a black and white image, do whites really look white and 
blacks really look black?
Does the image appear to have sufficient resolution?
If you are looking at a physical print, does it appear to have 
been nicely placed and sized on the paper?
Regarding prints, does the subject matter work well with 
the paper it is printed on? 
The good news is that presentational issues are relatively easy 
to fix. But if you see presentation problems and don’t fix them,  
then shame on you—no one will take a second look at work that  
is sloppily presented.
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
PHOTOGRAPHING AFTER DARK in the grand courtyard of the Louvre is always interesting 
and fun. With the interior and exterior lighting, the pyramid becomes a modern abstraction 
that contrasts with the ornate structure of the grand old palace surrounding it.
I was very careful to frame this photograph with the pyramid centered and the old building 
equally visible on both sides. This created what appears to be a mirror image and possibly a 
Photoshop confection (it’s not!). If you look carefully, you can see that each side is different and 
that the photo relies on good old-style photographic technique to create the composition.
The choices you make will 
 lead you to your future


STEP 5: ESTABLISH A BASELINE
Once you work your way through steps 1–4, you are ready to establish your baseline (see 
pages 23–28 and Workbook Exercises 4–9) and to organize steps that will help you toward 
your photographic goals. What one or two things can you do to become a better photogra-
pher? And if you are interested in the business end of things, what one or two things can you 
do to promote your work and get it out into the world?
Remember to take things one step at a time. You need to walk before you run. Perhaps 
your goal is to have some of your work displayed in a gallery. How do you get it there? Make a 
list of steps that will walk you toward this goal. But don’t try to tackle all the steps at once. This 

31
can quickly become overwhelming and discouraging. Instead, start at the top of your list and 
work your way through one or two steps. Then reset your baseline to the next steps, which 
become your next goals along the way.
Achieving your potential as a photographer involves so many things—good photo-
graphic technique, of course, but also a clear understanding of where you want to go with 
the photography. Is it a hobby? Is it a business? Do you just enjoy photography because it 
shows your personal view of the world, or is there something more that you want? This kind 
of self-introspection can be difficult but most revealing, and can carry over into your everyday 
life, helping you realize the joy and fulfillment of meeting your goals.
R eset your baseline when 
 you realize a goal
Evaluating Your Work

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
32
Continuing on and carrying on with the necessary work can be the most arduous part of the 
process for any photographer (or any creative artist for that matter). The truth is that there 
can never be an end to it. Whenever an artist feels that there is no more work to be done, 
and that they have reached the apex of their particular kind of work, then they are dead in 
the water—and resting on laurels rather than genuinely creating. There is always work to be 
done, and the process of improving is always iterative. The word iterative (or “to iterate” for the 
base verb) is used here to mean that the work one does toward achieving one’s potential is 
repeated over and over again while getting better each time. This is a concept borrowed from 
software development, but it also applies to many kinds of creative endeavors.
You can’t know and can’t iterate without evaluative tools, but evaluation and iteration 
are no substitute for intuition, innovation, and vision. This means that the task is two-fold:
To carry on with the mundane day-to-day process of working, improving, and 
evaluating; in other words, to iterate
To be open to the possibility of serendipitous and exogenous events, emotions, 
and possibilities taking your work to a whole new level
The ideas and exercises in this book address and approach both aspects of becoming 
a more creative, fulfi lled, and successful photographic artist. 
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 11
◼
◼
ITERATING THE PROCESS
Practice, 
practice, 
practice!
Hey  , Joe , how 
do you get to 
Carnegie Hall?
THE OLD JOKE that the pears in 
this photo are telling each other 
holds true for all artistic endeav-
ors. It takes time and work to 
become a better photographer, 
and sometimes we box ourselves 
in (as symbolized here by the jar), 
when we feel stuck or get into a 
rut of “same old, same old.” 
As inventor Thomas Edison said, 
“Genius is one percent inspira-
tion and ninety-nine percent 
perspiration.”


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
34
Success in craft and in pragmatics cuts across both domains—aesthetic (how good a 
photographer are you?) and pragmatic (what are your goals with your photography?). This 
can be visualized as a four-square grid, as shown below.
Ultimately, each of the four quadrants—working at becoming a better photographer, 
working at getting your work out there, being open to the possibility of exogenous aesthetic 
events, and being open to the serendipity of photography made manifest in the world—are 
important to success.
Keep in mind that the four quadrants are always interrelated: The best way to get your 
work out there is to become a better photographer, and becoming a better photographer 
gives you more opportunities in the world.
However, if you are only interested in the aesthetic part—becoming a more creative 
photographer—and getting you artwork out in the world doesn’t really interest you, then 
you don’t have to market your work. You don’t need to engage the pragmatic portion of the 
Iterating means repeating, and
getting better each time
 AESTHETIC AND PRAGMATIC DOMAINS
Where are you on this grid?
where would you like to be?
Aesthetic
Pragmatic
This could be someone who is 
working on becoming a better 
photographer and also has a plan 
for getting their work out there.
practice, practice, practice
creating an action plan
This could be a great 
photographer just doing 
it for the love of it.
Someone who has mastered 
photography and the business 
of photography would be here.
Someone who is just 
getting started with 
photography and doesn’t 
have an action plan 
would be here.
☞    See related Workbook Exercises 12–15

35
Iterating the Process
I WAS PHOTOGRAPHING in the famous gardens at Giverny, established by the Impressionist painter Claude Monet. 
Although I originally had a complex idea about the imagery I would make, when I saw the simple beauty of the 
flowers in the garden, like this tulip, I decided to limit myself to the simplest photographic technique—a handheld 
lens, manually focused, using its widest possible aperture. Sometimes in this complex world of ours, it is hard to 
remember that simple may be best! When we over-complicate things we can lose track of what is important, and 
what is not—and also the joy in simple things, of family and friends, clouds and wind, and flowers in a garden.


37
grid—your part of the grid is the aes-
thetic side on the left. Where do you fit 
on the Aesthetic and Pragmatic Domains 
grid? Check out Workbook Exercise 12 to 
figure this out.
As I’ve suggested, achieving your 
potential—in whatever you do—is work 
that is never finished. All journeys start 
with a single step. So it’s time to begin.
Let’s get started with the next 
section, “Unleash Your Imagination.” This 
section relates to the aesthetic portion 
of the grid shown on page 34. It will help 
you understand how to make progress 
creatively using the principles that make 
you an artist.
As you turn the next few pages that 
lead to the following section, consider 
these ideas:
Keep an open mind. Having an 
open mind can really affect 
one’s potential—opportunities 
can pass by because of limited 
thinking patterns or being  
afraid to take a risk.
◼
AS WE OCCUPY our own little spaces in offices, cubicles, 
and homes on the Earth, it is easy to forget that our planet 
is part of a magnificent cosmos, replete with a spectacular 
night sky. Images with star trails, like this shot along the 
coast of California’s Big Sur, serve to simultaneously remind 
us of the glory of the universe and our potential insignifi-
cance in it. If we approach this universe with a degree of 
humility, it is possible to create imagery that echoes the 
wonder that is our inheritance.
Iterating the Process


39
Use the old adage, “Work smarter, 
not harder.” By being smart about 
your work habits, you can get a 
lot done instead of spinning  
your wheels.
Be spontaneous. When you 
want to do something, don’t 
think about it, just do it. Many 
opportunities pass by because of 
hesitation or the inability to make 
a decision.
Nobody is born perfect. Aim for 
progress, not perfection. All 
significant endeavors take time 
to learn, as well as the drive and 
hard work need to get better at 
the craft involved.
“A day of no work is a day of no 
eating.” I take this famous quote 
of Pai-chang Huai-hai, an eighth- 
century Zen master, to mean that 
if you have a day without practic-
ing your photography, then you 
will miss out on the “meal” of 
discoveries that you could make 
while working. Keeping up with 
your photography is like practic-
ing scales for a musician. If you 
don’t do it, you get rusty.
◼
◼
◼
◼
FOR ME, THIS MOONRISE over the busy shipping in the 
Port of Oakland, California, symbolizes the birth of new 
accomplishments and aspirations—and how the aesthetic, 
portrayed here by the moon, can work in symbiosis with the 
practical, represented by the heavy industry of the busy harbor.  
Iterating the Process

UNLEASH YOUR    
UNLEASH YOUR

IMAGINATION
IMAGINATION

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
42
PHOTOGRAPHY IS A PORTAL
TO MAKE THIS image I used a fairly simple technique: With the camera on a tripod, I made many 
exposures that were combined in-camera. The model was moving on a black seamless background, 
and each exposure was lit by a burst of studio strobe lighting. While the model and I had agreed in 
advance on the choreography, this multiple exposure of a single model produced interesting and 
unexpected results that one observer has characterized as a “Rorschach for MFAs.”
Photography is a portal to your imagination. It’s as simple, and as complicated, as that. There’s 
technique, and it is important—but you need to internalize technique and get past it, and 
then you can use photography to unleash your imagination.
We photograph what we see, and as we master the techniques involved in photography 
we more and more learn to photograph how we see as well as what we see. It’s very 
important to understand that photography is about seeing, and in particular an individual 
expression of each person’s unique way of seeing. This individual and unique way of seeing 
is a huge component of imagination. Expressing how you see is one of the keys to creative 
image making.
A word that sums up what we see and, more important, how we see is “vision.” The most 
important task for any photographer is to learn to realize their own, unique vision. By the way, 
this goes for any artist, and not only photographers. Any artist worth their salt has learned 
how to express their own unique vision.
Sometimes you see partially realized vision. This is a common experience for me when 
I lead workshops. A student clearly has something in mind, something wonderful. They just 
haven’t learned how to clear the wheat from the chaff—so that their own unique vision sings 
loudly, undistracted by mundane details.
A good way of thinking about this is to remember the great Michelangelo chipping away 
at a block of Carrara marble. In any artist’s studio, whether physical or virtual, you’ll find a 
great deal of waste scraps “on the floor” before the vision that is held within is realized. But a 
great artist like Michelangelo can see the vision within the stone in his mind’s eye. He knows 
exactly how and where to start chipping to release a work like Michelangelo’s statue of David.
The trick is to learn the tools that enable one to see like an artist, and to realize the vision 
that lives within us and the things around us, all the time, in everything and everyone. Vision 
does not have to be complicated or complex. Sometimes the very simplest things are best 
and there is absolutely no need to get fancy with your ideas or your technique.
The idea behind this part of Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer is to provide you 
with the tools you need to realize your own unique vision, whether simple or complex.



45
Photography Is a Portal
Photography is the portal 
 to your imagination
ON A MISTY SPRING afternoon we left Paris, getting on the van for Monet’s famous gardens 
at Giverny. The pre-visualizations that I saw in my mind’s eye along the drive were of images like 
Monet’s Impressionist paintings, or images that showed the visually complex bridges in the Giverny 
water gardens. But when we got to the garden the simplicity of individual tulips in the light rain was 
too much for me to resist! Sometimes simplicity is best, and it is important to be open to what one 
sees, regardless of one’s preconceptions.
The first step, of course, is to identify your vision. Put another way, you need to be able  
to name and access the vision that is uniquely yours.
It’s a good assumption that you have a vision. But maybe you don’t know what it is. 
Maybe you are fearful of following your vision where you really want to go—you could be 
afraid of criticism, want it to all be “perfect” right away, or feel silly following imagination’s 
whim. This self-monitoring criticism creates a block for you and keeps you from having access 
to the sources of your creativity. 
Resistance to creativity, imagination, and vision takes many forms. The one thing you can 
be sure of is that we all experience it. For one thing, nobody has access to the sources of their 
own creativity all the time. We are not effective artists 24/7/365. We are human after all. 
Sometimes we are spot on. The feeling of being there has been described as “being in the 
zone.” For some, being in the zone means that thoughts become quiet and concentration is 
so intense that time passes without one knowing. Have you ever started a project and then 
looked up to find that three hours have passed? That’s being in the zone. No one is in the 
zone all the time. All practicing artists in whatever medium have experienced the feeling of 
being in the zone, and we all know when the zone eludes us. 
The best approach to the zone is:
1: 
When you know you are in your creative zone, take advantage of it! Don’t let anything 
distract you from your creative work.
2: 
If you are not in the zone, go ahead with creative work anyhow. Sometimes the act of 
making art spurs one into the zone, even if you don’t start out that way. Some folks 
have to work their way into the zone mindset.
3: 
Learn the tools, techniques, and mental attitude that can help you be more often  
in the zone (see pages 146–147 for more about being in the zone).
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 38

THE POWER OF DIGITAL

47
The Power of Digital
We’re lucky to live in a time of great changes and excitement in the photographic arts.  
Unlike in the past, there is little doubt that photographs can be a form of art. Nobody who  
is informed believes anymore that a photograph is just a literal representation of reality.
If you have any doubts about this, consider that a photograph, like a perspective draw-
ing, is a two-dimensional encoding of a three-dimensional scene. Through a trick like that of 
sleight of hand, our brains have internalized the conventions of vanishing point perspective, 
and visually read the scenes in many photos as though they have three dimensions.
Even apart from this literal sense in which a two-dimensional photo can never actually 
be reality, photos have been used to alter and disguise reality since long before the birth of 
Photoshop. Post-Photoshop, this kind of manipulation and exaggeration becomes trivially easy.
In the Photoshop era, the veracity of any photo—how much relationship it bears to some 
actual scene of physical reality—depends on the credibility and intentions of the creator 
(which can be hard to gauge) and the context of the photo. 
For example, reputable news sources have procedures for vetting the photos they 
publish, and guidelines regarding permissible post-processing. A professional photographer 
who violates these boundaries is guilty of a breach of trust, with serious consequences if 
discovered.
On the other hand, a photographer whose stated intention is to be artistic has absolutely 
no obligation to depict “reality,” whatever reality may be—although there is an obligation to 
create with an artistic vision that has integrity.
Where do we stand in this world of shifting sands? Clearly, the variable and flexible 
relationship of digital photography to reality makes for dangers and pitfalls. Life is just not  
as simple as it once was. 
Digital photography takes its rightful place alongside other media in which you can 
unleash your imagination without necessarily paying attention to mundane reality. It’s a 
medium that is far more powerful than film photography ever was!
DURING THE SECOND World War, the navy shipyards on Mare Island near Vallejo, California, built the ships that 
won the battles for control of the Pacific Ocean. But as the years past, the Mare Island shipyards tumbled into decay, 
and have become a favorite place for local photographers to capture the remains of the former bustling industry.
To exaggerate the sense of perspective with a vanishing point in this image of an old gantry used for building navy 
ships in the shipyards, I constructed and extended the gantry, and added landscape to the left side of the image. So 
the elements in this image are real, but they’ve been manipulated in post-production to create an image that as a 
whole, while plausible, is inherently unreal.
Along with power comes danger

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
48

49
Along with power comes danger. One aspect of the 
power of today’s photography is that it can function to 
unlock the portals to your imagination. Imagination is the 
deeper engine, the motivating force behind vision. Vision 
in turn is the driver for creating imagery that you can use 
to explore your uniqueness. 
How can you unleash the power of your imagination 
so that your vision is fed and you become a more creative 
photographer? While there are no recipes for creativity, 
there are insights and specific techniques that can help 
you recognize creative possibilities and transcend any 
self-imposed limitations. 
Why not unleash the power of your imagination,  
and learn to take advantage of your personal creative 
“secret sauce”? Learning to do this takes some work, and 
some play. Let’s start with some examples in the next few 
pages (think about how similar ideas might apply to your 
own work).
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 16
LEFT:  CONDUCTING A WORKSHOP along the Pacific Ocean in Point Reyes, 
California, I noticed a phenomenon at low tide: The ocean slapped up to cre-
ate pockets of water on the rock formation under my feet that stretched out 
to sea. Incidentally, this formation is entirely underwater at a normal tide. The 
thing is that to properly expose for the water on the rocks required a far longer 
exposure than the one needed to capture the wave in the background.
 Digital to the rescue! I made one faster exposure for the wave and sky, and 
one slower exposure for the misty pockets of water, then combined the two 
exposures in post-production.
PAGES 50–51: THE WORLD CAN be naturally chaotic, and in this image  
I used a composition of flowers shot on a light box to give a sense of both  
the beauty and random nature of many of the events that we experience.
The Power of Digital
Imagination is the 
doorway to creativity

Forget for a moment about photography    …


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
52
THE FORCE BEHIND VISION
Where does the vision that is needed to fuel image making come 
from? That’s a great question. I am so glad you asked. If you get only 
one insight from this entire book, please pay attention to this one. 
It’s worth the price of the book.
Vision is powered by imagination. It’s as simple and as compli-
cated as that.
Of course, this begs the question of where imagination comes 
from, and some people are more imaginative than others. I was 
almost going to say that it’s unusual to find lawyers and accoun-
tants with imagination, but the field of imaginative accounting is  
an art unto itself!
Now, here’s the thing about imagination…it can be nurtured,  
it can be trained, and it can be encouraged to grow.
Everyone has the potential for creative imagination (even 
accountants). But from an early age, we are taught just the wrong 
things from the viewpoint of the imagination. The imagination 
should be taught to prosper and thrive. Instead, parents, schools, 
and the circumstances of life tend to pound all imaginative 
impulses into dust. 
For example, in the grade school years the curriculum encour-
ages arid and boring nonfiction to the kind of creative storytelling 
that enriches the soul. (Yes, Common Core, I am speaking to you!)
So, it’s time to reclaim your inner child. Photography is play (see 
pages 174–177), so start playing! Remember your dreams because 
dreams are a very powerful way to tap into your imagination. Does a 
particular novel or movie really move you? If so, pay attention to the 
message you are getting and the ways it taps into your imagination. 
☞  See related Workbook Exercises 16 and 42 to find 
more ideas and a checklist for learning to encourage your 
imaginative powers
THIS IS A VERY long exposure (4 minutes) taken on a cloudy late 
afternoon, looking out over the open Pacific Ocean. Without the 
confidence in the force of my imagination, it would have been hard  
to have the faith to make this experimental but powerful image.

53
The Force behind Vision


55
Imagination is the motivating 
 force behind vision
THIS PHOTOSHOP COMPOSITE 
of a nautilus shell and a spiral stair 
is a rendition of shapes in architec-
ture that blend into those of nature. 
While this blending seems natural 
when you look at the image, it 
was apparent to me beforehand. 
In fact, the idea of creating this 
image came to life in my imagina-
tion while I was thinking about 
something completely different. 
On my camera screen, the image of 
the spiral staircase—from the back 
halls of the Embarcadero Center 
in San Francisco—seemed to 
beckon to me in a downward spiral. 
Something about the spiral stayed 
with me in my imagination.
When I returned to my studio later 
that day, I turned my attention to a 
half chambered nautilus shell that 
was sitting on my desk. Picking it up 
and holding it in my hand, I studied 
the shell, contemplating how I 
would like to photograph it.
Daydreaming there in the quiet 
of my studio, the cross-section 
of the shell and the architectural 
image seemed to fit together in one 
perfect spiral in my mind. So, once I 
photographed the nautilus, I made 
this happen visually by compositing 
the two images together.
The Force behind Vision

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
56
OWNING YOUR CREATIVITY
We’ve all had the experience of photographing a subject that many other photographers 
have tackled. “Well, duh,” you say, many of us photograph flowers or landscapes or kids 
or beautiful women. In my workshops, sometimes a group of technically competent 
photographers will stand in more or less the same place, each with roughly comparable 
gear, and—however much I try to persuade people to look at what’s in front of them with 
creativity—photograph more or less the same things.
But the interesting thing is that even when the subject is the same, a few photographers 
usually come away with amazing images, while the rest, even if they are technically compe-
tent photographers, produce solid B+ images: technically competent, but definitely missing 
the special something that really makes an image interesting and stand out from the crowd.
Let me say that photographic technique is important (for more about using technique to 
jump-start your creativity, turn to pages 112–115). Technique is important in the sense that 
photography is a craft. If you don’t master your craft, how can you know what the options are? 
In other words, photographic technique is necessary, but not sufficient to creative image 
making. The most technically proficient image in the world that doesn’t have a spark of 
originality, or an ounce of feeling, will be of absolutely no interest to anyone.
So let’s assume you know something about photography. How can you add your own 
creative touch to the images you make? Probably the key part of this question is “your own.” 
Because my creativity isn’t your creativity.
I don’t want to teach you to be a photographer just like me, and I probably couldn’t 
even tell you how to do exactly what I do, even if I wanted to. My goal is to teach you to be 
the best, most creative photographer you can be. This means that the creative “secret sauce” 
needs to be expressed in your own way. What you are cooking needs to be relevant to your 
own work.
A photograph expresses how we see. Looked at in one way, it is a representation of 
the world that has been arbitrarily composed, and is constrained by the crafts of formal 
composition and the rules of exposure. But importantly, a photo is a way of seeing, your  
way of seeing.
I LOVE SUNFLOWERS! They are truly a wonderful flower. Of course, sunflowers are often depicted in 
art. For example, it is probably hard for me to say “sunflower” without thinking of Vincent van Gogh’s 
famous sunflower paintings. But did you know that the sunflower is also visually interesting from behind? 
Looking at something from a new angle can lead to enhanced creative options, and versions of photos of 
common objects that present them differently—so that one is seeing the object as if new for the first time.


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
58
The way you see is very personal to you. 
Even photos of ordinary subjects—for 
example, landscapes—are an expression 
of the way of seeing, and therefore the 
individuality, of the photographer. 
Learning to access your unique 
individuality and way of seeing is the  
best way of identifying your special  
secret sauce—what will give you an  
edge when you make photographs.
How does one approach subjects 
and situations with creativity? Certainly, 
understanding equipment is necessary, 
and having an eye for exposure, color, and 
composition helps, but without the ability 
to tap your own unique creativity, coming 
up with something special would be a 
haphazard business at best.
Sometimes, the best bet is to work 
on seeing, and not photography. For this 
reason, I sometimes go on location without 
a camera. The goal is to help spark visual 
ideas without being stuck with the mun-
dane details of bothering with your camera.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 17
PHOTOGRAPHING THE ARC de Triomphe in 
Paris, France in the deepening twilight, I decided to 
increase the creative interest of the foreground of 
the composition by using a long enough exposure 
(30 seconds) to turn the car lights into abstract 
trails of light. The “car trails” in the foreground make 
a photo that would otherwise be fairly mundane 
much more interesting.
PLAYING WITH YOUR IDEAS


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
60
If you can conceptualize something, with all 
the tools of photography and digital art that are 
available, you can make it manifest. Of course, 
sometimes the process of figuring out how to 
accomplish the vision that your imagination has 
conceived is a long, drawn out, and plodding affair. 
But if you decide to do it, and then just do it, you 
will succeed.
So this means that the key underlying issue 
is the one of creative visualization. Learn to see 
first—and by seeing encompass an entire world 
of potentialities, of things that are waiting to 
be revealed, and new ideas waiting to be born. 
With this vision, creating digital photographic 
representations of your vision, when the 
circumstances are right, is merely a matter  
of photographic implementation.
Fortune favors the prepared mind. To capture 
creative worlds of imagination means growing 
your imaginative faculties. Imagination is like a 
muscle that needs to be exercised. When you  
have bulked up your imaginative biceps, you will 
 have the ability to begin to access a vision that  
is uniquely yours. With a unique vision, when  
the occasion presents itself, you can indeed be  
a photographer living up to your potential. 
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 18
WITH FORTUNE TELLERS, snake charmers, camel 
drivers, exotic food stalls, Jemaa el Fna in Marrekesh, 
Morocco, is a great place to let the imagination run 
wild, particularly at night when it seems like fairy 
tales from the Arabian Nights could come alive  
and anything could happen.
Fortune favors the prepared mind


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
62
AFTER SPENDING A somewhat stressful couple of hours driving around the one-way streets in the old town of 
Bourges, France, looking for my hotel, I was relieved to find a brass plaque on a stucco wall with a skinny covered 
passageway to drive through. My hotel room was in an old palazzo, and my room was in the former watch tower! 
Although it was raining, I lugged my camera and tripod up the stairs on the off chance that there would be some-
thing to photograph or a change in the weather. As I got to the top of the stairs, I saw that the weather was indeed  
win flux. I was able to take advantage of the last light of sunset to make this image showing the great old Cathedral  
of Bourges through the open hotel window.
In the next sections of Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer, I’ll show you how to tap into 
your own creativity by:
Harnessing the powers of serendipity in a controlled way. Remember: Fortune favors 
the prepared mind! Serendipity is my friend, and all very well and good, but when you 
see an image be prepared to make it happen without delay.
Keeping what’s important in mind. As I like to remind students, using newspaper 
lingo, “Don’t bury the lede.”  This means being really clear in your mind what your 
photo is about—the lede, or lead, is the key information in a newspaper story.
Learning to harness the power inherent in photographic composition.
Understanding that less is sometimes more. That which is implied but unseen can 
have much more power in an image than that which is explicitly rendered.
Listening to yourself. Often the first idea is the best idea, and we lose focus and dilute 
our creativity by being reluctant to listen to ourselves and trust ourselves. So learn to 
listen to your inner voice!
Setting limits intentionally. There are many kinds of limits you can set for your-
self in time, space, equipment, and subject matter (to name a few dimensions). 
Paradoxically, setting your own limits—which at first blush can seem to take creative 
resources away—actually can greatly enhance the options available to the creative 
experience.
Making a print portfolio. Until a photo has been printed, or reproduced in print, I don’t 
consider it finished. I encourage my students to create specific and targeted print 
portfolios as part of the process of understanding and presenting their own work.
Understanding that creativity is a lifelong pursuit. You don’t just go through the  
steps and stop. The idea is to go back over and over again, each time at a a higher  
and deeper level.
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
TAPPING INTO CREATIVITY



65
Tapping into Creativity
Find a quiet, comfortable place 
to let your imagination run wild
I LOVE TO PHOTOGRAPH at 
Urban Ore, a salvage “eco-park” 
operation in Berkeley, California, 
with the proclaimed mission of 
“ending the age of waste” and 
“if you’re not for zero waste, how 
much waste are you for?” 
One day, I decided to shoot at 
Urban Ore and intentionally limit 
myself to one lens. Using one lens 
seemed in keeping with Urban Ore’s 
minimal waste mission.
I roamed the piles and stacks of 
interesting junk—sinks, doors, 
cabinets, building columns, you 
name it—with my Zeiss 135mm 
f/2.0 and no other options.
Limiting the way I could “see” 
helped me see more. The reclaimed 
sinks at Urban Ore created an 
interesting abstract black and 
white pattern—one I probably 
would have missed if I had been 
carrying my full panoply of lenses 
and related gadgets.



Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
68
TELLING A STORY
Every photograph tells a story. Your first step is to understand the story that your photo is 
trying to tell. 
Some photographs tell stories that are like novels. The narrative in other stories is 
more like a poem. With a sequence of journalistic photos, the story is clear and nonfiction. 
With other kinds of photos, the meaning of the story is not so clear, the narrative is not 
straightforward—and it may take a perspicacious viewer to understand that there is a 
narrative story at all.
That said, if you are unclear about the story and the kind of story your photograph is 
telling, then you need to dig deeper. Without a clear understanding of the kind of story that  
is being shown and the details being narrated, you cannot know how to enrich the narrative 
or how to focus the primary thrust of the photo.
The images that stick with us have a point of view and you might almost say a “soul.” 
These are not stock photographs. These images make a statement, and their creator has 
endowed them with a narrative spark that constitutes a viewpoint and a definite narrative.
If you want to make stock photos that will sell well via a stock agency, you have likely not 
come to the right place. By definition, a successful stock photo must be used over and over 
again to tell a variety of different stories. This is like being a “jack of all trades and master of 
none.”  There is no compelling narrative, and the story that the stock image tells can easily  
be overridden and made to serve duty for any number of masters. The “soul” that this kind  
of image has is lightweight and rather bland.
To become a truly creative photographer, you do not want to create images that are 
lightweight and bland. Creative imagery has some of the personality of the artist that made 
them, a definite viewpoint, and when all is parsed a cohesive story. 
Start with an understanding of the kind of story your image is trying to tell. Is it a novel,  
a documentary, a play, a poem, or something else altogether? 
With the underlying form in mind, what is the arc of the narrative? In many cases, this 
may take some digging as the narrative can be hidden behind layers of metaphor, or even 
deceptively organized to apparently deny the presence of structure.
Once you know the type of story your photo is trying to tell, and have a handle on the arc 
of its narrative, the next step is to work to increase what dramatists term “narrative tension” at 
the heart of your image’s story. This means enhancing the range of light to dark, the range of 
sorrow to joy, and the relation of form to content as much as possible.
☞  See related Workbook Exercises 19–21


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
70
In the newspaper business there’s a saying that goes, “Don’t bury  
the lede.” Lede is, of course, jargon for “lead”—and in a newspaper 
story the lede, or lead, is simply the main point of the story. Of course, 
many newspaper stories do end up burying the lede, either on 
purpose or unintentionally. But newspaper stores should not bury  
the lede—and good news stories that are not intended as marketing 
or propaganda don’t.
Not burying the lede gets a little more complex in the context of 
an art such as photography. There’s very little art in placing the lede in 
a photo in the center of the composition, and making the lede huge. 
Often, the lede needs to be shown obliquely, or by indirection.
But completely apart from how it is depicted in your photo,  
you need to be very aware and completely conscious of what mat-
ters most in any photograph you are making or showing. That which 
matters most is the lede in your photo.
All too often I’ve had students show me images, with no idea about what is important  
in the image, or why they are showing their work to me. 
To help find the lede of your photo, ask yourself: 
What is the point of this image? 
What matters most about it? 
Why am I showing it to someone else?
☞  See related Workbook Exercises 22 and 23 for help finding the lede in  
your photos
◼
◼
◼
’
DON T BURY THE LEDE
THE DAY MY daughter was born she was given low chances of survival. She was a 24-week preemie, born 16 weeks 
early. I saw her lifeless, blue body, and then followed my wife on her own trip through cardiac intensive care. We 
assumed the worst, but in the days that followed Katie Rose miraculously defied all odds and began to thrive. 
I knew I had to photograph the story, and to focus on what mattered emotionally—the little hand in her mother’s 
big hand (shown above), another version of little Katie in her mom’s hand (right)—not the machinery and tubes that 
kept our daughter alive. Essentially, the lede is how small Katie is, shown in comparison with the hand size above.
Coming from a time when hope was all we had, my thought was that my photos of our daughter would send a 
message to hang in there, based on our experience, to others in the same situation. Incidentally, as I write these  
lines, little Katie is now a tough six-year-old, vivacious and lively, and enjoying her first year of kindergarten.

71
Don’t Bury the Lede

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
72
HARNESSING SERENDIPITY
It’s a truism that we never know for sure what will happen 
tomorrow. Time is a river, it is said, flowing in one direc-
tion. So we can remember the past, perhaps with varying 
degrees of accuracy, but we never know the future. 
You may think that tomorrow—or the next moment—
is going to be ho-hum, and more of the same. But you 
never really know. You might win the lottery, or fall off a 
chair, or stumble into a great photographic opportunity.
Life is full of surprises. The best photography is 
not sterile and removed from life, because compelling 
photography takes advantage of the serendipitous and 
messy nature of the world. If you are prepared, and always 
 expect the unexpected, your photography will be more 
creative, imaginative, and rich than if you are rigid in  
the way you see the world, and in how you go about 
taking photographs.
ONE EVENING, I was photographing the Golden Gate Bridge 
from San Francisco’s Baker Beach. The last light of sunset was 
almost gone. My tripod legs were in the lapping waves at the 
edge of the beach, and my exposures were getting fairly long 
(30 seconds). 
All of a sudden, in the middle of one of my 30-second 
exposures, a large “sneaker” wave came crashing toward  
my camera and tripod. I grabbed the tripod and ran ahead  
of the wave, setting the camera down on the dry sand as it 
was still exposing. 
I assumed the image was ruined, and was glad to have  
simply saved my camera. To my surprise, when I reviewed  
my files on my computer, this was the most interesting  
photo of the evening.
The moral: Never underestimate the power of serendipity!

73
Harnessing Serendipity


75
Let serendipity 
find you
Photographers vary in how 
rigid their personalities are, and 
how able they are to be flexible 
and creative when responding to 
new circumstances. Most likely, if 
you are a photojournalist cover-
ing a scene of global conflict, you 
need to be flexible to come away 
with good images—and to stay 
alive.
On the other hand, if your 
day job is working in a cubicle 
you may not have the reflexes you 
need to respond effectively to the 
unexpected. In other words, you 
may need some practical guidance 
and practice to learn how to work 
with serendipity.
THE COMPLEX OF buildings at the end of Point Richmond, 
California, used to be the end of the long road from the 
East Coast of the United States. At this point, cars and trains 
used to board a ferry to cross San Francisco Bay. These 
structures, along with the ferry wharf, are now abandoned 
and tumbling down.
Ignoring the “Danger” and “No Trespassing” signs, I made 
my way under, over, and through the barbed-wire fence, 
guarding the complex, ripping the back of my shirt in the 
process. (Just what are they guarding anyway?)
As you can see in the photo, I had been preceded by a 
multitude of graffiti artists. I took advantage of their work, 
along with the stunning light in the interior space, to create 
this image using an extreme wide-angle lens (15mm).
Harnessing Serendipity

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
76
The good news is that this 
stuff—the ability to find, antici-
pate, and respond to unexpected 
events—can be taught, and 
learned.
Whatever kind of photog-
rapher or artist you are, you can 
learn to be more intuitive and 
responsive in your reactions to 
changing situations—and things 
always do change, so buckle up 
your seat belts. 
Learning to harness the 
power of serendipity can improve 
your work and change your life in 
myriad (and often unexpected!) 
ways. If serendipity finds you, just 
let go and try to go with the flow.
THE BERKELEY MUNICIPAL PIER stretches almost a half 
mile out into San Francisco Bay. Along the way out to the 
end, there are views of San Francisco, the Golden Gate, 
Alcatraz, and Mount Tamalpais. The pier used to go even 
farther, so the end is boarded up with the slats you see here.
Hiking out to the end of the pier as the sun was setting, I 
noticed an extreme contrast between the slats facing me, 
which were in dark shadow, and the bright sunset beyond 
the fence.
I used three exposures to capture the entire range of light 
from the bright sunset to the shadowed pier. This technique 
enabled me to bring out the serendipitous beauty in the 
odd and almost random painting on the fence at the end 
of the pier.
Beauty is everywhere



79
Photography is a quest
Try this exercise: Photograph something through water with the purpose of capturing a 
refraction. The idea behind the photo of the refraction is to create a sense of illusion, that  
the viewer is seeing something that isn’t quite real.
Learning to work with serendipity means embracing the following six steps:
1: 
There is no universal path to creativity, or to the creation of great photos. Becoming 
a more creative photographer means exploring your personal path and ideas, not 
embracing a cookie-cutter style approach or recipe.
2: 
Technique matters. If you don’t know how to use your gear then you are like a painter 
who doesn’t know how to paint, or a musician who can’t play a scale. Take the time to 
understand basic photographic principles and how your camera works, and practice 
until you’ve internalized these things.
3: 
Our world runs on surface impressions and imagery. But often things are not what 
they seem. Learn to look (and see) more deeply.
4: 
Photography is a quest, but the ultimate prize is often different from our initial 
expectation. The truly creative photographer learns to quickly shift gears to take 
advantage of unexpected but wonderful things that come up along the way.
5: 
It’s important to move beyond your comfort zone, even if that means venturing 
beyond the things you know and have photographed in the past.
6: 
Serendipity, chance events, and ideas are important parts of creativity in 
photography (as in many other forms of art). Rather than futilely struggling  
against chance in the world, you will strive to embrace serendipity and make  
it your photographic friend.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 24
WHEN LIGHT PASSES through a medium other than clear air, the light waves become bent, producing a 
phenomenon known as a refraction. Refraction is particularly pronounced when the light passes through water. 
Playing with some vases in my studio one day, I set up a white background using kraft paper, filled the vases with 
some water, and started moving them around in front of each other. For this photo, I ended up aligning three vases  
in a row and placing a flower in the last vase, farthest from me and my camera.
Harnessing Serendipity

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
80
EXPECTING
THE UNEXPECTED
I’m a great reader of fantasy and adventure novels, and I went through an extended period of 
reading naval adventures, mostly set in the Napoleonic era. In many of these stories, the hero, 
always a daring and dashing captain of a small but powerful frigate, realizes something that 
every photographer should know: We see only what we expect to see. This very human failing 
was dangerous to the frigate captain because it was easy to miss anomalies, such as enemy 
ships where no ship was supposed to be.
The single most important trait of the creative photographer, like the frigate captain, is 
that he or she has learned to put aside expectations and see “what is really there” without 
preconceptions. 
When you look at the image on the right, do you see a found object in the murk of estu-
arial low tide, or do you see an elegant letter of the alphabet against a gradient background?
Try these exercises: 
1: Without a camera, observe a scene closely. What abstract pattern or patterns can the 
scene be boiled down to visually?
2: Pick something that you’ve looked at often, and that you think is visually boring. Now, 
let go of your preconceptions about your subject. Study it carefully. Find something 
you haven’t observed before about it, and make an interesting image using this new 
aspect of your subject.
LEMONADE FROM LEMONS
Photography often involves a goal. If you are a professional, you may be on assignment. 
Amateurs go somewhere to photograph, figure out and take on projects, give themselves 
assignments (maybe even the ones I’ve suggested in this article), and take workshops.  
These are all good things.
However, as I’ve already pointed out, life is full of surprises. It’s important to have a plan, 
but things often don’t work out as planned. And this is also a good thing.
Here’s how I think of this tension between an assignment (whether self-assigned or 
otherwise) and the inherent changeability of life. A photographic assignment is a quest, in the 
sense that Medieval knights undertook quests. So my first job is to accept the quest (assign-
ment) and plan to do it successfully as best I can.
But Medieval knights understood that by accepting a quest they were accepting the 
adventure that would be given to them, which was not necessarily the adventure originally 
undertaken as the quest.


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
82
This is another way of saying that if you are dealt photographic 
lemons, turn them into lemonade. Being too rigid about your original  
plan means that you will lose the wonderful images that appear,  
serendipitously, only along side roads.
I was leading a night photography workshop at the famous Point 
Reyes Lighthouse. The night was extremely wet and foggy, and didn’t seem 
like good conditions for photography. Instead of giving up, we wrapped 
our cameras in plastic bags and set out to capture the fog itself. One of my 
photos from that night, of the lighthouse mysteriously wreathed in fog, is 
shown to the right.
Try this exercise: The next time something goes wrong with a  
shoot, grab the problem, turn it into a possibility, and make it the basis  
of a photograph. 
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 25
BEYOND THE FIELDS WE KNOW
It’s a thin line indeed between the everyday and commonplace world that 
we think we know very well, and magical worlds where anything photo-
graphic can happen.
Time and again, the books I grew up with and most loved involved 
the protagonists being transported to a different and magical realm. For 
example, in C.S. Lewis’s Narnia series the kids were always going through 
the back of a magical wardrobe, slipping through a painting, or something 
of the sort.
In one such story, The King of Elfland’s Daughter, Victorian fantasist Lord 
Dunsany wrote about slipping over the line from our world beyond the 
Accept your quest and find the adventure
ONE FOGGY NIGHT, I descended the 300+ steps to the Point Reyes Lighthouse 
in Marin County, California. Droplets of water hung onto everything and sounds 
were muffled; even the savage Pacific Ocean breakers could barely be heard. 
Usually photographed on clear nights, the dense fog diffused the light and 
created an otherworldly sense of mystery and awe.  

83
Expecting the Unexpected

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
84
fields we know into faerie. On returning, years had passed, and nothing was ever the same 
again. This is another way of saying that once you find your creativity and inspiration you 
can’t go home again. But why would you want to?
I was thinking of Dunsany’s novel one morning when I slipped out before dawn to pho-
tograph dandelions covered in the morning’s dew (image to the right). As the morning sun 
started to rise, the droplets of dew became tinted with magical colors, and I was transported 
to a new and strange land.
Try this exercise: Starting with a place you know very well, find a way to “slip through the 
cracks” so you are looking around you with new eyes. Create a photographic image that conveys 
the wonder of the new world you are seeing.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 26
EMBRACING SERENDIPITY
If you know the answer in advance, it can easily take much of the fun away. Mysteries are 
mysteries because they contain mysteries. There’s a reason that mysteries are a popular liter-
ary genre, and why people like to read thrillers.
There are two implications, one on the side of the photo maker, the other regarding 
those folks who will view your photos.
As a creator, I never know where my photography will take me. I also don’t know in 
advance how I’ll figure out which way to go to get there. This means I need to be open to 
possibilities and to embrace serendipity. It also keeps my work fresh, interesting, and—yes!—
mysterious for me.
Try to make sure that some of this sense of embracing unexplored territories finds its way  
into your work for those who view it. A little mystery goes along way toward making imagery 
more interesting!
CREEPING ON MY BELLY through a wet, brown field in the fog before the sun rose, I was sure that 
the world was a dreary and dull place, lacking color. But much to my surprise, as the sun came up, 
this small dandelion started to glow with an astounding inner light. For me, it was a manifestation 
of the radiance that the world can display made real.
The moral? Often the right shot takes patience, and sometimes we must crawl on our stomachs in  
a dun-colored world before the universe reveals the truth of what is truly there.
Embrace unexplored territory


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
86

87
On a trip to photograph Oakland, California’s 
Chinatown, I got sidetracked by reflections in the 
skyscrapers of one of the few modern office buildings in 
downtown Oakland. The combination of the windows 
in the reflections called out to me, and I added colors to 
the old and new buildings to construct a radically new 
version of Oakland (the image is to the left).
Did I know I would do this in advance? No. 
I listened carefully to an idea in my mind’s eye, 
and executed it as best I could. There are many reasons 
to think this might not have worked as an image, but 
I didn’t let myself be stopped because I thought it 
wouldn’t work. I went ahead anyway, played, had fun, 
and came back with an interesting and creative image.
This image might not have been workable. Don’t be 
afraid to fail. If you never create an image that is no good, 
then you’ve been playing it too safe.
Don’t let the voice in your mind stop you from trying 
things. There are enough people out there in the world 
who will be critical. You don’t need an inner critic gang-
ing up on you before you even really get started.
Try these exercises:
1: 
Many things stop us from taking photos: We 
need to get somewhere, we have other respon-
sibilities, we don’t think the photo will come out 
well, and so on. What stops you? List 10 things 
that have stopped you from making a photo.
2: 
The next time you have a visual idea, however 
fleeting or unlikely it seems, pursue the idea to 
the end, as far as it goes, and come back with 
an image. Good, bad, or ugly, it doesn’t really 
matter. The point is to teach that nasty voice 
in your head that you won’t be stopped from 
unleashing your creative imagination.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 27
“A child’s attitude toward everything is 
an artist’s attitude.”    —  Willa Cather
Expecting the Unexpected


89
ONWARD THROUGH THE FOG
I like to say “onward through the fog” or OTTF for short—because it is a fog when one heads 
onward, and you don’t know where you are going until you get there. The trick is to walk 
along the road less taken, with creativity as your companion. You should be poised to take 
advantage of serendipity.
Along with emotional impact, creativity is the key ingredient that separates technically 
competent photos from stunning imagery. The ability to take advantage of life’s surprises is 
part of the essence of being creative. You can’t use the surprising to your advantage until  
you learn to expect the unexpected. 
This chapter of Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer has provided some ideas to 
help you take advantage of serendipity, and to learn to work with creativity as a helpful 
companion: 
Taking the creative road means finding your own way. While there are no recipes or 
formulas for creative success, there are some techniques, ideas, and exercises that  
can help you access your own creativity.
Photographic technique isn’t an end in itself—but you must master the basics 
of photography and your camera before you can take advantage of creative 
opportunities. Once technique is second nature, creativity and artistry start to flow.
Don’t fall for surface impressions. It’s vital to learn to see beneath the surface, and 
beyond the obvious, so you can start to depict what is really there. This is why some 
iconic photographs are so powerful—they have cut through the “surface noise” and 
found the “story” inside the image.
Strive to create images that have an emotional impact beyond the immediately 
obvious. Tell a story with your work. Why is your photo more than just a pretty 
picture?
If the situation doesn’t match your preconceived photographic plan, be flexible and 
switch plans to “make lemonade from lemons.” Always look for lemonade, not lemons, 
and if you are given artistic lemons, see them as a gift to use.
Learn to stretch beyond what you know and are comfortable with; this will change 
you as a photographer. You will feel uncomfortable and all change is scary, but it is  
the only way to truly grow as an artist and a person.
Take advantage of the wonderful opportunities that chance provides; make 
serendipity your friend—I call this the “serendipity factor.” It is amazing what can 
happen when serendipity finds you.
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
Be prepared to act when 
serendipity ﬁnds you
Expecting the Unexpected

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
90
Try to see what you don’t expect to see
ALTERING THE CONTEXT
What is more normal than an eye? We look at other people’s eyes all the time. But if you alter 
the context by popping a skull or flower in the pupil, the image becomes new and different. 
Furthermore, the skull versus the flower makes a big difference.
Look for a moment at the different eye images to the right. Cover them up and look at 
them one at a time. The top one shows just a beautiful, normal eye. We look, we see it—it 
seems unremarkable. Now move down to the middle image with the skull in the pupil. This 
changes the eye photo completely. We can’t not focus on that skull. It draws one in. Then, 
move down to the bottom image with the flower in the pupil. Again, this draws us in and 
makes us focus. How do the skull and flower change your perception of the eye? What are 
your associations?
Adding an element to something that is commonplace changes the context of a photo, 
and the way we react the photo. Furthermore, the content of the added element can control 
the entire emotional gestalt of the revised image.
Try this exercise: Photograph something commonplace. Contrive to add an element to the 
composition and note how the emotional freight associated with the image has changed. 
Now try the same thing with a different, new element.
THE POWER OF TIME
Time is probably the most powerful element that you can control in photography if you want 
to reveal the unseen, and also one of the most difficult to use successfully.
Classic uses of time in photos include blurring parts of a composition in motion, to turn 
lights at night into lines, and reveal the trails made by stars, such as the photograph of Lady 
Boot Arch shown on pages 94–95. Movies are also still photos combined over time.
Despite the ubiquity of time manipulation as a way to transcend the mundane in 
photography, it is one of the best tools available, and one that should be mastered.
Try this exercise:  Pick something in motion, and photograph it at a variety of shutter 
speeds to become very clear about the effect of time on motion in photography. Your choice 
of shutter speed should depend on what you choose to photograph (see workbook for ideas).
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 28

91
I’VE ALWAYS BEEN fascinated by the blackness of the pupil in the 
human eye. This is the lens through which we see the magnificence and 
color of the world. But outside looking in, it can appear like a black hole. 
What happens when you put something in this vortex? With the model 
on the left, I added first a skull, then a flower to the center of her attractive 
eye. With the flower stalk above, I added my own eye so that I could keep 
an eye on you and encourage your creativity. Ha!
Expecting the Unexpected


93
“Reality is merely an illusion, albeit 
a very persistent one.” —Albert Einstein
THE FOREST IS a wonderful and magical 
place. Wandering along the dreary forest floor 
past fallen leaves, branches, and spider webs, 
suddenly the sun may beam through. You 
never know: Those rays may hit a special rock 
in a sacred grove. Suddenly awake, the rock 
comes to life.
Revealing things that are not commonly 
seen, cannot be seen by the naked eye, or 
are usually overlooked is one of the most sig-
nificant ways you can add impact to a photo 
and create apparently simple images. This is 
never novelty for novelty’s sake, but rather it 
taps into one of the most important goals of 
photography as a medium of expression.
The best photos are apparently simple. 
This doesn’t mean they actually are simple, 
and apparent simplicity has the power to:
Show things that have been ignored 
or forgotten.
Change the context of an existing 
photo by adding or subtracting 
elements.
Use the power of photography to 
control time by changing the dura-
tion of an exposure.
What can you envision that no one else 
sees? Figure out a way for you to realize this 
vision and share it with the world. After all, 
what is reality and whose reality is it?
◼
◼
◼
Expecting the Unexpected

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
94
REVEALING THE UNSEEN
Stop for a second and think about what capabili-
ties photography has that are unique.
An important answer to this question is that 
photography can reveal things that are unseen. In 
fact, revealing things to people that they haven’t 
seen before is one of the main things that keeps 
me going as a photographer.
Of course, revelation is never straightforward, 
and there are a number of different strategies 
involved. And saying that something is “unseen” 
begs the question, “By whom or what is it 
unseen?” 
As the saying goes, if a tree falls in a forest 
and no one is around to hear it, does it make 
a sound? In this sense, photography can make 
the unseen real. For instance, theoretically we 
know that stars move in relationship to the 
earth (actually, it is the earth moving, of course). 
A photo that shows star trails over time brings 
home the fact there is indeed relative motion, and 
that the motion is real. Take a look at the photo 
to the right. This image of Lady Boot Arch in the 
Alabama Hills in eastern California was exposed 
for about 3 1/2 hours. During this time the earth 
rotated and the starlight left trails in the sky.
If your goal as a photographer is to create an 
image the world has never seen, then the content 
of your photo will be unseen, and your job is to 
reveal that which is unseen.
Revealing the unseen was the magic that 
kept me riveted in the chemical darkroom, and it’s 
the catnip that keeps me coming back for more as 
a photographer.


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
96
Let’s enumerate some of the ways that unseen things can 
be revealed:
The unseen thing is ignored, overlooked, or forgotten.
The context in which the thing is viewed is changed.
That which is unseen is only revealed over time, or 
using some other photographic mechanism.
The unseen thing does not in fact exist at all; your  
job is to create it.
To the right is a black and white photo of street lights 
coming through trees. It was taken on an extremely foggy 
night in a parking lot. The street lights cast a sickly looking 
orange glow. I was on my way to photograph something else, 
and could easily have ignored or overlooked this image. But 
I stopped and really looked at the scene and decided to take 
the time to make a few photographs. I’m really glad I did. The 
strength of the composition did not begin to emerge until I 
converted the image to monochrome in the digital darkroom. 
It’s a pretty unusual view of urban trees in the fog. If I’ve ever 
seen anything similar, it was probably in a horror movie.
Below is an 8-minute exposure of an Indian paintbrush 
flower taken at night. There wasn’t any moonlight and I didn’t 
use any source of light to illuminate 
the flower. The photo shows colors 
beyond the normal human visual 
spectrum. This display is intended to 
attract pollinators, and happens during 
the day, too—we just can’t see it with 
our eyes.
Try this exercise:  Find a  
subject that has secrets revealed  
only photographically.
◼
◼
◼
◼

97
Revealing the Unseen

THIS IS APPARENTLY a fairly simple architectural study of the Hotel de Sully near the famous Place de Vosges in 
the Marais district of Paris, France. But look more carefully at the image, particularly the doorway that leads into a 
neighboring courtyard. It’s easy to overlook, but the special resolution of this interior space within an interior space is 
what actually gives this image resonance. In other words, the space through the internal door is at a higher degree of 
resolution than the exterior space, giving the whole image a kind of holographic effect. 
My feeling in looking at the image was that it also needed to reflect the respectable antiquity of the environment. So I 
added a sepia tint and a border to the image to balance the somewhat subtle detail of the courtyard through the door.

99
NOTICING OVERLOOKED THINGS
Good photographers have hungry eyes. They 
are constantly looking, evaluating, and internally 
composing—and yes, even being busybodies, 
prying into everything. The photographer is 
part voyeur, and the voyeur is obsessive about 
observing the details of their obsession.
This makes photographs that show things 
that are often overlooked a common source of 
photographic inspiration. Photographers are  
just naturally good at this kind of thing.
There are two parts to creating an image of 
something overlooked. You have to conceptual-
ize and notice it, and then you have to figure out 
how to capture and render it.
The conceptualization and observation 
component is the most profound portion of this 
two-step operation, but we tend to emphasize 
the capturing and rendering. This is because 
capturing and rendering consists of techniques 
that can easily be delineated and broken down 
into steps—and also take considerable grunt 
work. On the other hand, conceptualization can 
occur in a sudden flash of inspiration.
Try this exercise: Carefully look at something 
around you. Consider for a moment how this 
commonplace item would have looked in the 
past: 20 years ago, 50 years ago, 100 years ago. 
Is there a way you can render a historical view 
of the object? Is there an interesting detail that 
makes the item unique? When you have fired 
your imagination, photograph the object and 
process the image using your vision.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 29
THIS IMAGE IS of Les Deux Magots, a watering hole in the 
heart of the Saint-Germain-des-Prés district in Paris, France, 
beloved by Ernest Hemingway and literati and glitterati ever 
since Hemingway’s era. 
Recently wandering past with only my iPhone camera in 
hand,  I noticed the waiter in old-fashioned apron “skirt” 
looking just like photos from bygone times in Paris. Before 
this vision from the past vanished, I snapped the picture.
Revealing the Unseen

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
100
SETTING LIMITS
How do you decide what to photograph? This sounds like a simple question, but it turns out 
to pose a surprisingly difficult problem—one that is surprisingly universal across artists, level 
of ability, and genres.
Almost every artist in almost every medium—not only photographers but also novelists 
and painters—has confronted the so-called horror vacuii , which is Latin for fear of the empty 
space. In a nutshell, this creativity killer wakes up when that voice in your brain says, “But I 
have nothing to photograph” or “How do I start?”
Part of the problem is the vastness of the blank page. When you can write anything,  
paint anything, photograph anything, why is a particular subject worthwhile? And where  
do you start?
The very vastness of the array of possibilities can be paralyzing. Thinking about this 
potential paralysis leads to one way to get around horror vacuii, which is to intentionally  
set limits for yourself.
CONFRONTING THE HORROR VACUI
Horror vacui means fear of empty space. Throughout the ages—in whatever their choice of 
medium—artists have confronted empty spaces, blank pages, white canvases, and just trying 
to figure out what the heck to create. This is no different with photography, except maybe 
even a bit worse because it is so easy to simply press a button and take a snapshot.
Particularly when it seems as if nothing interests you, how do you know what to photo-
graph? The universe is a big place. A photo is a two-dimensional representation of a “chunk” 
of this vast visual sea and space. Paralysis can set in when you think of all the possibilities.  
The full range of possible captures using the equipment in an average camera bag is far 
beyond the capacity of the human mind to visualize all at once.
An answer to this “analysis paralysis” is that it doesn’t necessarily matter so much what 
you choose to shoot. But you don’t want to spend time staring into space or gazing at your 
navel. So get out there and start photographing! It doesn’t matter what you choose to 
photograph so long as you are photographing something.
A technique for avoiding fear of the blank page—in photographic terms, this might be 
fear of the empty frame—and analysis paralysis is to set limits for yourself.
WHEN CONCEPTUALIZING THIS photograph of a model, I decided to limit myself to basic shapes and make it as stark as 
possible. The idea was to photograph the model impersonally as though she was a fruit or a pepper, from a less recognizable 
angle (her back). This means that the viewer needs to look at the image somewhat closely to understand what is being rendered.


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
102
LIMITATION AS ICONIC STYLE
In my workshops, I often point out to participants that we may expect too much of photog-
raphers. If a great painter did one great painting a week, we’d say that painter was incredibly 
prolific. However, as photographers we expect to get great—or at least interesting—images 
every time we go out shooting.
You should practice photography often. In some respects, getting good at the craft  
of photography is like becoming skilled as a musician. You need to know your instrument,  
er . . . camera, and practice until controlling the camera is second nature.
If you take my advice and take photos all the time, you’ll shoot many times in any given 
week. It is simply not realistic for anyone to expect to get great, or even interesting, or even 
good, images out of all this material. So many of your practice images should never see the 
light of day, and will live on only in your digital archives.
In fact, the reputation for greatness of some artists is burnished by the fact that they only 
created a small number of works. For example, there are less than 30 known paintings by the 
great painter Vermeer. 
Even when an artist has been relatively prolific, limitation to a particular subject matter, 
style, or way of seeing is part of what builds artistic reputation. We recognize the particular 
way of seeing of Claude Monet and Vincent van Gogh. The heroic black and white landscapes 
of Ansel Adams are undeniably great photos, but if you think about it, these photos are 
subject to a number of strict limitations of style, subject matter, and technique.
For most well-known artists, limitation of some kind serves two purposes. It is a signature 
that allows the work of the artist to be recognized. Also, limitation allows these artists to work 
within their comfort zones. Because they have limited themselves, they have also set them-
selves free to soar within the parameters of their signature limitations. Think about how you 
might use limits in your own work to create your own signature style.
MOTIVATING THROUGH ASSIGNMENT WITH LIMITATION
Many of the professional assignments and requests from art world clients that I’ve worked on 
have helped me grow as a photographer. Although sometimes assignments can be mundane, 
or even distasteful, I’ve been fortunate that this has seldom been true for me. Assignments 
have provided external limitations, prodded me to move in unexpected directions, and 
pushed my comfort zone.
If you don’t have clients to provide these benefits, you should give yourself assignments 
that include internal limitations to help yourself become a more creative photographer.
He who seeds a thought, harvests a destiny



105
When creating assignments for yourself, you should:
Make sure the self-assignment really does limit you.
Choose something you find difficult, either technically or in terms of subject matter.
Consider choosing something very different from your usual choice of subjects:  
If you usually photograph nudes, try flowers instead.
Start by using limitations to pare your self-assignment down to the very minimum. 
Then gradually add alternative techniques, approaches, and subject matter.
Be sure to get outside your comfort zone.
SETTING PERSONAL LIMITS
There are many ways you can choose to limit your photography with the goal of getting 
around creative blocks to become a more creative photographer, or to create an iconic style. 
The choice of limitation should be yours, but here are some ideas: Limit yourself to a location 
or subject matter, choose one lens to work with for an entire day, use only one technique—
black and white, for instance—give yourself a time limit for each photo you take.  
Time is one of the most interesting variables to use in self-limitation. There are many 
ways to go about it. I know a photographer who shot only one picture a day for an entire year. 
I also know a painter who limited himself to using crayons for one year—no paints or brushes. 
It changed his whole perspective about creating art. 
Another way to limit yourself using time resembles the technique of speed drawing, 
except with your camera. The idea is to see how many photos you can take in five minutes.
There are many ways you can limit yourself without even being aware that you are doing 
so. One self-limitation of the bad kind is to think that a photographic challenge is too tough 
or that you can’t do it. Don’t limit yourself by assuming failure in advance.
You are the best and you can do it. I’m positive.
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
ANTONI GAUDI’S SAGRADA FAMILIA in Barcelona, Spain, is best known as a lush, incredibly dense, incomplete 
structure with colorful religious and botanical references in the architecture. Less commonly seen are the dark spirals 
inside the Sagrada Familia towers, which can be explored as part of the special tower tours. The limitation of photo-
graphing within these spaces are that tripods and flash are not allowed, and the areas are very dark. My tactic was 
therefore to accept this limitation and work with it. To make this image, I boosted the ISO to the maximum setting on 
my camera (ISO 51,200), composed the image, and accepted a certain amount of graininess as a consequence of the 
location, subject matter, and darkness.
If you change the way you look at things, 
the things you look at change
Setting Limits

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
106
IN HIS POEM “The Road Less Traveled,” Robert Frost wrote:
Two roads diverged in a wood, and I   — 
I took the one less traveled by, 
And that has made all the difference.
My experience in life is that I have often trod paths that are “less traveled by.” 
These less trod ways may seem peculiar to outsiders, but in the end, by listening 
to my inner voice, I have found the right way to proceed. In this photo, made 
near the Green Gulch Zen Monastery in California’s Marin Headlands, I tried to 
illustrate the dilemmas and joys involved in choosing the path less traveled.
THE PATH TO CREATIVITY
Becoming more creative cannot be approached like an assembly line. 
There is no one-size-fits-all way to enhance the imaginative component 
of your photography. At the same time, with the exception of a few kinds 
of precision photography, creativity is the great differentiator between 
merely competent and truly inspirational photographers.
Several photographers can shoot the same subject and all come  
back with technically competent captures. But one of those photogra-
phers might produce results that will outshine his or her buddies—all 
because of the creative X factor. We’ve all seen this kind of disparity of 
result, and we’ve all likely experienced another phenomenon that I’ve 
already mentioned. Some days you’ve probably felt in the photography 
“zone,” ready to rise to the challenge of improvising gorgeous creative 
imagery. Other times, everything seems dull and flat, and there are no 
acceptable solutions to the visual challenges that arise. Nothing seems 
worth photographing. 
My creativity is not the same as your creativity, nor should it be. My 
eyes, and the filter of my experiences and my brain, are different than 
yours. Part of what is wonderful about viewing photography is that we  
get to see the world as others have seen it.
There is no recipe for creativity. We must each learn about our own 
path. That said, there are ways of seeing and thinking that can benefit 
everyone. You can learn to increase your creative X factor, and to boost 
your batting average. You can increase the percentage of times that the 
photos you take are in that wonderful and mysterious creative zone.

107
The Path to Creativity

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
108
Try these exercises to flex your creativity: 
1: 
What is unique about your personal path 
to creativity? List the top three most 
important characteristics of your creative 
vision. Can you make a photo that shows 
each of these characteristics?
2: 
Break your own rules. The next time you 
are getting ready to photograph some-
thing, stop, and figure out what it is that 
you always do when you photograph. 
Then, do the opposite of what you are 
used to doing. If you feel uncomfortable, 
you are on the right track!
3: 
Take your time and make a mental list of 
things that bother or annoy you when 
you photograph. Challenge yourself to 
find creative solutions to fix these things, 
then relax, breathe deep, and take some 
photos. Was your photography more 
rewarding?
☞See related Workbook Exercise 30




Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
112
Perhaps you’ve run into the following dilemma: Photography is a 
refuge that gives you creative joy and pleasure. But to get better as a 
photographer past a certain point requires consistent and hard work.  
How can this paradox be resolved?
Technique matters, and technique can be fun. In this section, you 
will find out how to integrate photographic technique with your vision 
and how to take your joy in photography to a higher level by dint of 
application.
Mastery of technique is part of what allows some photographers to 
capture extraordinary and unexpected images apparently effortlessly. The 
lack of apparent effort is likely an illusion, but technique is very important.
You’ll possibly be surprised to learn that the process of becoming 
more creative also makes a photographer more technically proficient. 
Creativity implies experimentation and trying many different approaches, 
which in turn fosters learning new techniques and honing the edges of 
TO CREATE THIS image of temple flags on the approach to an important 
Shugendō Buddhist shrine in Japan, I allowed some of the flags to soften 
because of motion in the breeze, while I aimed the focus point of the image 
toward the more distant flags, which would thus stay apparently sharper. My 
idea was to create a sense of flowing motion in this sacred spot, relating the 
form of the image to the idea of the place I was photographing—where the 
photographic techniques for portraying motion were critical.
BEING
CREATIVE WITH TECHNIQUE 
BECOME A TECHNIQUE VIRTUOSO
Photography is inextricably bound up with technique. There’s no such 
thing as a great photographer who is oblivious to photographic craft. 
That said, we should aspire to virtuosity: Like a gifted musician who 
has practiced scales five hours a day for years, our mastery of pho-
tographic technique should free us to concentrate on the aesthetic 
aspects of photography. Technique should be second nature, which 
lets your imagination soar.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 11.

113
Being Creative with Technique


115
Make technique second nature so your 
imagination and creativity can soar      !
those you already know. If you are doing the exercises in this book and in the Workbook,  
you are spending time practicing photography, which will help to make you a virtuoso.
Cameras and lenses don’t take photos, photographers do. That said, we can’t make 
photographs without a camera, and we need to use a lens. Actually, it can be said that many 
photographers not only need to use a lens, they love lenses and photographic gadgets.
There’s a spectrum of photographers, from those who see hardware (cameras, lenses, 
etc.) as a necessary evil to those who greatly enjoy their toys. The first kind of photographer 
in their heart would like to be able to visualize images straight out of their mind’s eye; the 
second kind would lose interest if new hardware weren’t involved.
From a broader sense, many disciplines are involved in becoming technically proficient  
as a modern photographer:
It is vitally important to understand the basics of exposure and what happens when 
you get your camera off Auto.
You need to know how to work with focus and depth-of-field, using the term “focus” 
in both an existential and a technical sense (see pages 134–145).
You must learn to be a careful observer of shifting lights, shadow, and color, and 
understand the nuances of light intensity, quality, and color temperature.
Beyond the arena of the camera as capture device, modern photography involves 
many issues of digital post-production. These topics include workflow, retouching, 
image enhancement, and the creative techniques of the Photoshop darkroom.
When you stop to consider how an image is presented, you’ll realize how much goes 
into this. Whether you are showing your work digitally online, or presenting it as a 
framed printed piece (for more about creating portfolios, turn to pages 188–193), a 
great deal of applied design (see pages 116–119) goes into each finished photograph. 
A related skill is learning to pre-visualize the end result as you begin a photographic 
venture, and bringing that pre-visualization into the initial steps in your work.
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
MANY DISCIPLINES WENT into creating this image, which at first glance shows a woman—or is it a sea 
creature?—with at least 100 arms. The process for this image began with studio strobes and in-camera multiple 
exposures, using a capability called “Autogain.” Autogain works to balance the exposures in a multiple exposure 
sequence so that each exposure contributes proportionately to the resulting capture. Post-production techniques 
included stacking several exposures together in Photoshop using Statistical methods.
Being Creative with Technique

PHOTOGRAPHY
IS APPLIED DESIGN

117
Photography Is Applied Design
THIS STAR MAGNOLIA photographed on a white background 
presents an unusual play on the normal relationship of a photo-
graphic subject to the photographic frame. Since the boundaries 
of this photograph are all high-key white, the only place the 
image connects with the frame is where the stem of the magno-
lia branch crosses it. From a design viewpoint, this is sufficiently 
unusual to provoke a kind of double-take in the unconscious of 
the viewer. It also allows a kind of coiled potential motion in the 
flowering branch, which almost seems like it is ready to bound 
out of the frame.
Since the time of the Greeks, design principles have been applied to visual images (for 
example, see the Rule of Thirds on pages 128–129).
Applying the ideas derived from formal design to photography makes complete sense 
because when you stop to think about it, a photograph is a designed object. A photo is 
two-dimensional. It is generally—although not always— presented in a specific format. For 
example, the proportions in a normal dSLR echo those of the 35mm film frame and are 3:2 
(sometimes easier to think of as 1.5:1). In practice, this means that unless you crop away from 
the nominal size, the height is 1 1/2 times the width in a vertical composition, and the width 
is 1 1/2 times the height in a horizontal composition.
As a side note here, why be normal? It’s perfectly reasonable to present photos in a wide 
variety of crop ratios. For example, a square crop can often be extremely, graphically effective. 
But whatever crop you choose, the issue is graphic effectiveness. And graphic effectiveness 
itself flows from good graphic design.
Getting back to formal issues of your photographs, your image—cropped or not—
resides within a “frame.” Used in this sense, the word “frame” does not mean a picture frame, 
but rather refers to the external boarders of the photo. An image sits within a “frame” created 
by its top and bottom. How does the content of the image relate to its frame? One design 
consideration is to use the relationships of the elements within an image compared to the 
image’s frame to intentionally divide your photos on one particular plane: horizontally, 
vertically, or diagonally.

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
118
Design, whether three- or two-dimensional, is a very 
important topic. Overall, my suggestion is to become as 
design-conscious as you can. Start by looking at everyday 
objects from a design perspective. Design (or lack of 
it) is all around you. With products that have been well 
designed (some of those from Apple Computer come to 
mind), how was this good design achieved? What factors 
went into the good design? With products that seem to 
be poorly designed, what makes the design bad? How do 
form and function inter-relate in form and design?
Consider picking up some books related to design  
and maybe even taking a formal design course.
Beyond framing, from a design viewpoint, there  
are always many issues to consider. One of the most 
important ones that relates to photography is the use  
of patterns and repetition. 
Examples of photos that emphasize repetitive  
patterns include the photo at the right and the photo 
shown on pages 120–121. In both these images, the 
pattern relates to the frame of the photo. In addition,  
the images are carefully designed so that they appear  
to extend beyond the frames, but are also delineated  
with a break within the pattern—a key characteristic  
of successful photos that use patterns.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 32
THIS IMAGE OF the viniculture terraces along the Upper 
Douro River in Portugal’s port wine country employs a number 
of formal design tropes: The curvilinear shapes of the terraces 
are broken up by a strong midpoint line (the dirt road), and 
the thrust of the curvilinear motion is opposed by a strong 
diagonal going from the upper right down to the lower left.
“Be like a duck, calm on the surface, but always 
paddling like the dickens underneath.”   —Michael Caine

119
Photography Is Applied Design

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
120
Let’s step back for a second and think about exactly what a photo is, 
and also what it ain’t!
By necessity, creating a photo is an act of design. Specifically, a 
photograph is a composition of two-dimensional design framed by  
the border of the image (as discussed on pages 117–118).
Put in the context of design, what are the elements that go into 
formal photographic design, and how can you approach any composi-
tion to enhance your results? What is the best way to approach the 
design aspect of photography without becoming overly rigid and using 
the aspects of design to enhance the creativity of your compositions?
Concepts of creative composition can be divided into a number  
of different high-level areas and concerns:
By becoming conscious of formal design issues, how can you 
improve your photos? (See pages 116–119.)
How can you use the tools of conventional photography to 
enhance your compositions?
How can you unleash your imagination within the constraints  
of composition?
Can compositions be extended with the tools of the digital era?
It is not always easy to divorce the subject matter of a photo from 
its composition. While this can be a difficult exercise, it is almost always 
helpful to look at photography from both distinct viewpoints: as formal 
design, and as expression of passion with primary interest in narration. 
Keep in mind that design without imagination is barren and futile; 
but imagination without design is unruly and unsatisfying. So a truly 
holistic act of photographic art requires effort in both domains: the 
technical craft of design, and the passion of the storyteller.
◼
◼
◼
◼
BECOMING
COMPOSITION CONSCIOUS
THIS PHOTO SHOWS a detail of one of the “art cars” that can be found 
driving around the streets of my hometown, Berkeley, California. The 
abstract Mondrian-like effect shown in the image was the intention of the 
artist who created the car—and emphasized in my photo by the abstract 
and close-up framing of the subject matter.

121
Becoming Composition Conscious

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
122

123
Your camera and lenses are 
like paint brushes
PHOTOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUE AND 
COMPOSITION
A painter uses a paint brush, and the scope of what the 
painter can put on canvas is limited by the paint brush and 
the techniques that the painter uses to employ the brush.
Your camera and lenses are to your photographs what 
the paintbrush is to the painter. These are the tools that limit 
what you can do, and provide you the many opportunities  
for what you can do.
It’s important to understand the palette of techniques 
open to you, and to be very familiar with how the tools and 
techniques influence how your compositions come out.
From a compositional viewpoint, the most important 
photographic technique issues are:
Lenses and focal lengths, and their impact on 
composition.
The way your choice of shutter speed renders motion.
How your choice of aperture impacts depth-of-field 
and apparent sharpness. In other words, areas that 
are in focus and out of focus can be equally impor-
tant compositionally.
In the photograph of a rock formation in the 
Southwestern desert shown at the left, I used a moderate 
wide-angle focal length to give the illusion that the vast 
landscape could be seen as a flower.
Try this exercise: Choose a lens with a focal length that 
creates an abstraction of your subject matter. Put another 
way, choose your lens so that it is not immediately appar-
ent to your viewer what the subject matter is. If this is done 
right, the subject will be revealed upon closer inspection, 
which produces an “aha!” moment that is one of the goals of 
creative photography. This is a compositional technique for 
revealing the unexpected, as discussed on pages 80–93.
◼
◼
◼
Becoming Composition Conscious

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
124
Lenses and Focal Lengths
Exotic lenses are fun toys, and great ways to jump-start creativity. I’ve got a 
great deal of mileage out of using my digital fisheye lens in unexpected ways, 
as this extreme wide-angle portrait of my infant daughter shows.
I’m not asking you to go out and buy an expensive piece of glass. If you 
own a fisheye already, great. But otherwise, improvise! For example, hold a 
small mirror in front of your normal lens, and only shoot with the mirror held 
up to your lens for the day. By the way, there are also inexpensive auxiliary 
fisheye lenses for iPhones, as well full-size cameras. 
So, lenses are a good way to play, and photography is about play (if 
you don’t believe me, see pages 174–177). But getting down to brass tacks, 
it’s important to understand the design and compositional implications of 
different focal lengths. 
The best way to do this is to stick to one focal length during an extensive 
photography session. Every time I try this in the field, I learn about the special 
characteristics of my lens and focal length.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 33
Shutter Speed
The shutter speed setting on a camera controls the duration of time that the 
shutter is open and lets light into the sensor. So shutter speed is not really a 
speed, but is best thought of as a duration of time.
The duration of time the shutter is open controls how a photo renders 
motion—motion of the subject, and in some cases motion of the camera. As 
such, it is one of the primary creative controls that you have as a photogra-
pher. Fast shutter speeds, such as 1/1000 of a second, keep the shutter open 
for a short duration of time and stop motion crisply. Slower shutter speeds, 
such as 10 seconds, keep the shutter open for a longer duration and create 
a blur effect when rendering motion. For example, the water shown to the 
right under the old bridge over the Neckar River in Heidelberg, Germany, was 
captured using a shutter speed of 30 seconds, creating a pleasant, soft effect 
using the motion of the river’s current. 
The important thing is to understand the creative impact of your  
choice of shutter speed, taking into account the motion of your subject  
matter, and of your camera.
Shutter speed sets a duration of time

125
Becoming Composition Conscious

WANDERING ON FOOT from ryokan to ryokan, and 
onsen to onsen, along the ancient Kumano Kodo 
pilgrimage trail on the Kii Peninsula of Japan’s Honshu 
Island, the weather grew wet. I knew that day that I 
would be crossing mountain passes, so I bundled my 
camera into a waterproof wrapper, opened a large 
white umbrella, and then headed up the wet trail. Mile 
after mile of switchbacks led me through rainy forest 
and the serene sounds of dripping waterdrops. Finally, 
the trail opened up and I came out onto the Kumano 

Sanzen Roppyaku Po, which literally translates to “the 
place with a view of the 3,600 peaks of Kumano.” The 
rain had stopped, but I suspected that I had only a 
brief interlude in which to make an image. I pulled my 
camera out of its wrapping, put it on the tripod, and 
shot three exposures for a horizontal panorama. I used 
a moderately slow shutter speed (1.3 seconds) to intro-
duce attractive blurring in the clouds. As I completed  
the final exposure in the panorama, the rain started  
up again, and I quickly wrapped up my camera.

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
128
 RULE OF THIRDS
It’s hard to have a discussion of formal composition without the so-called Rule of Thirds 
coming up. Frankly, I am getting a bit sick of the Rule of Thirds because it is over-dis-
cussed and over-relied-upon, but it does have its place.
Here’s the idea: Take your photo (probably in the standard 3:2 proportions) and draw 
two horizontal and vertical lines across the frame, each line one third of the way across 
the image dimension, so the photo is divided into nine equal quadrants as shown in the 
illustration below. Put the important elements of your composition at the intersection 
of the lines.
Understanding the historical context of the Rule of Thirds makes it clearer when it 
is helpful, and when it is pure baloney. The Rule of Thirds was originally formulated by 
landscape and seascape painters in the early 1800s, with the idea of having a formula for 
keeping important compositional elements out of the dead center of an image, while 
placing them somewhere attractive and important.
So the Rule of Thirds is most helpful with landscapes. For example, in the photo of 
the two rivers coming together in the southwest of France shown at the right (refer to 
the illustration above): The horizon line falls on the upper horizontal grid line; the bases 
of the bridge that run horizontally across the photo through the water are on the lower 
horizontal grid line; and the bend where the two bridges meet on the left is on the left 
vertical grid line.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 34

129
Becoming Composition Conscious

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
130
If you have ever taken an introductory photography class, 
you were probably taught to try to hold your camera as 
still as possible. Along these lines, the point of using a 
tripod is usually to steady the camera and make sure  
that it doesn’t move.
I’m here to tell you that it’s time to have some fun, by 
breaking the rules about keeping the camera steady and 
throwing the rule out the window! 
Note that I said throw the rule out, not the camera! 
Although in fact, some folks taking this idea to extremes 
have created a kind of photography called “camera 
tossing” where the shutter is left open while the camera is 
gently tossed in the air. Kids, don’t try this at home!
So, the name of the game is to intentionally move 
your camera. What about night photography in a crowd 
with a shutter speed in the 1 to 10 second range? Some 
results in a crowded Parisian street are shown to the right. 
Keep in mind with this kind of playful photography 
that you get a lot of duds. The aim of the process is not 
that every photo should be perfect—they won’t be! If you 
take 100 shots with a handheld camera in motion during 
a long exposure, you may get one good one.
Try this exercise: Intentionally use a slow shutter speed 
to create a motion blur effect, either because the camera 
moves or the subject moves. What shutter speed did you 
use? Keep track of what shutter speeds work for what sub-
jects, with what effects. It’s really important to remember 
what shutter speed does what with which kind of motion. 
Without internalizing this information, you won’t be able 
to use these effects in an improvisational way. You might 
want to even use a notebook to jot down the results of 
different shutter speeds and their impact on motion. 
Remember, the Ansel Adams dictum that a “notebook  
and pencil was the most important piece of gear in his 
camera bag.”
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 35
PLAYING
WITH SHUTTER SPEED

131
Playing with Shutter Speed

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
132
ABOVE: TO MAKE THIS semi-abstract image of trees in a Parisian park, I started by putting a moderate wide-
angle lens on my camera (35mm) and choosing Manual Exposure mode. Next, I put the shutter speed to 3 seconds’ 
duration—long enough to allow me to have some creative fun, but short enough to still capture recognizable 
shapes and objects. After a good bit of trial and error, I found that the most attractive way to render the rows of 
trees was to steadily move the camera vertically, starting at the top and moving down to the bottom. To make this 
kind of effect, it is important to be smooth, gradual, and to evenly distribute the length of the exposure. Of course, 
when you try something like this that is mostly trial and error, many of the attempts will not come out satisfactorily.
RIGHT: STANDING ON A bridge near the Île Saint-Louis in Paris, France, overlooking a channel of the Seine River 
at the dark end to an autumn day, I decided to create a romantic, out-of-focus image by intentionally wiggling 
the camera slightly during this 1.3 second exposure. 

133
Playing with Shutter Speed

FOCUS

135
Learn to focus on what matters
IN A FORMAL GARDEN in Nara, the ancient imperial capital of Japan, everything seemed beautiful to me. However, in the 
beauty of everything, where was the specific? As I wandered the garden in late autumn with my camera on a tripod, it took  
me a while to find my subject matter. 
Exploring without the need to latch onto something too quickly helped still my mind and left me open to photographic ideas 
and gestures. I felt more connected to the quietude and serenity of the garden than if I had started snapping photos without 
taking my time. When I saw this gnarled tree and its reflection, it was clear to me that this was what I wanted to focus on. 
Focus
The idea of focus, and focusing, means a number of different things depending upon the 
domain of discussion:
Speaking informally in a general context, and not specifically in a photographic sense, 
to focus on something is to pay attention to it, presumably because it matters. 
Within photography, focus is one of the key technical and creative tools when making 
a photo. Specifically, to focus a lens is to optically resolve it to specify the range of 
distances that appear sharp; this optical choice is made in conjunction with aperture, 
which controls depth-of-field.
The mind can also be focused. Perhaps this is most familiar as the experience of being 
in the “zone.” When I am in the zone photographically, I don’t notice anything except 
my work. Decisions seem to flow unconsciously and without effort (see “Being in the 
Zone” on pages 146–147). 
In a broad sense, to focus on something means to highlight that thing and to understand 
that it is important (see “Don’t Bury the Lede,” pages 70–71).
In a more narrow technical sense, the act of focusing is one of the creative controls of 
photographic image making that allows the artist to indicate what matters in an image. 
Used this way, understanding how to focus and, more important, what to focus on, is crucial. 
Unfortunately, all too often, contemporary photographers have ceded pinpoint control over 
focus to the computer and Auto Focus devices in their digital cameras. Next time you go out 
there in the field with your camera set to Auto Focus, keep in mind that your camera has no 
idea about what is important in an image and what isn’t.
Unlike what many photographers seem to believe, your camera is not sentient and does 
not have a consciousness that can validly ascribe importance to portions of an image.
You do.
Even once you have mastered the technical aspects of focus, and have learned the perils 
of relying on Auto Focus, keep in mind that focusing your lens is always in the service of what 
is important to you about a photographic subject.
◼
◼
◼

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
136

137
THIS WINTER IMAGE in Yosemite Valley, California, shows the dramatic scenery of 
lower and upper Yosemite Falls wreathed in mist. But unlike many photos of the area, 
the spectacular vista is not really the focus of this photo. As a matter of composition 
and focus, the viewer’s attention is brought to bear on the old, lone tree. 
The tree is in focus, and the romantic and dramatic landscape is not. So both 
foreground and background are important, but the story being told here is the 
narrative of the ancient tree against all odds. To emphasize this narrative aspect 
of the photo, I’ve titled the image “Alone I Stand.” In other words, the photographic 
narrative is from the old tree’s viewpoint.
Are you in focus? 
Is your life in focus?
Focus
When it comes to what you choose to focus on, your 
choice of subject is the only thing that matters. You must 
truly care about what you photograph to muster the 
energy, persistence, and creative juices that are needed 
to see a photographic task to the end. Don’t believe those 
who think of photography as something that can always 
be done casually. It is often (but not always) the case that 
the more effort you put into your photographic work, the 
more you will get back.
Try this exercise: Life and death situations 
involving people you care about don’t happen all 
the time, and that’s a good thing. But everyone has 
something they care deeply about, so deeply that 
just thinking about it brings them to tears. Find 
something you care about, and then find a way 
to create an image of a detail that tells the whole 
story—the way the photo of my daughter’s little 
hand in her mom’s big hand shows what really 
matters (see page 70). Consider the message you 
want to send to others in the same situation: Even 
if things are tough, there is always the possibility  
of hope and redemption.

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
138
ONE FINE, RAINY afternoon in May, I was walking with my camera through a garden filled with beautiful, blooming flowers. The water 
made everything appear saturated and more deeply colored. The air smelled of ozone and mossy, green earth.
Focusing my attention and my lens on this red tulip petal, I used a moderate telephoto lens (135mm) and a wide-open aperture (f/2) to focus 
on the waterdrop. The use of selective focus creates an attractive background area that is intentionally impressionistic and out of focus.

139
“The mystery isn’t in the technique, 
it’s in each of us.”    —  Harry Callahan
By understanding how to focus an image, you’ll clarify your compositions. 
Techniques for discovering and better acknowledging the true subject of your 
photos will help you be direct in delivering the power of your imagery. 
By focusing on what really matters to you and your life, you’ll be able to 
integrate personal passion with your photography, and start on the lifelong journey 
of discovery that true artists make.
Ranging very roughly from the technical to the narrative, here are a number of 
different approaches that will help you focus on what really matters:
Understand the difference in emphasis between edge-to-edge focus and 
selective focus.
Know when an image is about photographic focus, rather than its apparent 
subject matter.
Consider the difference between the subject matter that you, the creator, 
have assumed, and the content that is seen by your viewers.
Emphasize both the contrast and synergy between in-focus and out-of-focus 
in your imagery.
Learn to pre-visualize how your photos will come out.
Understand if your photo is primarily about formal elements—lines, shapes, 
colors, and composition.
Learn to express your passions in your photos.
Listen to your unconscious when creating and editing photos.
Be prepared to do what it takes to make great photos, and don’t stop with 
half measures.
Tell stories that can move people to tears, despair, transcendence, and hope.
Try this exercise: Create a selectively focused image where the image is about how 
it is focused. In other words, your photographer friends should be driven to think 
about how the image was focused when they look at it. By the way, this is an exercise 
to get you thinking about, and working with, focus. In “real life”, the more powerful 
the photo, the less it makes viewers think about photographic technique, and the 
more viewers tend to think of the subject matter, with technique forgotten. 
☞See related Workbook Exercise 36
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
Focus

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
140
SELECTIVE FOCUS VERSUS EDGE-TO-EDGE 
SHARPNESS
There’s a very different feeling between images that are 
completely in focus and present edge-to-edge sharpness, 
compared to selectively focused images that use focus to 
emphasize a particular element within the photo. 
An image that is edge-to-edge sharp can be 
extraordinarily striking and a great photo. At the same 
time, edge-to-edge images have a certain flatness. There’s 
nothing in this kind of image that tells the viewer to pay 
special attention to a particular part of the image. It’s the 
overall gestalt or pattern that matters. An example of 
this kind of photo is the black and white botanical image 
shown to the right. 
At the opposite end of this spectrum, a selective-focus 
image that represents the intent of the creator always 
emphasizes the area that is in focus, although out-of-focus 
areas can be important as well (see “Aperture and Bokeh” 
on pages 143–145). 
Not all images fall entirely at one end or the other 
of this spectrum. In other words, some images have an 
intermediate zone of focus. But your takeaway should 
be that when you are pre-visualizing an image, it’s really 
crucial to know in advance whether you are going for 
overall sharpness or selective focus.
Try this exercise: Create two photos of the same subject 
matter, one using selective focus and the other delivering 
edge-to-edge sharpness. Which one is better? Why?
WHILE LEADING A black and white master class photography session in a botanic 
garden, I saw these beautifully patterned leaves and knew that I had to create an end-
to-end sharp image. Fortunately, I had a specialized macro lens with me that stopped 
down to f/45 so I was able to capture the striking graphical patterns absolutely in focus.
“Attitude is everything.”  
  —  Diane von Furstenberg

141
Focus

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
142

143
Aperture and Bokeh
The choice of aperture in an image controls the depth-
of-field, the range of distance within an image that is in 
focus. In the photo of the corn poppy (Papaver rhoeas) 
shown at the left, I used a wide-open lens setting to 
create as little depth-of-field as possible so that only  
the flower was in focus.
Wide open means that a large lens opening is 
selected. You can choose a large lens opening with 
aperture-preferred metering, or by using manual 
exposure controls. The smaller the number notated in  
an f-stop, the larger the opening in the lens. For example, 
f/2.0 means a large opening in the lens, and f/36 means  
a small opening in the lens. 
The larger the opening, the shallower the depth-of-
field, meaning the less range of subject that will be in 
focus. While the notation can be somewhat confusing, 
what you really need to think about is the size of the hole 
in the lens: The smaller the opening, the more depth-of-
field, and the larger the f-stop number. In contrast to a 
wide-open lens, a lens that is at its smallest opening is 
said to be stopped down.
So a wide-open aperture setting is used when you 
want selective focus, and a stopped-down aperture is 
used when you want edge-to-edge sharpness. Obviously, 
intermediate apertures are also a possibility.
An important point to keep in mind is that aperture, 
in conjunction with the design of the specific lens you 
are using, control the attractiveness of out-of-focus areas, 
as well as those areas that are in focus. The out-of-focus 
portions of an image are called bokeh (ボケ in Japanese).
An image can be said to have “good” bokeh or not- 
so-good bokeh—and good bokeh is hugely important  
to the success or failure of selective-focus images.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 37
Focus
“You are an aperture through which the universe 
 is looking at and exploring itself.”—Alan Watts

WANDERING THE GARDENS 
established by the painter Claude 
Monet at Giverny, France, in the 
spring, I set a limit by constraining 
my photographic possibilities 
and used a moderate telephoto 
lens (135mm) at its widest open 
aperture (f/2). 
The result is an extremely shallow 
depth-of-field so only a portion 
of the frontmost tulip petal is 
sharp and in focus, while the 
background of the image is 
attractively out of focus and 
presents nice bokeh.

145
MONET’S GARDEN AT Giverny is divided by a road into two 
sections: Flower beds near the main house are above the road, 
and wet, water lily gardens are below the road. (Interestingly, in 
Monet’s time, the road was a train track so Monet’s many visi-
tors and admirers could take the train right through his garden.)
The iPhone shot of the water lily section of the garden exhibits 
high depth-of-field. In other words, there is a uniformity of focus 
between the front and rear portions of the image. This is typical 
of a camera with a very small sensor size, because the smaller 
the sensor the greater the inherent depth-of-field. While there 
aren’t many choices of aperture on an iPhone, you can be pretty 
sure that if one portion of an iPhone image is in focus then the 
entire image will be in focus.
The corollary is that for controlled use of selective focus, it is best 
to use a more sophisticated camera than an iPhone, and one 
with a comparatively large sensor such as a DSLR. 
Focus

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
146
I’ve mentioned the phenomenon that some artists, musicians, and athletes call “being in the 
zone.” When you are in the zone time flows without notice, decisions are made fluidly, improvisa-
tion leads to good results, and when your photographic session is done, it feels as if you’ve come 
out of a trance—with remarkably good photographic results.
Being in the zone is not a random event. While you can’t always control inspiration, you can 
take actions that make it more likely that you will enter the zone. These actions fall into a number 
of major groups:
Fortune favors the prepared mind. If you understand photographic technique, have 
researched your subject matter, and are primed to take advantage of temporal condi-
tions, you are more likely to easily slip into the zone.
Take care of yourself. Athletes know that they must get appropriate sleep, eat good 
foods, and generally take care of their physical well-being or it will be harder to perform 
and get into the zone. Of course, while actually performing athletic feats, they may need 
to stress their conditioned bodies and minds to the maximum, but at a baseline, they are 
in good shape both physically and mentally. What is true for the athlete is also true for 
the photographer.
Practice focusing your mind. This isn’t just a matter of photographic techniques and 
optics. And it’s more than just about imagery. Are you often distracted? If your phone 
rings, do you feel compelled to answer? Are you constantly texting? I know of no better 
zone killer than the smart phone. If you are in the field working on photography, do 
yourself a favor and put your phone to “Do Not Disturb.” You’ll be glad you did, although 
there may be cold-turkey withdrawal symptoms.
Speaking of withdrawal symptoms, sometimes a stiff shot of espresso is a help!
The focused mind of a focused photographer in the zone is alert without being jittery, and 
aware of the surroundings without being scattered. There’s a goal in mind, and steps being taken 
toward that goal. These steps are pursued without tunnel vision and with a sense of play.
Some obsession is good, and even necessary. But this is a knife’s edge: Too much obsession 
and you risk turning passion to routine, and joy to habit.
I’ve discovered that one of the best ways to get and stay in the zone is to let go of my ego as 
an artist. It helps me to accept and understand that I am a vessel and a vehicle for what I create. 
I am not responsible for originating all parts of my imagery. It is my job to be open to my uncon-
scious and to truly do my best, but I do not have to force things. Some days I’m in the zone and 
things work; other days it just doesn’t happen as well. If I make the effort but let go of the result, 
then things work out surprisingly well.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 38
◼
◼
◼
◼
BEING IN THE ZONE


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
148
SIMPLICITY
THE COMPLICATIONS OF
Speaking of simplicity—we were speaking of simplicity, 
weren’t we?—photographic images that appear simple 
are most likely to be effective from a graphic design 
perspective, and to emotionally resonate. But this kind of 
apparent simplicity is deceptive, and anything but simple. 
The appearance of simplicity is surprisingly complex to 
achieve, and paradoxically to create “simple” images takes 
all the wiles of consummate photographic artistry.
Sometimes less is more. It’s a great feeling to go 
shooting with one lens. The single optic experience 
simplifies and clarifies. Like the Zen mendicant, I am often 
richer as a photographer when I cut my choices down to 
the bone.
Just as physical things can be a spiritual trap in our 
workaday lives, too many photographic choices and too 
much gear can lead to hardening of the photographic 
arteries. Keep it simple and fluid, and strive to improvise.
Ah, but which lens to use, and what exposure, and 
what focal length (if using a zoom lens)? Those are the 
questions. I have stood baffled in a beautiful scene, trying 
to overcome my inability to choose the best tool to use  
for the moment.
So much better to not overcomplicate. I would 
rather be a simple wanderer with my camera, backpack, 
and bedroll than lug the complex recreational vehicle, 
barbecue, and mobile communication entrapments of 
moderns life with me—and I try to convey this sense  
of preference in my life and work.
Try this exercise: Sometime when you are feeling no 
inspiration and stuck in a rut, choose a single lens, set it at 
a single focal length, and use aperture-preferred meter-
ing to choose one f-stop. Start taking photos. I absolutely 
guarantee that you will be surprised with what you come 
up with. This very simple exercise is a great way to rein-
vigorate your photography generally and get out of a rut.

149
The Complications of Simplicity


151
ABOVE: THE HAND GESTURES of representations of Budhha are significant, and have specific meanings. 
The Dhyana mudra (hand gesture of Buddha) is also called the Samadhi mudra. This hand gesture invites 
meditation and a sense of deep involvement with the universe.
I photographed this statue of Buddha in the garden outside Sensoji, the oldest temple in Tokyo, also known 
as the temple of the Asakusa Kannon.
LEFT: IT’S HARD TO think of a simpler idea for a garden than a Zen Buddhist rock garden, such as the one 
shown here. The idea behind this rock garden is to use patterns to echo the sense of raindrops splashing into 
a pool. When composing this photo at a temple in Kyoto, Japan, I intentionally included the shadow formed 
by the temple’s roof line to add some compositional tension to the simplicity of the Zen garden.
The Complications of Simplicity

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
152
ON A WET DAY in Tokyo, Japan, I took out my camera and 
wandered around in the rain. Walking past a shop, I saw these 
colorful umbrellas sporting light drops of moisture. Without 
thinking too much, I reflexively snapped the apparently simple 
image you see here.
Sometimes less is more
Just because a photograph has things in it, it doesn’t mean 
that the gist of the photo is necessarily complicated. In fact, 
some of the most striking photographs essentially use patterns, 
colors, and shapes to render order and simplicity from the 
complex world we live in.
A case in point is the photograph of umbrellas I took on 
a wet day in Tokyo, Japan, at the right. Nowhere is there more 
“stuff” than in some of the streets and stores of Tokyo. But 
somehow this image transcends all the junk and speaks to  
color, romance, and those things that make life worth living.
So the fact that a photo has complicated elements does  
not necessarily contradict simplicity.
Incidentally, this image was simply an online digital file 
until a photographic collector saw it on my web site and asked 
me to make a print. It wasn’t until I had actually made the print 
that I saw that this photo had some of the beneficial aspects of 
an elegantly simple and sensuous image—and that it wasn’t 
just about “stuff.”
Sometimes you have to take your photos into the real world 
to actually see them. Moving beyond capture and computer in  
a way that feeds the creativity of the photographic process is 
the subject of the next section, “From Photo to World.”
Try this exercise: Grab your camera and walk around your 
neighborhood, trying to look at the things that you’ve seen 
a million times with new eyes. How could you photograph a 
flower pot, for instance, just showing it in the simplest way, 
using shapes, or shadows? Take some photographs of these 
everyday things, trying to capture them in the simplest way.

153
The Complications of Simplicity



Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
156
LISTENING
TO YOUR INNER VOICE
Photography is at its best a reflection of the soul of the 
photographer. If I know your photography and I respond 
to it, then I am knowing something about you in a deep 
sense, and responding to you.
The clear implication is that to create meaningful 
imagery, you have to know yourself. Essentially, the 
ancient dictum “to your own self be true” is absolutely 
on the money.
Thus, glossy imagery that advertises may often 
serve its stated purpose but is seldom profound. There’s 
no soul of the creator here, and the reflection of being  
is the reflection of a hired-gun marketer.
Photography can be used to capture beauty, extol 
the wild places of the earth and the human heart, or 
tell stories that involve great sadness, great happiness, 
inspiration, and tears. Your goal is to find these stories 
that are meaningful to you, and to use your photos to 
tell them. This involves two steps:
You need to understand what moves you. Who 
are you? Why do you care about these things? 
What raises you above the vacuous marketing 
masses?
Once you understand yourself and your key 
values, you need to work to create photos  
that, in fact, reflect yourself.
Knowing how to create photos that reflect yourself 
requires knowing what your photos are about. This 
starts at the simplest level: What are you focused on  
(see pages 134–142)? What is your photo about, what 
is the story you are telling, and why will it move your 
viewers?
Try this exercise: Create a self-portrait where you  
don’t take yourself seriously.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 39
◼
◼


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
158
KEEPING AT IT
Don’t believe those who think of photography as something than 
can always be done casually. As with life itself, it is often, but not 
always, the case that the more effort you put into your photo-
graphic work, the more you will get back. 
There is a great deal of truth to the idea that creating good 
work is “one percent inspiration and 99 percent perspiration,” as 
Thomas Edison famously said. Edward Weston put it this way: 
“A real artist is nothing if not a workingman, and a damn hard 
working one.”
For me, I go to work on my photography on good days. I also 
go to work on bad days.
In other words, I don’t let whether I am feeling blue, whether 
the kids have gotten me up in the night, whether somebody is 
hounding me for something stop me from working. I work when  
I have lots of money. I work when I am not so flush.
Of course, my work is also my play. I am lucky enough to have 
creative work to do, but work is still work even if it is fun. No matter 
how fun and creative it is, some parts will still be drudgery,
So I just keep going.
The other side of this coin is that you need to be able to listen 
to yourself. You won’t be very good at listening to yourself—or 
anyone—if you are constantly on the phone, texting, checking  
out Internet sites, and generally seeming busy, but actually  
being distracted.
If this sounds like you, have faith! You can learn to overcome 
the distractions of external stimuli so that you can better listen 
to your inner voice. For some tips to help with overcoming 
distractions, see “Being in the Zone” on pages 146–147.
So the take-aways are:
 You need to clarify what is really important, and learn to 
avoid unnecessary distractions.
However much fun you have with photography (and play  
is good, see page 174–177), you must also be prepared  
to engage in steady, persistent work, not all of which  
will be fun!
◼
◼

159
Keeping At It

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
160
WORKING
SMARTER NOT HARDER
Okay, so you’ve learned to be a persistent and hard 
worker. As a “good” photographer, you are prepared to  
put a great deal of effort into your craft. You’ve internal-
ized the “true fact” that successful photography requires  
a great deal of elbow grease, persistence, and just plain 
old ornery stubbornness.
Even so, you should think about the benefits of 
“working smarter, not harder.”
Some photographs just won’t come together,  
no matter how hard you try. If you spend a day and a 
night waiting for things to happen in exactly the right 
order, and they never do, then you may have waited 
too long, and likely missed other opportunities. This is 
important enough to be worth repeating: The true cost of 
never quitting is missing lots of alternative possibilities.
Of course, field photography often involves a 
debate—sometimes with oneself—about whether to wait 
for the right light in one location, or moving on to another 
location. It’s less obvious, but this also applies to studio 
photographs. Time and opportunities are never infinite  
in the real world.
Listening to one’s inner voice means learning to make 
effective choices with a minimum of fuss, and no regrets 
or second-guessing after the fact.
This doesn’t mean you should be half-hearted.
If you beat a dead horse, you can say to yourself, “At 
least I gave it all I got.” And yes, the sense of not settling 
for half measures is truly important. At the same time, I 
find that my best work happens when I am having fun 
as well as working hard—not to mention working with 
fluidity and flexibility. Flexibility means being able to 
move on when the time is right—which, of course, begs 
the question, how do you know when the time is right  
to quit?

161
Working Smarter Not Harder

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
162

163
The photograph shown to the left is of Bixby Bridge, a classic 
1930s structure spanning a chasm along the Big Sur coast of California. 
It took considerable planning to get me into position at the right time 
for these shots. I waited for hours in a cold fog with my tripod poised 
over a dark drop for the light to be low enough and for the right 
combination of car lights to pass by.
During the time I was waiting, I made hundreds of captures, 
mostly just to pass the time, as I knew they weren’t right. Only the 
last few captures were interesting; once I had them on my memory 
card I saw the clouds were closing in, packed up, and went for a hot 
bath and bed. I trusted myself to know that there was no point in 
lingering. If there had been some way to get inserted just at the right 
five minutes, I could have dispensed with my earlier waiting; but, of 
course, this kind of precision is not possible in real life, and the lot 
of every field photographer is to spend time waiting with—or with-
out—patience.
As opposed to film, digital captures are essentially free. As I like  
to say (when referring to a digital capture), “Film is so expensive!”
Most of us take advantage of this fact to shoot tons of exposures. 
However, when I analyze my results, I find that most of the usable cap-
tures from a session are right at the beginning or (a bit less frequently) 
right at the end. Sometimes this gap spans hours. I could have gone 
out for dinner in between and not missed anything. 
In fact, a stronger statement is possible. My first shot is often very 
close to the best of any session. There are a number of possible reasons 
for this, including the extra care I’m taking early on, my excitement at 
the shot, the fact that the scene is fresh for me, and so on. 
Try this exercise: Spend a day shooting different scenes, but only 
allow yourself one shot of each scene. Be tough: You must truly move 
on to something different after each exposure. Then, on another day 
stick to one general subject. Spend a great deal of time and make 
hundreds of captures. Analyze your results to see where in the session 
you did your best work. Which day was more productive? And when, 
during each day’s shoot, were you most productive?
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 40
Working Smarter Not Harder
“Completely devote yourself to listening 
to your inner voice.” —Shunryu Suzuki

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
164
In my workshops I sometimes ask participants to join me in an exercise, which is to 
list the reasons not to undertake a specific photographic challenge, or not to make a 
particular photo. Folk sure do come up with some creative reasons not to photograph! 
Here are some of the doozies I’ve heard over the years, many of which seem perfectly 
plausible and valid on their face:
I’m late for an appointment.
Taking a photo will take too much time.
I have to pick up the kids.
It won’t come out anyway.
I don’t want to have to get my tripod.
I don’t like using my tripod.
I don’t have a tripod.
The subject may not like it (if a portrait).
The file will just sit on my hard drive.
I’ll never be as good as Ansel Adams (or Harold Davis, or whomever).
I don’t go to interesting places.
When I go somewhere interesting I want to enjoy it, not spend my time  
taking photos.
This seems too much like work!
I’m not good enough.
I don’t want to turn around (or back up, or pull off the road, or whatever).
The key thing to do is to be aware of this voice (we all hear it!)—and to go ahead 
and make that photo anyhow. 
If you let the inner naysayer stop you, you will never make photos, or grow as a 
photographer. But you need to know the reasons the voice uses, because many of 
them are really so silly, and when you know the so-called “reasons” you can overcome 
them. Transparency is key. We cannot vanquish the inner voices that may come from 
childhood traumas or simply from the forces of resistance in the universe without 
knowing what those voices are saying.
Try this exercise: List all the reasons you have used for not making photos!
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 30
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
THE VOICE
THAT STOPS YOU


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
166
Should you stay, or should you go? The eternal lifestyle argument about 
having patience with the old versus sampling the new plays out every day 
for photographers in the drama of the choices they make about whether  
to stick with one possible image or to move on.
How do you know if it is time to move on? Here are five signs that you 
should watch for. When you notice them, stop your current direction of  
work and move on to new challenges. Or simply take some time to rest, 
relax, and recharge. If two or more of these signs apply, you should  
definitely switch gears.
When to move on:
1: 
You are physically feeling tired, cold, hungry, and grumpy. 
2: 
You are frustrated and bored with what you are photographing.
3: 
You no longer remember why you wanted to take photos. Even 
thoughts of that new lens or camera body fail to inspire feelings  
of gear-lust.
4: 
The images you see on your LCD seem boring and uninspiring.
5: 
When you look around, other subjects seem much more interesting 
than what you are photographing. When this happens, there is no 
excuse for not getting you and your camera off your respective 
duffs and moving on to greener pastures.
There’s no right or wrong about the decision to stick with a project or 
to find something new, whether the project is a major portfolio (see pages 
188–193) or a single endeavor in the field. These kind of conundrums are 
as old as photography and part of a continuing dialog between serious 
photographers. For example, Ansel Adams and Edward Weston were great 
friends and loved to photograph together outdoors. When the question of 
whether to move on came up, as narrated in Weston’s Day Books, Adams 
wanted to stay for better light and Weston wanted to scout out more 
optimal locations.
Where your bias is on the “stay-put versus move-on continuum” to  
some extent depends on your personality. But don’t use moving on as an 
excuse for lack of patience. There’s no doubt that serious photographic play 
takes work and time. Don’t use moving on as an excuse for avoiding this 
work. Always strive to take the time and care that you deserve as an artist  
to achieve the potential that is in you.
FIVE SIGNS
IT’S TIME TO MOVE ON

167
Five Signs It’s Time to Move On

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
168
If you’ve decided that it is time to move on, but don’t 
know exactly what to do next, it is time to play with 
creative destruction. Many of the world’s great innovations 
and works of art have been born out of creative destruc-
tion. Creative destruction is perhaps most familiar in a 
business context: A company innovates a new product 
because its old business is slowly diminishing, and 
with the new product line further cannibalizes the old 
business. This scenario is extremely fruitful as a model 
for artistic creation. You cannot create anything highly 
original while stuck in a rut, but getting out of the ruts 
often involves change, destruction, and effort.
You can often witness creative destruction in 
children’s play, where, for example, a train track is deci-
mated by an outer space alien invasion amid cries of glee, 
leading to a more involved and intricate subsequent play 
space and structure once building starts again.
For a photographer, creative destruction is a very 
useful technique with many possible guises. For example, 
shining a harsh light from behind a glass straight at the 
camera destroys any chance of delicately rendering the 
glass. But a harsh light directed this way creates new 
possibilities in the spirit of creative destruction.
In the field, you can stop and decide to “destroy” the 
image you are working on by moving on. A simple tech-
nique for encouraging creative destruction is to rotate, 
and photograph whatever is behind you, whether or not 
it seems like a valid subject for a photo.
Closely related to creative destruction is the concept 
of allowing yourself to fail. Don’t worry about making mis-
takes. Everyone makes mistakes. If you make a mistake, it 
shows that you are human and that you are trying to do 
something new. When I see the work of a student that is 
without mistakes, I see someone who isn’t willing to take 
risks and get out of their comfort zone. 
CREATIVE DESTRUCTION

169
Creative Destruction

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
170

171
In other words, always be willing to get messy, take 
chances, and make mistakes. Truly inspirational work 
comes from the creative destruction that this kind of 
thinking out of the box implies. If you are willing to try 
something different and to risk failure, you may be amazed 
at what you accomplish and succeed beyond your wildest 
dreams. 
Try this exercise: Make a list of the ways you might prac-
tice creative destruction in photography. (Hint: I’ve only 
mentioned two, but there are many more.) The next time 
you get bored with a photo session, intentionally choose a 
method of creative destruction from your list, and proceed 
to shoot based upon it. 
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 41
THE BERKELEY MUNICIPAL PIER in Berkeley, California,  juts out 3,000 feet into 
San Francisco Bay. I have often shot the Berkeley Pier, with its wonderful views of San 
Francisco and the Golden Gate Bridge, from the pier itself. After photographing the 
pier many times, I began to wonder whether it might be possible to shoot the pier 
from below. Checking the tide tables for the Berkeley Marina, I found a good day  
and time to arrive at the pier at extreme low tide.
Getting beneath the pier felt kind of weird, almost as if I were descending to the 
underworld through a crack. The opening was about two feet high, so I really had to 
slither with my gear and tripod to fit through (alas, I am not as svelte as I used to be!).
Once under the pier, however, I was surprised at the spaciousness. Of course, this was 
low tide, but the pier construction extended back over something like a chamber 
carved out of landfill. Everything was clammy and wet. I shared the space with scut-
tling crabs, seaweed, rats, and assorted broken glass and garbage. As I made my time 
exposures, every once in a while a wave came through the pilings with a splash that 
got my attention—and had me ready to move quickly to protect my gear if necessary. 
I found a place to position the tripod legs between the rocks, and moving them made 
a squishy sound in the mud. Mentally, I vowed to wash everything washable as soon 
as I got home!
Creative Destruction
Why ask why?

MAINTAINING BALANCE

173
In a world filled with distractions, demands, and opportunities, how can we maintain our 
balance as photographers? In the best of times, maintaining balance was a tricky act for all  
of us as parents, when making a living, and as citizens. Add to this the compulsion and goal 
that is creating art, and things become even more complicated. 
Maintaining balance means different things to different people, and in different life situ-
ations. But as a photographic artist, it is clear that I need both to work carefully at a detailed 
and almost obsessive level. At the same time, I also need to be able to employ broad strokes, 
think conceptually, and enjoy the grand gesture. Balancing these two competitive modes of 
being is a tough act indeed.
The playwright and humorist Oscar Wilde, who in real life didn’t know much about main-
taining balance, put it in his tongue-in-cheek jest this way, “Everything in moderation—even 
moderation.” Great Harvard University philosophers aren’t known for their lack of rigor. 
Cautioning against over-reliance on rigorous and compulsive patterns of work and thought, 
Harvard philosopher Ralph Waldo Emerson characterized consistency as “the hobgoblin of 
petty minds.”
Taking the photographic part of your life, what is an approach that balances competing 
needs to allow you to maintain your balance? First, you must expect to regularly work and 
practice photography, whether or not you feel like it on a given day (see pages 160–163). 
Next, don’t over plan things and don’t create expectations for yourself that are unrealistic 
about the quantity of good work that you can expect. I always appreciate photographers who 
emphasize quality over quantity. I like to tell workshops that it is easy to press the shutter 
and take a photo, but it is very hard to make a great image. Expectations in this regard can 
be unrealistic. A painter who made one great painting a week for a year would be considered 
hugely prolific; why should we photographers try to hold ourselves to a greater production 
quota? It simply ain’t possible.
Perhaps most important of all in maintaining balance is to build time into your schedule 
that is both distraction-free and available for play. This means turning off your phone and 
other devices, forgetting about the Internet, and maybe finding someone to take care of the 
kids. Then, give yourself a photographic assignment. Go somewhere that you’ve never been 
before and are interested in exploring and photographing. Maybe the new place is only a 
block away from your familiar haunts. It doesn’t matter. The idea is to take time for yourself 
and your art, and to get you out of the daily routine.
In all things in life, there is a season and there is a balance. The trick is to find the right 
place and the right balance for the season you are in as a person, artist, and photographer. 
Make your call based on where you are in life and stand by the decisions you’ve made—and 
take your stand with both endurance and flexibility.
“Everything in moderation—even moderation.” 
—Oscar Wilde
Maintaining Balance

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
174
PHOTOGRAPHY IS PLAY
When is the last time you really played? Have you ridden with glee down a slide 
lately? Made yourself nauseous rolling down a grassy slope? Planted your face 
in a snow bank when your sled crashed? Built—and then knocked down—a 
towering block structure?
If you are around children or have little kids, you may, in fact, have done 
some of these things. But whether or not you have kids, it’s vitally important  
to take time to play. Seriously.
Playing is a vital component of learning and crucial to staying fresh and 
creative in your endeavors—even those beyond photography. All too often, 
adults have forgotten how to play (there are also some sad children who were 
never encouraged to play). In a world dominated by office cubicles, routine, 
commutes, the Common Core, and the unrelenting concerns about being a 
responsible adult, it can be extremely challenging to keep playing. But we  
forget how to play at our creative peril.
In fact, even if your primary concern is efficiency at work, many studies show 
that work goes better when it is partially play. Time and again, studies have 
shown that people learn more when they are having fun, meaning when they 
play. So there are good practical reasons to keep it fun.
In the context of photography, playing is itself the most important 
component of work. The more serious and professional you are about your 
photography, the more important it is to keep playing and having fun.
As a professional photographer of many years standing, many of the  
aspects of running my photography business are routine business and market-
ing chores, and not particularly fun. But I wake up each morning invigorated  
and thrilled because what I get to do for a living—the photography itself—is  
so much fun! The truth is, for me, the work of photography is more like playing 
than anything else!
With the neophyte photographers I see in my workshops and my own kids, 
there’s no problem staying creative. They are playing and having fun—and you 
never know what they are going to do next—it’s exciting! Turn the camera at a 
weird angle, sure. Toss it in the air and carefully catch it, why not? Experiment 
with multiple exposures, be my guest. 
In contrast to this playful spirit, photographers I see who have been making 
all or some of their living from photography can be unremittingly grim and 

175
Photography Is Play


177
Photography Is Play
“Creativity is contagious”   —Albert Einstein
morose about photography itself. If this is you, knock it off! Get outside 
in the sunshine and play! Have fun!
Think for a minute about these questions:
Why did you start becoming a photographer?
Was it fun when you first started?
Is photography as much fun now?
If not, why not?
Remember the joy you had when you first started taking pictures, 
and some of them were even kind of good?
You goal is to bring back that joy, and to make photography fun 
again. Many things that are worth doing, including photography, take 
effort. But that effort can be fun. An if you are having fun you will be a 
better photographer.
As I’ve already said, I learn a great deal by watching my kids. If you 
observe kids, they don’t think of what they are doing as work. (Unless 
they are doing homework or house chores, but that is a different 
story….    )
Give a kid a camera, and they will take it and make the weirdest 
photos, things you and I might never have thought of. This is in keep-
ing with the way kids use play, as part of their discovery mechanism in 
relationship to the world. So become a kid again! 
Here are some ideas about how you can use the things kids do to 
reintroduce the feeling of play into your photography and your life:
Jump up and down 10 times. How many adults are in the habit 
of jumping up and down? Next, hop up and down on one foot, 
and then the other.
Photograph two silly things that don’t seem right together in a 
single shot. Try to make a coherent story out of it.
Invite someone you know to be a portrait subject. Ask them to 
make as silly a face as possible, and photograph it. Maybe ask 
them to try on a silly hat, or stand in an odd pose. In other words, 
have as much fun as possible with the shoot!
☞  See related Workbook Exercises 16 and 42
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
178
For me, there is great power in the solitude of nature. Like 
the famous naturalist John Muir, I believe that if there is 
a place where prayer is appropriate, it is in nature, and in 
the wild places of the Earth.
Of course, I’m also a child of civilization, and I depend 
upon technology, computers, books, and digital cameras. 
I have responsibilities, assignments, deadlines, and kids. 
But I like to escape as often as I can, recharge my batter-
ies, and enjoy solitude.
One of my favorite places to go is Yosemite Valley. But 
I always feel ambivalent about staying on the valley floor. 
It’s hard to escape light pollution, the noise of internal 
combustion engines, and the general contamination  
of society.
The photograph you see to the right is an expression 
of my ambivalence. Sure, Yosemite Falls is beautiful, and 
the stars are naked in their solitude. At the same time, the 
area under Yosemite Falls is lit by mercury vapor lights 
from Yosemite Lodge, and there is light pollution to the 
left and to the right even on a moonless Yosemite night.
As time has gone by, I have found that I am deeply 
passionate about many things beyond the sometimes 
empty wilderness. First and foremost on this list are my 
family and kids. I’m also a passionate photographer, and 
I love the experience of learning deeply about different 
cultures.
There’s not much point in re-creating a postcard view 
of a tourist spot. Photographs with passion that resonate 
with your passions are multidimensional. No matter how 
much you love something, there are also aspects that 
make you uncomfortable or irritate you. Truly passionate 
photography embraces the ordinary and the extraor-
dinary and moves beyond the single dimension of the 
tourist shot or the paean to the wilderness. 
The truly passionate photograph captures nuance, 
has a viewpoint, and therefore has a soul. 
INTEGRATING
PERSONAL PASSION

179
Integrating Personal Passion


181
The fastest way to exceed your own 
goals is to add passion to your  work
Integrating Personal Passion
What are you passionate about? How can you 
integrate this passion into your photography? And 
how can you move beyond a one-dimensional 
photograph that is a cliché to an image with a 
viewpoint that explores the subtleties of the 
subject matter you are passionate about?
Try this exercise: Photograph something you 
are passionate about but also have mixed feel-
ings about. Try to pre-visualize the image—your 
photo should express this ambivalence. How are 
you going to show this ambivalence to someone 
looking at your photo?
EARLY MORNING LIGHT coming through the shoji 
screens woke me where I lay on my futon on the floor 
in a rustic ryokan in Takahara, Japan.
Takahara means “the high fields,” and the night 
before I had learned that from the high fields, which 
are still farmed traditionally today, the valleys below 
were often filled with beautiful mist and clouds in the 
early morning.
I opened the screen and stared out at a chill world 
with fog hanging in the distant valleys. The warmth 
of my futon called out to me, but this was no time 
to dawdle indoors! I threw on my warmest clothes, 
grabbed camera and tripod, and headed out to  
make some passionate photos.
Later, the hot communal bath washed away my 
cold. Breakfast was many dishes. I could identify the 
smoked salmon, but others remained a mystery. 
Then, with pack on my back, I headed out into 
autumn to walk along the trail to the next village.

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
182
WHAT
ARE YOUR GOALS?
This book started with helping you to articulate a Road 
Map to Success (see page 16). Creating a plan that you 
can stick to and that has clearly defined benchmarks and 
criteria for success is vitally important. Without an articu-
lated plan, you cannot make progress in any endeavor, 
and this includes photography. The best plans include 
intermediate steps for achieving the goals, and while they 
encompass a flexible attitude, also embed metrics that 
enable you to decide when you’ve completed a portion 
of the plan and can move on to the next step. 
In the figure shown on page 16, Road Map to 
Success, you were asked to establish a baseline, then 
improve, next establish a revised and improved baseline, 
and then to repeat the process over and over again. The 
important steps to evaluating your work and establishing 
a baseline were addressed on pages 20–31.
This Road Map to Success, shown at the beginning  
of Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer, is only a 
piece of the puzzle that becoming the best you can be 
involves. Let’s step back for a second and unpack the 
meaning of this.
As you’ve been reading my book and following along 
with the exercises, you’ve probably realized a few impor-
tant points. Almost everything that I’ve said is deeply and 
personally felt. Anything worth creating is born through 
some pain, and this is the most personal, least technical 
book that I’ve written.
It is hugely important to me to help you push against 
mere survival and the boring, humdrum facts of daily 
existence. This book involves taking a bite of my heart: 
It is a wail and rail in contra-positive agony and ecstasy 
against the forces of destruction, entropy, and anarchy 
that are rampant in the universe. 
If we are not better than boredom, cruelty, and 
routine, then why is life worth living? 

183
What Are Your Goals?

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
184
“We are all inventors, each sailing out on a 
voyage of discovery.”  —  Ralph Waldo Emerson
These thoughts lead naturally to the higher goal that should be the endpoint of the 
Road Map to Success that I mentioned above. In other words, the Road Map addresses 
the beginning of your journey. 
The Road Map also is helpful in considering how to become more creative, as well as 
the intermediate steps on the Hero’s Journey (you, of course, are the Hero).
What the Road Map does not address is the endpoint. Namely, what is the goal of all this? 
As this book approaches its conclusion, it is now time to remedy this intentional omission. 
While there is commonality across the domain of goals, each photographer’s goal is a per-
sonal issue. I would have let you in on your goal at the beginning of this book, but I couldn’t. 
The goal is yours to discover, and it can’t be had for a pittance. You must do the work to fi nd 
your goal, and that involves being diligent about pursuing the exercises and suggestions in 
the book.
When you have a creative goal in mind, you can creatively deconstruct the Road Map to 
Success on page 16 and come up with an extended process with your current baseline and 
an ultimate goal the destination. Take a look at the From Here to There diagram below.
FROM HERE TO THERE
Where you 
are now
STEP 1
Road Map
to Success
(Page 16)
YOUR
FINAL
GOAL!
res
et 
to
 n
e
w
 
g
o
a
l
Do it again!
STEP 2
Road Map
to Success
Do it again!
STEP 3
Road Map
to Success
re
se
t t
o 
n
e
w
 g
o
a
l
Reset your goal as 
many times as you 
need to until you 
reach    ...
Each step is one 
step closer to 
your ﬁ nal goal
☞  See Workbook Exercise 43



187
What Are Your Goals?
Keep in mind that it is always easier to destroy things than to create things, and that your 
ultimate goal doesn’t have to be etched in stone or incredibly precise. In fact, it may be better 
if it isn’t precise.
A statement such as “I want to be the best photographer that I can be, and I want to be 
the most creative artist I can be” is a perfectly acceptable end goal. Having an end goal of this 
sort doesn’t stop you from having more practical and pinpointed steps along the way such as, 
“I want to have a solo gallery exhibition.” 
Do keep in mind as you formulate your goals that you must learn to walk before you can 
run. Having a grandiose, overarching goal is great, but also put the effort into delineating 
how you think you might get there. Also keep in mind that any plan is a living document. Life 
changes, goals change, and so do you. This is as it should be.
Having a solo gallery exhibition is actually a really ambitious goal. It’s smart to formulate 
realistic goals in light of where you are in your baseline. If you propose a really ambitious goal, 
without thinking through the steps to get there, you might just stop right there because the 
whole thing is so overwhelming. Little baby steps are the way to go—they will get you there!
Here are some examples of steps that might help lead you up to your goal, which I’ve 
seen successfully accomplished in my workshops:
I’ll learn to make a good print.
I’ll learn to mat and frame my artwork.
I’ll learn how to use that new lens.
I’ll learn Harold’s “flower photography on a light box” technique.
I’ll travel to a place I’ve never been and photograph the wonders I find.
I’ll stop being scared of Photoshop and really learn it.
I’ll get my camera off Auto and learn about exposure.
Today I will take a random walk in the woods and photograph what I see and find.
Today I am going to make myself uncomfortable photographically by moving  
beyond my comfort zone and figuring out how to deal with it.
I am going to finally make a portfolio of my work because I believe in me (see  
pages 188–193).
Fear is most of what holds people back. Fear is the mind killer. To express your goals, big 
and small, means to face your fears. Resolve today to face your fears, accept them, and move 
beyond them.
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
“Imagination is more important 
than knowledge.”   —  Albert Einstien

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
188
MAKING A PORTFOLIO
In my workshops, I encourage participants to create 
a portfolio as a manifestation of their assertions of 
creative self in fighting the resistance of life. To create 
a portfolio of work is to make a true statement about 
who you are as a creative artist and a photographer, 
and it is also a surprisingly challenging enterprise. 
On page 187, I included making a portfolio as  
an example goal: “I am going to finally make a 
portfolio of my work because I believe in me.” This  
is a great goal.
Let’s talk for a minute about what a portfolio is 
and what it is not. There are many kinds of different 
portfolios. So while the apex portfolio may be a 
sequence of archival prints, beautifully presented in 
an elegant Solander box, an online album of JPEGs 
can also be considered a portfolio, depending upon 
the context. The kind of portfolio you create will 
depend upon where you are (your “baseline”), and 
your goals. In other words, once again it is important 
to walk before you can run. 
Specifically, the goal of creating a portfolio is to 
establish a unified body of work. First and foremost,  
it is important to:
Find a theme, either new or based on a 
previous body of work.
Make sure that your work that will go into 
the portfolio is substantive and diverse, 
while remaining cohesive.
Edit your work.
These goals can be accomplished electronically 
without printing anything. If you create this kind of 
portfolio, you will learn some important technical 
skills along the way, such as: how to sequence images, 
and how to choose images that are related to each 
other. You’ll also find out how to create electronic 
◼
◼
◼

189
Making a Portfolio

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
190

191
Making a Portfolio
file types and learn how to use an online gallery to 
display your work.
Most important, you are making a statement 
about your creative self. I am me, this is the work  
that represents me, and it is worthy to be seen as a 
unified body of work with a theme. This is something 
that you will be able to point folks to when they ask 
what you do and be able to take great personal pride 
in. If you can’t be proud of your portfolio, turn around, 
and keep working on it until you are satisfied. 
There are manifest creative benefits to working 
to make one or more portfolios for yourself, and of 
course, there are many shapes a portfolio can take.
Perhaps the simplest is an online album at a 
venue such as Flickr or 500px. You can also use  
a portfolio to create a physical product such as a  
self-published calendar or book. 
But I believe the power of creating a portfolio 
truly comes into its own when you create a print 
portfolio using some of your work. I like to tell work-
shop attendees that their photography is not really 
complete until it has been taken into the “real” world, 
either in publication or as a photographic print. 
Now, I didn’t always believe this about the 
importance of the photographic print.
When I first started out in digital photography, 
I didn’t really understand that digital was a medium 
that was every bit as capable of being used to create 
fine photographic prints as film photography. Perhaps 
the technology wasn’t there yet and all the pieces 
weren’t in place. In any case, it seemed to me that one 
could just produce a JPEG, post it to an online forum, 
and call the whole thing done.
I’ve learned that nothing could be further from 
the truth. My job as a photographer isn’t complete 
“For fast acting relief try 
slowing down.”   —  Lily Tomlin

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
192
until I’ve printed my image, or in some cases seen it printed in a publication. For 
one thing, an image posted online works in low resolution, and low resolution can 
hide a universe of technical flaws. 
But leaving technical issues aside, what is a photograph? And what is the point 
of photography? For me, this involves printing. Making a print portfolio as opposed 
to an electronic portfolio extends the benefits of portfolio creation greatly.
You can print the portfolio yourself, or work with a printer or printing lab, or 
even arrange to have the portfolio printed as a publication-on-demand (POD) book. 
In other words, you don’t need a publication contract, and any photographer can 
produce a printed portfolio of their own work.
 In addition to the steps involved in creating an electronic portfolio, creating  
a print portfolio involves these steps:
Preparing photos for printing
Deciding on the physical form of the portfolio
Designing the contents of the portfolio, either on your own or working  
with a designer
Printing the portfolio, and binding or packaging it appropriately
Smiling and having fun as you show the world your wonderful portfolio  
of prints!
Making an attractive portfolio of your own work is one of the best ways to 
advance your creativity. The portfolio serves as a marker for how far your work  
has come, and is something you can show the world as you begin to become  
the best photographic artist that you are capable of being.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 44
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
Work in progress on three of my portfolios is shown on the folowing pages:
PAGES 188–189: This image shows the Monochromatic Vision prints laid out to cure as they 
are signed and numbered. There are 12 numbered copies in this portfolio.
PAGES 190–191: My Botanique portfolio contains several Japanese Unryu Washi pullouts, 
including the Star Magnolia Panorama shown in this photo.
RIGHT: The Kumano Kodo portfolio includes spiritual and secular images from a visit to Japan. 
The entire portfolio is printed on one 16.5-foot-long continuous sheet of Japanese Kozo Washi.
The mind is everything   —what we think, we become

193
Making a Portfolio

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
194
I was asked by an art gallerist I work with to help educate some clients regarding my print 
making. Essentially the issues come down to exploring how my prints differ from mass-
produced inkjet prints, since largely the same equipment is used. In contrast to those you  
get from Costco or giclées from an art reproduction company, my prints require a great  
deal of hand labor. 
Prints from a high-end inkjet printer go by a variety of names, including:
Inkjet print: I think you’d rather suspect this term would be in use.
Pigment print: The printer lays down pigment rather than altering an emulsion  
as in traditional photographic printing.
Giclée: Named after the French verb gicier, “to spurt,” a neologism specifically  
coined to avoid the “stigma” of being called an inkjet print.
Piezo print: Named after the kind of print head that is in the printer.
Personally, I don’t think there is much in the name, and all these terms mean the same 
thing. After all, a rose by any other name is still a rose. Overall, I tend to favor “pigment print.”
The widespread confusion of terminology relates to the incredible spectrum of uses for 
this technology: You can buy inkjet prints at Costco, where they are honestly labeled, you can 
buy the somewhat pretentiously named giclée prints from companies that reproduce art, and 
you can collect one-off artisanal pigment prints from solo artists such as I who make these 
prints one at a time in their studio.
The difference between these various uses isn’t really the gear that is involved, just as 
the difference between mediocre and great photography is rarely the gear the photographer 
uses. Quality in digital print making really comes down to knowing the quirks of the printer, 
understanding how to get the most out of digital workflow, how the technology is used, the 
vision behind the print making, and the care and time that is spent on each individual image.
I would emphasize the point that in my opinion just as much craft, skill, and artistry goes 
into making a good artisanal digital inkjet print as ever went into a print made in the chemical 
darkroom. The vision and care required are much the same, but the specific skills required are 
different. If you include output file preparation, printing, and post-printing issues, an average 
print might take something like 5 to 10 hours for me, in some cases a bit less, and in some 
cases much more—sometimes I have to print an image 20 times until it is right and I get that 
one good print.
The take-away should be that considerable effort and time goes into every print that I 
make. There is no such thing as “mass printing” in my studio. Of course, this leaves out the 
hours or weeks it may take me to make my images in the first place.
◼
◼
◼
◼
ARTISANAL PRINT MAKING


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
196
CREATIVITY FOR LIFE
Creativity is not a one-shot deal—it is like a muscle! To develop your creativity muscle you need 
to keep using it, and to regularly exercise different aspects of creativity, just as different weight 
machines at the gym strengthen different parts of your body when you use them regularly. 
Many of the exercises that you’ve seen throughout Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer, 
and also in the Photographer’s Workbook, are intended to help you grow different aspects of 
your creativity.
The goal is to stay creative, and grow more creative, through a long and productive artistic 
career—essentially, being creative for life! 
Sure, some days one feels more creative than other days. And certainly the true photo-
graphic artist needs to go on working regardless. But keep in mind that creating a body of work 
such as a good photographic portfolio is a marathon, not a sprint. Pace yourself! There will be 
days you may not feel like working, and days in which you don’t feel inspired. But remember  
to rise above it all and keep on track with your long-term goals (see pages 182–187).
By explicitly planning for a lifelong process of creativity, you will be better able to weather 
the ups and downs that go with any process that requires inspiration, and better able to 
integrate photography with the rest of your life.
Keep in mind that creativity works best on a spiral model, meaning that one often circles 
back to ideas of the past. Here’s what I mean. When you first approach a new subject or tech-
nique, you are filled with passion and enthusiasm. Much good work ensues. Hours, days, weeks, 
or perhaps months go by.
Eventually, you begin to get bored. This is a good time to move on to something that fills 
you with photographic enthusiasm.
You find a new love, and a new enthusiasm, and the cycle starts again.
The time will come when you spiral back to the original work. You’ll bring renewed enthu-
siasm to it, as well as a richness gathered from the other work, interests, and passions that have 
occupied you along the way.
And so the spiral goes.
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 45
I LOVE TO PHOTOGRAPH nautilus shells, and have created many nautilus images in the course of my 
photographic career. The organic spiral of this shell is one of the most profound patterns in nature, and echoes 
the sequence of numbers in the famous Fibonacci sequence. The image on the right shows a split cross-section 
of a chambered nautilus, photographed on a black velvet background with my super-sharp Zeiss Otus lens.


Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
198

199
Creativity for Life
A life filled with regrets about the paths not taken is a 
life not worth living. Hindsight may be 20-20, but foresight 
never is. Nip this kind of retrospective self-indulgence 
in maudlin fancies about those things that got away by 
starting your own “bucket list,” in other words, things that 
you want to accomplish during your creative life.
It’s fine for some items on your photographic bucket 
list to be difficult and extraordinary. In other words, you 
don’t realistically have to expect to accomplish every item 
on the list, but you should be able to take a shot at it. 
Climbing mountains if you are in decent shape but have 
never traveled beyond the armchair is okay, exploring new 
galaxies is probably beyond the pale since it is unrealistic 
outside of sci-fi.
I also encourage you to include mundane and simple 
ideas on your bucket list as well, things that you can 
accomplish in your home or your backyard. For example, 
create a compelling low-key image. Or make a portrait of 
someone you love.
As you begin to keep track of your bucket list, flesh it 
out. Make notes about what you need to do to accomplish 
the photographic bucket list item. Provided you haven’t 
been too wildly extravagant in your bucket list choices, 
you should be able to start checking items off your 
photographic bucket list, and adding the results to the 
portfolios you have begun to create (see pages 188–193).
Go for it!
☞  See related Workbook Exercise 46
Embrace the power of your inner voice
LIFE IS AN ADVENTURE, sometimes gentle and calm, 
sometimes rushing with a roar of foam to crash against the 
shore. Whether in peak or trough, waves—and our lives—are 
always in motion. We can hope to enjoy the ride, but we can’t 
stop the waves or the adventure and passage of life itself.

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
200
Who are you? Who are you really?
Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer is about helping you figure out who you 
are as a person, an artist, and a photographer. Armed with this insight, you can begin to 
apply the tools that humanity has developed over the eons since we first crawled up out 
of the muck beside the oceans of a young world and declared ourselves as beings with 
consciousness.
The point of applying these tools is to help you achieve you goals, and to draw your 
line in the sand. I want you to stand up for who you are!
Humanity is great at making weapons and developing novel ways to wage war. We’re 
also not bad at corporate greed and figuring out ways to oppress people, and funnel them 
into narrow and desperate dehumanized niches.
“Do not go gentle into that good night,” wrote the poet Dylan Thomas. “Rage, rage 
against the dying of the light.” Perhaps we cannot be all that we want to be, or create the 
photographs we really want to create, but at least we can try.
Every time someone gives up on their creativity, every time someone loses faith in 
their ability to achieve their potential as a photographer, then the forces of darkness that 
surround us win—sometimes less, and sometimes more, depending on the wattage of the 
creativity that is lost.
Author Steven Pressfield in his influential The War of Art has called the forces that array 
against achieving our creative potential resistance (see page 164 for more on the concept 
of resistance). Resistance takes many forms, and usually is first expressed as a shortage: 
for example, if there seems to be not enough time, money, or talent to complete a project. 
Often time, money, and so on are proxies for a greater shortage that we may have last felt 
consciously when we were children: a shortage of all-encompassing love.
To use Pressfield’s concept, when we don’t stand up against resistance the forces of 
darkness win. In reading Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer and working through 
the exercises, you have started to take a stand against this darkness because my whole 
book is a push back against resistance. 
I will say it again: I want you to draw your line in the sand. By all means rage against 
the oncoming darkness. Do not be gentle. Be loud. Don’t sell your birthright for a mess 
of pottage when you can have the whole thing. Affirmatively be the best artist and 
photographer you can be, and say it now with me, saying it loudly, screaming to  
the heavens, “I can and I will achieve my potential ! ”
Thank you for reading my book. I know you can do it.
DRAWING YOUR LINE
IN THE SAND




Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
204
RESOURCES
COMPANION WORKBOOK AND WEBSITE
Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer is designed to be read and used with the exercises in the 
accompanying pullout Workbook. If the companion Workbook pages are missing, or if you need to 
download additional pages to print for your personal, non-commercial use, please visit my website,  
www.digitalfieldguide.com/achieving, where you can download a PDF version of the Workbook.  
You’ll also find related material and new exercises that I will post from time to time.
COME VISIT HAROLD’S WEBSITE
Please visit my website, www.digitalfieldguide.com, and my blog at www.photoblog2.com. On my blog 
you will find literally thousands of images and the stories behind them. My goal in writing my blog is to 
share my journey as a digital photographer with you. In this regard, you’ll find information about many 
of the techniques that I use as well as back-story information about the visual and philosophic decisions 
I have made.
 My current workshops are listed at www.digitalfieldguide.com/learning/workshops-events. 
BOOKS BY HAROLD DAVIS
I have written books on many aspects of photographic technique, Photoshop, and the spiritual side of 
photography. My Creative Photography series from Wiley Publishing covers the gamut of photographic 
techniques, and has been called “a great way to start a photography library.”
Besides the Creative books, if you enjoyed Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer, you may also 
be interested in some of my other books: 
The Way of the Digital Photographer (Peachpit Press, 2014)
Monochromatic HDR Photography (Focal Press, 2014)
Creating HDR Photos (Amphoto, 2012)
Photographing Waterdrops (Focal Press, 2012)
Photographing Flowers (Focal Press, 2011)
The Photoshop Darkroom (Focal Press, 2009)
FOR FURTHER READING
I have learned from, leaned on, and borrowed the concept of resistance from The War of Art by Steven 
Pressfield (Black Irish Entertainment, 2012). 
If you are interested in wabi-sabi, you might want to take a look at Wabi-Sabi for Artists, Designers, 
Poets & Philosophers by Leonard Koren (Imperfect Publishers, 2008). To begin to understand some of 
the concepts of Zen as they relate to photography, see Zen in the Art of Photography by Robert Leverant 
(Images Press, 2011). A good introduction to Zen generally can be found in Zen Mind, Beginner’s Mind by 
Shunryu Suzuki (Shambhala, 2011). 
The photographer’s journey in the companion Workbook (Exercise 43), borrows, of course, from the 
ideas and work of Joseph Campbell. To learn more about Joseph Campbell, a good starting place is The 
Hero with a Thousand Faces (New World Library, third edition, 2008). 
There are many books aimed at an audience of business people who want to increase their produc-
tivity, become more efficient, and achieve their goals. Almost any artist can benefit by applying some of 
these techniques to their own work. One such book I recommend is Focal Point by Brian Tracy (American 
Management Association, 2005).
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼

205
GLOSSARY
Resources and Glossary
Angle of view: The view that a lens 
can capture, expressed in degrees. For 
example, the angle of view of a normal 
50mm focal length lens is roughly 43°. 
The greater the angle of view, the more 
wide angle a lens is.
Aperture: The size of the opening in a 
camera lens, usually designated as an 
f-stop.
Bracketing: Shooting many exposures at 
a range of settings. It often works better 
to bracket shutter speed rather than 
aperture.
Channel: In Photoshop, a channel is  
a grayscale representation of color  
(or black) information. In RGB color there 
are three channels: red, green, and blue.
CMYK: Cyan, Magenta, Yellow, and Black; 
the four-color color model used for most 
offset printing.
Color opponent: A color channel that 
includes information about both a color 
and its opposite color.
Color space: Sometimes called a color 
model, is the mechanism used to display 
the colors we see in the world, in print, 
or on a monitor. CMYK, LAB, and RGB are 
examples of color spaces.
Curve: An adjustment used to make 
precise color and exposure corrections.
Depth-of-field: The distance in front of 
and behind a subject that is in focus.
DSLR: Digital single lens reflex camera.
Dynamic range: The difference between 
the lightest tonal values and the darkest 
tonal values in a photo.
Equalization: A Photoshop adjustment 
that maximizes the color in channels.
EV (Exposure Value): Denotes any 
combination of aperture, shutter speed, 
and ISO that yields the same exposure.  
–1 EV means halving the exposure, and 
+1 EV means doubling the exposure.
f-number, f-stop: The size of the aperture, 
written f/n, where n is the f-number. The 
larger the f-number, the smaller the open-
ing in the lens; the smaller the f-number, 
the larger the opening in the lens.
Focal length: Roughly, the distance 
from the end of the lens to the sensor. 
The ratio of focal length to sensor size 
determines the angle of view.
Focus stacking: Extending the field of 
focus by combining multiple photos.
Gradient: A gradual blend, often used 
when working with layer masks in 
Photoshop.
Grayscale: Used to render images in 
a single color from white to black; in 
Photoshop a grayscale image has only 
one channel.
Hand-HDR: The process of creating an 
HDR image from multiple photos at dif-
ferent exposures without using auto-
matic software to combine the photos.
HDR: Extending the dynamic range in an 
image using techniques including multi-
RAW processing, hand-HDR, and auto-
mated HDR software.
High key: Brightly lit photos that are 
predominantly white, often with an 
intentionally “overexposed” look.
Histogram: A bar graph that represents a 
distribution of values; an exposure histo-
gram is used to display the distribution of 
lights and darks in an image. 
Inversion: A Photoshop adjustment that 
inverts the color in a channel or channels.
ISO: Scale used to set a camera’s 
sensitivity to light.
JPEG: A compressed file format for 
images that have been processed from 
the original RAW file.
LAB color: A color model consisting of 
three channels. The Lightness (L) channel 
contains the luminance (black and white) 
information, the A channel contains 
magenta and green, and the B channel 
holds blue and yellow.
Layer: Photoshop documents are 
composed of layers stacked on top of  
each other.
Layer mask: Masks are used to selectively 
reveal or hide layers in Photoshop.
Low key: Dimly lit photos that are 
predominantly dark, often with an 
intentionally “underexposed” look.
Multi-RAW processing: Combining two 
or more different versions of the same 
RAW file to extend the dynamic range 
and create a more pleasing final image.
Overexposed: An overexposed photo 
is too light. The exposure histogram is 
bunched toward the right side of the 
graph.
Photo compositing: Combining one or 
more photos to create an image that can 
be “impossible” or surreal.
RAW: A digital RAW file is a complete 
record of the data captured by the sen-
sor. The details of RAW file formats vary 
between camera manufacturers.
Refraction: Curvature and distortion 
caused by a change in a lightwave in 
relation to its speed; for example,  
when light enters water.
RGB: Red, Green, and Blue; the 
three-color color model used for 
displaying photos on the Web 
and on computer monitors.
Shutter speed: The interval of time  
in which the camera shutter is open.
Stacking: Combining images shot 
over time to create a single image 
with the effective exposure time 
of all the shots combined.
Stopped down: To stop down a lens 
means to set the aperture to a small 
opening (denoted with a large f-number), 
letting in as little light as possible.
Tonal range: The range of color and  
light and dark values in an image.
Underexposed: An underexposed  
photo is too dark. The exposure 
histogram is bunched toward the left  
side of the graph.
Wide open: To set the lens wide open,  
or to open up a lens, means to set the 
aperture to a large opening (denoted 
with a small f-number), letting in as  
much light as possible.

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer
206
INDEX
A
Adams, Ansel, 12, 102, 130, 164, 166
Adobe Photoshop, 47
aesthetic baseline, 16, 32–39
aperture, 123, 143–145
iPhone, and 145
artisanal print, 194
assignment, self, 105
Auto Focus mode, 135
B
baseline
aesthetic, 16
establishing, 16, 18, 30–31, 34, 
37, 182
maintaining, 172–173
pragmatic, 16
blank page, horror of, 100
bokeh (ボケ), 143–145
Botanique portfolio, 192
bucket list, 199
Buddhism
Shugendō, 112
Zen, 148–151, 204
C
composite, photo, 55
composition
creative, 120–127
focus, and, 123, 139
formal, 28, 139
lenses, and, 123
listening to yourself, 156, 160–163
photography, and, 120–129
context, altering, 90
creative destruction, 168–171
creativity, 89, 196–199, 200
composition, and, 120–127
owning your, 56
path to, 106–109, 168–171
photography, and, 66–109
play, and, 52, 58, 130–133, 158, 
174–177
spiral model, 196
technique, and, 112–115
cropping, 117
D
depth-of-field, 115, 123, 143, 
144–145
design
imagination, and, 120–127
photography, and, 116–119, 118
destruction, creative, 168–171
disassociating, 24, 27
domains, aesthetic and pragmatic, 34
DSLR, compared to 35mm format, 
117
E
edge-to-edge sharpness, 140–141, 
143
establishing a baseline, 16, 18, 30–31
evaluating
formal photographic, 24–27
steps, 23
your work, 20–31, 182
exposure, 56, 57
long, 20, 52, 58, 72, 96
F
f-stop, 143
fears, facing, 11, 16, 87, 164–165, 166, 
168, 187, 188, 200
focal lengths, 148
lenses, and, 123, 124
focus, 115, 146
choice of subject, and, 137
composition, and, 139
photography, and, 134–145
selective, 140–141
formal composition, 28
framing, photography, and, 117–118, 
120
Frost, Robert, 106
G
Gaudi, Antoni, 105
giclée, 194
goals
photography and, 16, 18, 182–187
portfolio creation, and 188
H
Hemingway, Ernest, 99
high-key photography, 78–79
horror vacui, 100
I
iconic style, 102
imagination
historical, 98–99
unleashing, 40–65
in-focus versus out-of-focus, 139
inken (Japanese chop), 12
inkjet print, 194
inner voice
listening to, 156, 160–163, 199
naysayer, 164
iterating your photography, 32–39
K
Kumano Kodo, 12, 126–127, 192
L
landscapes, and the Rule of Thirds, 
128–129
lede, 62, 70–71
lenses, 124
composition, and, 123
focal lengths, and, 124, 148
Lewis, C. S., 82
limits
iconic style, as, 102
motivating with, 102
personal, setting, 105
setting, 62, 100–105
M
Michelangelo, 42
Monet, Claude, 35, 45, 102, 144–145
Monochromatic Vision portfolio, 192
motion
blur, 130–133
rendering, 123
shutter speed and, 130–133
N
narrative response, 27, 68–72, 
137–139, 156
O
out-of-focus versus in-focus, 135–139
P
passion and photography, 56, 
178–181

207
Index
patterns, 42, 50–51, 80, 112, 113, 
118–121, 150
photo composite, 55
photographer as poet, 11–12
photography
aperture, and, 123, 143–145
balance, maintaining, 172–173
baseline, establishing, 16, 18, 
30–31, 182
bokeh, and, 143–145
bucket list, 199
composition, and, 28, 120–129, 
139
creative destruction, and, 168–171
creativity, and, 56, 66–109, 
168–171, 196–199
design, and, 116–119, 118
evaluating your, 16, 18, 182
steps, 23
expectations, 172–173
exposure, and, 7, 20, 52, 56, 58, 
72, 96
fears, and, 187
focus, and, 134–145
framing, and, 117
goals, 16, 18, 182–187
imagination, and, 40–65
improving, 32–39
inner voice
listening to, 156, 160–163, 199
naysayer, 164
limits, and, 62, 100–105
passion, and, 178–181
patterns, and, 42, 50–51, 80, 112, 
113, 118–121, 150
plan, making, 182–187
playing, and, 52, 58, 130–133, 158, 
174–177
portfolio, creation and, 188–193
presentation, 28
pre-visualization, 60, 115, 140, 181
print
importance of, 152, 191
making, 194–195
quest, as a, 79
resistance, and, 11, 16, 87, 
164–165, 166, 168, 188, 200
revealing the unseen, 93–99
Road Map to Success, 182–187
self-portraiture, 156
serendipity, and, 32, 39, 62, 72–79, 
82–84, 89
sharpness, and, 123, 140–141, 143
shutter speed, and, 123, 124, 
130–133
simplicity, and, 65, 93, 148–153
technique, and, 79, 110–153
time
as element in photos, 90
controlling with photography, 
93
duration of, 124
to move on, 166
vision, and, 52–55
working smarter, 160–163
Zen, and, 148–151, 204
Zone, and, 45, 135, 146–147
Piezo print, 194
pigment print, 194
planning, photography and, 47–49, 
182–187
play, photography as, 52, 58, 
130–133, 158, 174–177
portfolio
creating, 188–193
making, 62
themes, and, 191
post-production, digital, 115
potential, achieving your, 200
pragmatic baseline, 16, 32–39
pre-visualization, 60, 115, 140, 181
composition, and, 139
presentational context, 28
Pressfield, Steven, 200, 204
print making, 194–195
artisanal, 194–195
importance in photography, 152, 
191
photography, and, 194–195
print portfolio, making, 62
proportions, formats, and, 117
Q
quest, photography as a, 79
R
resistance, 11, 16, 87, 164–165, 166, 
168, 187, 188, 200
overcoming, 187, 196–199, 200
revealing the unseen, 93–99
Road Map to Success, 16–19, 
182–187
Rule of Thirds, 128–129
S
selective focus, 140–141
self-portrait,156
self assignment, 105
serendipity, 32, 39, 62, 72–79, 82–84
setting limits, 100–105
sharpness
apparent, 123
edge-to-edge, 140–141, 143
shutter speed, 123, 124, 130–133
motion, and, 124
simplicity, photography and, 65, 93,  
48–153
spiral model of creativity, 196
stock photography, 68
stopped down, 143
story, telling in photos, 27, 68, 
137–139, 156
T
technique
creativity, and, 112–115
photography, and, 79, 110–153
time
as element in photos, 90
controlling with photography, 93
duration of, 124
to move on, 166
U
unexpected, expecting the, 80
unseen, revealing the, 93–99
V
vision, and photography, 52–55
W
Weston, Edward, 158, 166
wide open, 143
workflow, 115, 194
working smarter, 32, 39, 160–163
Z
Zen, 148–151, 204
Zone, being in the, 45, 135, 146–147


My Photographer’s 
Creative Workbook
This is my line in the sand! I am committed to becoming 
a more creative photographer and achieving my 
potential. I will overcome and stamp out all resistance!
Your name here !
The companion workbook to 
Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer by Harold Davis
ISBN: 978-1-138-82636-6  © Harold Davis
THIS BOOK BELONGS TO

ou’ve written your name on this workbook. 
Wait a minute! You didn’t? Well, just take a 
gosh darn minute and turn back a page, grab a 
pencil or your favorite pen, and put your Joan 
Hancock on the line! Okay. Good job!
Now you have your name on the front of the 
workbook. And you are well and truly committed 
to drawing your line in the sand, and to achieving 
your potential as a photographer.
This workbook is here to help you. But there 
are a couple of things you should know to get the 
most out of using it:
The workbook is a companion to Achieving 
Your Potential As a Photographer, and is meant 
to be used in conjunction with the book. 
It’s important that you understand that the 
exercises in this workbook are most fully 
explained and illustrated in the book itself. 
For each exercise, a cross-reference to the 
book is indicated in the workbook, like this:  
For more about this exercise, please see 
Achieving Your Potential page 18.
The best way to use this workbook is as a kind 
of journal. It is your journal, not my journal, 
and completing the exercises helps make it 
personal to you. You will get out of it what 
you put into it. 
When using the workbook in conjunc-
tion with Achieving Your Potential As a 
Photographer, I encourage a couple of 
diff erent possible workfl ows: You can do the 
exercises as you read about them in the book; 
or you can fi rst read the book, and then do 
the exercises, referring back to the book as 
you need to. Mixing and matching is fi ne; the 
key thing is the doing!
◼
◼
◼
The pages in this workbook are perforated 
so you can easily pull them out as needed, 
or you can pull them all out and put them 
in a binder. If you need extra copies of a 
workbook page to complete an exercise or 
to do one more than once, please feel free 
to photocopy the workbook pages. You can 
also download them in PDF format from 
www.digitalfi eldguide.com/achieving.
Generally speaking, there are several kinds 
of exercises in the workbook, which should be 
approached somewhat diff erently. You’ll fi nd 
exercises that help you clarify your goals and 
how to plan in an organized way to achieve 
them. You will also fi nd photography exercises, 
and exercises that are intended to enhance your 
creativity and conceptual abilities in a general 
way. In essence, the diff erent kinds of exercises 
are intended to meld “left brain” and “right brain” 
approaches. As such, you may be more comfort-
able with one kind of exercise than another. But 
the key thing is to do them all. The more you 
get out of your comfort zone, the more of your 
potential you will achieve.
Good for you for deciding to start down the 
path to achieving more as a photographer. Now 
get out there and do it! 
◼
BEGIN YOUR JOURNEY
Y
Harold sez: I’ve 
made this workbook as 
much like the experience of 
being in one of my workshops 
as possible—this is a 
workshop in a book!

‘
WHAT  S IN HERE
1 
Goals, Baselines, and Overcoming  
Resistance
2 
Road Map to Success
3 
The Steps to Evaluating Your Own Work
4 
Disassociating
5 
Formal Photographic Evaluation
6 
Emotional, Intuitive, and Narrative Response
7 
Presentational Context
8 
Your Feelings about Photography
9 
Taking a Stab at Your Baseline and Goal
10 
Getting from Here to There
11 
Practice, Practice, Practice!
12 
Aesthetic and Pragmatic Domains
13 
Creating an Aesthetic Action Plan
14 
Creating a Pragmatic Action Plan
15 
Integrating the Aesthetic and  
Pragmatic Plans
16 
Unleashing the Power of Your  
Photographic Imagination
17 
Visualizing without Your Camera
18 
Learning to Pre-visualize
19 
What Story Does the Photo Tell?
20 
Bringing the Story into Your Own Photo
21 
Creating a Sequence of Photos That  
Tell a Story
Getting the Most Out of 
Your Companion Workbook
22 
Finding the Lede in Someone Else’s Image
23 
Finding the Lede in Your Photo
24 
Photography As a Quest
25 
Changing Problems into Possibilities
26 
Finding New Worlds
27 
Overcoming Resistance: What Stops You  
 
from Taking Photos?
28 
The Importance of Time in Photography
29 
Exercising the Historical Imagination
30 
Overcoming Resistance: Putting the Kibosh  
 
on Petty Annoyances and Irritations
31 
Interim Progress Report
32 
Using Patterns
33 
Lenses and Focal Lengths
34 
The Rule of Thirds
35 
Mastering Shutter Speed
36 
Finding Your Personal Passion
37 
Aperture and Bokeh
38 
Getting into the Zone
39 
Making a Self-Portrait
40 
Modulating Your Photography
41 
Creative Destruction
42 
Playing with Photography
43 
The Photographer’s Journey
44 
Creating a Portfolio of Your Work
45 
Creativity for Life
46 
Creating Your Photo Bucket List

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
“Photography is an adventure the same as life itself.”
  — Harry Callahan
GOALS, BASELINES, AND OVERCOMING RESISTANCE
1
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 16.
What are your goals as a photographer?
Where are you now as a photographer?
What do you need to do to get from where you are now to achieve your goals as a photographer?
What is stopping you from achieving your goals as a photographer?
How can you overcome the resistance that is stopping you from achieving your goals as a photographer?

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
ROAD MAP TO SUCCESS
THIS EXERCISE REPRESENTS AN initial process to try to pinpoint where you are now in relationship to where 
you would like to be, and how you can conceptualize getting there.
The point of the process is in large part repetition; in other words, you should expect to repeat this 
exercise on a fairly regular basis, and in particular, when you feel you have made substantial progress. It’s an 
exercise borrowed from the business world and as such is intended to be applied to both visual (aesthetic) 
and practical (pragmatic) aspects of photography.
There are only two mistakes one can make along the 
road to truth; not going all the way, and not starting
2
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 16.
ROAD MAP TO SUCCESS
Establish a baseline
Aesthetic
Pragmatic
Ј
Ј
Improve
Overcome
resistance
go
 f
o
r
 
i
t
!
d
o
 i
t 
ag
ai
n
What steps can you take to get better?
g
o
 
f
o
r
 
i
t
!
d
o
 
i
t
 
a
g
a
i
n
Tell the story of where you are as a photographer:
Harold sez: 
Repeat this as many 
times as you need. For the 
continuation of this exercise, turn 
to The Photographer’s Journey, 
Exercise 43.
2

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
EVALUATING YOUR OWN WORK is an important component of establishing a baseline. If you don’t know 
how good what you have done is, how can you fi gure out how best to improve? The problem is that 
objectively evaluating one’s own work can be extremely diffi  cult even with the best will in the world. One 
technique that helps is disassociation, which means to try to view your work objectively rather than with the 
emotions you used when you made the images. Once you are disassociated as possible, you can extend your 
evaluation over a number of formal domains as shown in the checklist below. 
The point of the exercise is to learn to establish baselines so that you can use your baseline to see how 
you improve following the process shown in Exercise 1.
3
For more about this exercise, please see 
Achieving Your Potential pages 20–23.
THE STEPS TO EVALUATING YOUR OWN WORK
“The potential for greatness lives within each of us.”
  — Wilma Rudolph
Do each exercise and check them off  when fi nished:
Disassociating  (see Exercise 4)
Formal Photographic Evaluation (see Exercise 5)
Emotional, Intuitive, and Narrative Response (see Exercise 6)
Presentational Context (see Exercise 7)
▢
▢
▢
▢
Initial here when 
you have completed 
all the steps.
Choose a body of work and call it: 
Establish a baseline. Enter a description of your baseline for your body of work here:

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
EVALUATION STEPS
what is the
photo about        ?
try to be 
objective with
your critique
make your 
mind blank
let go of 
your  work
Exercise 4
Disassociate
from your work
Exercise 5
Formal
photographic
evaluation
Exercise 6
Emotional, 
intuitive, 
and narrative 
response
Exercise 7
Presentational 
context
Exercises 8 & 9
Establish a baseline
leave your ego
at the door
forget
about 
photography
what steps do you need to take to 
become a better photographer      ?
Harold sez: 
Understanding where you are, 
where you want to go, and making 
a plan for getting from here to there 
is crucial. I’ve borrowed some of the 
planning tools that businesses use to 
help you plan this process.
Now go for it      !

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
THE GOAL OF THIS exercise is to forget about photography. And in particular, your photography. This is 
about the only place in any of my books or workshops where I will ask you to forget about photography, 
but it’s important that you learn how to do this.
But wait! This is a book about photography! How come you want me to forget about it? The answer 
is that it is almost impossible to give yourself enough distance from your own photography to evaluate it 
objectively and establish a baseline without learning to make your mind a blank when it comes to photog-
raphy. Essentially, this involves practicing meditation, and diff erent people like to meditate in diff erent ways. 
Here are some meditation techniques that have helped other folks clear their minds:
Listening to calm, patterned music such as Gregorian chant
Going for a walk
Attending a worship service or formal meditation session
Listening to the wind and weather
Taking a warm bath or hot tub soak with candlelight
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
DISASSOCIATING
“Meditation for me is staring up at my imaginary
 ceiling fan wondering what I am doing with my life.”
  — Erica Rhodes
4
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 24.
Leave my ego at 
the door.
What has helped you most meditate and clear your mind about 
thoughts about photography?
Someone says my 
photos are great or 
awfulÑI donÕt care 
anymore.
I can look at what 
IÕve done and see 
what is there 
without making a 
judgment.
Put my hopes, 
dreams, and 
fears about my 
photography away 
for now.

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
FORMAL PHOTOGRAPHIC EVALUATION
THE IDEA BEHIND THIS exercise is to evaluate your work using strictly photographic terms of reference. You 
want to be able to disassociate from your work as you perform this evaluation to be as objective as possible. 
Bear in mind that there are many formal characteristics of any photograph, and you may need to add your 
own categories to the list below. You can use this exercise on a per image basis, and you can also apply it to 
a group or sequence of work.
5
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 24.
What is the eye fi rst drawn to in the photo? And is this in keeping with the narrative content 
of the photo?
Has exposure been used eff ectively and creatively to support the image?
Is there anything else you want to add to the evaluation?
Is the photo in focus, or is lack of focus used 
appropriately?
Comment:
Does the composition work?
Comment:
Is the image framed in an interesting way?
Comment:
Are there any obvious compositional fl aws? 
(Example: A telephone pole sticking out of 
Aunt Edith’s head.)
Comment:
▢Yes ▢No
▢Yes ▢No
▢Yes ▢No
▢Yes ▢No
“Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication.”
  — Leonardo da Vinci

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
EMOTIONAL, INTUITIVE, AND NARRATIVE 
RESPONSE
IT’S BEEN RIGHTLY SAID that a photo with rich emotional content that is technically lousy will beat a 
technically perfect photo with banal content, any day of the week. This implies that the single most 
important aspect of evaluating a photo is determining the power of the inherently subjective, namely 
the extent to which the photo generates emotional, intuitive, and narrative response. Subjective or not, 
evaluating emotional resonance is crucial, and there are some criteria that can help you make this kind 
of evaluation—that’s the point of this exercise.
6
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 27.
Title of photo or sequence of photos:
ë What is the photo about?
´ Does the photo tell a story? What is the 
story about?
ı  Is there a sense of mystery about the 
photo that makes you want to keep looking 
at it?
´ Does the photo show you something 
you haven’t seen before?
´ Does the photo shed light on profound 
human relationships?
ï Does the photo show something that 
isn’t commonly seen?
Í Does the photo show you something 
you haven’t seen before?
ñ How unique or original is the photo?
î What feeling do you think the viewer 
gets from the photo?
´ Is this feeling in harmony with the 
subject matter of the photograph?
´ Does the feeling of the photo mesh well 
with the formal aspects of the photo?
´ Is there anything else that needs to 
be taken into account when this photo is 
evaluated for emotional content?
11
12
“The chief enemy of creativity is ‘good sense’.”
  — Pablo Picasso

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
PRESENTATIONAL CONTEXT
“CLOTHES MAKE THE MAN,” proclaimed Polonius in his sententious and pompous advice in William 
Shakespeare’s Hamlet. Alas, as we grow older, we begin to realize that in the eyes of the world there is 
some truth to this. Sigh. A photograph, at least in part, is bound to be judged on its “clothing”—how the 
photograph is presented.
The good news is that presentation is comparatively straightforward and it’s not that hard to determine 
a baseline. This is more a matter of craft than art, and generally knowledgeable viewers will usually reach 
consensus on matters of presentational context. 
7
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 28.
Title of photo or sequence of photos:
ë Are there dust, hair, or “gribblies” in the 
image?
´ Are there any obvious fl aws that should 
have been retouched?
ı  In a color image, does the color work?
´ In a black and white image, is there a 
nice range from lights to darks?
´ Does the image appear to have 
suffi  cient resolution?
ï Are there areas of unattractive noise in 
the image?
Í With physical prints, is the image nicely 
sized and placed on the paper?
ñ Does the subject matter work well (i.e., 
marry well) with the paper it is printed on?
î Do you see any other presentational issues?
“Wherever there is light, one can photograph.”
  — Alfred Stieglitz

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
YOUR FEELINGS ABOUT PHOTOGRAPHY
8
“There are no rules for good photographs,
there are only good photographs.”   — Ansel Adams
Why did you start taking photos? How long have you been a photographer?
What do you like most about photography and making photos?
What do you dislike about photography?
Who are your artistic and photographic heroes?
If you could have lunch with one great photographer or artist, living or dead, 
who would it be? If you could ask them one question, what would it be?
Is there anything else 
you want to add on 
how you feel about 
photography?

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
Your focus determines 
your reality
TAKING A STAB AT YOUR BASELINE AND GOAL
WRITE DOWN YOUR 
thoughts about the steps 
you need to take to get 
from where you are to 
where you want to be. 
Don’t get fancy. Don’t be 
shy. Just tell it as it is and 
keep it simple. Limit this 
to fi ve steps. For the time 
being, don’t pay too much 
attention to practicalities.
9
GETTING FROM HERE TO THERE
10
Date:
Harold sez: 
Your baseline will 
change over time, as will 
your goals. Don’t hesitate to 
repeat the exercises related to 
goals and baselines as many 
times as you need to.
What is the current state of 
your photography (baseline)? 
Please refer to Exercises 2Ð7.
What is your goal with your 
photography? 
DonÕt think about this one too 
hard; just write down the Þ rst 
thing that comes to mind.
Enter your baseline from Exercise 9:
Enter your goal from Exercise 9:
1)____________________________
2)___________________________
3)____________________________
4)____________________________
5)____________________________
Five intermediate 
steps to get to 
your goal

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
PRACTICE, PRACTICE, PRACTICE!
11
For more about this exercise, please see 
Achieving Your Potential pages 32 and 112.
“Try not. Do or do not. There is no try.”   — Yoda
THE CRAFT OF PHOTOGRAPHY takes work. You want to get to the point where technical issues are second 
nature and internalized. The only way to do this is by practicing. Just as a good musician needs to spend 
many hours a day practicing, to become a photographic virtuoso, you gotta put in the time. 
This exercise asks you to keep track of the amount of time you spend photographing in the course 
of your week.
Practice, 
practice, 
practice!
Hey  , Joe , how 
do you get to 
Carnegie Hall?
Morning
Afternoon
Evening
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Harold sez: 
Compared to an art like 
painting, photography draws on a 
number of disparate creative skills, 
including the ability to work with a 
machine (a.k.a. your camera) 
and software.
Enter the amount of 
time you spend working 
on photography during 
the course of a week.

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
AESTHETIC AND PRAGMATIC DOMAINS
Aesthetic
Pragmatic
This could be someone who is 
working on becoming a better 
photographer and also has a plan 
for getting their work out there.
practice, practice, practice
creating an action plan
This could be a 
great photographer 
just doing it for the 
love of it.
Someone who has mastered 
photography and the business 
of photography would be here.
Someone who is just 
getting started with 
photography and doesn’t 
have an action plan 
would be here.
AESTHETIC AND PRAGMATIC DOMAINS
SUCCESS AS A PHOTOGRAPHER cuts across two signifi cant domains: the aesthetic and the pragmatic. The 
aesthetic involves visual and imaginative concerns. The pragmatic domain involves practical issues of craft 
and interaction with the real world. Exercises 12–15 help you explore your strengths and weaknesses across 
these two distinct domains, and how to integrate the steps needed for you to become stronger in both 
domains.
12
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 34.
Where are you on 
this grid? Where 
would you like to be?
“Somewhere something incredible 
is waiting to be known.”   — Jack London
Where are you in terms of photographic 
aesthetics?
Where are you pragmatically?
Where would you like to be aesthetically?
Where would you like to be pragmatically?

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
Date:
CREATING AN AESTHETIC ACTION PLAN
CREATING A PRAGMATIC ACTION PLAN
13
14
For more about this exercise, please see 
Achieving Your Potential pages 34–52.
When you get to the 
top of the mountain, 
keep climbing
Only those who 
dare, truly live
Enter the Þ ve necessary steps you need to get from where you 
are to where you would like to be in the pragmatic domain. 
1)________________________________________
2)________________________________________
3)________________________________________
4)________________________________________
5)________________________________________
Enter the Þ ve necessary steps you need to get from where you 
are to where you would like to be in the aesthetic domain. 
1)________________________________________
2)________________________________________
3)________________________________________
4)________________________________________
5)________________________________________
For more about this exercise, please see 
Achieving Your Potential pages 34–52.

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
INTEGRATING THE AESTHETIC AND 
PRAGMATIC PLANS
TAKE YOUR AESTHETIC STEPS and your pragmatic steps and combine them to create an integrated 
plan that works on both aesthetic and pragmatic domains, with the most important three steps that 
you need to take.
15
Harold sez: Don’t feel 
overwhelmed by the road ahead! 
Look back and give yourself kudos for 
how far you have come. Whatever you 
set your mind to can be accomplished!
An idea that is developed and put into action is more 
important than an idea that exists only as an idea
Step 1:
Step 2:
Step 3:
For more about this exercise, please see 
Achieving Your Potential pages 34–52.

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
UNLEASHING THE POWER OF YOUR 
PHOTOGRAPHIC IMAGINATION
PHOTOGRAPHY SHOULD BE LIKE playing. For more about this, see Exercise 42, “Playing with Photography.” 
And play itself works to release the creative imagination. Here are some ideas for photographic play that you 
can accomplish wherever you are and with whatever camera you have. Check each idea off  the list after you 
have given it a go.
Remember: This exercise is about the process, not the result. So don’t worry if the photos don’t come out. 
You’re bound to give your creative imagination a “slap upside the head” simply by trying.
16
For more about this exercise, please see 
Achieving Your Potential pages 52 and 174.
If you can dream it, you can build it   !
Harold sez: Bulb is a 
shutter speed setting that opens 
the shutter for as long as the shutter button 
is depressed. This allows you to make long 
exposures. Most cameras have the capability 
of making Bulb exposures. Check your camera 
manual to see if yours does and to ﬁ nd 
out how to use it.
▢
▢
Photograph something RED.
▢
Photograph a naked person. ▢
▢
▢
Photograph a fl ower.
▢
Photograph a shadow.
▢
▢
▢
Go up to a stranger and ask them 
if you can photograph them.
Create a photo without looking 
through the viewfi nder or looking 
at the LCD.
Put your camera on Bulb, and 
make a long exposure.
Photograph something you’ve 
never photographed before.
Make a photo that shows 
time passing.
Make a photo while intentionally 
moving your camera.
*

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
VISUALIZING WITHOUT YOUR CAMERA
17
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 58.
USING PIECES OF CARDBOARD and tape, create a photographic “frame.” Then, use your frame to look at the 
world as you would through a camera, but without the ability to make any photos.
Draw a sketch in the box below of something that you’ve seen using the frame you made. Don’t worry 
about your drawing skills; this is about jotting down ideas.
When you realize how perfect everything is,
you will tilt your head back and laugh at the sky
DonÕt worry about 
your drawing skills; 
just do your best  !
Draw what you “saw” without your camera:

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
LEARNING TO PRE-VISUALIZE
ONE OF THE MOST important skills that any photographer can have is learning how to accurately 
pre-visualize. This means having an image in mind before you click the shutter, knowing the steps 
you will need to take to realize the image, and successfully creating the image that you had in mind.
Start by fi nding an image that you would like to create. Frame it in your mind. 
18
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 60.
If we could see the miracle of a single flower 
clearly, our whole life would change
Describe the image you would like to create:
Steps for making the image:
How the image came out:
Were you able to create 
the image that you 
pre-visualized?
▢
▢
YE S  !
NO  !
Pat yourself on the 
back É you are great at 
pre-visualization.
Try again! Repeat 
this process  Ñ it is so 
important to become a 
pre-visualization pro! 
You can do it!

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
WHAT STORY DOES THE PHOTO TELL?
19
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 68.
IT’S REALLY HELPFUL TO be able to understand the story and kinds of stories that photographs tell. 
Sometimes the narrative gist and purpose of a photo is obvious. Other times, the story is not so clear. 
The purpose of this exercise is to help you understand photos based on the underlying narrative, even 
when the narrative isn’t obvious.
Pick a photograph where you don’t immediately see the story. This should be a photo that you didn’t 
make, possibly by a well-known photographer.
Repeat this exercise with many different kinds 
of photos until you feel conÞ dent in your 
ability to suss out the underlying narrative. 
Practice makes perfect  Ñ once again!
Describe the photo you picked:
Where did you fi nd it?
How does the photo make you feel?
Is the photo
Please explain your choice:
How does the content of the photo relate to 
your feelings?
How does the content of the photo relate to 
the narrative form (e.g., story, poem, etc.)?
▢a story ▢a poem ▢other
Harold sez: I believe 
that all photographs are 
about a story. It’s our job as 
creative photographers to ﬁ nd the 
stories we want to tell.
Don’t miss the donut by
looking through the hole

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
BRINGING THE STORY INTO YOUR OWN PHOTO
NOW THAT YOU HAVE experience with detecting underlying narrative in imagery that is not your own (see 
Exercise 19), it is time to bring this into your own work. Go forth and create a photo with narrative of some 
kind intentionally in mind. Create a very rough overview sketch of the image below once you have made it, 
and then answer the questions.
20
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 68.
Repeat this 
exercise as many 
times as you need 
to until you feel 
you have control 
of narrative in 
your photos.
Draw your rough sketch here:
Describe the photo you created:
What was your intended narrative?
How does the photo make you feel when 
you look at it?
Is the photo
Please explain your choice:
How does the content of the photo relate to 
your feelings?
How does the content of the photo relate to 
the narrative form (e.g., story, poem, etc.)?
Do you think the narrative works as intended? If not, what is the revised narrative?
▢a story ▢a poem ▢other
“The only Zen you can find on the tops of mountains
is the Zen you bring up there.” — Robert Pir sig

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
Next, create each of the 
photographs in your story-
board. Show the completed 
photos to a friend who does 
not know the story you 
are trying to tell. Do they 
understand your story?
Write the overall concept for your story here:
Explain the role that each of the six images in your story sequence will play:
ë
´
ı
´
´
ï
Grab a piece of paper and sketch the six images in their narrative order. You are making a 
storyboard. Staple it in here, so it becomes a part of your workbook.
CREATING A SEQUENCE OF PHOTOS THAT 
TELL A STORY
THE IDEA BEHIND THIS exercise is to bring narrative in photography out of the closet of the single image, 
and into the broader space of the photographic sequence. As such, a photographic sequence is typically 
used in a story that is essentially journalistic in nature. In the long run, you may or may not wish to practice 
journalism, but in the short run, understanding narrative sequence in the context of a photographic story 
can only help you with mastering photographic storytelling.
The goal of this exercise is to plan, storyboard, and create a sequence of six images that tell a story. 
21
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 68.
Harold sez: With a 
single image, the narrative is 
often hidden, but with a sequence of images 
that make up a story, the narrative is usually 
pretty clear. Practicing narrative with a 
sequence will help you embed narrative 
into a single image.
“  You can see a lot just by looking .  ”
 — Yogi Berra

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
FINDING THE LEDE IN SOMEONE ELSE’S IMAGE
22
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 70.
If you had to guess 
about the lede, show 
the image to a few 
friends and ask them 
what it is about.   Try 
to come up with a 
consensus.
Repeat this exercise 
with many different 
kinds of photos until 
you feel conÞ dent 
in your ability to 
determine the lede.
THE “LEDE” IS NEWSPAPER jargon for the most important part of the story. Creating great images means 
knowing what’s important in your photo and using the photo to emphasize the important element. In other 
words, as they say in the newspapers, “don’t bury the lede.”
Exercises 22–24 are intended to help you fi nd the key subject matter in your images. Pick a photograph 
where you don’t immediately see the lede. This should be an interesting photo that you didn’t make.
Describe the photo you picked:
Where did you fi nd it?
What is the point of the image?
What matters most about the image?
After answering these questions, do you understand the lede of the 
photo? What is it? If you don’t know, make a guess:
“The obscure we see eventually. The completely obvious,
it seems, takes longer.” — Edward R. Murrow

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
FINDING THE LEDE IN YOUR PHOTO
23
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 70.
NOW THAT YOU HAVE experience with fi nding the lede in imagery that is not your own (see Exercise 22), 
it is time to bring this to your own photographs. Go out and create a photo with the lede in mind. 
Create a very rough sketch below of the image you want to make with the lede emphasized, and then 
make the image and answer the questions.
Draw your rough sketch here:
ë 
Describe the photo you created:
´ 
Is the lede obvious or is it buried?
ııIf the lede is buried, what do you need to 
do to make it plainer?
´ 
If you can clearly see the lede, what 
techniques did you use to make it obvious?
´ 
Do your friends see your intended lede? (Don’t tell them what you think it is.) If not, what 
do you need to change to make the lede clearer in your image?
Revise your image and 
show it to your friends 
again. Repeat this 
process until they can 
clearly recognize the 
lede.
Harold sez: 
Repeat this exercise as 
many times as you need until 
you feel that you have control 
of the narrative issues in 
your photos.
Get your friends 
some coffee!
“Sometimes it’s necessary to go a long distance 
out of the way in order to come back a short 
distance correctly.” — Edward Albee

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
PHOTOGRAPHY AS A QUEST
24
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 79.
I BELIEVE THAT ONE of the best ways to approach photography is as a quest, in the sense that knights-
errant of old accepted quests and adventures. These knights went out to do something gallant and brave 
with the understanding that there would be peril as well as opportunity and repetition as well as adventure. 
The resolution of a quest is never what it seems when the quest is undertaken, and the adventurer must be 
prepared to explore side paths. Remember, the quest is about the journey, not about the destination.
“No matter where you go, there you are.”
— On the USS Excelsior, Star Trek VI
Imagine that you can do anything you want. What is your ideal path as a creative photographer?
To achieve your goals along your ideal path, what areas of photographic technique do you need to reinforce, 
brush up on, and practice?
Good photographers need to learn to see beyond superfi cial appearances. Give a few examples of things that 
you have seen that are diff erent than the way they appear on the surface:
Undertake a photographic project with the clear idea that you will look for interventions that change the direc-
tion of the project as you go along. Think of it as planned serendipity. Write down the project you’ve undertaken 
when you fi rst begin this “quest”:
Now describe how your project has changed because of changing circumstances and direction:
Harold sez: Often 
detours create better images 
than “sticking to the plan,” but it is still 
important to have a plan. 

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
CHANGING PROBLEMS INTO POSSIBILITIES
THE POINT OF THIS exercise is to develop your creative “muscles” to use things that go wrong to your 
benefi t. This is the proverbial “making lemonade from lemons.” 
SOME OF THE MOST creative photographs fi nd “worlds” that are the ordinary viewed in extraordinary ways. 
Here are some ideas to help you bridge the gap into “diff erent worlds.”
25
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 82.
What cool ideas do 
you have?
Photograph 
into a mirror.
Photograph 
refractions through 
a glass of water.
Photograph after 
dusk or during 
the night.
Try some extreme 
close-up photography 
of something like a 
leaf.
1) Think back on a photograph 
or photographic shoot that 
went wrong and where the 
photos came out badly. 
Describe it  :
2) With the beneÞ t of 
hindsight, what could you have 
done to turn the situation 
around? Is there a way you 
could have used the problems 
to beneÞ t the end results ?
Problems often come up in 
photography. No doubt youÕll 
have a chance to ß ex your new 
Òproblem redirection musclesÓ 
soon. The next time things 
start to go ÒsouthÓ when you 
are photographing, see if your 
insights from this exercise help 
you salvage the situation.
FINDING NEW WORLDS
26
Date:
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 84.

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
OVERCOMING RESISTANCE: WHAT STOPS YOU 
FROM TAKING PHOTOS?
ONE OF THE MOST diffi  cult aspects of resistance to creative photography is the voice in each of our heads 
that appears to give very rational reasons why we shouldn’t even attempt to make a photo. For example, 
“I’m too busy to stop to do photography,” or “I’m just too tired.”
This voice, which I sometimes like to call “the Whiner,” is disarmed when you call attention to it. By bring-
ing the Whiner out of the shadows and into the bright light of day, you will be able to see just how pathetic 
and fearful the Whiner is and become able to overcome this nattering nay-saying nabob of negativism.
List things that stop you from photography and from making specifi c photographs. Start with the 
general and continue on down to the specifi c.
When you have completed your list, it’s time to banish the things that stop you from photography by 
having a “banishing ceremony.”   There are several diff erent forms this can take, but usually one approach is 
to write down the things that stop you as a list, like the one above. Now, burn the list, or tear it to pieces 
and toss it in the air, or bury it in your yard with all due ceremony.
Keep in mind that you have banished the things that stop you from photographing. The next time you 
have a photographic idea, however fl eeting, and resistance rears its ugly head, say “I have banished you—be 
gone!” and make a point of following through on your idea.
27
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 87.
“Keep away from people who try to belittle your ambitions. 
Small people always do that, but the really great ones make 
you feel that you, too, can become great.” — Mark Twain
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Ex: I’m just not good enough.
Ex: The photo is on the other side of the road. I’ll have to make a U-turn.
General resistance
SpeciÞ c resistance

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
THE IMPORTANCE OF TIME IN PHOTOGRAPHY
28
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 90.
TIME IS PROBABLY THE most powerful element that you can control in photography to reveal the 
unseen, because your choice of shutter speed determines how motion is rendered over time. The 
point of this exercise is to create images that capture motion on a spectrum from instantaneous 
to almost endless.
Here are some ideas for photographic subject matter that creates interesting results when 
photographed with diff erent shutter speeds:
Stars at night
Take a look at 
Exercise 35 to learn 
more about controlling 
shutter speed and time 
with your camera.
Choose a subject matter that’s in fairly high speed motion, such as a waterfall or cars on a 
highway. Use a fast shutter speed (1/1000 of a second or faster), to freeze the motion.
With the same subject, use an intermediate shutter speed (1/8 of a second to 1/60 of a second) 
to partially freeze the motion of your subject and also show some blurring.
With the same subject one last time, use a slow shutter speed (depending on the light from 
1 to 5 seconds) to render the motion as blurred and abstract.
In comparatively low light, choose a subject in motion, such as waves or clouds, and use a long 
shutter speed (15 seconds to 2 minutes) to create motion blurs that are attractive and abstract.
With your camera on a tripod, go out at night and capture the motion of the Earth relative 
to the stars. You’ll need an aggregate exposure of 20 minutes and longer to really start seeing 
star motion.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
People in a crowded 
public space
Waves
Cars in motion
A waterfall in motion 
or other moving 
water
“A hunch is creativity trying 
to tell you something.” 
—Frank Capra
Harold sez: The 
best way to capture the 
motion of star trails is to use 
a composition technique called 
“stacking.” This combines multiple, 
shorter exposures to create a single 
aggregate photo with a longer 
effective exposure length.

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
EXERCISING THE HISTORICAL IMAGINATION
29
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 99.
IMAGINATION IS A MUSCLE and the more muscles are exercised, the stronger they get. One important kind 
of imagination is historical imagination. What did something look like in the historical past? What was 
happening in that place at that time in the past? What were people like?
This exercise has two parts, pre-visualizing the historical past and then re-creating it.
First, locate a place with an interesting past and describe it:
How many years ago are you trying to imagine? Describe the scene as it would have been at the time period 
you are imagining:
How does your imagination diff er from what the scene looks like now?
Now that you’ve done the grunt work, go out with your time machine camera, and create an image 
that captures the scene from the past as you’ve imagined it. Check this box when you are fi nished: 
Next, pick a time frame and try to understand what it might have looked like. Bear in mind that there’s a great 
deal of variety in what the past could have been like. The further back, the more diff erent it will be; however, if 
there has been recent disturbance of the time line—a new development has supplanted a traditional village, for 
example—then there can be a radical diff erence even though only a short time has passed.
Write down the steps you need to take to re-create the scene that you are imagining:
▢
“It is the power of the mind to be unconquerable.”
—Seneca

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
OVERCOMING RESISTANCE: PUTTING THE KIBOSH 
ON PETTY ANNOYANCES AND IRRITATIONS
MANY TIMES THINGS THAT are really relatively petty get in the way of our photography. Maybe this 
form of resistance doesn’t actually stop us from taking pictures, but it sure as heck makes the process 
of photography less fun, and limits your ability to be truly creative.
The idea behind this exercise is to become clear about the things that annoy and irritate you. With 
clarity, you may be able to overcome some of these factors or alternatively to fi nd work-arounds so they 
are no longer bugging you, sapping your creativity, and being parasites on your power.
To complete this exercise, list the petty annoyances.
For each petty annoyance, come up with a plan for dealing with it. Either solve the problem, for 
example by complaining about the noise and making it stop, or decide that you can really live with it in 
the grand scheme of things. In either case, once you have a plan for dealing with the annoyance, cross it 
off  the list above.
30
For more about this exercise, please see 
Achieving Your Potential pages 108 and 164.
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Ex: There’s too much noise for me to focus!
“It isn’t the mountain ahead to climb that wears 
you out, it’s the pebble in your shoe.” —Muhammad Ali

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
INTERIM PROGRESS REPORT
31
Think back to where you were when you completed the fi rst exercise in this workbook. Compare that to where 
you are now:
How have your goals changed?
How has your baseline changed?
How have you changed?
Harold sez: 
Great job! Keep up 
the good work!
“Never discourage anyone who continually 
makes progress, no matter how slow.” —Aristotle

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
USING PATTERNS
32
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 118.
Pick one of these patterns and create a photo that uses objects in nature or things you construct. 
Then do it again with another pattern.
“The truth is outside of all fixed patterns.”
 —Bruce Lee
THE ABILITY TO RECOGNIZE and use patterns eff ectively is crucial to many kinds of photography. This 
exercise gives you a number of tools and techniques for enhancing your use of patterns.
Here are some sample basic patterns:
Draw your own patterns here:
ë 
Create a pattern using only shadows 
and light. Comment:
´ 
Find a striking pattern in a large-scale 
landscape. Comment:
ııPhotograph a pattern that is only 
revealed in the course of a long exposure. 
Comment:
´ 
Photograph a pattern that is only 
revealed by motion in nature. Comment:
´ 
Make a pattern using rocks, and then 
photograph the pattern. Comment:
ï 
Find a pattern in something industrial. 
Comment:

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
LENSES AND FOCAL LENGTHS
33
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 124.
LENSES ARE A PHOTOGRAPHER’S paint brush. What you can do with a photo depends upon your choice of 
lens. It’s really important to get to know your lenses in as much intimate detail as possible. This exercise will 
help you become totally familiar with your lenses.
Indicate special 
features about 
your lenses, 
such as macro 
capability
Step 1: List the lenses in your kit in order, as much as possible, by focal length:
Step 3a: With the focal lengths you have selected, photograph the same subject.
Step 3b: Try this from a single, stationary position.
Step 3c: Try this while moving around.
Step 4: Now, try the same thing with a diff erent kind of subject matter.
What is your experience of using these diff erent focal lengths? Which focal length 
works best for which kind of subject? Which focal length do you prefer and why?
Prime (fi xed focal-length lenses)
Zoom (variable focal-length lenses)
Step 2: Choose one wide-angle, one normal, and one telephoto focal length and list them here:
Wide-angle lens:
Normal lens:
Telephoto lens:
When you 
write down your 
lens, also include the 
maximum aperture that it 
is capable of, for instance, 
55mm f/1.4 (the f/1.4 is 
the maximum aperture 
of this lens).
“The real question is not what you look 
at but what you see.” —Henry David Thoreau

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
THE RULE OF THIRDS
34
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 128.
THE RULE OF THIRDS proposes a hypothetical formal compositional rule: Draw vertical and horizontal lines 
in pairs across your composition with the lines evenly spaced so they divide the composition into nine even 
rectangles. The important parts of the composition should fall according to the Rule of Thirds where the 
lines intersect.
According to the Rule of 
Thirds, the circled areas 
are the important parts 
of the composition
Step 1: Make a “Rule of Third-ifi er.” You will need eight strips of cardboard and some tape. Tape 
four of the strips together in a photo-shaped rectangle. Next, take the remaining four strips and 
carefully lay them over the rectangle to form the sectional divisions for your Rule of Third-ifi er. 
Step 2: Try your Rule of Third-ifi er on a variety of subjects. 
Step 3: Make some photos that use the Rule of Thirds to enhance the composition.
Step 4: Try to make some photos where the Rule of Thirds does not apply and/or where 
applying the Rule of Thirds actually makes the composition worse.
Where does the composition seem to work well using the Rule of Thirds? And where 
doesn’t it work so well?
What are your feelings about the Rule of Thirds after completing this exercise?
Harold sez: There are NO rules 
in art! When someone proclaims a 
rule, such as The Rule of Thirds, be 
skeptical, very skeptical.
“Learn the rules like a pro, so you can 
break them like an artist.” —Pablo Picasso

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
Harold sez: To 
learn to work better 
with shutter speed, also 
take a look at Exercise 28, 
which emphasizes time. Time is 
closely related to shutter speed, 
while this exercise is primarily 
about controlling your camera. If 
you work with both exercises, 
you should get a good handle 
on both shutter speed 
and time.
MASTERING SHUTTER SPEED
ONE OF THE KEY creative controls on your camera is the shutter speed dial. Shutter speed is not actually a 
speed, but rather it’s the duration of time that the shutter is open, letting the light in to hit your sensor. To 
achieve your potential as a photographer, you need to know the many possibilities available in the shutter 
speed control.
Camera motion
Subject is still
Subject is moving
Camera is still
(on a tripod)
Motion is frozen
Motion is blurred (unless an extremely fast 
shutter speed is used)
Camera is moving
Motion is blurred
Motion is very blurred
Take  a look at the chart above showing how motion is rendered depending upon both the camera 
and the subject. The object of this exercise is to observe this for yourself, and to begin to understand which 
shutter speeds work best with the diff erent combinations. To do this exercise, you will probably need to use 
Manual Exposure mode. Please take a look at your camera manual to learn how to do this.
35
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 130.
Step 1: In a bright-light situation, photograph all the possibilities shown in the chart above. 
Make your own chart below, fi lling in the white areas, showing the shutter speeds you used, 
and subjectively describe how the three kinds of blur diff er.
Camera motion
Subject is still
Subject is moving
Camera is still
(on a tripod)
Camera is moving
Step 2: In a low-light situation, use the chart at the top of this page to photograph all the 
possibilities. Fill in the white parts of the chart below with your results:
Camera motion
Subject is still
Subject is moving
Camera is still
(on a tripod)
Camera is moving
“Creativity takes 
courage.” —Henri Matisse

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
FINDING YOUR PERSONAL PASSION
36
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 139.
PHOTOGRAPHERS WHO ARE GOOD at their art generally understand that their photos are examples 
of how they see. How you see is an extraordinarily important part of who you are. The best and most 
passionate photographs come from passionate people photographing subject matter that they are 
passionate about. To make more emotionally resonant photos, fi rst fi nd out what you are passionate 
about and what drives you.
“Action is the fundamental key to all success.”
 —Pablo Picasso
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
1.
2.
3.
4.
For each item in your list, how can you make this into an image? 
Now go out and make your 
passionate photographs  !
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________
1.
2.
3.
4.
List some things that you really care about (are passionate about):

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
APERTURE AND BOKEH: PLAYING WITH 
YOUR LENSES
37
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 143.
Harold sez: 
Remember, the background 
of a photo is as important to 
the success of a composition as the 
foreground. Your choice of aperture 
will help decide how a background 
is rendered.
ALONG WITH SHUTTER SPEED (see Exercise 35), aperture is one of the most important creative controls your 
camera has. When it comes to the aperture setting of your camera, there are three things that are important 
creative aspects of your photos that aperture controls: 
1.  The amount of light let in
2. 
The depth-of-fi eld = the range of depth that is in focus
3. 
Bokeh = the attractiveness of background out-of-focus areas
Besides aperture,     depth-of-
Þ eld and bokeh are dependent 
on the focal length and the 
design of a speciÞ c lens
Photocopy this chart, 
so you have one for each 
lens that you listed
Lens
Maximum aperture
(wide open)
Minimum aperture
(stopped down)
Step 2: For each lens in your list above, take a photo with each of the possibilities in the 
table below. The idea is to create photos that are properly focused and also where you 
have intentionally thrown the lens way out of focus. With both in-focus and out-of-focus 
possibilities, see what your photos look like at wide-open, intermediate, and stopped-
down apertures. For each lens, when you make your photo, put a check in the chart below 
at each of the possibilities.
Wide open
Intermediate
Stopped down
In focus
Out-of-focus
Aperture
For each lens that you have tested, what are the visual diff erences depending on the 
settings when the lens is in focus and out of focus, and the aperture is set to wide open, 
intermediate, or stopped down? Describe:
Step 1: List the lenses in your kit with their maximum and minimum apertures (grab 
another piece of paper if you need to).
Lens:
A jug fills
one drop at a time

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
GETTING INTO THE ZONE
38
For more about this exercise, please see 
Achieving Your Potential pages 45 and 146.
WHAT GETS YOU INTO the zone? Think about it for a second. Plan a photo-shoot indoors or in the fi eld 
that maximizes these things so you can get into the zone. The check list below will help you prepare to 
enter the zone. 
▢
▢
▢
▢
Be sure you understand your 
camera, lens, and gear, and have 
your camera manual handy.
A few days before your project, 
eat really healthily.
Research what you will be 
photographing.
For a few days before your project, 
make sure you get plenty of sleep.
Make a plan for your photo-shoot:
Before the photo - shoot
▢
▢
▢
▢
▢
▢
Turn off  your phone ringer and put 
your phone on Do Not Disturb. 
Indoors, play music that is 
soothing and upbeat. If you 
are out in nature, be sure to listen 
to the sounds around you.
Focus. The only thing on your 
mind should be the photo-shoot.
Put petty annoyances out of your 
mind (see Exercise 30).
During the photo - shoot
During the photo-shoot practice 
from time to time disassociating 
(see Exercise 4).
Every now and then, take a 
moment to stretch, unkink your 
body, and breathe. This will help 
keep your mind creative.
“Do not dwell in the past, do not dream of the future, 
concentrate the mind on the present moment.” —Buddha

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
MAKING A SELF-PORTRAIT
39
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 156.
MAKING A SELF-PORTRAIT can be great fun! It is also a good photographic exercise. Whether or not the 
end result is “art,” by setting out to make a formal self-portrait, you will certainly learn how to make more 
interesting selfi es to post online.
Step 1: Make a self-inventory. Write down the characteristics that are most important about you:
Step 2: Explain how you plan to use a photo to show your most important characteristics:
Step 6: How does the anonymous description compare to your self-inventory? What did the stranger get 
right, and what did they get wrong? What can you do in a future self-portrait to better convey your important 
characteristics? Write your thoughts here; then make a new self-portrait.
Step 3: Use your plan to make your self-portrait.
Step 4: Show your self-portrait to some friends. Do they think it represents you well?
Step 5: Give the friend a blank piece of paper. Ask them to show your self-portrait to someone who doesn’t know 
you. The friend should be neutral and non-communicative about you and your portrait. The friend should ask 
the stranger to describe what they think you are like based on your self-portrait. Get the friend to write down the 
description verbatim. Transcribe what the stranger said here:
“What I consider the human predicament 
may simply be my own.” —Richard Avedon

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
MODULATING YOUR PHOTOGRAPHY
40
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 163.
IN MUSIC AND ENGINEERING, to modulate something means to restrict its range. For example, in sound 
engineering, amplitude modulation restricts the highs and lows in sound waves. Radio signals are treated 
with amplitude modulation; otherwise, when you turn on a car radio, you would be alternately blasted and 
not able to hear the sound.
Some people shoot literally thousands of photos when one would be better. The concept of modulation 
in photography means in part to make an appropriate amount of photos. Here are some ideas that may help 
you modulate the volume of your photography.
Take your camera off  Burst Mode. It sounds like a machine gun and is disruptive and destroys any 
possibility of being in the zone (see Exercise 38).
Spend a day shooting diff erent scenes, but allow yourself only one shot of each scene.
Spend a week where you only take one photo each day—make each one count!
For this exercise, choose a place or subject that is easy to return to over the course of a week. Plan 
several photo-shoots. Each time you go, alternate between these two thoughts: “I am going pig out and 
take, literally, tons of photos,”  and  “I am going to take only one photo for this session of something that is 
really special.”  Here’s a table so you can mark what you did each time.
◼
◼
◼
Today I am going to take 
tons of photos. Enter the 
number you took:
Today I am going to take 
only one photo. 
Check off  the day:
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
After you are fi nished with your week, 
think about several things: How did you 
feel after a shoot where you took many 
photos as opposed to only one photo? 
Were you calm or jittery, more or less 
satisfi ed?
“Everything in moderation, even moderation.”
—Oscar Wilde

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
Harold sez: 
Remember, it 
is important to take 
risks, make mistakes, 
and get out of your 
comfort zone!
CREATIVE DESTRUCTION
THE IDEA BEHIND CREATIVE destruction is to intentionally introduce random and anarchic elements with 
the full understanding that these elements may ruin your photo. So relax! There is also the possibility 
that creative destruction may salvage a mediocre image and add a powerful and unexpected thrust of 
serendipity.
Here’s a list of some possible ways that you might introduce an element of creative destruction into 
your photograph:
Create an image by shining a harsh light at your camera.
Photograph something behind you without looking at the subject.
Intentionally way over-expose or under-expose an image.
Gently toss your camera in the air and catch it while the shutter is open.
Can you think of some ways to add creative destruction to your photos? As you think about specifi c 
methods of creative destruction, you may fi nd it hard to come up with specifi cs. This is because creative 
destruction is so far removed from the normal way we think about the process of photography. So, relax, 
forget about an orderly and logical life, and think about some weirdness you can come up with. 
◼
◼
◼
◼
41
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 171.
Write down some of your creative destruction ideas here:
Using some of the creative destruction ideas on this page, go forth and make some photos. Did 
any of the photos come out? Did your use of creative destruction lead you to come up with some 
interesting ideas? Will you be using creative destruction in your photography in the future?
“The urge to destroy is also a 
creative urge.” —Pablo Picasso

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
PLAYING WITH PHOTOGRAPHY
42
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 177.
PLAY IS IMPORTANT IN all aspects of life. Too often, we lose our sense of play, and are taught and trained 
to only regard the straight and narrow. Kids know how to play. Why is it then that so few adults seem to 
enjoy playing? 
Playing is fun, and most folks think photography is fun, too. If you lose your sense of play around 
photography and begin taking it too seriously, then you will enjoy photography less. Somewhat surprisingly, 
you won’t be as good a photographer, either. Time and again, studies have shown that integrating play into 
your life, work, and activities enriches everything you do.
Get over the fear of 
being ridiculous for 
once and for all  ! Most 
truly creative people are 
ridiculous at times  !
For more 
ideas about 
playing, see 
Exercise 16.
ë 
It’s time to do some warm-up play. Take 
5 to 10 minutes and jump, skip, climb some-
thing, and run around the block. Perhaps you 
could even get to a kids’ playground and slide 
down the slide and climb on the jungle gym!
´ 
Kids never worry about what they look 
like when they are playing, but adults stop 
themselves because they think they are going 
to look silly. Intentionally do something really 
silly or funny by wearing a silly hat, costume, 
or make-up. 
ııWhen is the last time you really had fun 
photographing? What did you photograph? 
What made it fun?
´ 
Photograph several things in one photo 
that don’t normally go together and that 
look ridiculous together. For example, a tennis 
shoe next to an elegant plate of food.
´ 
Play with scale by photographing 
something small to make it look big, and 
something big to make it look small.
ï 
Photograph people clowning around 
together. 
Í 
Photograph toy animals, such as stuffi  es 
or a rubber ducky.
ñ 
Hand your camera to a stranger and ask 
them to take a photo.
What ideas do you have about how to play with your camera? Jot them down here:
Bring the joy 
back into your 
photography! 
“It’s a happy talent to know how to 
play.” —Ralph Waldo Emerson

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
“The privilege of a lifetime is being who 
you are.” —Joseph Campbell
THE PHOTOGRAPHER’S JOURNEY
A GREAT WAY TO think of your progress in life and as a photographer is what Joseph Campbell called “the 
Hero’s Journey.” In this archetype, of course, you are the hero as photographer—so it’s not just any hero who 
is journeying. No heroic journey is ever possible without pitfalls, pratfalls, and speed bumps. So the process 
of Your Photographer’s Journey can be conceptualized as understanding where you are (the baseline), 
overcoming obstacles to improvement (using the exercises in this workbook), and establishing a new 
baseline. It certainly is worth pointing out that every hero’s journey bears some similarity to the archetypical 
hero’s journey—but will have features that are uniquely yours. Tell the story of your “journey”!
Tell the story of how you 
overcame the obstacles and 
how you have improved.
Tools for evaluation and determining baseline:
Exercise 2, Road Map to Success
Exercise 3, The Steps to Evaluating Your Own Work
Exercise 4, Disassociating
Exercise 5, Formal Photographic Evaluation
Exercise 6, Emotional, Intuitive, and Narrative 
Response
Exercise 7, Presentational Context 
Exercise 9, Taking a Stab at Your Baseline and Goal
Exercise 10, Getting from Here to There
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
43
For more about this exercise, please see 
Achieving Your Potential pages 182–184.
Evaluation (baseline):
Overcome obstacles (improvement):

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
FROM HERE TO THERE
Where you 
are now
STEP 1
Road Map
to Success
(Page 16)
YOUR
FINAL
GOAL!
res
et 
to
 n
e
w
 
g
o
a
l
Do it again!
STEP 2
Road Map
to Success
Do it again!
STEP 3
Road Map
to Success
re
se
t t
o 
n
e
w
 g
o
a
l
Reset your goal as 
many times as you 
need to until you 
reach    ...
Each step is one step 
closer to your Þ nal goal.
Some tools for overcoming obstacles and photographic 
improvement:
Exercise 11, Practice, Practice, Practice!
Exercise 13, Creating an Aesthetic Action Plan
Exercise 16, Unleashing the Power of Your 
Photographic Imagination
Exercise 18, Learning to Pre-visualize
Exercise 23, Finding the Lede in Your Photo
Exercise 25, Changing Problems into Possibilities
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
Your Journey 
continues; keep on 
evaluating new baselines and 
overcoming the obstacles  !
Harold sez: All great 
journeys begin with the ﬁ rst 
step. No journey is truly worth 
undertaking unless it takes you out 
of your comfort zone. 
Evaluate again (set new baseline):
Overcome obstacles to your new 
baseline (improvement):

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
CREATING A PORTFOLIO OF YOUR WORK
44
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 192.
MAKING A PORTFOLIO OF your work is a very important way to support creativity and achievement in 
photography. The experience of editing images and presenting them gives you valuable skills in pre-
visualizing and understanding what matters in photographic image making. In addition, by creating 
your own portfolio, you are drawing a symbolic line in the sand. This line says “I am good enough to 
have a portfolio,” and “Here is a portfolio that represents me.” In other words, it is a cry to the world that 
you take yourself seriously as an artist. There are many kinds of portfolios and many ways you may 
decide to present your work. This checklist will help you track your progress.
ë 
What is your portfolio about?
´ 
Name your portfolio:
ııHow many images will be in your 
portfolio?
´ 
Have you edited your work to choose the 
images in your portfolio?
´ 
Have you posted your portfolio as an online gallery or album? What is the web address?
ï 
Will you use an online service to print a 
publication on demand (POD) book? If yes, 
which service?
Í 
Will you make a print portfolio in 
addition to your online portfolio?
Print portfolio checklist
▢
▢
▢
▢
▢Yes ▢No
▢Yes ▢No
Prepare photos for printing.
Decide on the physical form of 
the portfolio.
Design and order the contents 
of the portfolio; choose a 
container, box, or binding.
Print the portfolio.
“We have to continually be jumping off cliffs and
 developing our wings on the way down.” —Kurt Vonnegut

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
CREATIVITY FOR LIFE
45
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 196.
THE GOAL OF THIS exercise is to stay creative. The spiral below is your yellow brick road. The idea is to start in 
the center and write a small goal, and as you move outward on the spiral, write bigger and bigger things you 
would like to accomplish.
W
r
i
t
e
 
a
 
s
m
a
l
l
 
g
o
a
l
 
h
e
r
e
—
f
o
r 
e
x
a
m
p
l
e
:
 
T
o
d
a
y
 
I
 
w
il
l
 
p
h
o
t
o
g
r
a
p
h
 
f
o
r
 
a
t
 
l
e
a
s
t
 
1
0
 
m
i
n
u
t
e
s
.
When you have 
Þ lled up the spiral, 
start a new one! 
±
Harold sez: 
Creativity is for life!
“There is no greater joy than that of 
feeling      oneself a creator.” —Henri Bergson

Achieving Your Potential As a Photographer: Companion Workbook
Date:
CREATING YOUR PHOTO BUCKET LIST
THE IDEA BEHIND A bucket list is that it is a list of things you want to do before you, ah, kick the proverbial 
bucket. A photography bucket list refers specifi cally to places, things, and photographic styles that you 
want to experience. Starting and maintaining a photographic bucket list is important because it gives you 
something to look forward to and is a source of inspiration and joy. Provided that you include bucket list 
items that relate to everyday life, and are not just exotic safaris to Africa, if you have a good photo bucket 
list, you should never be bored with photography.
I’ve allowed you space for 10 bucket list items, because that’s all that will fi t on this page. But I 
encourage you to come up with more. Feel free to photocopy this page or use a separate piece of paper 
to continue your list. Maintaining your bucket list is important! Be sure to revisit your bucket list from 
time to time to cross off  bucket items that you’ve accomplished, and to add new ones.
46
For more about this exercise, please 
see Achieving Your Potential page 199.
“All journeys have secret destinations of 
which the traveler is unaware.” —Sir Francis Drake
ë
ï 
´
Í
ıı
ñ 
´
î 
´
´
My Photo Bucket List
Harold sez: 
Photographing 
everyday objects 
around you in a new way 
belongs on every bucket 
list, just as much as 
exotic travel.

