Actions to prevent flooding 
around the house 
With global warming and the resulting climate changes, 
flooding is increasingly becoming a problem. Often the 
ordinary householder thinks there is nothing they can do 
to protect their property - but now there is !  
This page will help you gain a better understanding on 
how floods can damage your property and how products 
can 
help 
you 
in 
the 
event 
of 
a 
flood 
in 
your 
area.  
 
Basements 
If an Antiflood Barrier has been fitted, the chances are that seepage will not effect your 
basement, however this cannot be guaranteed. Seepage through the ground is a gradual 
process and is subject to a lot of variables, such as:  
• 
Has your basement been adequately tanked? If not, what is the porosity of the 
ground?  
• 
Do you have cracked or damaged drains?  
• 
There are many, many more factors that can also take effect.  
Suspended Floors 
This is the same as with basements, with the exception that the area beneath the floor is 
unlikely to have been tanked. A sump situated roughly at the centre of the house could be 
used in conjunction with a pump to remove any collected water. It would, however, not be 
advisable to set the sump too deep as penetration through the water table could occur and 
this would not be good in the long term.  
If you do decide to install a sump, as with many building projects, it is recommended that you 
use a professional to complete the work.  
Air Bricks 
Over the years, ground levels around external walls tend to rise. Maybe a patio or pathway 
has been built higher than the recommended 6 inches below damp proof course level? 
Whatever the reason, you may find yourself with a potential water entry point. If the Antiflood 
Barrier has been fitted, air bricks will usually be protected.  
There are, however, other factors that need to be considered: If rainwater or run-off were to 
collect inside the barrier, can it be pumped out quickly enough in relationship to the height of 
the air brick? If in doubt, consider using a device designed specifically for this purpose.  
Drains 
Drains are a major problem during a flood as they cannot cope and will therefore fail to work. 
Here follows a brief outline of protection systems that you can install yourself.  
If you have installed the Antiflood Barrier, water from the outside will be greatly reduced if not 
stopped completely. The next step is to tackle the drains in order of priority. The lower the 
drain in relation to the floor level the greater the need for action. These levels will always be 

affected in relationship to the flood level and will change inside the barrier only if and when 
water is discharged via the WC, bath, basin, sink rainwater.  
Manholes 
It is usually possible to put a plug in the manhole to stop backfeed from mains sewers etc. 
You can also use the manhole as a collection sump inside the barrier It is advisable to employ 
a redundancy brace to ensure the plug stays firmly located in the drain. This ensures that if 
the bung is not located correctly or tightened sufficiently, it will not be forced out by backfeed 
pressure. A simple piece of 6" x 2" laid in the channel will usually suffice.  
Gullies 
If your gullies are connected to the main drainage or tank, as the flood advances the water 
will come out of the gullies in relationship to the flood level. Therefore all gullies need to be 
sealed, although this may not be necessary if you have plugged the main drain as above. 
There is a range of automatic backfeed gullies but they can fail & make the whole barrier 
system pointless. Some products are manufactured to deal with this problem.  
Sump 
If you cannot use the manhole as a collection sump, a series of sumps will need to be fitted 
inside of the barrier in order to dispose of seepage and rainwater should the need arise. 
These sumps can be fitted with automatic pumps to discharge water and a manual pump can 
be supplied should the electrical supply fail.  
Bath 
If you have a bath situated on the ground floor then that would be the next affected point of 
entry. Logically, the lower the discharge point, the lower the seepage. Some products will seal 
most drains, including showers and washing machines. Once again this will not be necessary 
if the manhole is plugged.  
WC 
Next the ground floor WC. The same advice as "Bath" applies.  
Washing machine stand pipes, basins, sinks and so on.  
Airvents 
Air vents should not be an issue if the barrier system is fitted, however there are some 
products which can be installed where it is impractical to erect the barrier.  
Ground Seepage 
There is always the possibility of ground seepage. The severity of this seepage is not 
calculable as the volume of water seepage is governed by a great many factors. It is possible 
to slow down the seepage but first you have to know where it will occur and why. If your 
premises are of a modern construction, it is most likely that after the foundation brickwork had 
been built, the builders filled the void around the brickwork with all kinds of rubbish. This is a 
potential problem as this filled void is very seldom compacted and, as such allows the water 
access to a greater height in relation to the ground level, than that of compacted ground. The 
answer is to cover the area around the edge of the property with paving properly sealed to the 

walls. In some cases you may well want planting areas. These should be excavated down to 
the foundation slab and filled with compacted earth.  
Garden soakaways are usually constructed away from the property and should be well 
outside the barrier. However, these soakaways are of numerous designs and can give easy 
access to the inside of the barrier via the drain outlet. If the property is on a soakaway ensure 
the drain is plugged within the barrier.  
Modern drains are back filled with shingle or similar. This is also a potential entry point for 
water. Regardless of how much seepage you get, there is usually a pump that can cope with 
it.  
Now you can do something to stop your home flooding and inevitably ruining your furniture - 
and possibly your life!  
 
 

