Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Further Praise for Actionable Intelligence
“BI starts with an attempt to ask the right business questions until the 
answers reach an actionable outcome. This book reminds us to begin 
with back to basics before we jump into developing what users ask for. 
Keith calls it ‘The Initial Answers.’ From my experience, within-memory 
technology and advance visualization, businesses may no longer have 
to ‘peel the onion’ or drill down to reach the Actionable BI. Bringing 
together the power of BI and the business knowledge of the users is the 
ideation process Keith describes in his book.”
—Elizabeth Lim, Vice President & CIO, Enterprise Information
Management, STATS ChipPAC Ltd
“Big data is the buzzword these days; there is not a week passing through 
without an article, a blog, a discussion around this topic. There is no
denying the fact that data, and if big even better, off er a big potential for 
business people. But is this enough? Surely not. . . . Through the book, 
Keith, Cliff , and Donald will guide you through this data jungle and 
enable you to unveil the full potential of your data for actionable intelli-
gence. Do yourself a favour, read it!” 
—Roxane Desmicht, Senior Director, Corporate Supply
Chain, Infi neon Technologies
“Only a few years ago, the ability to have access to data across a global 
enterprise was the challenge. Leaders struggled to make decisions in the 
absence of near time information. Fast forward to the present, and those 
same leaders are still challenged to make decisions—because there is too 
much data. Actionable Intelligence provides a road map to navigating the 
big-data space to provide decisions and, more importantly, results. Kudos to 
Keith Carter and team in sharing their career passion and lessons learned.” 
—Edward DuBeau, Sr. Director, ERP, Zoetis
“This book, Actionable Intelligence, is a fantastic resource in shifting our 
energy from delivery of technology to delivery of insight and organiza-
tional outcomes. Whether new to BI or a seasoned veteran, Actionable
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Intelligence provides a ‘how to,’ or refl ective assessment, on how we as
BI professionals add real value.”
—Stuart Ward, Platform Manager: Business Intelligence
and Reporting, ANZ Bank
“Actionable intelligence represents the next frontier of innovation. 
Decision makers would be wise to empower their operations to harness
eff ectively actionable intelligence to gain a competitive advantage. 
Actionable intelligence promises to level the playing fi eld among profi t-
seeking enterprises, regardless of size. This book off ers a glimpse into
paradigm-shifting approaches that every business owner ignores at
its peril.” 
—Justin Swindells, Patent Attorney
“So much of the hype about Big Data has led organizations to expend 
large sums of money with relatively little return on their investment or 
to wallow in the slough of despair as they try to fi gure out all they want 
to know. This book from a highly experienced and skilled practitioner 
working within a global context cuts through all the nonsense with 
delineated action steps, sage advice, and insights from many diff erent 
practical situations. Carter’s key point is that Big Data is ONLY useful
when it provides actionable intelligence that informs decisions and 
guides responses. It grows by accretion as more and more insights are 
derived and delivered with impact across the organization. This book 
will be sheet music for the practiced eyes and ears of senior manage-
ment and an open entrée for data practitioners within enterprises to
become more central to core operations that increase competitiveness
in complex global markets with their ever changing parameters and
issues. Larger nonprofi t and government agency leaders can also glean 
many useful insights from this volume. This is a must-read for 2014 and 
beyond for senior leaders, managers across the enterprise, and those lead-
ing work in applied data fi elds.” 
—Dennis Cheek, Ph.D., Executive Director, National Creativity
Network, USA, Co-Chair, Global Creativity United, 
and Visiting Professor, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, 
IESEG School of Management, France
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Actionable
Intelligence
A Guide to Delivering 
Business Results with Big 
Data Fast!
Keith B. Carter 
with contributions 
from Donald Farmer
and Cliff ord Siegel
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Cover image: Wiley
Cover design: Wiley
Copyright © 2014 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the 
prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-
copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 
750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for 
permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River 
Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/
go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best eff orts 
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy 
or completeness of the contents of this book and specifi cally disclaim any implied warranties of 
merchantability or fi tness for a particular purpose.  No warranty may be created or extended by sales 
representatives or written sales materials.  The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation.  You should consult with a professional where appropriate.  Neither the
publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profi t or any other commercial damages, including 
but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact
our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United
States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material 
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in print-on-
demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you
purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information
about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Carter, Keith B., 1973-
 Actionable intelligence : a guide to delivering business results with big data fast! / Keith B. Carter 
with contributions from Donald Farmer and Cliff ord Siegel.
  1 online resource.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 Description based on print version record and CIP data provided by publisher; resource not viewed.
 ISBN 978-1-118-92060-2 (ebk); ISBN 978-1-118-92065-7 (ebk); 
ISBN  978-1-118-91523-3 1. Decision making. 2. Strategic planning. 3. Big data.
 I. Title. 
 HD30.23
 658.4′038028557—dc23
 
2014027154
Printed in the United States of America
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Dedicated to my late mom, Mary Kennedy Carter, 
and my dad, Donald Wesley Carter Sr.
Their life and love is a source of constant inspiration.
This book is also dedicated 
to you and people like you
who want to help others make better decisions.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
vii
Preface 
xi
Acknowledgments 
xvii
Introduction 
1
Chapter 1: Vision of Actionable Intelligence 
5
The Challenge at Hand 
7
The Big Data Lie 
13
Actionable Intelligence: The Road and the 
Destination 
14
Stages of Actionable Intelligence: Getting Ready
for the Journey by Knowing Where You Are
and Where to Go 
22
Are You Ready to Take the First Step? 
26
Summary and Considerations 
29
Notes 
29
Chapter 2: Discovery of the Business Situation
(Business Discovery) 
31
Government Intelligence 
34
Contents
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
viii
c o n t e n t s
Ask the Questions 
37
Answer the Questions: Business Discovery 
38
Visual Consistency and the First Tool 
42
Off  to the Races 
45
Summary and Considerations 
45
Notes 
45
Chapter 3: Creating a Foundation of Data 
47
Building the Foundation 
48
Benefi ts of Having the Right Data 
49
The Data Challenge 
50
Acquire Data in Four Consistent Steps 
51
The Byproduct: Master Data Management 
61
Data Management Issues in the Spotlight 
63
The Data Supply Chain 
65
Build the House 
65
Summary and Considerations 
67
Notes 
68
Chapter 4: Visualization 
69
Complete Circle 
70
So Now, How Can You Do It? 
74
The Way Ahead 
77
Example of Iterative Visualization to Solve the
Question “How Do I Get There Quickly, Safely, 
Effi  ciently:” Leveraging Global Positioning 
System Data 
77
Eff ective Visualizations: Tell a Story to Your Mind 
80
Noticing Visualization Pitfalls 
80
Summary and Considerations 
83
Notes 
83
Chapter 5: The Initial Answers 
85
Attempting to Regularly Capture Benefi ts, 
False Starts, and a Rhythm 
87
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Contents 
ix
The Results of Actionable Intelligence Delivered 
87
The Power of Quotes 
89
Possibilities with Actionable Intelligence 
89
Almost Done? 
98
Summary and Considerations 
99
Note 
99
Chapter 6: Time for Change 
101
Collaborative Business Planning 
103
Linking Collaboration to Actionable Intelligence 
106
Summary and Considerations 
110
Chapter 7: Governance: Funding Intelligence, 
Protecting the Results 
111
An Actionable Intelligence Governance 
Methodology 
112
Intelligence Budgeting 
121
Remember the Key Points of the UPS Story 
122
Governing the Use of Actionable Intelligence
and Establishing Data Security 
125
Summary and Considerations 
133
Notes 
133
Chapter 8: Sustaining Delivery of Actionable Intelligence 135
Leading Intelligence 
136
Quick Wins to Build Trust 
140
Hiring Done Right for Big Data with Big Data 
145
Training 
148
Business Cultural Change 
149
Communication 
155
Knowledge Lock‐In 
157
What’s Next? 
159
Summary and Considerations 
161
Notes 
161
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
x
c o n t e n t s
Chapter 9: Tying It All Together 
163
Cliff ord Siegel’s Journey at Lifetime Brands 
163
Starting the Right Way 
165
Finding the Right Pitch 
166
Developing a Mission and Strategy for 
Intelligence Capabilities 
167
TIE: The Intelligent Enterprise at STATS 
ChipPAC with Elizabeth Lim 
170
The Recipe to Greatness 
174
Summary and Considerations 
179
Notes 
180
Chapter 10: Next Frontiers 
181
A Healthier Lifestyle with Actionable Intelligence 
183
The Street‐Smart Cabbies 
184
The Amplifi ed Customer Experience 
186
Selling Better 
187
Serve Me Better . . . But Don’t Intrude on
My Private Life 
188
Getting Started 
189
The Starbucks Experience 
190
Summary and Considerations 
191
Notes 
191
Chapter 11: Epilogue 
193
Four Steps of Actionable Intelligence 
195
About the Author 
197
About the Contributors 
199
Index 
201
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xi
 W
hat’s actionable intelligence?
 In speaking around the world on the topic of making 
better decisions using facts, I’ve found again and again that
leaders from all industries yearn for more information. They want to be 
able to assess risks and opportunities quickly and effi  ciently. They want 
answers in enough time to be able to make a diff erence. They want to 
seize opportunities. They need intelligence that is on time and accurate. 
They want what I call “actionable intelligence.” 
 A Vision of What Could Be: The Hospital 
Information System
As I was beginning my own journey into actionable intelligence, my 
mother had a stroke. Her stroke led me to understand the real need for 
intelligence in a transformative way. 
 It was a gray day in early 2010. I was on my way to my offi  ce at the 
Estée Lauder Companies, Inc. in Melville, New York, where I was work-
ing in a global role establishing an intelligence organization, running the 
 Preface
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xii
p r e f a c e
project management offi  ce (PMO) for supply chain, managing Sarbanes‐
Oxley and customs compliance, and implementing operational effi  cien-
cies throughout the business. 
As I drove to the offi  ce, my head was fi lled with thoughts of supply 
chain intelligence. My thoughts were interrupted when my cell phone
started ringing. 
It was my father. 
“Son, I’m at the hospital. Your mother fainted in the bathroom this 
morning and I couldn’t revive her.” 
Silence. . . . 
I asked, “Where are you? What hospital?” 
“Please come to South Nassau Community Hospital,” he responded. 
When I arrived at the hospital, my mother, Mary, was sitting up in 
bed, looking a bit weak. 
The doctor told me, “Your mother had a stroke.” 
She looked fi ne, but could only mouth words to us. She could not 
speak. Miraculously, she began to speak about 30 minutes later and was 
able to move her arm. We spent the rest of the day at the hospital, wait-
ing and wondering. 
At about 6:30 the next morning, as I was making my way out of my 
house, my cell phone rang. It was a nurse at the hospital. 
“Mr. Carter, come quickly to the hospital,” he said. “Your mother 
had another stroke.” 
I was numb. 
I immediately called my dad and drove over to the hospital. 
When I arrived at my mom’s bedside, she couldn’t speak, she couldn’t 
move the right side of her body or her left arm. As she was poked and 
prodded by the doctors, she didn’t visibly react to any pain. 
Tears came to my eyes. Here was my mom—my hero for life—now 
with a contorted face and unable to speak or move. 
I became greatly concerned. What eff orts would be made to support 
my mother?
I asked for information—basic things, such as what we could expect 
medications to do to help my mother. The hospital staff  responded 
coldly: “We are busy. Later we will try to give you the information.” 
I pushed for more: “How did this second stroke happen? What do 
the MRI and X‐rays look like?” 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Preface 
xiii
 They responded, “We don’t have that information. Go to records 
downstairs.” 
 I did, but to see the records I had to stand in line and pay. I received 
the images on a disk in a format I couldn’t immediately view. 
 In fact, I ran into roadblocks that prevented me from gathering facts 
at every turn. 
 It was diffi  cult to fi nd doctors who would explain the situation, 
and nurses were at best impatient and often downright mean. (I would 
realize later that their frustration stemmed from being worked hard and 
lacking information themselves to respond to customers like me.) 
 The situation was beyond frustrating. I just couldn’t access informa-
tion fast enough, and relatives from all over the country were asking me 
again and again, “What’s the status?” “How’s Mary?” “What medicines
is she taking?” “How often?” “When?” “How much?” “With what?” 
“What are the side‐eff ects?” 
 And so on and so on. 
 I became information central. I set up conference calls at specifi c 
times for my relatives to provide information so I wouldn’t have to call 
50 people individually. However, these calls were very frustrating because 
I was stuck between a hospital that didn’t readily share updates about my 
mother and family members who wanted to be totally involved in her 
care. They were all concerned, and so was I. We wanted facts so we could 
understand and improve the situation. 
 Thankfully, an angel and dear family friend, Dr. Linda Huang, 
helped us move my mom to Columbia University Presbyterian Hospital 
(Columbia for short). 
 Each case of moving a patient from one hospital to another is dif-
ferent, but typically, the accepting physician reviews the case and assesses 
the risk versus the benefi ts of moving the patient. Thankfully, Linda, a 
graduate of Columbia Dentistry and assistant professor of the same, was 
able to make it happen. 
 Columbia was amazing! I drove there following the ambulance. 
When I arrived and saw my mother being taken care of, I immedi-
ately approached a doctor. He took the time to walk my father and me 
through her case. 
 I had been trying to understand the medications prescribed to my 
mother at the other hospital, but the nurses and doctors were always 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xiv
p r e f a c e
too busy there. When I asked the doctors at Columbia, they said, “Wait 
one moment.” And, indeed, in just minutes, they presented a chart of 
medications. The chart explained the indications, contraindications, 
side eff ects, timing, and dosages of all the medications. Wow! Talk about 
instant information. 
It was amazing; the hospital staff  had time to spend with me and had 
all the information they needed at their fi ngertips. 
Later, I would ask the doctors more questions—specifi cally, about 
the MRI that I never saw at the previous hospital. You will recall that the
previous hospital gave us a CD that could be viewed only using specifi c 
hospital software—and cost me time and money to receive. 
The Columbia doctor took me over to a workstation in the hallway. 
These workstations were located throughout the hospital. He logged in, 
entered my mother’s information, and immediately brought up all her 
records. He showed me the MRI on the spot, and calmly and respectfully 
showed me the infarction (dead part of the brain) and explained its impact. 
I didn’t have to go to a separate records department. I didn’t have to 
wait in line. I didn’t have to pay. And, importantly, I could immediately 
view and understand the information. Why? Because the information 
was at the doctor’s fi ngertips. And, he took time to explain everything to 
me in a way that had meaning. 
The hospital information system was so powerful at Columbia that 
anytime I wanted information I could simply ask and it was given. Staff  
could just as easily access information. 
I was very impressed, and my family was pleased with the under-
standing that this new fl ow of information enabled. The level of care 
at Columbia was remarkably more engaging and patient‐oriented—all
because of information. 
It was this hospital experience that propelled me toward a journey 
to actionable intelligence capabilities: instant access to forward‐looking 
information on everyone’s desktops. 
 Benefi ts of Actionable Intelligence 
 As a business leader or a business function lead, you have customers. 
Don’t you want to be able to fi nd information about a specifi c request 
from a customer immediately? Just as Columbia University Presbyterian 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Preface 
xv
Hospital has thousands of patients, you might have thousands of orders. 
The ability to fi nd the right information for a customer at the right 
moment—and to be able to immediately explain the information—
earns you so much trust and faith, it is impossible to measure the benefi t. 
 Without the kind of hospital information system that Columbia 
University Presbyterian has, when someone asks a question you likely 
have to say, “Let me call you back,” then research the information, which 
possibly involves e-mailing other people. (Hopefully, they will send a
response.) This is an issue because people are impatient and very busy. 
The reason they are asking your business a question is because they want 
to know the information right now, not 30 minutes later and certainly 
not days later. 
 Think about the soft benefi ts of having answers at your fi ngertips: 
•   You don’t have to take as much time to answer the customer. 
•   The customer has more confi dence in your ability to deliver. 
•   Expectations can be set quickly. 
 The hard benefi ts: 
•   When you share the information, you can react to the customer’s 
request and achieve hard benefi ts right away by adjusting the order 
if they need more or less. 
•   More broadly, all plans can be adjusted to take into account all the 
known information at all times, leading to real savings and increased 
effi  ciency at a relatively small cost. 
 For a concrete example of what actionable intelligence can do, con-
sider this quote from a product director in a large fast‐moving consumer 
goods company. 
 We’ve been carefully tracking an important product launch, 
worth $55.6 million in the next 12 months. The actionable 
intelli gence tool showed me the global forecast has increased
by 160,000 pieces globally for the next six months in the last four 
weeks alone, a $10 million increase. This information enables us 
to stay ahead of the demand increases and proactively coordinate 
a response, reducing costs and ensuring we don’t go out of stock 
and avoiding airfreight. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xvi
p r e f a c e
 See the diff erence? Speed and results! Readily available 
information for decisions enables proactive actions and creates 
heroes like this product director. 
Actionable intelligence capabilities can result in massive benefi ts for 
you, your coworkers, your boss, your customers—basically, everybody 
related to the company. Let this book be the guide on your journey, and 
you may soon fi nd yourself the next actionable intelligence hero. 
Now please join me for a good walk on the journey to delivering 
actionable intelligence. 
 How to Use This Book
 The book is written as a guide for sharing best practices, emphasizing 
key points, and defending eff ective intelligence methodologies. Business 
managers can use it to work with IT and say, “Look here! We can work 
together like this.” I also expect IT to be able to use it to run to senior 
management and say, “Hey! We can be really good partners with you on
delivering sales.” 
When stuck on how to visualize data or tell a story, pull out this 
book and follow the ideation methodology. 
At the end of each chapter is a section called “Summary and
Considerations.” 
There you will fi nd: 
• A Point to Ponder 
• A Quote to Remember 
• A Question to Consider 
To evolve the concept of actionable intelligence, I encourage you to 
share your thoughts, ideas, and experiences. You can do so on my web-
site:  www.keithbcarter.com . 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xvii
 B
ig hugs and thanks to my wonderful wife, Stella, and our boys, 
Emmanuel and Luke, who were all very supportive as I wrote
this book. My boys listened to it as a bedtime story. 
With great thanks to my friends, mentors, and family, who have 
changed my life in small and big ways. 
A special thanks to Jessica Foong, Wen Wei Zhao, and Mike Van Den 
Eijden for their special work. 
I thank God for granting me the experiences in actionable intel-
ligence so I can share them with you in this book. 
A special thanks goes to Debra Donston‐Miller, who helped sand off  
the rough edges from this book. 
I would also like to mention the following people who contributed 
to the book in their own special way: 
Yuri Aguiar
Ed Dubeau
Dennis Cheek
Haley Garner
Rayna Fagen
 Acknowledgments
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
xviii
a c k n o w l e d g m e n t s
Naveed Husain
Jason Schogel
Ser Aik
Jason Mayberg
Naveed Husain
Mike Saliter
Hideki Sakai
Rocky Russell
Helena May
Teresa Kennedy
The SCI team
And IT people around the world! 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
1
 Introduction
 M
y hope is that readers come away from this book with the 
realization that they can improve the lives of others by giving 
them the answers they need to make better decisions faster 
and easier. 
When team members have usable information at their fi ngertips, 
they can: 
• Answer questions faster, with little or no eff ort needed to collect 
the data. 
• Make better use of their time, planning improved outcomes. 
• Make improvements for the future, instead of dwelling on past failures. 
If actionable intelligence sounds a lot like business intelligence, it’s 
no wonder. 
Using this book as a guide, you can play a part in making a positive 
impact on your colleagues by achieving the dream that business intelli-
gence (BI) has promised since the term was fi rst coined way back in 1858. 
BI tools are the same across industries, whether you are helping a 
business, government, or nonprofi t. BI concepts can also be helpful for 
individuals who want to make revolutionary change. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
2 
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
While they are very diff erent in the end, both BI and actionable 
intelligence start with a question. 
When a new question is raised, time is of the essence; the intelligence 
organization needs to respond quickly. However, due to the rigidness of 
the system and lack of focus in the organization or the governance meth-
odology, it can be diffi  cult to make the changes necessary to arrive at a 
complete decision. 
For example, analysis might be performed in Excel, because a busi-
ness user requires additional factors or information. The results will likely 
be presented in PowerPoint—with static data points that are as limited in 
usability as when the project began. 
For years, the smartest minds in BI have struggled with how to deliver 
forward‐looking answers to improve outcomes. Vendors and consultants 
have recommended how to leverage “regular” data—and now big data. 
The promise is a single source of truth. If we can get all the data into 
f
one place, with no data duplication, only  then will we be able to visualize 
the data and reach information nirvana. 
Actually, a single source of truth may actually introduce risk. The 
answers look so perfect and precise that they tempt people into making 
decisions that should really require more thought and additional data 
enrichment from various sources. 
For the past 15 years, dedicated, hard‐working teams have churned 
out BI reports but missed the mark on the original vision of business 
intelligence. 
I off er an alternative approach to achieving incredible results from 
business intelligence: 
• Live and work with purpose to improve the lives of others by giv-
ing them the answers they need to make better decisions faster and
more easily. 
• Deliver sustainable improvements in agility, impact, cost savings, 
improved quality, excellent customer service, and more. 
• Build a team of passionate and purpose‐driven organization mem-
bers to identify the burning platform(s) and share a vision of  “what 
good looks like.” 
• Work with these “doers” and start delivering iterative answers. Cut 
out the “talkers.” 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Introduction 
3
•   Build the benefi ts case with quick wins. 
•   Watch out for cultural and political challenges that get in the way of 
sharing data, sharing intelligence, and sharing success and recognition. 
•   Allow for mistakes. 
•   Be open to changing course, vision, and focus, if needed. 
•   Do whatever it takes to deliver results. 
 I also challenge you to think about whether your organization has 
capabilities to: 
•   View forward‐looking metrics answering: What will our business 
performance look like in the future according to our plans?
•   Answer a customer’s questions about their orders without e-mailing 
others for information. 
•   Instantly understand the impact of a catastrophe on the business. 
•   Regularly validate the data quality (timeliness and accuracy) on a 
visible dashboard. 
•  Run strategy meetings with the data needed to make fact‐based deci-
sions without stressing out your organization by requiring them to 
cobble data together into Excel. 
 If your company can do all of these things, it is far ahead of most, 
according to a Harvard Business Review study of Fortune 1000 companies
w
and large government agencies (“Who’s Really Using Big Data” by Paul 
Barth and Randy Bean, September 12, 2012). 
 The study stated that: 
•   Only 15 percent of respondents ranked their access to data today as 
adequate or world‐class. 
•   Only 21 percent of respondents ranked their intelligence capabilities 
as adequate or world‐class. 
•   Only 17 percent of respondents ranked their ability to use data and 
intelligence to transform their business as more than adequate or 
world‐class. 
 I have seen the same thing in my own studies here in Singapore. During 
the Big Data World Conference September 2013, Dr. Jussi Keppo and I ran 
a big data clinic in which we encouraged conference participants to write 
down their key learnings, strategic business questions, and capability gaps. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
4
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 More than 60 percent felt they did not have the people capability to 
gain benefi ts from big data—in either business or IT. 
 More than 40 percent felt data accuracy and data sharing were prob-
lems that prevented them from getting the answers they needed to make
better decisions. 
 This book will enable you to leverage the power of big data by devel-
oping an actionable intelligence ecosystem to manage data, visualize it 
and use it to: 
•   Answer strategic business questions at the speed needed to make a 
diff erence. 
•   Identify execution issues and improve agility. 
•  Provide forward visibility in enough time to improve business out-
comes.  
 You will learn how several multinational corporations delivered real 
business benefi ts and many soft benefi ts using actionable intelligence. 
 By the end of the book you will be able to envision, budget, imple-
ment, and deliver similar benefi ts at your own organization. 
 Enjoy the journey! 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
5
 Chapter  1
Vision of  Actionable
Intelligence 
 Key Points and Questions
• For intelligence to have value it must deliver answers in time to 
make a diff erence to business outcomes. 
• The availability of big data is not an immediate way to improve your 
business. 
• Before jumping to statistical packages and hiring data scientists, 
make sure business leaders have visibility into the intelligence you 
already have in hand. 
• Statistical models that are missing large sets of data and don’t include 
infl uencing data never predict the future; they can be used only to 
neatly outline past mistakes. 
 A
ccording to Chinese folklore, around 170 A.D., China’s Han Dy-
nasty was very weak. As a result, lawlessness and corruption were 
rampant throughout the land. One man, Liu Bei, and his friends 
swore to bring peace to the land by unifying the country and reestablish-
ing the emperor. This task proved to be diffi  cult, so they turned to an 
adviser renowned for his wisdom, Zhuge Liang. Together, they set out on 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
6 
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
an expedition to create an alliance with a general named Zhou Yu, who 
controlled one‐third of China. But Zhou Yu, knowing that Zhuge Liang 
was critical to the success of his enemies, sought to trick him into taking 
on an impossible task as a way to prove loyalty to the proposed alliance. 
The true purpose was to trick Zhuge Liang into unwillingly signing up 
for his own death. 
The task was to create 100,000 arrows in 10 days or face execution 
by General Zhou Yu. One hundred thousand arrows in 10 days sounds 
like an absolutely impossible task for any ordinary man. Zhuge Liang 
would surely face death, right?
But he was a resourceful and wise hero. Here’s what he did: He pre-
pared 20 boats with straw puppets and straw bales on the sides, and a few 
men inside. He knew the night he sailed his ships into battle would be 
particularly foggy. Zhuge Liang made his men sail just close enough to
be heard but remain unseen. Then he had his men light some torches, 
beat the drums, and shout orders to the few men actually on board the 
20 ships to sound like a large force coming for attack. 
Zhuge Liang foresaw the warlord Cao Cao’s response: Cao Cao quickly 
ordered his archers to move out and start shooting toward the drum sounds 
and torches. Volley upon volley, he and his men fi red away. The arrows from 
the archers got stuck in the straw fi gures on the boat and the straw bales on 
the sides. When Zhuge Liang’s boats were loaded on one side with arrows 
and threatened to tilt under the weight, he ordered the ships turned 180 
degrees to catch arrows with the straw bales on the other side of the boat. 
With more than enough arrows and dawn beginning to break, he 
ordered the ships to sail back to Zhou Yu. 
So what did Zhuge Liang end up with? One hundred thousand 
arrows and his life, and all the while he sat drinking wine in his cabin 
on the ship. And Cao Cao? He hadn’t really been attacked, but he was 
outsmarted nonetheless. 
Zhou Yu’s plan to kill Zhuge Liang through trickery had failed, and 
this later resulted in his own downfall. 
The diff erence among the three men was their use of information—
intelligence, to be more precise. 
Zhuge Liang knew what was going on. He knew it was going to be 
foggy. He knew what his task was, and knew what Cao Cao’s reaction 
would be when he was confronted with Zhuge Liang’s trap. He com-
bined this knowledge and performed extraordinarily, against all odds. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Vision of  Actionable Intelligence 
7
Zhuge Liang had a 360‐degree view of both the internal and external
environment. And he acted accordingly. By contrast, Cao Cao was liter-
ally left in the dark throughout the supposed attack, and Zhou Yu had 
taken a gamble on Zhuge Liang’s knowledge without knowing the facts 
about Zhuge Liang’s capabilities. 
 Most businesses nowadays are in the position of Cao Cao:  They lack 
visibility into what is truly happening in the business environment and 
make quick, snap reactions to what is happening around them. They are 
not at all proactive; they are not leveraging the environment. Instead, 
they are manipulated by the environment. 
 The Challenge at Hand 
 Today, more than ever, information is everywhere around us. Indeed, we 
are bombarded with information. We all know, for example, that Face-
book, Twitter, and LinkedIn are sources of information about our social 
lives. Though the diff erent apps and sites in this fi eld all off er diff erent 
forms of social media, they have one thing in common: They let people 
create information and allow them to read everyone else’s information. 
 For example, by participating on Facebook, you always know what 
is happening in your social circle via posts on your Facebook wall and 
updates from others. Some information is useful; some is useless. How-
ever, in the end, you always know what is going on because everything 
is conveniently posted in a single spot: the Facebook wall. 
 Businesses operate by receiving a tremendous amount of informa-
tion but usually lack the central, company‐wide “Facebook wall” to see 
it all at any one time. 
 The process of gathering information from others is often long and 
painstaking instead of instant and easy. Where businesses would benefi t 
signifi cantly from having all the information they need at their fi ngertips 
to provide answers, most are still struggling to pull together the most 
basic data. Some even lack common defi nitions and use data sets requir-
ing cumbersome translations to see a global result. 
 However, if employees know all the latest social updates, why can 
the same employees not know all the latest information about their own 
companies?
 There is a similar disconnect with mobile. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
8 
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
What data do you need to respond quickly to your customers or 
leaders? How quickly can you access it? Is it accessible on a secure 
mobile device?
When customers walk into retail stores they have a wealth of knowl-
edge about the products they are considering purchasing. In Figure   1.1  , 
63 percent of smartphone owners are checking the prices of the products 
while they browse, a process called “showrooming.” The data they get from 
their mobile devices helps them to decide where and when to buy products. 
Think about this process and how people shopped just a couple 
of years ago. It is a huge change. Why should corporate employees not 
expect the same level of change in their own organizations?
If consumers can go through a signifi cant process change to adapt to 
the latest big data technology to use actionable intelligence without any 
formal training, why can these consumers not do the same when they 
arrive at work?
For today’s businesses that is the challenge: change. Think about the 
diff erence honestly. Is it: 
• Complacency to accept the current situation, even though that situ-
ation could be improved massively? 
• That your company is using systems that just are not as fast and easy 
as using Facebook?
• That your company has implemented processes and incentives that 
are inadequate for driving a change in behavior?
 Figure 1.1 How Consumers Shop 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Vision of  Actionable Intelligence 
9
 Let us start by illustrating just how painful and dire the current 
situation is for modern‐day companies, especially those that are larger 
in size. 
 Typically, supply chain senior management needs to go several levels 
down the chain and interact with a team of people just to fi gure out if 
and when a market will receive its shipments. This is due to how widely 
dispersed the information is. 
 Figure   1.2 is a sample e-mail chain—one that you might fi nd in any 
supply chain organization. (Any resemblance to actual emails is purely
coincidental.)
 Some of the details of Figure  1.2 follow. 
 —–Original Message—– 
 From: Singapore Sales
 Sent: October 15, 2009 
 To: APAC Regional Forecaster 
 Cc: 
 Subject: Takashimiya Wants Additional 30% for Valentine’s Day 
Exciting news! Our customer wants 30% more than the original order. Can we 
have it?
 Figure 1.2
E-mails around the World in 90 Days 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
10
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 —–Original Message—– 
 From: APAC Sales
 Sent: October 15, 2009 
 To: APAC Regional Forecaster, APAC Supply Chain 
 Cc: 
 Subject: Takashimiya Wants Additional 30% for Valentine’s Day 
Can you help get more products for this customer?
 —–Original Message—– 
 From: APAC Supply Chain 
 Sent: October 18, 2009 
 To: NY Supply Chain 
 Cc: APAC Forecaster 
 Subject: Takashimiya Wants Additional 30% for Valentine’s Day 
Let me check with NY Supply chain. NY can you provide an answer to this 
request??
 —–Original Message—– 
 From: NY Supply Chain
 Sent: November 3, 2009 
 To: APAC Supply Chain
 Cc: 
 Subject: Takashimiya Wants Additional 30% for Valentine’s Day 
Let me check who makes it and follow up with them.
 —–Original Message—– 
 From: APAC Supply Chain 
 Sent: November 10, 2009 
 To: NY Supply Chain 
 Cc: 
 Subject: Takashimiya Wants Additional 30% for Valentine’s Day 
Please respond? The customer really wants to know.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Vision of  Actionable Intelligence 
11
 —–Original Message—– 
 From: NY Supply Chain
 Sent: November 28, 2009 
 To: APAC Supply Chain
 Cc: 
 Subject: Takashimiya Wants Additional 30% for Valentine’s Day 
I found out the product is made in Long Island. [ This would have required checking 
at least four systems or contacting four people in each major manufacturing location. ] 
 —–Original Message—– 
 From: NY Supply Chain
 Sent: November 28, 2009 
 To: NY Manufacturing 
 Cc: 
 Subject: Takashimiya Wants Additional 30% for Valentine’s Day 
Can you support making a quantity of this much for this item code?
 —–Original Message—– 
 From: NY Manufacturing 
 Sent: December 2, 2009 
 To: NY Supply Chain 
 Cc: 
 Subject: Takashimiya Wants Additional 30% for Valentine’s Day 
We don’t have enough components. Let me check with the supplier, but I have to 
go through the purchasing group.
 —–Original Message—– 
 From: NY Manufacturing 
 Sent: December 3, 2009 
 To: NY Purchasing 
 Cc: NY Supply Chain 
 Subject: Takashimiya Wants Additional 30% for Valentine’s Day 
Can the supplier provide additional XYZ components?
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
12
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 —–Original Message—– 
 From: NY Supply Chain
 Sent: December 15, 2009 
 To: NY Purchasing, 
 Cc: NY Manufacturing 
 Subject: Takashimiya Wants Additional 30% for Valentine’s Day 
Purchasing, please respond
 —–Original Message—– 
 From: APAC Supply Chain 
 Sent: January 3, 2010 
 To: NY Supply Chain 
 Cc: 
 Subject: Takashimiya Wants Additional 30% for Valentine’s Day 
Do you have a response yet?
 —–Original Message—– 
 From: NY Supply Chain
 Sent: January 5, 2010 
 To: APAC Supply Chain
 Cc: 
 Subject: Takashimiya Wants Additional 30% for Valentine’s Day 
No, still waiting for Long Island Manufacturing who is waiting for purchasing, 
who is waiting for the supplier.
 —–Original Message—– 
 From: APAC Supply Chain 
 Sent: February 10, 2010 5:15 PM
 To: NY Supply Chain 
 Cc: APAC Forecasting, Singapore Sales 
 Subject: Takashimiya Wants Additional 30% for Valentine’s Day 
Please cancel this request. The retailer had to fi ll the spot with other products.
Painful to read, isn’t it? 
All of these e-mails might suggest a highly complicated issue, but the 
problem is quite simple: lack of answers. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Vision of  Actionable Intelligence 
13
 It was really diffi  cult to determine: 
•   Who made the product
•   The product’s status 
•   Which suppliers provided components
•   Who was responsible for delivering results
 Worst of all, there was no performance benchmark that would incent 
all involved to provide better service in the future. 
 All over the world, customers and sales teams desperately ask when 
they will receive their shipments. All the while, the supply chain strug-
gles to provide the needed answers. Sales and operations battle over the 
right numbers for forecasts, inventory, and customer service. 
 These meetings can sometimes become emotional and demoralizing. 
 Luckily, some companies have recognized the situation and agreed 
they need to do something about it. These companies realize that they 
need information that can be trusted. Information that is aggregated, 
ready to access, and easy to comprehend. Information they can act on—
in other words, actionable intelligence. 
 The Big Data Lie 
 Business leaders and employees hear that moving from an organization 
that is completely opaque to one in which information is readily avail-
able undergo a world of change. Decision making will no longer be 
based on guesswork, hunches, or random facts. Instead, it will be based
on good, clean, valuable pieces of information that are ready for action. 
That is what companies nowadays are striving for. 
 Armed with this knowledge, companies jump in and start collect-
ing big data—extremely large and comprehensive data sets—to inves-
tigate and draw conclusions from. However, this is the wrong fi rst step 
because raw data says nothing by itself, and placing even more data into 
bigger databases or copying data into spreadsheets provides no value. 
This is simply more of the same. Leaders and employees still won’t have 
answers; instead, they will have data—more data than they had before, 
but not the kind of data or the approach to data that would make their 
lives easier. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
14
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
Another mistake is to start by cleaning up the data and categorizing 
every bit of it. There is value to cleaning up data. Indeed, there is benefi t 
to normalizing data by centralizing, classifying, and structuring it. However, 
it’s hard to make a business case to do this because when the cleaning and 
organizing is done, the data does not provide answers to business questions. 
This is especially true when it turns into an IT‐focused project that doesn’t 
gain the assurance from users that the data has been validated and is usable. 
The right approach is to start with a strategic business question and 
acquire the data to answer that question. Only then can you quickly start 
visualizing your business, performing business discovery, and delivering 
actionable intelligence. You will provide information that people can 
act on because it is complete, true, and readily available. The actionable
intelligence approach works iteratively, starts small, and grows. All the
while, it delivers answers to the strategic business questions. 
 Actionable Intelligence: The Road
and the Destination
 Today, the benefi ts from the massive quantities of data we generate are 
only realized when that data is processed using a growing array of visua-
lization tools. Simple spreadsheets and software such as QlikView, SAP 
Visual Intelligence, and SAS provide a dynamic visualization of big data, 
uncovering the myriad links and interconnections behind the information. 
It is also helpful when data is stored in well‐understood systems 
like Microsoft SQL Server. However, with big data, performance can 
become an issue that necessitates making a move to Hadoop, Google Big 
Query, or SAP HANA. 
With the right tools for the job, sometimes just as pilots to show 
return on investment, we can move on to the more interesting part of 
the work—achieving real business results. 
 Business Discovery 
 Business discovery is the critical step in transforming the unstruc-
tured mass of big data into actionable intelligence. The tools mentioned 
above enable companies to drill into the many levels of data, under-
stand the connections among them, and open up new understanding 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Vision of  Actionable Intelligence 
15
and opportunities. They also take a complex, real‐time, constantly evolv-
ing picture of a business and translate it into easily understood visuals. 
This process of business discovery enables businesses to see a new, more 
complete and more encompassing business model. 
 And, as technology develops and more data is created, the potential for 
generating actionable intelligence across more and more areas is set to grow. 
 Retailers, for example, can gather data from customer loyalty cards 
and link them to other data from their customers’ social networks. Such
intelligence will allow them to better understand who their custom-
ers are and their infl uence upon other existing or potential customers. 
Companies can then more eff ectively target their marketing and make
better predictions of purchasing behavior. 
 Let us take another hypothetical example of actionable intelligence: 
A man is walking down the street in Singapore and he faints because his 
pacemaker has stopped. An ambulance is called to the scene. 
 A few minutes earlier a woman had tweeted about seeing a man 
who appeared dazed. Fifteen minutes before that security cameras 
had captured this man looking confused because the pacemaker was 
failing, and for the past few hours the pacemaker status had indicated 
failure. If all of that data had been correlated, the man’s pacemaker 
malfunction could have been prevented. At the very least, the data 
would have enabled the ambulance drivers to get to the location 
earlier and react faster based on facts to improve the outcome for 
the man. 
 The scenario just described might sound far‐fetched, but think 
about how what we take for granted today sounded equally far‐fetched 
just a few years ago: 
•   Investors keeping track of thousands of stocks at once without the 
aid of a massive computer system, something we can now do on the
move in the palm of our hands. 
•   Manufacturing companies able to view the real‐time performance 
of every manufacturing line in every plant in every location around 
the world by computer. Today, this is expected in any enterprise 
resource planning (ERP) system. 
 What we considered big data 30 years ago is not complex and chal-
lenging now. Looking three decades into the future, today’s big data will 
also be simple.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
16
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 Improving Outcomes 
 The key to improving outcomes is the combination of tools, people, and 
processes—the “capability set” that allows us to capture and process this data 
to deliver actionable intelligence in time to improve business outcomes. 
e
Speed is of the essence. Intelligence, after all, is only of real value if 
you receive it quickly enough to make use of it. 
Already, next‐generation leaders are leveraging big data and deve-
loping capabilities for delivering greater levels of actionable intelli-
gence. By pulling in data from complex, high‐volume sources like social 
media sentiment, customer movements tracked via cell phone apps, and
real‐time resource location, businesses can determine instantly what the 
optimum future outcome can be, improving the accuracy of business 
planning and overall corporate performance. 
These capabilities enable companies to seize opportunities that oth-
ers cannot. Meanwhile, companies that fail to leverage their own big 
data to extract actionable intelligence may miss out on potentially mas-
sive savings and could succumb to their competitors and current market-
place forces. 
To take one recent example, industrial giant General Electric (GE) 
says it believes the utility industry can extract about $150 billion of 
unrealized effi  ciencies by using already existing data in smarter ways. 
Using what it calls “immersive” data visualization, GE’s Grid IQ soft-
ware allows utility fi rms to better monitor their infrastructure, applying 
data streams to deliver intelligence that enables them to respond to busi-
ness changes at high speed and, critically, in time to make a diff erence. 
The message to any business is clear: Smart use of data to answer key 
questions about your business is essential to building a more encompass-
ing business model and giving you the edge on your competitors. 
Businesses that have yet to start developing actionable intelligence 
capabilities are at risk of becoming obsolete. Figure   1.3 illustrates the 
actionable intelligence goal companies should be reaching for. 
So how can a company organize itself and what process should it follow 
to deliver actionable intelligence? 
I recommend that businesses establish an actionable intelligence shared 
service group as shown in Figure   1.3 that reports into a senior leader in 
the business unit that needs the most performance improvement. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Vision of  Actionable Intelligence 
17
 At Estée Lauder, my department reported into the supply chain to 
try to reduce inventory and improve customer service. Your organiza-
tion may need help in other areas, such as sales or marketing or fi nance. 
To determine which area to focus on, look at the departments that will 
likely have the highest chance of success. Choose the area with the fol-
lowing characteristics: 
•   Leaders have a vision for actionable intelligence. 
•   Critical business needs are clear, but the facts to improve the situa-
tion are lacking. 
•   There are resources and time to establish an organization to deliver 
the capabilities. 
 Businesses that have jumped onto the big data bandwagon without 
giving it much thought are fi nding themselves in a big mess. A 2012 
study from International Data Corp. found that just 0.05 percent of 
available data in 2012 was analyzed. Gartner also estimates that, through 
2015, 85 percent of the Fortune 500 companies will fail to exploit big 
data opportunities for a competitive advantage. 
 Figure 1.3
 Actionable Intelligence from Big Data
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
18
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
Business leaders around the world recognize the strategic edge that 
big data brings. At the recent Big Data World conference in Singapore, 
many of the executives that I spoke with see the value of big data, but 
they are not quite sure how to get there. Figure   1.4 provides a simple 
yet eff ective SWAT framework to help business leaders translate big data 
into actionable intelligence. 
 S—Strategic Business Questions
 Every business has its priorities 
and overall strategy. As business leaders, it is important to understand that 
big data is intertwined with your overall strategy. Direct your big data 
eff orts depending on the strategic priorities of your company. And, do 
not try to source all the data—focus just on the “burning platform.” The 
strategic business question should be a guide. 
This critical fi rst step focuses the eff ort, gains sponsorship, and 
ensures the priority of the project remains high. The results at the end
will also garner the right amount of visibility when the answers are 
delivered. After years of implementing business intelligence without tan-
gible results, it’s time to focus on the real business questions. 
I was asked, “Do companies know the critical questions?” Emphati-
cally, yes. There are common questions senior management asks including: 
• How can we increase sales and customer service?
• Why do we have so much inventory?
 Figure 1.4 SWAT Iteration Framework 
Strategic
business
questions
Wrangle
data
Answer with
visualization
Take action
• High-Level Design
• Detailed Design
• Build Prototype
• Usability
• Timing
• Build Tool
• Process Change
• User Acceptance
• Process Change
• Value Realization
• More Questions
• Iterate
• Education/
 Training
• Organization
 Change
• Data Definition
• Business
  Ownership
Iterate
Iterate
• Source
• Analysis
• Transform
• Validation
• Timing
• Availability
• Documentation
• Question
• Business Case
• Metrics/Levers
• Root Cause
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Vision of  Actionable Intelligence 
19
•   How can we reduce returns and quality issues? 
•   How can we increase profi table sales and net profi t overall? 
•   Who are our customers and how can we answer their needs best? 
 Selecting one question to focus on allows for the rapid, iterative 
development to occur as the business and technology teams can focus. 
The narrative to describe the project becomes easier as well. Clarity 
of purpose allows sponsors and supporters to get behind the project
because they’ll clearly see the opportunity to deliver tangible results. 
 Comparatively, if the technology team is tasked with establishing a 
technology foundation for Big Data with the general reason to enable 
the business to answer these questions, the task can be so overwhelming 
to try to collect the data. Sponsors and supporters will be disappointed 
as usual as the project extends beyond the time when the answers were 
important. 
 Sponsors want quick results with low cost. This isn’t possible unless 
the project is focused and purpose driven. 
 W—Wrangle Data   While many people have been advocating the
mass collection of data, you should follow a diff erent approach. The data
needs to be focused solely on the strategic question. This enables the 
acquisition team to collect and review data quality. The quality of your 
insights is only as good as the quality of your data sets. So, before you 
head out to collect any data that you can lay your hands on, pause for a 
moment to consider the following: 
•   What kind of data do you really need to answer the strategic busi-
ness questions?
•   Where can you fi nd it? 
•   What are the IT infrastructure, tools, and policies needed?
•   Who are the people on your team with the required skillset to ana-
lyze the data?
•   How can you do all these things in a cost‐eff ective manner?
 By focusing on the required data you’ll have solid business sponsor-
ship to access data which can normally be blocked by politics, siloed 
mentality, or lack of resources to gather the data. The diffi  culty of pulling 
together data from all parts of the organization, business units, and 
geographies can stop an Actionable Intelligence project in its tracks. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
20
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
This work should be done with an rapid and iterative framework 
like this: 
• A quick blast out to all parties to request the data
• Focus on working with those who provide positive responses and 
results
• Verify the data and if right incorporate into the data repository 
• Repeat steps to gather more data 
 A—Answer with Visualization
 According to Napoleon Bonaparte, 
“A good sketch is better than a long speech.” Raw data displayed in Excel 
is diffi  cult to use to garner insights. Fortunately, innovation in the fi eld of 
data visualization has created business discovery tools that make things
easier and more eff ective. For example, QlikTech (NASDAQ:QLIK) has
created a tool called Qlikview that provides user‐friendly yet concise 
executive dashboard and report capabilities. 
However, while tools such as QlikView enable results, the process of 
developing a framework for that visualization is critical to success. Typical 
intelligence tools visualize data after you select a specifi c fi lter. But 
Qlikview goes the other way around. The data and relationships are all 
visible to you to discover new opportunities. You have to see the diff e-
rence to believe it. 
To gain the most benefi ts at this stage someone on the team needs to 
have a vision for how the answers will be used. For that vision to come 
alive you should hold regular (weekly or at least monthly) design sessions 
with business users, asking: 
• How will the answer be used? 
• How can we best show “Where We Are Today?” 
• How can we show “How to Win Tomorrow”?
• How do we embed intelligence into the business? 
• How will the standard operating procedures change?
• Are the right critical issues being highlighted for review? 
 T—Take Action
 With a visual answer supported by good data, we move 
into the “take action” phase. Review the answer with the sponsor, and deter-
mine the actions to be taken in the short term and the long term, including: 
• What actions can we take right now? 
• Can we capture the value saved or earned? 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Vision of  Actionable Intelligence 
21
•   Does the current process and organization need to change to start 
making fact‐based decisions? 
 Inevitably, the fi rst answers will generate more and deeper questions. 
Start the SWAT framework again and quickly provide answers again . . . fast. 
 The SWAT framework enables fast, continuous delivery of action-
able intelligence. 
 Take the following example: Imagine you work on the intelli gence 
team of a company that manufactures toy cars in diff erent shapes and 
sizes. Things were going great with your toys—the kids loved them. But, 
recently, kids have been more interested in tablet PCs than cars. 
 So, here’s a new challenge to keeping the company profi table. The 
strategic question left unanswered is: Are we maximizing our profi t? 
 One day, your boss asks you to visualize the revenues and costs of 
each business unit. Your team gathers the right revenue and cost data for 
each business unit. You then visualize that data to show how diff erent 
business units are doing. 
 You show your visualization to your boss to answer his question. 
But your boss notices one unit—say, the toy fi re truck department—
performing particularly badly. He delves into the individual costs in his
tool and discover where the money went. Apparently, the toy fi re trucks 
cost double the manpower of toy police cars but are sold for the same 
price. Now your boss has some information that suggests all production 
should be switched to toy cars. But to get a full picture of whether he 
should do that, you might need to deliver more information about the 
product lines including: 
•   What is the historic demand for fi re trucks and police cars?
•   How is it changing?
•   What social media chatter is going on about the products? 
•   Who is the customer and what are we doing to attract more of the same?  
 Now you’ve sparked something—a bit of actionable intelligence. Of 
course, the entire process is slightly more complicated. 
 Throughout this process there are some goals you should strive for. 
I call these goals the Vision of Actionable Intelligence: 
•   Easy‐to‐access internal and external information that enables deci-
sion makers at all levels to quickly answer questions with facts
•   Good data quality (on time and accurate) 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
22
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
•  Ability to access answers during meetings, walking down the hallway, 
on the way to the airport, or while talking to a customer without
ever having to send an e-mail to a colleague in a diff erent informa-
tion silo  
 Actionable intelligence stands for more than just visualizing your 
data. It requires you to break down the silo structure of diff erent depart-
ments and their data to equip the people in a company with the full
picture of the situation. 
 Here is where the major ERP systems fall dramatically short. Com-
panies rarely connect these systems to all internal and external functions, 
so the reports and data warehouses run short of the information needed 
to fully provide actionable intelligence. 
 In such an environment with data silos and shortfalls, users need 
to cobble together data from many diff erent sources into some sort of 
spreadsheet. This situation is so common that I have found in speaking 
to large companies around the world that Microsoft Excel seems to be 
the most used tool for performing business analysis. 
 Indeed, in the fall of 2012, I spoke at a conference on end‐to‐end 
visibility and asked the 300‐plus participants whether they use Excel 
along with a business intelligence (BI) tool to get a full picture of data. 
One hundred percent said yes. 
 When I asked how many use more than one BI tool, 90 percent said 
they did. So, big companies with big budgets—enough to pay $2,200 
per head to attend a conference—still don’t have a BI tool that meets 
their complete needs. Why?
 In addition to breaking down silos, actionable intelligence creates 
massive benefi ts for companies—often bigger than you could even 
imagine. 
 Stages of Actionable Intelligence: Getting Ready 
for the Journey by Knowing Where You 
Are and Where to Go
 Before you start off  on your journey of actionable intelligence and big 
data, take a moment to assess where you on the maturity curve. (See 
Table  1.1 .)
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
23
 Table 1.1  Stages of Actionable Intelligence 
Stage
Description
Visibility
Data Quality
Method of 
Collecting Data
No facts
• “I’m right! Believe me! Let
me tell you.”
Backward looking
Unknown
Inconsistent
• “I know that this is going to 
work! I can feel it!”
 Individuals who rely on their 
gut feelings and make decisions
based on feelings instead of facts
Invested, but no
benefi ts yet
“IT will let us know.”
• Getting conned by the con-
sultant
• Stage of wasting a lot of 
money
Backward looking, 
but copies of manual 
reports are automated
Straight copies from 
unverifi ed sources
Extract Transform 
Load (ETL)/slow
Local hero
“Let me show you.”
Customized results 
making it easier to 
make business decisions
Attested to by
power users
ETL and guerrilla
acquisition for 
speed
Intelligence 
leader
Fact‐based decision-making 
practitioner for strategic
business questions
• Here is my potential 
outcome.
• Forward looking
• Potential opportuni-
ties and risks
• End‐to‐end visibility 
optimized
• Known catalogued
• Data KPIs accompany 
senior management 
dashboards
Planned and
executed with 
excellence
• This is the band of optimal 
outcome.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
24
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 No Facts . . . So, Use Your Gut?
 In the traditional decision making process, leaders rely on their gut feel-
ings and their intuition to tell them what is right and where they should
go. However, it is a backward‐looking approach that reacts without any 
supporting evidence. 
Despite the advances in technologies and a whole bookshelf of  busi-
ness intelligence tomes, some companies still choose to remain in this stage. 
According to an SAS Institute survey conducted among data management 
professionals, about 32 percent of the companies are in this stage. 1
This could be because they tend to have a more traditional culture 
and they are resistant to change. Thus, it is not surprising that most of 
them are not the dominating market leaders or big players. 
 Invested Money and Time but Not Yet Receiving Tangible Benefi ts
 Companies that are willing to take the fi rst steps to overcoming resis-
tance to change and start exploring the realm of intelligence may soon
fi nd themselves stuck in a situation where they are spending lots of 
money and feeling like they are not getting the most out of the engage-
ment of their consultants. This is because improving the data quality and 
acquisition process will take signifi cant time and eff ort. As such, most
people who don’t understand the proper sequence for incorporating 
intelligence into the culture will conclude their strategy is not working 
and will, thus, remain stuck in the situation. The SAS Institute survey 
shows that 39 percent of professionals who are exploring big data are in 
this stage.   
 Local Hero
 Leaders who have maintained good‐quality data in a central location, 
have worked with an extremely good consultant, or have read a good 
book about leveraging actionable intelligence and big data will prob-
ably fi nd themselves at this stage—localized success. They have enjoyed 
quick wins that are impressive enough to convince top management or 
the rest of the team to sponsor the exploration of the project. According 
to the SAS survey, 16 percent of data management professionals are at 
this stage.   
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Vision of  Actionable Intelligence 
25
 Intelligence Leader (Enterprise Actionable intelligence Capabilities)
 With more funds, resources, and support from the rest of the team—
coupled with the right combination of governance and cultural man-
agement—companies will join the 12 percent that are implementing/
executing decisions based on big data. They will develop into fact‐based 
enterprises that grow further and fl y higher with actionable intelligence. 
 At which of these stages in Table  1.1 are you? 
 If we look at things from the “people” perspective, we can see some 
of the underlying factors that infl uenced the results of the projects. 
When people rely on gut feelings, they doubt their capabilities to adopt 
learning and adopt intelligence into their work and businesses. There are
no key performance indicators (KPIs) to do it, and they generally feel 
apprehensive about taking the fi rst step and try to fi nd excuses to delay 
discussion or just to change the topic. 
 When they have overcome that fear and become beginners, they will 
start off  with IT‐led projects and IT‐created KPIs. As the company starts 
to get more comfortable and confi dent about the projects, it will become 
“business‐engaged,” whereby business executives start to use intelligence 
on their own instead of demanding IT spoon‐feed them the reports and 
information they require. They will also start to create business KPIs. 
 By the time the project reaches the stage shown in Table   1.1 of 
“local hero,” the business would have taken control of the project and
the project becomes business‐led. Team members start to focus on and 
commit themselves to answering the strategic business questions and go 
deeper to try to gather the answers. When the process is done right and 
the savings are measured, people’s capabilities reach the stage whereby 
they can deliver business results. 
 As the entire company buys into the new system, employees’ lives 
are made easier and the benefi ts start rolling into the fact‐based enter-
prise; leaders become apostles who spread the power of actionable intel-
ligence to everyone. This is the stage you want to be in—and the stage
you want to sustain yourself in. 
 Growing People’s Capabilities on Actionable Intelligence 
 It’s up to you to determine where you are and where you want to go. 
Table   1.2 provides descriptions of what actionable intelligence looks like 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
26
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
in diff erent companies and how it’s measured. You are already equipped 
with the roadmap and an idea, a vision of what actionable intelligence 
should look like for you. Time to start! 
 Are You Ready to Take the First Step?
 In this chapter, we have seen what actionable intelligence can lead to 
and the world of change it creates. In the next four chapters, diff erent 
steps in the process to create your own actionable intelligence program 
will be highlighted. All business, nothing too technical. With the help 
of this book you can become the next Zhuge Liang, a sage who deliv-
ers limitless value to your organization, enabling your organization to 
see a 360‐degree view of the situation and be proactive in decision 
making. 
It does not matter what function you perform in an organization 
or what kind of organization you work in. You will have the power 
to inspire, defi ne a vision, and rally followers to share your beliefs. You 
will have the power to empower coworkers and give them actionable 
intelligence. 
 Table 1.2  Profi les in Actionable Intelligence
Profi le
Description
Measuring Results
No leadership
• “I don’t know what analytics 
is.”
• “Intelligence = 007?”
• “It’s impossible for us to
do it.”
No KPIs. Projects 
completed but original 
business case not 
reviewed.
Information 
Technology(IT)‐led
“Hey IT, just run the report for 
us.”
IT created KPIs that
don’t quite fi t the 
business needs.
Business engaged
“I’ll create the report myself.”
Business created KPIs.
Business led
“Let’s focus on the strategic 
business questions.”
Go deeper to retrieve.
Business results
“I’ve delivered results with 
forward intelligence.”
Act and shine.
Apostles
“Everyone should know the 
power of actionable intelligence.”
Shares results with others.
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Vision of  Actionable Intelligence 
27
 Why Is It Called Actionable Intelligence and Not 
Analytics or Big Data?
 The words we use create feelings and pictures in our mind. It is really 
important to use words that provide an instant response in our audience. 
 For example, Bond . . . James Bond versus analyst. 
 Or just take the word analytics apart into its syllables and you arrive 
at unfortunate primary school jokes. If you are the head of analytics well, 
I’d change that if I were you . . . just saying. Or at a loud cocktail party 
try shouting, “I’m into analytics!” 
 Seriously, let’s look at each phrase. 
 Big data. No one heard about it till a year ago; geeks, tech sales, and 
technical marketing loved it; it sounds so smart, but what does it mean 
to the rest of the world? Recently, I asked an audience of 150 people and 
fi ve panelists at a conference on big data to defi ne it. The panelists had 
six diff erent defi nitions and the audience wasn’t sure at all. We do not 
have any reference to it from growing up. It means nothing except how 
pundits are trying to defi ne it. 
 In my view big data is a state, a situation, that defi nes a set of data that 
no one is using and may not know how to use. Thousands of years ago 
when the Romans did a census, they wrote down a lot of information but 
had no easy way to process it. Compared to today, a census is easily viewed, 
visualized, and used to make decisions using computers. What was big data 
in the Roman era is now just . . . data. Today, companies have data about 
their products from social media and millions of transactions in myriad 
interconnected systems. When a company cannot leverage this data into 
information to make decisions, we can call it big data. 
 According to Merriam‐Webster, analytics is defi ned as: the method 
of logical analysis.2
 So what is analysis? Again, Merriam‐Webster’s defi nition:  3
 1:  separation of a whole into its component parts 
 2 a : the identifi cation or separation of ingredients of a substance; b : a 
statement of the constituents of a mixture
 3 a : proof of a mathematical proposition by assuming the result and 
deducing a valid statement by a series of reversible steps; b  (1): a
branch of mathematics concerned mainly with limits, continuity, 
and infi nite series (2): calculus 1b 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
28
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 4 a : an examination of a complex, its elements, and their relations; b :
a statement of such an analysis
 5 a : a method in philosophy of resolving complex expressions into 
simpler or more basic ones; b : clarifi cation of an expression by an 
elucidation of its use in discourse 
Do we have all year to create a discourse on the opportunities we need 
to seize because our competitor stumbled or a new trend just emerged? 
No. Businesses need to be agile, responsive, and when a customer comes 
yelling, “Where’s my stuff ?” we can’t turn to our helpful discourse on 
analytics. Nor would it help in the exceptional cases when the “stuff ” went 
missing or had a quality problem or the government of XYZ country just 
collapsed. After all, those events were not in the model. 
Actionable Intelligence: Merriam Webster’s defi nition of both words: 
Actionable: synonyms: useful, applicable, functional, usable, 
workable. 4
Here’s the defi nition: 
1: subject to or aff ording ground for an action or suit at law 
2: capable of being acted on <actionable information> 
Intelligence defi nition ( Merriam‐Webster Dictionary, 2014): 
1a  (1) : the ability to learn or understand or to deal with new or 
trying situations: reason; also: the skilled use of reason    (2) : the 
ability to apply knowledge to manipulate one’s environment or 
to think abstractly as measured by objective criteria (as tests)
 2a:   information, news ; b:   information concerning an enemy
or possible enemy or an area; also: an agency engaged in 
obtaining such information 
Now, we can see by defi nition that actionable intelligence is the right 
phrase for business. Do not follow the crowd and use what the pundits 
are saying; it simply does not apply to business. This book is about taking 
action, being practical, and being smart! Enable your organization with 
actionable intelligence capabilities, and you will win again and again. 
And one more thing: Figure   1.5 provides some statistics to get you 
excited. Industries of all type are gaining from leveraging big data into 
actionable intelligence to achieve better results in sales and cost reductions. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Vision of  Actionable Intelligence 
29
 Summary and Considerations 
 Notes 
 1.  2013 Big Data Survey Research Brief,  www.sas.com/resources/whitepaper/
wp_58466.pdf. 
 2. Merriam-Webster Dictionary, an Encyclopedia Britannica Company,  www
.merriam‐webster.com/dictionary/analytics. 
 3.  Ibid.,  www.merriam‐webster.com/dictionary/analysis. 
 4.  Ibid.,  www.merriam‐webster.com/dictionary/actionable. 
 Figure 1.5
 Benefi ts of Eff ective Data
 Source:“Business Benefi ts of Eff ective Data” from University of Austin study, 2010.  
:
Point to Ponder: Defi ne the vision, make it great! 
Quote to Remember: “As the entire company buys into the
new system, employees’ lives are made easier and the benefi ts
start rolling into the fact‐based enterprise; leaders become apos-
tles who spread the power of actionable intelligence to every-
one. This is the stage you want to be in—and the stage you want
to sustain yourself in.” 
Question to Consider: What is the question our organization
is passionate about, and is there interest in answering it?
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
31
 Chapter  2
 Discovery of the
Business Situation
(Business Discovery)
 Key Points and Questions
• Answer sponsored strategic questions all the time. 
• Taking too long to answer a question results in lost opportunities. 
• Good business leaders ask questions so they can guide their business 
to become great. 
• Great business leaders prioritize their questions and dedicate 
resources to fi nd the answers. They create and sustain the capabilities 
to make fact‐based decisions. 
 I
n the late 1400s, wars and bandits around the key trade routes 
through the Middle East to Asia made it diffi  cult for the Europeans 
to travel to India and China. Christopher Columbus believed there
was a shorter route to Asia that could be found by traveling in the op-
posite direction. In order to prove his great theory, he set off  in search of 
sponsors and support. He took his plans to the kings of Portugal, Genoa, 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
32
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
and Venice. He was rejected by all. He even asked his brother to seek an 
audience with Henry VII of England, but to no avail. 
In 1486, when he went to the Spanish monarchy of Isabella of 
Castille and Ferdinand of Aragon, they were skeptical about his ideas. 
However, they saw the potential in Christopher Columbus and wanted 
to keep their options open. They kept him on a retainer with monthly 
allowances to prevent him from taking his plans to others. 
When the Spanish army fi nally took over the last Muslim stronghold 
in Granada in January 1492, Christopher Columbus was fi nally given
the opportunity he had been waiting for: The Spanish monarchs agreed
to sponsor his voyage. In August 1492, Columbus left Spain (headed, 
despite what he thought, for the “New World”). 
The Spanish monarchs fi nanced the voyage of Christopher Columbus 
and his crew with the expectation of fi nding a new way to trade and 
new partners to trade with. If anyone had told them the return on their 
investment would be a new continent, gold, oil, and other bountiful 
natural resources, they wouldn’t have believed it. In fact, the Spanish 
monarchs did not even expect Columbus to return. 
Today, companies have a new world of data they need to discover. 
They need to understand the value of their data inside their four walls 
and the big data outside. To do so requires going on a voyage—a voyage 
of business discovery. 
However, most companies have not even attempted this venture 
because: 
• They do not have exploratory talent like Columbus and his small 
crew. 
• They cannot fully envision the benefi ts. 
• Politically, it is not typically the “good‐old boy” who can deliver this 
but an aggressive outsider who can get past the politics and position-
ing to achieve the results. 
And it is not even just businesses—or Spanish monarchies—that can 
benefi t from this voyage of discovery. Most any organization can. 
A friend who teaches public elementary school in Massachusetts 
shared with me that the drive toward data‐driven education some-
times ignores the fact that data is being collected about humans—
young humans. And what incents and dis‐incents these humans may 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Discovery of the Business Situation (Business Discovery) 
33
have nothing or everything to do with the material being taught 
and assessed. 
 For example, my teacher friend had a student who scored poorly on 
the state’s standardized math and English language arts tests. The teacher 
and other staff  pored over the data from the tests and other instruments 
to try to determine the best way to close the gap in this child’s learn-
ing. What the data did not show, however, was that the student was 
going through a very diffi  cult time at home. The best material and most
focused instruction would not help this student learn because—it was
discovered—he did not feel safe at home. The latter needed to be taken 
care of before the former could even be attempted. 
 When you think about it, teaching and learning are all about big data, 
and, indeed, education is moving toward a data‐driven model. When a 
teacher gets a new classroom of students, he or she can read each student’s 
records, examine past standardized test scores, and review work samples. 
 But the picture that the data draws is not really clear at all—at least, 
it is not complete. 
 “Ultimately, student achievement data alone only yield a ‘black box,’” 
noted Frederick M. Hess, author of Common Sense School Reform , in an 
article published in Educational Leadership magazine. “They illustrate how 
students are faring but do not enable an organization to diagnose prob-
lems or manage improvement. It is as if a CEO’s management dashboard
consisted of only one item—the company stock’s price.” 1
 Indeed, teachers have to explore further—go on a voyage of discovery. 
For example, do low standardized test scores refl ect a low academic abil-
ity, or do they refl ect the fact that the student’s father lost his job, that his 
mother is working the second shift and so isn’t home when the student 
gets off  the bus, and that the student was hungry the morning of the 
standardized assessment?
 A teacher who looks only at quantitative data—with little or no 
regard for the human being who is behind the data—will never fully 
realize the benefi ts that new teaching practices or units of study will 
uncover. The teacher needs to go on a voyage of discovery—he or 
she needs to speak to the student’s family, his friends, past teachers, the
administration, and—of course—the student himself. 
 Only then will the teacher begin to see and truly understand the 
student. The teacher can try new teaching techniques and present 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
34
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
material in diff erent ways. The teacher may fi nd that the student is able 
to eff ectively demonstrate understanding not in conventional ways but 
through drawing and play‐acting. 
In this example, the teacher is able to understand the value of the 
data within the four walls of the school but is willing to go beyond that 
data to get to benefi ts as yet unknown. 
Normal assessment of students is signifi cantly overweighted with one 
factor: performance on continuous assessment. Arguably, this can assess the 
student’s ability in several areas: memorization of facts and methods, logic, 
reasoning, and ability to perform under time pressure. But to understand 
how a student may perform in arts, science, and engineering, how do we 
assess their ability to visualize, innovate, inspire, and perspire? Wouldn’t it 
be wonderful if for primary school students we could: 
• Match students who learn better with hands-on and practical work 
with teachers that provide that experience 
• Create classes and exams that cater to students “on‐the‐move” versus 
those who can sit for two hours quietly writing away
• Assess the parents’ ability to provide a nurturing environment and 
teach them their role in education  
The common theme across these three ideas is having actionable 
intelligence on our students to enable them to excel in learning. The
strategic business question is, “How we prepare the next generation to 
improve the economic output of a nation.” 
By acquiring data on the student’s, teacher’s, and parents’ teaching and 
study habits we can visualize the right matrix of factors that will drive 
success. As long as we can act on the fi ndings, we will be able to deliver 
better learning outcomes. 
What can you do for those in your life who are learning to achieve 
a better outcome? 
 Government Intelligence 
 In 2009, I happened to need to visit the Singapore Embassy in Washington, 
D.C., for a dinner hosted by the past ambassador Chan Heng Chee. My 
family and I drove down from New York and had a fantastic time as 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Discovery of the Business Situation (Business Discovery) 
35
usual. We stayed overnight, and, during the drive back home, I saw a sign 
for The National Cryptologic Museum located at the National Security
Agency campus. 
 Curious, I took the entire family on a detour. We passed the National 
Security Agency (NSA) building and lots of odd, space‐age buildings
jutting out of the ground here and there. Were they complex listening 
and collection devices? Who knows? I was just excited about seeing the
NSA and the Cryptologic Museum. 
 Once inside the latter, we saw the famous red phone of presidents, 
encryption machines, and the Hall of Intelligence Heroes: the men and 
women who broke codes, deciphered communications, and changed the 
course of history by providing actionable intelligence at the speed the 
government and military required. 
 I was so inspired by that trip; top-performing governments have effi  -
cient information acquisition and management structures. When infor-
mation is placed into the hands of the right people, the right actions 
happen, often just in time to save lives or protect interests. 
 The National Security Agency has example after example of pro-
viding actionable intelligence to visionary decision makers—in enough
time to prevent catastrophes. The means and methods and depth of 
information may be concerning, but the fact is that to protect against
future threats we need to dig into the data share. (The biggest problem 
now is that with the exposure of Eric Snowden by the media, the bad 
guys know more about what to do to avoid detection.)
 The Finnish have a word, “aavistus.” In the United States, we call it 
intuition. Many businesses have intuition about risks and opportunities, 
but it can be too time‐consuming or expensive to collect all the data nec-
essary to gel the intuition into fact‐based decisions. 
 This is the dilemma that many professionals face today: They might 
have the right ideas and intuition, but there is not enough fi nancial sup-
port or resources to get to real and true answers. However, this should 
not be a deterring factor for you—not just yet. Do some research to fi nd 
out the challenges you need to overcome and what you are in for. 
 For my fi rst intelligence project, we had to deliver intelligence quickly 
but had zero budget and very little manpower. So I did some research as 
to what we should expect to achieve and how to get there—much like 
you are doing now. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
36
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
A great place to start is a book by Jeanne Harris and  Thomas Davenport, 
Competing on Analytics: The New Science of Winning.2  The book details many
examples of how companies used analytics to beat their competitors. 
The commonality among these companies lies in how they were able to
better connect with their customers. 
For example: 
• Netfl ix uses the previous selections of its users to suggest the mov-
ies they might like to watch in the future. This allows customers 
to feel they can get more out of their services because when new 
movies come out, they will know what to watch. For the company, 
a higher success rate of suggesting movies to the customer translates 
into higher customer satisfaction and higher ratings. This, in turn, 
leads to more customer references and recommendations. The data
was always there (sales receipts of purchases online). 
• Another example of a company that has successfully used intelli-
gence is 1‐800‐Flowers. It built an online fl ower business that essen-
tially replaced FTD. 1‐800‐Flowers got to know its customers very 
well. As a result, the customer gets good service and good products 
at a good price. 
• Will Smith, the actor, uses analytics to decide what movies he will 
star in. He looks at the genre, the story arc, the ending, and the role 
he will play. He then analyzes similar movies to see what their box
offi  ce performance has been. Then he selects the role carefully based 
on the data. 
It all starts with the strategic question. Before you get to the detailed 
answers with analytics, you need to have a culture of storytelling. The most 
successful companies train people to tell stories about their data. They are able 
to look at a set of data, see the relationships between the data and business 
problems, and then relate to senior management the current situation, 
opportunities, and threats, and recommended actions based on the facts. 
But after reading this book I was left with many questions: 
• How did all those companies and Will Smith actually deliver these 
dreamlike capabilities?
• What was actually improved, and how much was monetized? 
• What was the business case for hiring and training analysts?
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Discovery of the Business Situation (Business Discovery) 
37
•   What was the business case for data management? 
•   How could we deliver these capabilities fast, and what would gov-
ernance look like?
 Ask the Questions
 Business decisions are based on questions about the current situation and 
how that situation can be improved. Those are called strategic business 
questions. It can be tempting to execute business decisions without as
full and fact‐based an answer as one would like when the data is hard 
to acquire, or when the team is becoming exhausted by trying to put
together a story. It is a race to deliver answers before: 
•   The question has changed or moved on. 
•   The priority to answer the question has been reduced. 
•   The opportunity to answer is gone. 
 At a chief fi nancial offi  cers (CFO) roundtable I asked, “What’s stop-
ping you from delivering actionable intelligence?” 
 One CFO said passionately, “I have enough data, but my people 
can’t give me  answers !” 
 All executives need to ask, “Can I, today, aff ord to be lacking as much 
visual information as I need to answer my most pertinent questions?” 
 There is only one answer: “No.” 
 Your competitors may already have the capability to answer their 
most important questions. Even if they do not, the marketplace is chang-
ing. Without this capability, your business may not perform as well as it 
could. Your business might end up in the emergency room simply by 
making a seemingly small wrong decision or by not taking timely action. 
 When you have a business question that is important enough to spend 
money answering, you start off  gathering the data that makes sense to 
answer the question. 
 One tip, however: Control your scope/control the investment. You 
do not have to gather data from around the whole world. You do not 
have to build a huge vault, nor invest in all sorts of computing power-
scaling analysis right off  the bat. You just need the precise data necessary 
to answer your question. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
38
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 Controlling scope and working from strategic business questions will 
be a central theme throughout the discussion of implementing actionable 
intelligence. 
Answer the Questions: Business Discovery 
 The crucial step that follows asking questions is—you guessed it—
answering the questions. That is what the eff orts of gathering data and 
creating actionable intelligence capabilities will be all about. By answer-
ing people’s (leadership‐sponsored) strategic business questions as well as 
possible with the available data and compelling visualizations, you can
obtain the money and buy‐in to grow your eff orts, grow your team, and 
develop the project. 
 However, what strikes me as odd is that this seemingly simple and 
iterative pattern of asking a question and getting an answer is often not 
supported by traditional business intelligence (BI) tools. 
 Traditional BI tools operate by answering a predetermined set of 
questions. In this model, IT also plays a large role in churning out the 
fi xed reports for the rest of the business. 
 In contrast, there is a movement to create a set of tools allowing a free‐
roam approach to answering questions in which answers can be created 
on the go by combining any type of data that’s already available in a 
user‐friendly visualization. This approach is more user‐driven and allows 
users to create questions while they are digging in the data and explore 
the data for the right answer. 
 Gartner calls this approach “data discovery,” and QlikView, a key 
proponent of this type of BI, calls it “business discovery.” The discovery 
part lies in the opportunity for users to discover new facts in existing 
data and to discover new questions while exploring the data. 
 Here is QlikView’s defi nition of business discovery (see Figure   2.1 ): 
 Business Discovery is a whole new way of answering questions 
that puts the business user in control. Unlike traditional BI, 
where just a few people are involved in insight creation, Business 
Discovery enables everyone to create insight. It’s about work-
groups, departments, and entire business units having access to 
the data they need to make better decisions.”3
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
39
 Figure 2.1  QlikView Business Discovery Ecosystem 
 Source: Illustration by QlikTech, Inc. 
:
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
40
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
In my article published in NUS (National University of Singapore) 
Think Business magazine (June 3, 2013) called “Big Data: What’s the Big 
Deal?,” I go further to defi ne business discovery as: 
Taking a complex, real-time, constantly evolving picture of a busi-
ness and translating it into easily understood visuals, these tools
enable us to drill into the many levels of data, understand the 
connections between them and open up new understanding and
opportunities. This process of “business discovery” enables busi-
nesses to see a new, more complete and more encompassing 
business model. 
I would never say a company has a lack of reports, but, rather, it is 
typically missing the right analytical tools. During business discovery 
you should be asking questions like: 
• Do I have the critical business information I need to make decisions? 
• Are the data management teams maintaining the data well? 
• To review historical versus present and future, is my data aligned 
between my old systems and any new systems?
• Are my people trained and capable of using the intelligence to make 
better decisions?
• Is there a feedback loop that allows us to show we are using intel-
ligence the right way? 
I believe business leaders need ready answers to their business ques-
tions. Knowing the status of business can’t be a monthly exercise with 
data from weeks or months in the past. It should be consumable enough 
to be a daily or weekly exercise with a view into future possibilities based 
on current plans. Preferably, some modeling or multiple plans can be 
looked at to see what happens in various scenarios. 
Leaders also need to provide visibility to their teams. With visibility, 
the team can make better decisions; team members can spend more time
executing on opportunities they see instead of spending critical hours 
collecting data and formatting a report in Excel. 
Energy spent on collating data detracts signifi cantly from the time 
and energy of analysis. That is why actionable intelligence is the logical
next step in the evolution of efficiency mechanisms for any type of 
business. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Discovery of the Business Situation (Business Discovery) 
41
 Business Discovery Example
 Let me give an example of business discovery at Estee Lauder, my previ-
ous employer. 
 When I wanted to know why the customer service level was low and 
what level it could be at in the future, my team and I considered what we 
needed to know. First, we needed to ask the question: “What is customer 
service?” We determined that it is orders from our customers, with the 
products shipped on time and in full, of good quality, and with all the 
right paperwork. In addition, we needed to understand and be able to 
measure customer service performance. To do so, we considered what we 
would need to measure for the achievement of the “perfect order”: 
•   Customer information and the order information 
•   Inventory and forecast 
•   Information on the items/services 
•   Segmentation information such as brands and category 
 I directed my intelligence team to focus on the heart of the strategic 
business questions to visualize a fast answer. 
 Our strategic questions were: 
•   How can we improve our customer service?
•   How can we avoid inventory mistakes?
•   How can we make sustainable changes in our supply chain? 
 As soon as we started to delve into these questions, we realized there 
was a vast amount of data in a collection of BI reports, Microsoft Access 
databases, Excel fi les and other systems. We knew we needed to focus 
on the data relevant to the question, or we’d be lost in a soupy sea of 
information. 
 We needed to go deeper. We needed to align our discovery with our 
business goals: 
•   Where are we in terms of our business performance? This applies to 
our strategy, tactics, and where we wanted to go as a business. 
•   What do we need to try to do to become more competitive? 
 Each business will have its own set of strategic business questions. 
Your company might be fi ne in these areas; you might instead be looking 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
42
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
at quality or purchasing improvements. To be sure, every company has 
opportunities to make more fact‐based decisions. 
To succeed, we needed to prioritize the strategic business questions, 
set expectations on the delivery date of the answers, and then deliver in 
small steps following an iterative business discovery model. 
With regard to prioritizing, always remember the following: 
• Good business leaders ask questions so they can guide their business 
better. 
• Great business leaders prioritize their questions and dedicate resources 
to fi nd the answers. They create and sustain the capabilities to make 
fact‐based decisions. 
Business leaders give direction to the company and its strategy, but they 
also give direction to the business discovery process. So, to put together 
an eff ective apparatus to disseminate data and answer questions, you need 
to fi nd the answers to the most important questions. This will help you 
start up the eff ort to provide real answers for everyone’s big questions. On 
top of that, you have the opportunity to attract sponsors to your cause—a 
victory whose importance should never be underestimated. 
And whatever the development, don’t stop focusing on the core: 
answering sponsored business questions. 
One caveat. You simply cannot answer every important question. 
There will be a limit to what you can and cannot do, especially in terms of 
budget, manpower, and expertise. To demonstrate your new capabilities, it’s 
important to fi gure out what business questions can be answered well—
without straining resources to such an extent that it will hamper your results. 
At Estée Lauder, we fi rst tackled the global inventory tool, which 
allowed us to gather the inventories of Estée Lauder, centralize them, and
pick up on the details, for example, location, price, and SKU number. 
 Visual Consistency and the First Tool 
 We brought in a team, the MLH Group, that is very good at visualizing 
the strategic business questions in QlikView. Helena May and her team 
brought a deep knowledge of data models and visualization, without 
which we couldn’t make the information come to life. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Discovery of the Business Situation (Business Discovery) 
43
 When you use an Apple product, your experience includes consist-
ency, ease of use, smoothness of interaction, and fi t/fi nish. Each tool we 
created was built to meet the “Apple standard” of user experience. Keep 
in mind: We weren’t IT, so we actually had to use these tools to do work 
when we were done creating them. It was in our best interest to make 
the tools easy, fast, and eff ective. 
 NOTE  
 The business and IT have diff erent motivations. The project budget 
is used to deliver functions, not ease‐of‐use. Business users want ease
of delivering results post go‐live. 
 Even if IT is on the hook for results, they do not have to use 
the tools they build, so the incentive to achieve Apple‐like simplic-
ity, which is very complex to attain, is not there for IT. Unless the 
business doesn’t allow go‐live until simplicity and ease‐of‐use are 
achieved, it will get tools that are complicated to use. 
 Gaining Support with Our First Tool: Global Inventory Tool 
 Harry Bennett, former head of quality assurance for Estee Lauder’s North 
American operations, is a long‐time mentor and friend. When I fi rst 
started working at Estée Lauder, we met and he took me through the 
intelligence capabilities he had provided to the packaging and quality
assurance (QA) teams. It was the year 2000, and he had broken down 
silos to gather data into Microsoft  Access to provide visibility to projects. 
His passion and enthusiasm for data have always been impressive. In
2010, it made sense to me to show him the new actionable intelligence 
tool fi rst. 
 I met him at his offi  ce on a high fl oor in the General Motors build-
ing. After we caught up a bit, I drew Harry’s attention to his computer 
screen and asked him to open the global inventory tool on our internal
QlikView server. 
 I showed him how the About tab provided documentation on how 
to use the tool and, importantly, all the acronyms related to inventory so 
new people could understand the business terms. We then jumped right 
into the Global Inventory tab. I showed him how we could fi lter on all 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
44
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
types of metadata and search. I turned to Harry and asked, “Is there an 
item that has a QA issue that you are concerned about right now?” 
He thought for a moment, and noted that there was a product that 
was interacting with packaging the wrong way. 
After he gave me the product name, voilà! Instantly, he was able to see 
the locations of the inventory in manufacturing, distribution, in transit, and 
at our sales affi  liates with information that was just refreshed that morning. 
He saw that he could quickly drill into the results to see inventory 
details like quality status, expiration date, value, categorization, and so forth. 
I asked him how long it would normally take him to fi nd this infor-
mation, and he answered that it would normally take three to four 
days—and that’s if he had all of the correct information. 
I asked if he would support me in showing the global inventory tool 
to the Supply Chain Leadership Team (SCLT). He said yes, but suggested
we show it fi rst to Pat Chiappetta, former VP of Global Quality Assur-
ance at the Estee Lauder Companies, Inc. 
We visited Pat, who welcomed Harry and me, and I demonstrated 
the capabilities again. 
One of the key benefi ts of this tool was the ability it aff orded us to 
see the quality assurance status in each location around the world. The 
QA team was able to reduce the products on QA hold from $24 million 
to $6 million globally. The benefi ts included converting inventory into 
sales, clearing up space in our distribution centers, avoiding the manu-
facturing of additional products, and more. 
Next, I provided a demonstration to the SCLT in the hopes of bol-
stering support for our work. Note that we were not provided additional 
budget for this work. 
Little did I expect that there would be dissatisfaction! It came from 
one of the SCLT members, who claimed he hadn’t been asked what 
capability he’d want for his department. In truth, I had identifi ed him as
an early potential stakeholder, but when I went to set up a time to meet 
with him, he pushed me off  to one of his subordinates, who never fol-
lowed through. It wasn’t until much later that this department’s capability 
would start to be developed, long after other departments were reaping 
the benefi ts. 
The lesson I learned from this is that it is important to build support 
for your cause before going into a group meeting. Thankfully, I already had 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Discovery of the Business Situation (Business Discovery) 
45
support and requirements from other parts of the business. If I hadn’t, 
this one squeaky wheel might have delayed our project. 
 Off  to the Races
 Now you have seen how to discover and prioritize strategic business 
questions, the starting point in your journey, but we’re not there yet. 
The questions are just the theoretical foundation, the justifi cation for 
your project. What you need now is a practical foundation, something 
tangible, to go alongside the questions. To reach a satisfying answer you 
need something to base that answer on. You need data. And not just any 
data—you need the right data. It’s a race, but don’t make it a rat race. 
 Summary and Considerations 
 Notes 
 1.  Frederick M. Hess, “Data: Now What?”  Educational Leadership (December 
2008): 12‐17. 
 2.  Harvard Business Press, 2007. 
 3.  QlikView Business Discovery as of February 14, 2013. 
Point to Ponder: Think it! Start it! Show it!
Quote to Remember: “You simply cannot answer every impor-
tant question. There will be a limit to what you can and cannot 
do, especially in terms of budget, manpower, and expertise. ”  
Question to Consider: What opportunities could you be 
seizing if you had forward‐looking actionable intelligence capa-
bilities right now? 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
47
 Chapter  3
 Creating a Foundation
of Data 
 Key Points and Questions
• Staying focused on the strategic business question is critical for the 
data acquisition process. 
• Data accuracy and timeliness are critical to the success of delivering 
intelligence. 
• How useful is your data? Do you have data quality reporting? 
• “And Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan” 
Information acquisition has a long history. In biblical times, there was 
already a dire need for the right information. Take the story of Joshua 
and Caleb and the 12 spies in Canaan. For those unfamiliar with the 
Bible, the short story is this: 
 T
he Israelites were just exiled from Egypt and were traveling to the 
Promised Land of Canaan. God promised the Israelites through 
their leader Moses that the land of Canaan would be a land of 
milk and honey in abundance, but they had to take it over from the current 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
48
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
inhabitants. Moses wanted actionable intelligence, full information about 
internal and external factors about the land and its people. He said, “Go up 
through the Negev and on into the hill country. See what the land is like 
and whether the people who live there are strong or weak, few or many. 
What kind of land do they live in? Is it good or bad? What kind of towns 
do they live in? Are they unwalled or fortifi ed? How is the soil? Is it fertile 
or poor? Are there trees in it or not? Do your best to bring back some of 
the fruit of the land.” (It was the season for the fi rst ripe grapes.) 
Twelve spies went out and traveled all over the lands of Canaan, which 
were very suitable for living, compared to the desert the Israelites were 
residing in at the time. In Canaan, the clusters of grapes were too big for 
one person to carry. The people living there were big and strong, and the 
towns were fortifi ed with walls, but they had to make a decision. 
So after 40 days of gathering intelligence on the enemy, the band of 
spies returned to where the Israelites were camping and told them of all 
the obstacles standing in the way of their claiming the land of Canaan. 
The Israelites were dismayed by the news. Some began questioning Moses’ 
plans to enter the Promised Land at all, afraid they would be killed in bat-
tle. Only Joshua and Caleb tried to convince the others that although the
people in the land were strong, it was the time to seize the opportunity. 
And so by overanalyzing—by not following actionable intelligence 
but instead following their guts—the Israelites turned away from Canaan 
and started a 40‐year journey of wandering across the desert. During the 
journey, all of the spies except Joshua and Caleb perished. Even Moses 
died just prior to reaching the Promised Land again. And under the 
reign of Joshua, Moses’ successor, Canaan, was eventually taken. 
The moral of this story: Bad things happen when people receive intel-
ligence but act on their gut and hearsay instead of being guided by the facts. 
Businesses also need timely access to facts to make the right deci-
sions to enable them to grow faster, as opposed to being stuck in the
desert of rumor, hearsay, and gut‐based decisions. And to get facts we 
need a foundation to build on. 
 Building the Foundation
 When building a house, you need to build a foundation. It is not beautiful, 
you cannot cost‐justify it, and it is not even visible when the house is complete. 
Few house owners receive the praise, “What a nice foundation you have!” 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Creating a Foundation of Data 
49
 This foundation building is not a new concept. Thousands of years 
ago a story was written about two men who each built his own house. 
One man built his beautiful house on sand. The other man took time to 
build a solid foundation for his house on rock. When the storms of change 
and challenge came, only the house built on solid rock was left standing. 
 In the same way, it can be tempting to just go and create the dashboard 
or rush to buy a business intelligence (BI) system instead of taking time 
to develop a strong foundation of a data dictionary and central repository. 
This temptation to immediately deliver visible results can hamper eff orts 
to deliver signifi cant, sustainable, measurable results. Neglecting the found-
ation results in a chorus of “told you so,” when, in the end, the business 
receives the same old reports with marginally better graphics. The weak 
foundational issues of missing or incorrect data still are not fi xed. 
 What companies need to do instead is create a data dictionary that 
maps data names and defi nitions throughout the enterprise, and they 
need to validate the information. Documentation and validation are the 
solid rock foundation needed for actionable intelligence. 
 Benefi ts of Having the Right Data
 What is the value of ensuring the data is correct?
 Well, if the data is wrong you could miss shipments, disappoint cus-
tomers, and possibly spend thousands of dollars reworking quality issues. 
Just avoiding one mistake pays for fi xing this situation and also improves 
morale in the organization because employees can see where the problems 
are coming from and stop performing mind‐numbing “checking” work. 
 A good tip would be to take the time to estimate the cost of past 
mistakes. Doing so should result in data management getting the atten-
tion it deserves. Consider the following example: 
• A shipment to Thailand of . . .  women ?
•   The global supply chain team at a large cosmetics company received 
a message from the Thai authorities, “Your shipment has been held 
in customs because the documentation says the product is women.” 
•   Imagine a shipping container being inspected. The company is ship-
ping a full line of cosmetics to the Thai market to be sold in high‐end 
retail stores: lush red lipsticks, sweet perfumes, luxurious accessories. 
The container was sent to replenish store inventories and launch a 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
50
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
new product. Now, the whole shipment is stuck in customs because 
of one small problem. The new product had not been named cor-
rectly in the system. Someone forgot to change from the work-
ing name to the real product name. For more than two weeks the 
container sat in the hot sun of Thailand’s busiest port. The products 
won’t get to the stores on time unless extraordinary, and expensive, 
eff orts are made. 
• The point is, data accuracy has real business implications. A simple 
data‐entry fl ub cost thousands of dollars and delayed a shipment of 
new products to retail stores by several weeks—just one piece of data!  
 The Data Challenge 
 Notes Donald Farmer, VP, product management at QlikView: “People 
don’t trust data. People trust other people and their opinion of the data.” 
It is easy to understand why. In a large corporation with more than 
600 systems, lots of data, and no data quality dashboards, the strongest 
opinions of a few people reign supreme. 
Explanations for poor customer service or projections for what it 
could be in the future are pure conjecture but, when stated with author-
ity, are taken as fact. 
More than one supply chain executive has implemented inventory 
optimizers, supply network planning, and other capabilities, only to fi nd 
their organizations do not trust the output of these optimizers due to
incomplete or incorrect data. 
How can an inventory optimizer work in an environment where 
global inventory is not readily available? The answer is, it can’t. 
The challenge now is: How can we make people trust the data again? 
The simple answer would be: Create a data foundation for the data 
in the company that is complete and accurate at all times. 
However, it is impractical from the standpoint of time, resources, and 
fast delivery to try to create a data foundation of all data in a company. 
The strategic business questions need to be a guide for where to start
and end. We need to fi nd, acquire, and disseminate the data needed to 
answer the specifi c questions we need answered. Remember, focus on 
the questions at hand and work as effi  ciently as possible to assure success. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Creating a Foundation of Data 
51
 Acquire Data in Four Consistent Steps 
 When gathering data, the main thing to keep in mind is what the data 
will be used for. By constantly asking that question you can assure that 
you will not do unnecessary work when creating the foundation on 
which to build your successes. Ask yourself where the data will fi t in the 
big picture. This will also let you make sure that you can answer your 
strategic business questions. 
 When you have fi gured out what strategic business questions you need 
to answer, it’s time to create the foundation. Here, are the four steps you 
should take when creating the data foundation for actionable intelli gence. 
Each step will be explained in detail. 
Step 1: Identify the data needed and gather data from the known
sources. 
Step 2: Document the acquisition process into the data dictionary. 
Step 3: Determine the data owners, validate the data with them, and 
create a data dashboard for those owners. 
Step 4: Implement changes in people, processes, and systems to 
improve data quality. 
 Step 1: Identify the Data Needed and Gather Data
from the Known Sources 
 If I am trying to decide what type of shoes to buy, I need to know what 
the weather looks like in the place I live. If I’ve slipped a couple of times on 
railroad platforms or steps on rainy days and I’m smart, then I also need to 
determine whether those incidents will be a factor in the shoes I decide to 
buy. I know whether I want comfortably tight or loose shoes. Do I need the 
shoes to be seen, and who will see them? How long will they need to last, 
given my budget? With all of this data collected, I then need to fi gure out 
where I can buy shoes. How can I collect them? So, I have focused my data 
collection on an internal set of data and an external set of data. If I only have 
the weekend to decide, I will become even more precise about the data I 
need to collect. In other words, I may not be able to collect all types of data. 
 Applying this principle to the business, after you have a sponsored 
business question, you need to make sure to start off  with a list of the 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
52
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
data you need to answer the question. With the question in mind, hold 
some ideation sessions and list key facts needed to answer the question 
and determine what is redundant. Go through a couple of rounds to 
fi gure out what those are. Then seek out the source of that data. Under-
stand where it resides, how often it’s updated, and how to access it. 
Step 1 is perhaps the most straightforward: Identify the data you need, 
and place all the data in one place for you to use. Though that doesn’t sound 
very complicated, it can take up most of your data collection process. 
This process takes weeks and months of approvals, requiring reviews by 
interested and not‐so‐interested parties (with a risk of a “no” or simply
running out of time). That is the risk when working with people who 
have to give up control over their own data in exchange for the benefi ts 
of actionable intelligence. 
It is possible that the process of gathering your most important data 
will be so exhausting and costly that the project of creating actionable 
intelligence will never get past this stage. That is why it is very important 
to gather only the data that is necessary for the business questions at
hand. You can always collect additional data down the line. 
It might be helpful to set up a (temporary) data repository to centralize 
and control the data you are going to use, making quick connections to 
all the data you need at diff erent sources. The IT department can be 
of great help in setting up a server to get that data repository up and 
running. In fact, never underestimate the help a good IT department 
can off er—if it is convinced that a plan has merit and can actually work. 
 Step 2: Document the Acquisition Process into
the Data Dictionary 
 To start your data acquisition, typically you need some smart computer 
person to go and tap into the data source. This person can do two 
things: Tell you what the front screen looks like and what on the front 
screen matches the back end of the database. For example, what’s on 
the front end might be named “shoe,” but on the back end you might 
be looking at product ID “QB1234567.” Unless you have someone 
who can translate what users are seeing up front into what the data-
base is storing at the back, you’ll have to go through trial and error to 
fi gure it out. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Creating a Foundation of Data 
53
 Many times, systems are not fully documented in companies because 
they have been modifi ed over time or even custom‐built. So, in acquiring 
data from a system, you don’t want to make the same mistake that has 
been made in the past. The best documentation for data acquisition 
and the best documentation to make your actionable intelligence eff ort 
repeatable is a data dictionary. The data dictionary includes the list of 
elements that you want to have in order to answer a strategic question in
plain business terms, as well as a defi nition of what it’s supposed to mean. 
 After you have spoken with the computer person who explained the 
logic of how the fi eld is fi lled in, you can judge how close that comes to 
the defi nition you expected. Then you can identify the specifi c fi elds and 
the system or systems that the data comes from. Now you have your data 
dictionary, and it’s repeatable. You know where your data comes from, it is 
relevant to the question you want to answer, and you know what it means. 
 The challenge to data acquisition is that you may not be allowed 
to acquire the data because people have built up silos to protect. People
have built jobs—careers—protecting the data, massaging it so it looks 
just right. So now you come in and say, “Hey—I want your sales data!” It 
is not likely, even when you are in the same company, that sales data will 
be shared with you by a diff erent business unit even if it is in a diff erent
region. Clearly data acquisition has a human side to it: Will the owner 
share the data with you? That’s why it is important that data acquisition 
is aligned with the strategic question. If a senior executive has asked you
to answer her question, you can go back to that executive and say: “I’m 
being blocked from getting the data that we agreed was necessary to 
answer your question.” Now the executive can go to the data blocker 
and say: “Give up your data!” And you have broken down one silo. 
 It is important that you don’t start on the technical side when col-
lecting all the data because then you have no senior‐level support. Thus, 
you will miss the bargaining power to break down silos and gain control 
of other people’s data. Always circle back to the senior‐level support 
throughout this data acquisition process. 
 This is where the data dictionary will be important. It will tell you 
who owns the data, who gave you access to the data, how frequently you 
can get the data, and how you can pull the data in. 
 The data dictionary is also important because it provides a path for 
consistency. If someone leaves the acquisition team, for example, the
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
54
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
person’s replacement can use the dictionary to fi gure out how to appro-
priately treat the data. 
 Timing is also important: Let us say I have up‐to‐date sales data, but 
my pricing is not up‐to‐date. Now I have a problem. If I match up the 
two, my price and quantity would not line up. 
 In a global company, it is not unusual to have multiple systems per-
forming planning, warehouse management, data storage, and so on. 
Figure   3.1 depicts three main challenges you may encounter in mapping 
data: (1) non‐global databases, (2) inconsistent naming conventions, and, 
worst of all, (3) inconsistent data types. 
 Start with a simple and clear data dictionary. The example shown in 
Figure   3.2 is from a data dictionary for a central data repository. Data 
is organized by CD Table (a table that is in the central repository); CD
Field (the name of the fi eld in the table in the central repository); Field
Name (the source fi eld name); Table/Source (the table of the source 
data); Defi nition (the description of item or object); and Source (the 
front‐end source from which the business data can be seen). 
 The work of developing the data dictionary must be done by people 
who are intimate with the business—it simply cannot be outsourced. 
 When creating a data dictionary, focus on the business description 
fi rst; the heavy details of data types, fi eld sizes, and technical details will 
be fi lled in later. It’s important that companies accept the fact that there 
will be diff erences in business descriptions and even more important that 
 Figure 3.1  Challenges to Map Data 
AMAPS
WMS
DRP
Prod01
JDA
Netezza
Manugistics
Oracle
PDS
SmartOps
SAP
Central Data
Nonglobal
Databases
Inconsistent
Naming
Conventions
Inconsistent
Data Types
across
Databases 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
55
 Figure 3.2  Data Dictionary 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
56
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
business and IT teams work together—and across geographies—to cre-
ate a common business language to eliminate those diff erences. 
The benefi t of the data dictionary is that when you go to write your next 
intelligence tool, you already know the scope of the data that you have, you’re 
clear on the defi nitions, and there’s an understanding of any discrepancies.  
 Step 3: Determine the Data Owners, Validate the Data with Them, 
and Create a Data Dashboard for Those Owners 
 Now you have determined what data you need, collected the data sets, 
and documented their most important characteristics in a data dictionary. 
So what’s left? You have the data, but you still don’t know whether it’s 
the right data, whether it’s correct and complete. And that’s something 
you cannot do all by yourself. 
People do not trust data, they trust other 
people and their opinion of the data. So 
when the data owners, the people who input 
the data and/or use it, raise their hands and 
say, “This data is good; I trust it,” that will make it more likely for other 
people in the organization to believe it. It also means that it’s clear. It’s
not just that they trust it from the point that 1 + 1 = 2. It is also clear 
how the data has to be used, and the defi nition of the data is clear. 
However, this does not necessarily mean all your data can be universally 
validated because not every business unit has the same defi nitions for its 
data. For example, Brazil’s data may be diff erent from Poland’s, but both are 
right—they just use diff erent rules to measure or input similar information. 
If you go to the team in Brazil and ask, “Do these numbers look 
right to you?” 
Brazil might say, “Yes, this matches our source system; we’ve been 
using that data to manage our business.” 
Still, you would double check with Poland and ask, “Do you trust 
this data? If so, why?” 
So now, both Brazil and Poland have validated their data. Now they 
can trust that data to be true. 
But there is another reason to make sure both have raised their hands 
and said the data is good: Now they’re on the hook for the quality of 
their data, not you. 
 The data principle: “People 
don’t trust data, people trust 
other people.” 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Creating a Foundation of Data 
57
 If you pull in data from diff erent areas and then publish a report, 
your reputation is at risk. It’s important to get all relevant parties to sign 
off on their data. Now, you’re no longer solely on the hook for the 
data quality. 
 Placing the data into a centralized spot, understanding it, and mak-
ing sure it is fi t for use is the most important and challenging aspect 
of the intelligence‐gathering project. It also leaves you with important 
questions: If you succeed, will your eff ort be sustained? And will your 
people trust the data, or will you lose control soon, and will data quality 
decay again?
 The data acquisition team needs several tools to be successful in 
maintaining trust in the data. 
•   A view of when the data was last updated. 
•   A list of the tables and the stability of the sources (i.e., was the server 
up? Were batch jobs completed on time?) 
•   A review of the changes in data—signifi cant spikes or drops should 
be at least investigated with the users and IT. 
 Figure   3.3 is an example of very basic data status, which is easy to 
start with. Start slow, then move to more advanced analysis. 
 Figure   3.4 is another view of data health where you can visualize 
the record counts. 
 Again, these are simple views, developed quickly to guard against 
surprise data issues. 
 Invest a bit of time in protecting the reputation of the intelligence 
program. But do not make a whole project out of it with fancy tools 
and deep algorithms until you’ve received monetized results from the 
intelligence program. 
 Step 4: Implement Changes in People, Processes, and Systems 
to Improve Data Quality 
 The fi rst three steps constitute important groundwork to make your 
data acquisition sustainable. However, the last step is about changing 
people, processes and technology (P, P, and T). 
 On the people side, you already got the data owners to say they own 
the data, they’re responsible for it, and they have checked it for accuracy. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
58
 Figure 3.3  Data Acquisition Dashboard 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
59
 Figure 3.4
 Data Acquisition Record Count Dashboard 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
60
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
Now you need to start with the process of measuring all of that 
information, because what’s accurate today can be inaccurate tomorrow
and vice versa. Most of the time you fi nd there’s a lot of inaccurate data 
today, and there’s an opportunity to make it more accurate tomorrow, 
because what gets measured improves. 
A company might say: “All my sales information is right.” Maybe. 
But haven’t you seen or been involved in cases where you wanted to 
have the fi nance people close the books for a month but they couldn’t 
because one party lagged in its report?
Companies can’t make good decisions using old data, which puts 
responsibility for data quality squarely on the data owner’s shoulders. Indeed, 
data owners have two responsibilities when it comes to data quality: accu-
racy and timeliness. 
 The Data Dashboard  It can be useful to record intelligence in a
data dashboard. This dashboard will show the current data situation to
yourself and all stakeholders. Figure   3.5 shows a sample data quality 
dashboard for supply chain. 
Some sample key performance indicators explained: 
 Process Strength
• Green: Standard methodology, complexity mapped, and well‐defi ned 
•   Yellow: Some standardization, most complexities understood 
• Red: Multiple processes to achieve similar goals, complexity not 
mapped 
 Figure 3.5 Sample Data Quality Dashboard 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Creating a Foundation of Data 
61
 Input Capability 
•   Green: Easy, logical to input with bumper rails to avoid errors, right 
role as owner 
•   Yellow: Some automation to prevent errors, some propagation/
copying 
•   Red: IRS‐like tax form complexity, errors only caught during audit, 
and painful/costly 
 Review/Validate Capability
•   Green: Validation available to check inputs prior to use by system
•   Yellow: Some review reports are available 
•   Red: Review only possible by re‐inputting code, no validation 
 By the end of the assessment, the chart may mostly be red if there 
has never been a formal data management team nor supporting key per-
formance indicators to monitor the overall situation. Senior manage-
ment will become more supportive when they see the easy‐to‐read 
chart showing how dire the situation is. 
 As you start publishing the scorecard, actions will be taken, people 
trained, and the scorecard will begin to turn from red, to yellow, and 
to green. 
 I have reviewed this type of dashboard system with several com-
panies now, and the results are always stunningly . . . red. Whether in 
New York or Singapore or Japan or Shanghai, the starting dashboards of 
organizations ranging from banks to universities to manufacturers look 
mighty scarlet. What color would your organization be today? 
 The Byproduct: Master Data Management
 While building the data foundation to answer your fi rst questions, slowly 
you realize the process will get easier for you over time. Call it econo-
mies of scale. Not every question requires completely new data fi elds. If 
you gathered the demand for question 1, you can use that same bit of 
data for question 2 (provided you need the same data). You documented 
it already; you validated it. Now the exercise becomes copy‐paste. Of 
course, both questions require you to keep the data up‐to‐date; answer-
ing two questions even gives that data set more priority to be timely and 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
62
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
accurate. Ideally, all data sets you use are timely and accurate all the time, 
but that is a utopia. 
The interesting thing is you will slowly create common data sets 
for the company, shaping and logging the way data fi elds are named and
how they are fi lled in. You can create, as a byproduct of actionable intel-
ligence, “master data.” 
Master data is “reference data about an organization’s core business 
entities. These entities include people (customers, vendors, employees), 
things (assets, products, ledgers), and places (countries, cities, locations).1
Take for example data on a sales transaction: 
 William Smith sold to Teahouse Co. 10 bags of tea leaves for 65 on 
Jan. 1, 2003. 
Now, the separate master data elements used in this transaction are 
the salesperson (William Smith), the customer (Teahouse Co.), and the 
product (tea leaves). Each of these elements was listed in master data, to 
be used and reused time and time again. 
So, as a byproduct, what good is master data to you and me? I’ll make 
a clear distinction between byproduct and waste, because, as opposed to 
waste, having master data and taking it seriously has some major benefi ts: 
• More accurate and trusted data. If everyone uses the same mas-
ter data, errors will be spotted more quickly. Graduating from the 
tactic of a data dictionary to implementing a full master data strategy 
provides a fast, stable foundation for future intelligence work. 
• Data consistency. Master‐data management at the enterprise level 
ensures there will be only one defi nition for each business term. This
does not automatically mean one source of truth or one source of 
data that renders all other sources obsolete. Businesses need one set 
of defi nitions for their business terms, but they can have multiple 
sources of data. 
By applying master‐data management as a technique to structure 
your actionable intelligence eff orts, you can achieve more ease of use and 
fewer errors in the business. You will basically (re)create the data infra-
structure of the company, shaping its very existence. All that, just by deliver-
ing actionable intelligence. Remember: start with the basics! Master‐data 
management will naturally follow. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Creating a Foundation of Data 
63
Data Management Issues in the Spotlight 
 Lacking the ability to check on data automatically, companies have become 
big data checking teams. According to an Oracle survey of its customers 
across six diff erent industries, “less than 15 percent of organizations sur-
veyed understand the sources and quality of their master data and have a 
roadmap to address missing data domains.” 2
 In addition, it is unlikely there is a process to improve the situation 
nor is there a scorecard to monitor and evaluate the upstream data entry 
quality because it’s hard to implement and costs money. 
 So what are some of the best practices to follow initially? 
•   Establish a senior management meeting to review the data quality of 
your most strategic questions. Remember, this doesn’t mean address-
ing all the data—focus, focus, focus on the critical elements. 
•   When the quality isn’t up to expectations, know who the data owners 
are and have them fi x it ASAP. There can often be multiple owners 
because products and services are enriched throughout their lifetimes. 
•  Engage the business units and business owners to designate problem 
solvers who are regularly sharing best practices and acting as a fi rst line 
of defense support with the users who are actually entering informa-
tion at their desks, in the fi eld, in the warehouse, and so forth.  
 What should be on a senior management scorecard? 
 Go back to the strategic question! 
 Ours were: 
•   How can we reduce inventory?
•   How can we improve service? 
 A root concern of these questions for master data was, “Are we 
enriching our master data within the time frame needed to purchase, 
manufacture, and ship our new products?” So the list of   KPIs in Table   3.1 
monitored the product data status throughout its life.  
 Look at a key point—the very fi rst KPI is monetized! How many 
dollars are impacted by incomplete bills of material? This number woke 
senior management up right at the beginning of our data review meeting. 
 Organizationally, you should nominate a single person to be respon-
sible for each step in your business process. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
64
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
If the business was a hotel like my favorite, the Grand Hyatt in 
Singapore, the manager would have a data steward for: 
• Marketing and pricing 
• Facilities and rooms
• Guest check in/out
• Payment and collections 
Or for manufacturing you might have a data steward for: 
• Concept and R&D 
• Planning 
• Make 
• Sourcing 
• Delivering 
• Returns/corporate sales 
 Table 3.1  Example of Key Performance Indicators for Master Data 
KPI Name
Detailed Defi nition
Business Owner
Forecast $’s for 
incomplete bills of 
materials
12-month dollarized 
forecast for fi nished 
goods where the BOM is
incomplete within eight
weeks of shipping date.
Packaging Operations, 
Industrial Engineering, 
Planning
# of products with
incomplete coding within
eight weeks of shipping
The number of fi nished 
goods where the BOM is
incomplete within eight 
weeks of plant ship date.
Packaging Operations, 
Industrial Engineering, 
Planning
Cycle time to complete
product coding
Time from code creation 
to code complete.
Lead Data Stewards and 
Plant Local Stewards
# of codes completed per 
month
The number of codes
(fi nished goods, work in 
progress, raw materials) 
completed. 
Lead Data Stewards and 
Plant Local Stewards
Number of codes costed
by fi nance per month
 The number of codes 
that are successfully costed 
for the given month.
Cost Accounting
% of codes costed
Tracks the % total codes 
eligible for costing.
Cost Accounting
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Creating a Foundation of Data 
65
 Senior management is accountable for data quality. In most coun-
tries senior managers sign the auditor statements attesting to the accu-
racy of their books and records. The execution of data quality should be
managed and reviewed at least monthly with the above concepts. 
 The Data Supply Chain 
 As you pull information together following these four steps, you’ll begin 
to see how data fl ows in your company. Donald Farmer calls it the 
“information supply chain.” 
 As shown in Figure   3.6 , you can follow your critical data elements 
through and see their data quality in each stage to ensure the right intel-
ligence delivers the right decisions. 
 Mapping the data supply chain provides a solid foundation for an 
actionable intelligence project. It answers the key questions of where is 
the data, how often is it refreshed, what can we do to trust it, and what’s 
its intrinsic value. 
 Build the House
 Data is an important asset, and your project will be built completely on 
the data you choose to use. So it is your responsibility to ensure that 
you have all the data, that the data is timely and accurate, and that your 
data acquisition is well‐documented so you can do it again. You have the 
power to guide the project to victory, but that power lies not solely in 
the visualization. The process starts at the foundation. 
 Figure 3.6
Information Supply Chain 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
66
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
When you have the strategic business question and you have the data 
to answer the question, what’s left? The answer, of course! And in order to 
get to that step, you need to visualize the data with a tool. Then you can 
apply business discovery to delve through the data with ease and simplicity. 
So follow the right approach to fi nd the answers to your question!  
 BAD DATA QUALITY (NOT TIMELY, 
INACCURATE) IMPACTS LIVES  
 At the hospital, my mother’s condition gradually improved. A few 
weeks after she fi rst arrived, we prepared to transfer her to a long‐
term care facility on Long Island, New York. My father and I vis-
ited the facility and others on Long Island to fi nd the best place for 
her to rest, heal, and recover. We visited one particular facility, the 
Orzac Center for Extended Care & Rehabilitation, several times 
to make sure they had the right capabilities to support her. Great 
references, friendly staff —it all looked okay, and it was much closer 
to home than many other places, so visiting her would be easier. 
 We received detailed instructions upon checking her out from 
Columbia University Presbyterian Hospital. The Columbia staff  
was very courteous, and I felt hope as the ambulance took her to 
the new facility. My father rode in the ambulance with her, and I 
followed by car. 
 It was a Friday afternoon, and driving from New York City to 
Long Island can take about two to three hours. I arrived much later 
than my father and mother. By the time I arrived, they were well 
settled in, pictures placed on the windowsill, Bible on the table. 
 I felt something was amiss. By 7  p.m. , my mother—who was
on a ventilator at the time—was supposed to have received food, 
water, and medication. But it was past 9, and she wasn’t being taken 
care of. The staff  at the care facility told me they didn’t have the 
doctor’s orders so they couldn’t administer anything to her. The 
hand‐off  had failed. 
 Unlike the Columbia staff , these people didn’t know anything 
about my mom—for the next four hours! It was well past midnight 
by the time she was fed and hydrated. The worst was yet to come. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Creating a Foundation of Data 
67
 When they fi nally took action, they gave her too much food and 
too much water, too fast. By morning, she was in dire straights again. 
 Lack of quality data may have been part of my mother’s trau-
matic failure when she arrived at the extended care facility. They
were challenged by customer data quality in two ways: 
 1.  The staff  may not have had the doctor’s orders to feed, hydrate 
and, medicate her appropriately. 
 2.  Apparently, when the orders were provided, she was given the 
wrong amount. 
 My mother ended up in the emergency room, and then the 
hospital, for the next three days, until we transferred her back to 
Columbia. It was a safe ground. 
 Summary and Considerations 
Point to Ponder:  
•  A data dictionary forms the foundation for any actionable 
intelligence exercise. 
•  Lives are at stake at health care providers when they don’t 
use their data properly. 
Quote to Remember: “People don’t trust data. People trust
other people and their opinion of the data.” —Donald Farmer 
Question to Consider: Is there an eff ective data management 
scorecard with identifi ed owners measuring data timeliness and
accuracy?
Challenge: If you don’t have a data quality dashboard, do you 
know the data is right and your decisions are? There’s one way 
out, which is to say: “We’re making the best decision we can 
with the data we have.” 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
68
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 Notes 
 1.  Colin White, “Using Master Data in Business Intelligence,” BI Research, 
March 2007,  http://fm.sap.com/pdf/mar09/Using%20Master%20Data%20
in%20Business%20Intelligence.pdf . 
 2.  Trevor Naidoo, “Five Key Strategies in Master Data Management,” Profi t
(December 2010). 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
69
 Chapter  4
 Visualization
 Key Points and Questions
• With the foundation of strategic questions and data, what should we 
be visualizing?
• How should we be visualizing it? 
• Is there a methodology that works? 
• How can we continue to move fast, make a diff erence, and create 
believers of actionable intelligence? 
Source: Lee Min Lau. 
:
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
70
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
N
ow that you know how to get the data straight and how to 
visualize that data to arrive at answers, it is time to start build-
ing from there. Answering one strategic business question with 
the aid of great visualizations does not make you a hero instantly. So it 
is time to move on, increase the eff ort, and learn from your mistakes to 
make every new piece of actionable intelligence better, easier, and more 
visually appealing than the last one. 
That is the importance of visualization. You can have important data 
all cleaned up, full, and complete. If nobody sees it, it has as much added 
value as an empty bag. 
If the data is accurate and timely, as we saw in Chapter   3 , then 
you can unlock its dormant value by making it accessible. Do this by—
you guessed it—visualizing the data. Now, the defi nition of cutting‐
edge visualization changes every year. What is hip and modern today
looks hopelessly outdated tomorrow. That’s the reason you will not fi nd
images of visualizations in this chapter. Instead, you will fi nd examples of 
how visualizations develop. And more important, you will learn what 
elements are in all good visualizations. 
Visualizations need to answer “Where we are today?” “Are we happy 
or sad?” and “How do we win?” 
 Complete Circle
 After putting in place a solid data foundation and starting up our fi rst 
project at Eséee Lauder, we started to deliver rapid and iterative action-
able intelligence. We used a methodology I termed the Project Vision 
SWAT Iteration Framework (see Figure  4.1 ). 
This fast‐paced methodology delivers quick results by asking and 
answering: 
• What’s the strategic business question and iterative scope? (Chapter   2 ) 
• Which data is relevant to answer the question? (Chapter  3 )
• How should the answer be visualized? (Chapter  4 )
• How will the answer be used? What actions taken? What benefi ts 
achieved? (Chapter  5 )
• Start again and refi ne the strategic business question. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Visualization 
71
 Does this work? Yes, says Jack Levis, director of process management 
at UPS and creator of the amazing ORION project. 
 Levis manages a team of mathematicians who built the algorithms 
that help UPS shave millions of miles off  delivery routes—ORION, or 
On‐Road Integrated Optimization and Navigation. 
 When he fi rst brought up the project, his management was skeptical 
and so were the drivers. He set up competitions between the drivers and 
the system to refi ne the model and variables and to acquire more data. 
 Following an iterative approach and engaging the drivers paid off . 
 “Starting small shows the project is feasible, optimal, and, more impor-
tant, implementable. So we created and tested lots of prototypes,” Levis 
told me.1
 Levis also shared his three key steps to success with me: 
 Step 1. Prove the concept by delivering real dollars. 
 Step 2. Build into the process. 
 Step 3. Provide signifi cant deployment support. 
 Even with an effi  cient framework to bring about results, the ORION 
project was not without its challenges. One of the reasons management 
was skeptical was that the data seemed impossible to collect. 
 Figure 4.1
Project Vision SWAT Iteration Framework 
Copyright © 2012 Keith B. Carter. 
Data
Acquisition
Visualization
Answer/
Monetization
• Question 
• Business Case
• Metrics/Levers
• Root Cause 
• Business
  Ownership 
• Data Definition
Source
•
Analysi
•
s
T
•
ransform
Validation 
•
•  Timing
Availability
•
Documentatio
•
n
High-Level Design
•
Detailed Design
•
Build Prototype
•
Usability
•
Timing 
•
Build Tool
•
Process Change
•
User Acceptance
•
Process Change
Process Change
•
•  Organization 
•  Organization 
Change
Change
Value Realization 
Value Realization 
•
•  Education/Training
•  Education/Training
More Questions 
More Questions 
•
Iterate
Iterate
•
Business
Questions
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
72
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
For example, only the drivers knew external information such as: 
• The digital maps in use at the time were not accurate enough. UPS 
needs to show the exact route to the exact drop‐off  point, which is
sometimes deep into a mall or requires driving several levels into a 
parking garage. 
• The impact of season and weather on a route. Some of the local 
roads on the map looked crossable in normal GPS maps, but were, 
in fact, stream crossings that UPS trucks couldn’t go through during 
bad weather. 
• School openings and closings that impacted traffi  c on nearby roads. 
• How business customer opening times aff ected the delivery schedule. 
Despite the challenges, the ORION program has been successful. 
Some of the early benchmarks include: 
• 85 million miles saved each year. 
• Fuel costs account for less than 20 percent of savings. The main ben-
efi t is a reduction in driver time (82 percent of the benefi t). 
• Theoretically, one mile saved per driver per day in the United States 
alone saves UPS about $50 million a year. 
The ORION program also provides some best practices that any 
company can apply: 
• Manage expectations of management and leave space for improvement. 
• Do not do intelligence for intelligence’s sake. Think about payback. 
• To deliver breakthrough results, be ready to change people’s thought 
process and mindset. 
Now that you have established a solid start of your data foundation 
and an understanding of business discovery, you should have the follow-
ing support and capabilities in place: 
• Some business sponsors of strategic questions
• A data dictionary and standard business language plan
• A talented visualization team 
• Business users in the room ready to participate in ideation sessions 
on where to go 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Visualization 
73
 With all the above we had enough ingredients for a successful intel-
ligence project. 
 Inject speed into the process. 
Earl Newsome, former chief technology offi  cer, 
Estée Lauder
 I was waiting for an elevator, and who walked up but Earl Newsome, 
a man who knows how to transform organizations fast! But at Estée 
Lauder, the IT department he was working on changing was struggling. 
 Newsome shared with me how tough it was to reduce the red tape 
and get people moving. Then he said a phrase that has stuck with me for 
years: “We need to inject speed into the process!” 
 Speed in executing each step is the critical aspect. We established 
regular ideation sessions 45 minutes in length to agree on visualization 
or review iterative answers. This framework helped deliver answers in 
hours and days, satisfying the business’ need for speed. 
 The exciting part of intelligence work is the activity of turning data 
into easy‐to‐follow visual representations and then creating stories about 
how the business is performing today versus opportunities for better 
performance tomorrow. 
 Instead of looking at reams of spreadsheets, we delivered the ability 
to slice and dice intelligence. We brought together streams of data into
a single tool to show opportunities for improvement in easy to see red, 
yellow, and green indicators. 
 As the users saw the tools during our ideation sessions, they began to 
develop their own uses and purposes for the intelligence. This enabled us 
all to run faster toward monetizing the benefi ts. 
 The team and I were dedicated to the ideation sessions. While I was 
on vacation on the beach in Barcelona, we held sessions on one tool. 
When I was on a cruise ship in the Mediterranean Sea, we held a critical 
session with the head of supply planning. 
 Helena May, of the MLH group, held ideation sessions with the 
demand planning head during the day, at night, and on weekends. 
 The pace was intense, but the results were worth it. 
 The users saw where they could use the intelligence on a regular basis. 
They began to report the results of using the tools to us and regularly 
asked for improvements. Because we were following the iterative SWAT 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
74
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
framework we delivered the changes quickly. The speed of enhancement 
was a signifi cant departure from standard budgeting methodology and 
development approach. It was a refreshing change. 
 Instead of looking at printouts of data from the past, business users 
received graphical views of past and future performance. Our users were 
excited, and adoption of the tools increased. 
 A supply planner in North America said, “This is the fi rst time I can 
make changes to the plans three months ahead of time, instead of being 
blamed for shortfalls that happened three months ago.” 
 Here, I’d like to make a distinction between ideation sessions and 
requirement gatherings. Ideally, ideation sessions are aimed at the users, 
driven by the users, and demand total involvement every step of the way. 
Table   4.1   shows the diff erences between an ideation session and a typical 
requirement gathering. 
 So Now, How Can You Do It?
 By having the right structure in place, we were able to accelerate from 
the “beginner” to “localized success” and “enterprise actionable intel-
ligence capabilities” stages of actionable intelligence. 
 One such structure is the Human Centered Design Toolkit, by Inter-
national Development Enterprise (IDE). The kit was written to depict 
the three‐theory process that has been commonly used in multinational
corporations (see Figure  4.2 ). 
Table  4.1
 Ideation Session versus SDLC Requirements Gathering
Ideation Session
Standard Software 
Development Lifecycle (SDLC) 
Requirement Gathering Phase
User 
Involvement
High user involvement
High commitment level;
involved in all sessions
from the start of project
Little user involvement
Low commitment level
May be absent for certain 
sessions
Process
Brainstorming and 
open discussions; fast, 
proactive, on-the-fl y
problem solving
Written project brief reports
Slow, reactive, waits for 
approvals from related parties
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
75
 Figure 4.2
 Human Centered Design Toolkit 
 Source: www.hcdconnect.org, www.hcdconnect.org/methods. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
76
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 Hear Phase
 1. Determine who to talk to. 
a. Who are the right sponsors, supporters, and who will use the new 
intelligence to deliver results
 2. Determine how to gather stories. 
a. What’s the right process in your organization? Can you interview 
and engage with people? 
 3. Determine how to document your observations. 
a. How can we work together with team members?
 Create Phase 
 1. Synthesis: Bring information and knowledge together. 
• Gather the appropriate group of individuals (with a range of demo-
graphics and backgrounds). Sometimes bringing in some unrelated 
individuals may provide a new perspective. 
• Share stories. 
• Identify patterns from the existing data. 
 2. Ideation sessions: Think freely without any constraints, limits, or 
judgments. 
• Create opportunity areas and move away from analyzing data and 
toward creating new solutions. 
• Brainstorm new solutions. 
 3. Prototyping: Make realistic ideas. 
• Structure and improve brainstormed ideas into tangible solutions 
in a fast and inexpensive manner. 
 4. Feedback: Improve for the better. 
• Seek critiques and opinions of the team to identify how to improve 
further. 
All these steps should be executed in days, especially prototyping. 
The resources and permission should be available to execute good ideas 
as they are created. Enable fast prototyping!
 Deliver Phase
In the deliver phase, ideas and solutions created will be implemented 
to deliver value and results in a sustainable way: 
 1. Viability check 
• Develop a model that will provide value to the customer, revenue 
to the organization, and returns to the stakeholders. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Visualization 
77
 2.  Capabilities identifi cation 
•  Source for the required capabilities, manpower. and partners to imple-
ment the solution from existing resources or network of contacts.  
 3.  Plan a pipeline of solutions 
•   Map out how the new solutions move or impact the organization 
and its strategy for new or existing markets and customers. 
 4.  Conduct mini‐tests or pilots
 5.  Create a learning plan
 6.  Evaluate and monetize the outcomes
 Delivering is important, as is getting the right answer to lots of impor-
tant strategic business questions. This can be done by anyone because 
there are a great number of possibilities for the deployment of actionable 
intelligence.  
 The Way Ahead
 The technology is there, you know the steps to creating actionable intelli-
gence, and your team is ready to step it up. It’s now your duty to build 
actionable intelligence momentum and make the eff ort reach its tipping 
point. Grow the project organically until it grows by itself because the 
organization sees that your project is indispensable to almost every busi-
ness unit. After reaching that phase, the enterprise actionable intelligence
stage mentioned in Chapter  1 , the possibilities are endless. 
 Example of Iterative Visualization to Solve
the Question “How Do I Get There Quickly, 
Safely, Effi  ciently?”: Leveraging Global
Positioning System Data
 Take this following example: You are driving a car and want to know 
whether you will arrive safely and on time. It’s an old problem with an 
old solution. A speedometer visualized the data point of your current 
speed, the gas meter showed whether you still needed to make a stop. 
Everything else you had to do by yourself. That would be the fi rst itera-
tion of visualizing the available data. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
78
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
In the 1960s, the U.S. Navy envisioned a new opportunity to move 
ships eff ectively and came out with satellite navigational systems. By the 
time they were made fi t for consumers, these systems ran on the Global 
Positioning System (GPS) and allowed drivers to have a box in their car 
that calculated where they were, how long the drive was going to take, 
how far they still had to drive and whether they were keeping to the 
speed limit. 
Iteration two, the navigational system to add on to iteration one, was 
elegantly designed and visualized all the information it gathered in such
a way that the user only needed one glance at the little box to see what 
needed to be seen. 
Even though iteration two doesn’t show whether the user will be 
there on time, the navigational system will come pretty close. Users can 
answer that question for themselves, and hooking up the schedule to the 
navigational system could lead to visualizing the answer to that question. 
However, there is one word in the strategic question—“Will I 
make it safely and on time?”—I left out. Currently, no system takes into 
account safe driving. 
So that brings us to iteration three—one we haven’t realized yet. To 
show whether you can drive safely and be on time, we need to layer in 
traffi  c conditions on the road, weather conditions, police speed traps, and 
so on. We also need to know how likely the car is to break down—on 
major points like tires, brakes, and lights. Some systems still provide this
information, but most systems stop before reaching this point. By visual-
izing this you could give a basic answer as to whether you will arrive 
safely and on time (and without tickets). 
We can go deeper still to iteration four. It is possible to realize sys-
tems that monitor whether you have been on a certain stretch of road 
before, whether your average speed is up on that stretch, and how many 
accidents have occurred on that same stretch. By monitoring biometrics 
you could also tell whether you are intoxicated, have a low pulse, feel 
sleepy, or have an illness that interferes with your ability to drive. Let’s
call this harder‐to‐get data really big data. 
While you are driving you need a very fast answer. The answer needs 
to be simple, visual, and nondistracting. You can’t aff ord to be distracted 
by, for example, your current heart rate, on top of everything else being 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Visualization 
79
displayed in your car. When you need the answer, you need it fast. You 
can’t do the whole analysis while driving. 
 So this leaves us with one question: What would this visualization 
look like? I’d suggest a big view with clear colors indicating whether 
you are making it and whether you are safe. If you want to know by 
how much, you should be shown an estimate of the diff erence in travel 
time. If you want to drill down, you should have the option to say to 
your little black box “tell me the factors delaying me,” and the box 
would list them. 
 Whether you were at iteration one or iteration four, there were 
some commonalities in the example. 
•   You want the answer as quickly as possible. Why would you have a 
visualization if it only requires more work? The aim of visualizing 
data is to instantly get a picture of what the organization looks like. 
The same was true for every iteration in the car. You can get the
answer instantly, without having to do anything. 
•   We want to visualize the relationships as clearly as possible. Ideally, 
there should be no ambiguity as to what the visualizations mean, 
how the data must be interpreted, and how the diff erent sets of data 
link together. While driving, you need to be shown how each of the 
factors increases or decreases your safety or driving time. That way 
you know how you can alter your driving or bodily state to be more 
optimal. 
•   A visualization brings together data from multiple departments, plac-
ing it on one screen in a logical way so that cross functional discus-
sions can be held easily. It creates an overall picture across diff erent
information silos. Your heart rate in a car doesn’t mean anything by 
itself, but in combination with various other metrics, your black box 
can reach a conclusion on how fi t you are to drive. 
•   You need to be able to tell a story: What do these numbers mean? 
What does the situation mean, or what should I do? Why? How 
should we go about that? The navigational system gives you the 
routes, the information. It’s up to you to fi gure out how you determine 
the journey to arrive on time and safely. The navigational system is 
not giving you the fi nal step, it’s not automatically taking you there. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
80
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
As soon as machines take over the process of interpreting the answer, 
making the decisions, and refl ecting on those decisions, management 
can be fi red and robots can take over the business. Until then you need 
to be able interpret the story behind the data, the story behind what 
the numbers tell you.  
 Eff ective Visualizations: Tell a Story to Your Mind
 Why are we visualizing information in a particular way? Why do bar 
charts and pie charts work better than tables? The answer is simple. It’s
because of how our minds work. We trigger a bigger area in our brains 
when we look at data ordered in a way that comes naturally to us than 
we do by looking at raw data. Raw data, lists, and tables require us to 
think in order to understand the data and piece together the relation-
ships in our minds. Visualizations let you see the relationships visually 
and instantly. This works because our minds use heuristics to determine 
what goes together, and data visualizations use those same heuristics to 
show people what they need to know. 
Early in the twentieth century the Gestalt school of psychology, 
developed by Christian von Ehrenfels and inspired by Hume, von 
Goethe, and Kant, determined how the mind sees relationships between 
points and pieces of drawings. This led to mapping some important heu-
ristics that to this day remain valid and the basis of many visualizations. 
Table  4.2 provides a short list of the heuristics the mind uses. 
These heuristics are interesting and explain why certain visualizations 
work so well. Though when you keep in mind just the list of common-
alities we discussed earlier when creating visualizations, you will almost 
always automatically adhere to one or more of these heuristics, because 
your brain knows what makes information easiest for it to understand.  
 Noticing Visualization Pitfalls 
 In the end you are still the user of the tools you create to visualize the busi-
ness. The tools will not make your decisions nor give you the relationships. 
They are called tools because they give you the means to fi nd relationships 
and make the decisions.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Visualization 
81
 The Post Hoc Fallacy 
 One of the biggest pitfalls here is the fact that you still have to fi nd the 
relationships for yourself.  This sounds easy but can lead to what practitioners 
call the post hoc fallacy. The post hoc fallacy means you see relationships 
that aren’t there, just because the data suggests such relationships. This 
nasty trap can be avoided by clear and careful thinking when determining 
relationships suggested by the data. Does the relationship make sense? Is 
it causal one way or another? Or is there just a correlation? The famous 
example from statistics is this: On days where people buy more ice cream, 
more people drown. So people drown because of ice cream? No! People 
drown because there are a lot of people in the sea on hot days. And on 
hot days more ice cream is sold. There is a relationship, but no causation 
between ice cream sales and drowning. So be aware; use your logic. 
 Table 4.2  Human Heuristics
Proximity
Objects that are close to each
other are assumed to belong 
together.
You probably feel a connection 
to the nearest city as opposed to 
some place on the other side of 
the country.
Similarity
Objects that are perceived as 
equal are assumed to belong 
together.
Tigers and lions go together 
much better than tigers and fi sh. 
They are similar.
Enclosure
Objects enclosed by a line or 
plane are assumed to belong 
together.
All the things on a desk are
assumed to be of one person; 
all the things not on there are 
assumed to be of someone else.
Closure
Objects that are not fully 
fi nished will be assumed to be
fi nished in the mind.
If you stare into a crescent
moon, you will likely see the
outlines of a full moon. The
mind does this.
Continuation Objects that disappear partially
behind other objects are 
continued in the mind.
To see this, all you have to do
is shove one item in front of 
another.
Connection
Objects linked together by 
anything whatsoever are 
assumed to belong together.
Connection is very easy; you’ll
associate almost everything 
that is connected to each other 
physically as a group.
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
82
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
Earlier I mentioned that statistical forecasts that do not include the 
right amount of data and infl uences are good for matching the past but 
not for predicting the future. Many organizations talk about “forecast 
accuracy” with decimal points as if to appear very precise. The reason 
business leaders aren’t satisfi ed is because the forecast is often wrong and 
there is a cost associated with errors in either poor customer service or 
increased costs. 
This was made very clear in the April 6, 2014,  New York Times  arti-
cle “Eight (No, Nine!) Problems with Big Data,” by Gary Marcus and
Ernest Davis.2
[Even] when the results of a big data analysis aren’t intentionally 
gamed, they often turn out to be less robust than they initially 
seem. Consider Google Flu Trends, once the poster child for big 
data. In 2009, Google reported—to considerable fanfare—that 
by analyzing fl u‐related search queries, it had been able to detect 
the spread of the fl u as accurately and more quickly than the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. A few years later, 
though, Google Flu Trends began to falter; for the last two years 
it has made more bad predictions than good ones. 
Visualization should fi rst be used to identify a situation holistically, 
with a wider fi eld of vision. Too often, scientists attempt to hone in on 
a correlation right away. This is like looking at the stars through a tele-
scope when there is an elephant in your way. You fi nd very interesting 
constellations, until you step back and realize it’s not the stars you are 
seeing but an elephant’s hide!
The authors of the  New York Times article also warn about making 
too many connections. 
 If you look 100 times for correlations between two variables, 
you risk fi nding, purely by chance, about fi ve bogus correla-
tions that appear statistically signifi cant—even though there is 
no actual meaningful connection between the variables. Absent
careful supervision, the magnitudes of big data can greatly amplify 
such errors. 
 Organizations can avoid these problems by maintaining focus on the 
big picture and the original strategic question. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Visualization 
83
 Summary and Considerations 
 Notes 
 1.  Keith Carter, “Big Data: A Framework for Action,” NUS Business School Think 
Business (October 2013),  http://thinkbusiness.nus.edu/articles/item/156‐big‐
data‐a‐framework‐for‐action . 
 2.  www.nytimes.com/2014/04/07/opinion/eight‐no‐nine‐problems‐with‐big‐
data.html?_r=0 . 
Points to Ponder: With regular, short bursts of engagement, 
business owners can feel true ownership about the visualization. 
Quote to Remember: “Be aware; use your logic.” 
Question to Consider: What would your ideal visualization
answer?
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
85
 Chapter  5
 The Initial Answers 
 Key Points and Questions
• The next step in business intelligence. 
• Get the project up to speed. 
• Keep measuring the results to win over and satisfy sponsors. 
 C
ongratulations. By the time you reach this stage, you should be
able to answer your fi rst strategic business questions with a sat-
isfying answer. Was that it? Is it done now? 
No! We must measure the results, plus understand the monetary 
benefi ts and the soft benefi ts to justify developing after even more 
actionable intelligence. 
Actionable intelligence can be used in many diff erent ways, both 
proactively and—sometimes, in the face of disaster—reactively. It is with 
the latter that a company’s actionable intelligence capabilities are truly
put to the test. 
On March 11, 2011, we arrived at work hearing about a terrible 
tragedy. Japan had been hit by an earthquake and a tsunami—lives were 
lost, and nuclear meltdown loomed. Our CEO convened a crisis man-
agement council to determine the welfare of our employees in Japan, 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
86
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
how we could assist the people of Japan, and what was the impact on 
our business. 
We received a call with a request to provide intelligence about our 
business including the risk to supply, sales, and so on. 
We created an analysis that showed: 
• Our current global inventory at manufacturing, distribution, and 
suppliers 
• Production plans that could be impacted by a decline in raw materi-
als sourced from Japan 
• Suppliers and customers impacted by the crisis
My team delivered the information to the crisis management team 
on the same day. A complete assessment of the impact of the crisis on
200‐plus supply chain nodes, more than 10,000 SKUs across more than 
26 brands and more than 100 countries. 
These results helped guide the crisis management team with facts. 
One senior executive called it “magic!” 
He added, “Without the actionable intelligence capabilities of your 
team, we may never have received this level of detail.” 
A recent article noted the need for supply chain leaders to implement 
end‐to‐end supply chain visibility. 1 This article stressed the need for 
actionable intelligence. It reinforced something we experienced fi rsthand 
when the earthquake hit. 
I was very glad to see we had increased our capabilities in the right 
direction. Instead of simply gathering big data and upsizing old systems, 
we delivered new, useful capabilities. 
Companies and governments should not be collecting big data just for 
the sake of data. They should be focusing on using data to fi nd answers 
to the strategic business questions that deliver life‐changing results. At 
Estee Lauder, we were able to control the disruptions caused by the 
disaster and risks to the company that could have been translated into 
the loss of hundreds of jobs. The benefi ts of leveraging big data to fi nd
answers should result in continued employment for the company’s 
workers because the company is able to maintain its operations. In addi-
tion, there will be better employment opportunities because the type and 
quality of work the team is doing is smarter and higher. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
The Initial Answers 
87
Attempting to Regularly Capture Benefi ts, 
False Starts, and a Rhythm 
 To build on the success of end‐to‐end visibility, start gaining broader 
support for intelligence by showing measurable results from its use. 
 I tasked my entire team with gathering comments, feedback, and infor-
mation from various parts of the organization. I put up a thermometer 
in the offi  ce, like the ones you see in front of fund‐raising organizations. 
It was big, and at the top it had a goal of $1 million. I said to the team in 
one of our meetings, “Everyone needs to bring in the monetized benefi ts 
of intelligence.” 
 I expected us all to fi nd savings and even made it part of our goals 
and objectives. 
 A week or two went by and nothing . . . I was quickly losing hope. 
 Then, Kristin Zellner, a bright, sparkly‐eyed, energetic woman, started 
presenting me with quotes and savings from business users. She had 
taken her own initiative to work with supply chain team members to
monetize the use of intelligence. The users who gave us the quotes also
benefi ted. Their names went up in lights! I call these resume builders. 
Anytime you can show you have delivered money to an organization, 
other organizations are going to want you to do the same for them. 
 It benefi ts the intelligence team because now the monetized results 
are associated with the project, and you have an ambassador in the busi-
ness who will share this information with team members. 
 Finally, I wrapped this eff ort into a process by which Kristin would 
update my status report to my boss with the latest quotes and savings. 
This showed we were delivering results from the beginning. 
 Make sure you or someone on the team is performing this role of 
monetizing results. 
 The Results of Actionable Intelligence Delivered 
 On the very fi rst week we held training, a supply planner used our intel-
ligence tools to deliver $200,000 in customer service! 
 Once users know there’s a problem, they can drill into the item to 
see where it’s made and where the customers are globally, in an instant. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
88
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
Without our tools, the supply planner would not have easy visibility 
into whether his product is on track for delivery because his product 
could be made in locations that were not connected into the central
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system. To understand the full pic-
ture, he may have needed to look into 14 diff erent systems as well as send 
e-mail to other departments for additional information. 
For this specifi c instance, Global Days of Supply showed the item was 
a new launch and made in Belgium. The supply planner and Kristin called 
the planner in Belgium to ask why the supply orders weren’t showing up. 
The planner said, “Oh! The Manufacturing Resource Planning (MRP) 
f lag is turned off  in our planning system. We have all the raw materials, but 
it would never have been made on the production f loor!” 
Out of 10,000 products, one wasn’t set correctly . . . another data 
quality management issue, but this time visualized and acted on to improve 
the outcome. 
Kristin asked the supply planner how much this fi nding was worth 
in customer service protection. He calculated we would have missed the 
launch and it would have risked $200,000 in planned sales. 
This fi rst event nearly covered the project cost up to this point in 
one day. That was really exciting!
 POLITICS OF CAPTURING QUOTES
AND BENEFITS  
 Danger comes from all sides. Top IT management, your boss, and 
other senior business leaders become concerned if too much light 
is shining on the actionable intelligence team. 
 While good leaders should support the success of their organi-
zation, chalk it up to human nature. Someone will say, “These results 
don’t prove anything” or   “People are uncomfortable with your quotes.” 
 Ignore it. 
 If you are on the intelligence team or leading it, these quotes and 
savings are your currency to buy continued support from the sponsors. 
No one can deliver more support in an organization than the team 
that harnesses big data to help their colleagues make better decisions. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
The Initial Answers 
89
 It was the turning point that enabled the business team to go from 
being reactive to being proactive about protecting the supply chain and 
turned the discussion from “what happened?” to “we are taking action
to make the future even better.” 
 We began to receive several quotes a week about benefi ts the tools 
delivered to the company. 
 Through gathering quotes at Estée Lauder we delivered more than 
$87 million in the fi rst 10 months—much more than the cost to imple-
ment actionable intelligence. In fact, had I predicted that we would 
achieve this amount of monetized benefi ts for the business, no one 
would have believed me. I would not have believed it myself. The best 
part of this eff ort was the fact that the user community raised their hands 
throughout the year to share the benefi ts they themselves had found. 
 The Power of Quotes
 By collecting all these hard benefi ts and user quotes, we slowly built a 
powerful case to convince business sponsors the project was worth its 
cost. Existing sponsors kept our eff orts up and running, while new spon-
sors joined in as they became convinced of the benefi ts of actionable 
intelligence. In the end, success builds more success, more resources, and
more capabilities. Never forget that you need success fi rst to rally sup-
port, before you can start increasing your eff orts.  
 Possibilities with Actionable Intelligence
 At Estée Lauder, we saw how actionable intelligence allowed us to real-
ize millions of dollars in savings in the production and manufacturing 
aspect of the supply chain. However, the possibilities with actionable 
intelligence do not end there. Following are examples of how businesses 
can use actionable intelligence: 
 Social Media Sentiments 
 Social media has traditionally been the domain of marketing. Scan-
ning e-mails, tweets, and posts and analyzing the frequency, semantic 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
90
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 relationships, writing styles, sentence structure, and relative importance 
of certain words or phrases from Facebook or Twitter can tell a lot about 
the writer of the posts. Social media sentiment analysis can help com-
panies to: 
• Understand their customers’ opinions, why consumers are upset 
with the brand, and what they will say about it to their friends. 
• Identify areas for improvement and innovation. 
• Improve their reputation and branding; food and beverage compa-
nies should be on top of their various platforms, rating their estab-
lishments to attract new customers as well as to retain old ones. Too
many potential customers may be impacted by reviews made by 
users in forums. 
• Enhance demand by visualizing where social media is indicating the 
customer is and where the project is, and identify where consumers 
in need of their product are and get the customer service to work 
with them to meet their specifi c needs. 
• Utilize the power of social media to help identify customers at 
various stages of life. This will allow them to off er the appropriate 
service or product, for instance, help banks identify people in the
market for life insurance, joint saving accounts, saving plans for a 
house, or mortgages. Studying social media allows a company to be 
highly responsive to specifi c customer needs. 
. . . but there’s more. By connecting social media to the supply chain 
we can deliver faster insights to determine: 
• Use of the products and services by consumers 
• Availability of the product/services at the location and time custom-
ers want to buy 
• Perception of quality in the customers’ view. 
Companies should ensure this information quickly fl ows to the oper-
ations areas to respond as needed. Make sure to establish a solid informa-
tion supply of social media data by establishing a play book to clearly 
defi ne the actions to be taken when customers share their concerns on 
social media. Plan the steps that marketing, customer service, and supply 
chain will take. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
The Initial Answers 
91
 Supply chain normally has responsibility for quality assurance. Keep 
in mind social media can be an extension of the QA department to rap-
idly test and receive customer insights. 
 Execution Excellence
 More often than not, there are events that lie beyond an organization’s 
control and aff ect its ability to execute 100 percent perfectly. However, 
by collecting information about the diff erence between the actual versus 
the planned execution method, companies can get one step closer to 
achieving execution excellence. 
•   Identify bottlenecks, causes of error, and challenges. Determine the 
root cause for low performance and utilization of resources. Is there 
a section along the production line that is slowing down production 
or creating a large number of defective products? Understand the 
challenges faced by the employees working in that section and take 
actions to either remove the bottleneck or increase the capacity at
the bottleneck. 
•   Optimize the use of resources. Can resources be further utilized to 
improve productivity? Is there an over allocation of manpower in 
one department that has caused the marginal effi  ciency of employ-
ees to be falling? How can employees be reassigned to a diff erent
department to improve overall effi  ciency? 
•   Improve and ensure quality standards. Manufacturing products of 
the right quality will not only result in savings of time, money, and 
eff ort needed to correct defects, but it will also help to maintain 
customer loyalty and trust in the brand. 
 Prediction of Future Performance
 For public companies, there is a routine of predicting company perfor-
mance for fi nancial investors and analysts. When targets are not met, 
investors and analysts will suff er, too. With intelligence on near‐real‐time 
information about company operations, companies will be able to: 
•   Identify emerging trends. Use competitive intelligence to see where 
competitors are falling down either in supply chain (not enough 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
92
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
products) or in branding. Analyze these areas and seize opportunities 
where the organization can enter and serve that group of consumers. 
• Make more accurate predictions. 
• Take action to counter threats or seize opportunities. 
 Cost Management 
 Costs are the bottom line of the company and the higher the line, the 
smaller the profi ts gained from the top line of sales. With intelligence, 
companies can take actions to achieve the optimal solution to the fol-
lowing questions: 
• Based on our best demand and supply plans, what is the cost of acquir-
ing each customer and the revenue to be earned from them in the 
next 12 to 18 months?
• What could cause the costs to increase and what can we do to lower 
the cost in the future? 
• Where is the lowest cost to serve to our future customers based on 
market expansion plans and demand?
• What is the range of profi t targets we may achieve if we serve this 
channel at this volume of sales and with this margin?
• Based on all the above, what could our margins be in the next quar-
ter, half‐year, year, and what target can we safely set?
• These questions need to be answered at a corporate, regional, and 
local level with visibility through the entire enterprise to optimize 
the results. Set the expectation of daily visibility to risks and easy 
access to information to seize opportunities. 
 Mergers and Acquisitions 
 The time that companies have to off er or accept an acquisition or merger 
varies greatly. Having the right information at hand with the right algo-
rithms to calculate the risk and return on investment helps provide an 
objective review of the target company. Of course it can be diffi  cult to 
acquire the data necessary, but the value of gathering the data is very high: 
•  You will get an early start on integrating the companies, which trans-
lates into faster return on investment via synergy and shared services. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
The Initial Answers 
93
•   Seeing the data enables a realistic assessment on whether the rolled‐
up numbers are accurate. 
•   Having a team and process in place sets the table for future acquisi-
tions to go well. 
 Key questions to ask include: 
•   Identify the potential savings or losses. Would the cost of acquisition 
threaten the fi nancials of the company? Is the value of the company 
likely to experience exponential growth in the near future? Tony
Hsieh of Zappos rejected an acquisition off er of $2 million for his 
fi rst company, LinkExchange, only to be acquired by Microsoft a 
year later for $265 million. 
•   Leverage customer, workforce, or operational synergies. Will the 
merger bring about economies of scale from the combined volume 
of activi ties and products from the two companies? Will this free up 
more manpower to perform higher value‐adding tasks? Will the repu-
tation, image, and branding of one company complement or compete 
against the other? 
•   Seize the right opportunity, What are the emerging trends that 
might be blind spots for our competitors. Are they falling down either 
in supply chain (not enough products) or in branding. Are there 
areas where your organization can enter and serve that group of 
consumers that doesn’t yet feel satisfi ed? 
 Manufacturing, Operations, and Quality
 As one of the areas in the company with the longest usage of intelligence, 
operations and manufacturing are well-known for the Total Quality Man-
agement and Six Sigma methodologies. With actionable intelligence, opera-
tions can go beyond just measuring yield or adopting a reactive approach: 
•   Determine capital investment. Simulate scenarios to balance the pros 
and cons of investing in new equipment. Will the purchase of equip-
ment with a higher production capacity lower the unit cost with fewer 
production runs or will it overproduce items that will result in wastage? 
•   Alert users about major potential quality or system failure issues 
early and proactively. In 2013, the Chief Information Offi  cer (CIO) 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
94
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
of Komatsu K.K. Kosuke Yamane and I met, and he told me a piece 
of the latest technology being put in their big equipment is a com-
plete monitoring system that communicates the health, location, and
status of the equipment. This data can be used to proactively main-
tain the equipment for customers thereby reducing lost work time 
and protecting customer goodwill. 
• Proactively receiving almost‐real‐time information will enable the 
organization to strategize resource reallocation countermeasures instead 
of using a reactive fi re‐fi ghting approach. 
• Manage the sales order book to optimize margins by sharing the 
timing of new launches; orders and quotes can be timed to protect 
margin opportunities. 
 Testing and Getting the Right Formula 
 Gut feeling alone is not enough anymore because business has become 
very global and very complex. Actionable intelligence and hard facts aug-
ment gut feeling, providing leaders with new planning capabilities. We can 
use actionable intelligence to understand whether we are doing things the 
right way and reaching out to customers in the most eff ective way. Online 
platforms and websites use intelligence to their advantage. They: 
• Utilize heat maps to identify which areas of a page receive the most 
attention, activity, and approval. How long are consumers spending 
on the website and what is the hit rate like? Why are they leaving so 
quickly? Where are visitors hovering around on the website? Where
did they stop?
• Maximize the consumer experience by making the appropriate 
changes. 
• Experiment and pilot‐test all aspects of the websites before the full, 
offi  cial launch. Gather consumer intelligence and identify the best 
way to launch with a bang. 
 Health Care and Healthier Living 
 The discomfort when we get sick is not just the feeling of illness we con-
tend with. This discomfort is coupled with the fi nancial concern about 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
The Initial Answers 
95
the medical bills associated with diagnosis and treatment.  Intelligence
can enable professionals in the health care and insurance sectors to pro-
vide better services to patients and their families: 
•   Make predictions about the likelihood of health insurance buyers 
getting more severe diseases. Are clients paying the right premiums 
for the plans? Is the insurance company bearing too much risk? If 
the client has a family background of certain diseases, should they be
serviced with a better plan?
•   Conduct medium‐term demand planning to prepare for the infl ux 
of hospital cases. Is there suffi  cient information available to help the
hospital make the necessary preparations to provide the required 
care, attention, and treatment to the largest number of patients in the 
fastest, most effi  cient manner?
•   Enable caregivers to make better diagnoses using an intelligent learn-
ing system that brings together clinical trial results with doctor obser-
vations, and social media feedback from consumers. Leveraging this 
big data helps care providers make the right decisions for patients.  
 Other questions include: 
•   How can doctors reduce the pressure in the decision-making process 
for the caregivers? 
•   Can the availability of medical records and better accuracy in the 
prognosis help them to make the right decision and justify that deci-
sion to the rest of the family? 
 Attracting and Retaining Customers
 In marketing, there are several ways to reach out to the target group 
and segment. However, with so many mediums out there, which is the 
right one to invest in to bring in customers? Intelligence can provide 
the appropriate justifi cation that will enable marketers to allocate their 
budgets to the right eff orts to reach out to the right customer: 
•   Identify the appropriate mix of marketing mediums to reach out to 
the right group of people. If the target audience is a group of retired 
elderly, should the medium be social media platforms or should it be 
television advertisements?
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
96
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
• Reward loyal customers with customized services and discounts. 
According to Tony Hsieh CEO of Zappos the company rewards its 
customers by upgrading their purchases from the standard delivery 
to an overnight delivery. This incentivizes customers to make repeat 
visits and become loyal advocates of the brand. 
• Avoid bad customers while attracting the stars. Who should be 
attended to: the guy in the turtleneck sweater and jeans who looks
like Steve Jobs or the man in the suit? Should customers be profi led 
based only on their looks, or is there more information that can 
be used? 
On a global level, the marketing team needs to provide sales and 
supply chain with market share estimates and the impact on demand 
forecasts, inventory, and supply. Combining price optimization with 
consumer migration patterns and in‐depth looks at point‐of‐sale activ-
ity of a brand leader can provide better fact‐based estimates. 
 Business Capabilities for Insurers 
 Insurers should be actively pursuing intelligence initiatives in three key 
areas: customer‐centric, risk‐centric, and finance‐centric activities. 
Figure   5.1 identifi es a number of important areas where intelligence is 
already being applied by leading insurers. Many of these areas have signi-
fi cant potential to create an even larger business impact through the use 
of high‐performance intelligence. 
In meeting with insurance companies in the United States and Japan, 
it is clear that while they are highly analytical about risk, most lack 
depth of customer knowledge. Actionable intelligence will enable 
insurers to make customer decisions in real time, even as interactions are 
in process. 
 Figure 5.1 Actionable Intelligence Opportunities: Insurance 
Risk Intel
Underwriting
Pricing
Fraud
Reserves
Customer Intel
Identification
Cross-Sell
Retention
Finance Intel
Modeling
Portfolio Optimization
Liability Coverage
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
The Initial Answers 
97
 Insurers can identify potential customers by linking their extensive 
internal information with external data including social media, political, 
economic risks, and more. 
 According to a study by A.T. Kearney,3 car insurers can help lower 
insurance rates for good drivers by monitoring their behavior using a 
system installed in their car called  telematics . The system provides infor-
mation about speeding and reaction to driving conditions, which can 
be analyzed to assess a 20 to 30 percent discount in insurance rates. 
 The same system can be used to improve driving habits by track-
ing the length of time the driver was on the road, and a warning can be
issued when the driver may be tired or when the brake too hard. 
 The association of British Insurers calculated the industry has not 
made an underwriting profi t since 1994. Insurance claims and the costs 
to insure resulted in a £289 loss in 2013 according to their study “UK 
Insurance Key Facts 2013.” 2
 The opportunity telematics and actionable intelligence provide is to 
bring this back into a profi table range by rewarding good drivers and 
improving bad drivers. Several new business models can be put in place 
according to the AT Kearney study: 3
•   Pay As You Drive: A device installed in the vehicle validates the mile-
age and location allowing for more accurate risk and thus cost. 
•   Pay How You Drive: An accelerometer provides event data on sharp 
turns, hard braking, or fast acceleration. This could be particularly 
helpful for fl eets with signifi cantly higher risks of property damage, 
fatality, loss of business, and reputation. Both the insurer and business 
could take proactive steps to improve driving behavior. It would also
be a great fact‐based driving record for future employers. 
 If the car and insurance industry don’t jump on this, we’ll be sure to 
see consumers leveraging a mobile phone app that provides evidence-
based driving records to challenge insurance premiums. 
 Pricing Optimization
 The reservation price of each consumer is diff erent. Charging every 
consumer the same price is not necessarily optimal. Having intelligence 
into the reservation price of each consumer will enable the organization 
to identify the right price for the right customers. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
98
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
• Consider the opportunities for dynamic pricing. In the United States, 
even within the same state, online retailers provide a diff erent price to 
a customer using a Windows computer and one using a Mac. 
• Identify the appropriate price and value of a product or service. 
Amazon and other auction websites or retailers that have a bidding 
system allow consumers to decide the optimum price. 
• A consumer from Russia may travel to certain cities via a connect-
ing fl ight through the United Kingdom on the way to New York, 
for example. A brand that knows the fl ight pattern based on data 
collected from travel agencies, hotels, and social media can look at 
its product pricing and optimize the price so the consumers react 
the way the brand wants them to. In Hong Kong and China, for 
example, brands quickly saw their Hong Kong store sales increase 
as Chinese consumers began travelling. The knowledge of the huge 
price diff erences between Hong Kong and China attracted both 
individual consumers and smart businesspeople, who bought pallets 
of product at a time. They would simply cross the border into Guang 
Zhou and resell at a discount to the consumers in China. 
Note that this list is by no means comprehensive! Actionable intel-
ligence is usually not limited by technology. The barrier lies in the crea-
tivity of the user. Any piece of data can be turned into intelligence by 
organizing and visualizing, even your breakfast. 
 Almost Done? 
 When your project gets invigorated, that’s when you will strike. That’s 
the tipping point, the critical mass that will be reached to do great things. 
So is there anything left? Why, certainly, yes there is. In dealing with peo-
ple, processes, and technology, so far most of what we have done is aimed 
at technology and its direct implementation. The next chapter deals with
changing and adapting to processes in the organization. Chapter   7 will
be about the people and making the eff ort sustainable over the long run. 
I’ve mentioned cases for how actionable intelligence can be used in 
multiple industries. New cases and opportunities are being written every 
day. Please take a look at my website  www.keithbcarter.com  to fi nd out 
the latest opportunities for your business. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
The Initial Answers 
99
 Summary and Considerations 
 Note 
 1.  Mary C. Holcomb, Serhiy Y. Ponomarov, and Karl B. Manrodt, “The Rela-
tionship of Supply Chain Visibility to Firm Performance,”  The Best of SCM 
Research (2010). 
 2.  Association of British Insurers, “UK Insurance Key Facts” (September 2013). 
 3.  Joe Reifel, Mike Hales, Gang Xu, and Shamik Lala, “ Telematics: The Game 
Changer Reinventing  Auto Insurance,” AT Kearney (2010). 
Point to Ponder: Performance metrics drive behavior. Make 
sure you are driving the right behavior. 
Quote to Remember: “Inject speed into the process!” 
Question to Consider: What do you need to do to capture
and monetize the benefi ts? 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
101
 Chapter  6
 Time for Change
 Key Points and Questions
• Work with business leaders to embed the fact‐based decision mak-
ing into their processes. 
• Establish cross‐functional/regional collaboration to properly lever-
age actionable intelligence. 
• Break down the silos, access your own data. 
• Is your governance structure giving you the money or asking you 
the question fi rst? 
• How do you persuade sponsors to put money on the table? 
• Don’t become mired in cost discussions. The visibility will bring 
many more benefi ts than cost, both hard measurable benefi ts and 
soft ones. 
• Portion of your life are online; should you be concerned?
• Data security: How do you guard against spies and breaches? 
 T
his statement by Helgerson should give pause to every business
leader, every human resources person, and every change agent. 
The U.S. government on boards incoming presidents long before 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
102
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
they take offi  ce, providing them with intelligence, which they can turn 
into action on the fi rst day they take offi  ce. This is the gold standard for 
bringing new staff  onboard at any level. The president is trained on the 
pro cess, method, and purpose of his role as a decision maker before his 
fi rst day. 
The purpose of briefi ng presidential candidates and presidents‐elect 
is to give them a head start on implementing defense tactics as soon as 
they assume offi  ce. 
After taking offi  ce, the chief executive receives something called the 
President’s Daily Brief (PDB), prepared by the Central Intelligence 
Agency (CIA) and tailored to each executive’s style and focus. For 
example, the CIA established a very good relationship with President 
Reagan and provided him with economic, political, and military oppor-
tunities. The end of the Cold War and takedown of the Berlin Wall was 
helped, in large part, by the CIA’s PDBs, which provided insight into 
how the Soviet Union leaders would respond to economic relationships. 
Reagan is still credited today with this tremendous success during his 
presidency. 
In contrast, the relationship between President John F. Kennedy and 
the CIA was strained, according to Helgerson. The information pro-
vided to him by the CIA was not as timely or accurate as it needed to be. 
This contributed to several mis‐steps including the Cold War incident 
called the “Bay of Pigs.” 
 CIA PRESIDENT’S DAILY BRIEF: A SOLID 
EXAMPLE OF CROSSFUNCTIONAL 
ACTIONABLE INTELLIGENCE  
 “Since 1952 the Central Intelligence Agency of the U.S. govern-
ment has provided presidential candidates and presidents‐elect with
intelligence briefi ngs during their campaigns and transitions. Their 
briefi ngs have helped presidents be as well informed as possible on 
international developments from the day they take offi  ce.” 
Source: “Getting to Know the President,” John L. Helgerson, retired CIA 
inspector general .
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Time for Change
103
 By President Ronald Reagan’s time, the CIA had set the bar high, 
operating a sophisticated and well‐oiled intelligence machine. As one of 
the world’s largest intelligence agencies, that’s its job. 
 How often do you brief your leadership and key customers on risks 
and opportunities? Even if you could do so regularly, would they under-
stand the information and act on it?
 To gain the same benefi ts from intelligence as US policy makers from 
the CIA you will need to change the way you acquire, validate, and con-
sume intelligence throughout your enterprise. There will no doubt need
to be some changes in governance, budgeting, security, sales, and opera-
tions planning. By leading change you will do more than just reinforce 
the core of actionable intelligence; you will integrate the processes of the 
entire organization with your own. 
 By now you probably have technology ready; you’ll also be surprised 
at the talent available within your organization when you provide them
with data, but these need to be focused toward the goal of answering 
strategic business questions to be fully eff ective.  
 Collaborative Business Planning 
 The real champions of delivering business results are the people who 
can successfully instate the process of collaborative business planning. 
This sounds very simple, but it can be a daunting task. Various business
functions are often aligned against each other because they have opposing 
key performance indicators (KPIs). Take sales and operations for example. 
The demand for fast delivery of products to the clients by the sales team 
clashes with the operations team’s capacity to deliver balancing speed, 
cost, and quality. Sudden demand spikes may require the operations 
team to work overtime resulting in higher costs of production and, thus, 
confl ict with the fi nance team’s expectations of lower costs. 
 By bringing all departments together in a regular meeting armed 
with equal access to intelligence, issues, problems, challenges, and bottle-
necks can be brought out for discussion. In addition, through the ideation 
sessions discussed in Chapter   4 , all departments can work together 
to overcome those issues and agree on the targeted sales for the com-
pany, how operations and purchasing will support the manufacturing and 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
104
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
delivery of the required goods, and what the targeted top and bottom 
lines for the year will be. 
Companies can be more effi  cient when they go back to where they 
started from: having all the business teams in the same room to optimize 
business performance. 
Let us go back to that original situation all companies begin in. When 
a company fi rst started, the founder has the passion and the strategy. The 
sales team is in the same room as operations, and manufacturing or services 
is also nearby. As the company expands, sales moves out to a fancy offi  ce 
somewhere else; operations stays with the plant. Sometimes diff erent sales 
and operation plants are set up in various locations, but the founder is still 
in the headquarters. 
As the company grows, communication becomes more siloed, and 
security controls are put in place to prevent knowledge from leaving the
company. The same security controls block people in the company from 
sharing information that would help them make better decisions. This 
marks the end of sales and operations sitting together and the beginning 
of a very siloed business. For the past 20 years, Oliver Wright highlighted 
collaborative business planning as a best practice that demanded that 
companies go back to putting business functions in the same room, and 
back to sharing important information, resulting in signifi cant perform-
ance gains. To make this happen we need actionable intelligence. 
 What Is Collaborative Business Planning? 
 Collaborative business planning is a regularly executed process that brings 
all business function plans into one integrated plan that is reviewed by the 
management from an aggregate level. It reconciles demand and supply plans 
at detail and aggregate level and links to the operating plan. The process 
usually covers the business plans over an 18‐month horizon to help with 
the allocation of resources and the execution of business plans and strategy. 
Aligning all of a company’s plans nets some very signifi cant results. 
Most important, it will make the company much more effi  cient by 
making management responsible for reconciling all the diff erent plans
and optimizing the diff erent goals in the company for the best end result. 
This effi  ciency can result in shorter lead times, less stock‐outs, better 
forecasts, and less excess inventory. See Table 6.1 for sample benefi ts.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Time for Change
105
Table 6.1 Sample Effi  ciency Benefi ts
Operation Area
% Change  Range 
Median
On‐time delivery to 
customers
+10–40%
+25% 
Inventory levels
–12–70%
–41% 
Manufacturing downtime
–20–50%
–35% 
Plant effi  ciency
+2–33%
+17% 
Transportation costs
–5–30%
–17%
 Source: Tom Wallace, “Sales & Operations Planning: Costs and Benefi ts: The Financial View of Imple-
menting Executive S&OP,”  T. F . Wallace & Company (2009): 6.
 These are benefi ts reported by 13 major companies implementing 
collaborative business planning according to a T. F. Wallace study on sales 
and operations planning benefi ts in 2009. Another major benefi t worth 
mentioning is the increase in forecast accuracy. Because this process requires 
more information from all parties, the forecasting model becomes more 
robust. In the same study, there was a forecast error reduction of  20 to 
25 percent. As a touchstone, Figure   6.1 shows the required actions to support 
collaborative business planning (CBP). This does not have to be complex, 
but it does need to be fast and results-oriented. Each day your organization 
isn’t achieving eff ective‐CBP results is another day competitors gain an edge. 
 It is not all smooth sailing once you start. Here are some challenges 
this business process entails: 
•   Naming a champion or expert to lead the implementation
•   Obtaining senior management support 
 Figure 6.1   Key Requirements for Actionable Intelligence to Make a Diff erence
Actionable
Intelligence
Strategic Questions
Quality Data
Visualization
Collaboration
Improved Outcomes
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
106
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
• Achieving process compliance
• Proper defi nition, understanding, and acceptance of assigned roles 
and responsibilities including the identifi cation of the specifi c objec-
tives for employee appraisals 
• Establishing collaborative meetings as a business priority 
• Establishing IT‐enabled processes with adequate tool functionality
All in all, these bullet points are very similar to the needed factors for 
actionable intelligence. Companies need to build the right techno logies, 
adapt their processes to the new capabilities, and get the support of man-
agement to ensure the project is adopted and carried out properly.  
 Linking Collaboration to Actionable Intelligence 
 Enabling collaboration among business functions with actionable intelli-
gence is a bit of a chicken‐and‐egg story. Which one comes fi rst is always 
a problem, but, in the end, the same results will be achieved. Once one is 
in place, it will be a relatively small step to institute the other. 
• From collaboration to actionable intelligence:  If actionable intelli-
gence capabilities will be delivered when collaboration processes are 
already instated, this will open a new world to each function’s users. 
By delivering answers to questions and in‐depth views on the business 
situation, your actionable intelligence capabilities can greatly enhance 
the collaboration meetings. Now the users can have meetings that are 
more fact‐based, thus making the company more effi  cient. 
• From actionable intelligence to collaboration: Actionable intelli-
gence makes the step to eff ective collaboration very small. It is mostly 
a process that builds on top of actionable intelligence, so to come 
up with collaborative business planning after you delivered action-
able intelligence could even be a logical next step in enhancing the 
decision-making process of management. 
Of course, the synergies delivered will work both ways. Collaboration 
allows companies to achieve actionable intelligence as well as embed it 
into their business and improve actionable intelligence. It is an escalating, 
collaborating eff ect. In the process of integrating collaborative business 
planning with actionable intelligence we can discern four stages: 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Time for Change
107
Stage 1: Improved communications. At this fi rst stage, data is incom-
plete and requires verifi cation, and other issues are unresolved as yet, 
but a calendar and cadence have been established. 
Stage 2: Problem solving. There are still problems in the process, but 
data for decision making is more trustworthy and problems are more 
visible and can be actively addressed. 
Stage 3:  Problem prevention. Near‐term problems have been addressed, 
allowing the management team to focus its attention further ahead into 
the future planning horizon. 
Stage 4: Strategic and tactical decision making. Collaborative business 
planning is a mature process and now the company has solidly imple-
mented problem solving and prevention. The management team closes gaps 
between the reality of the situation and its alignment with busi ness goals.  
 Ground Zero
 The start of integrating collaborative business planning with actionable 
intelligence is usually recognizable by an announcement that sales and 
operations planning (S&OP) is being implemented, followed by some 
skepticism from departments around the company and top management. 
Sales and operations’ best‐practice leaders and gurus always claim that 
fact‐based decision making has to be led from the top, because that is the 
only way to get groups that were siloed—and may even have a dysfunctional 
relationship—to sit in the same room with each other. But they miss 
an important point. Many business function leaders make a business of 
protecting data and massaging it so their department looks good. Getting 
them to share this data with each other requires a senior leader to come in 
and insist on full transparency—and accept no other alternative. 
 By providing full transparency we can also create actionable intelligence. 
When a company embarks on the process of collaborating, it should at the same 
time enable actionable intelligence capabilities, leading to full transparency. 
Stage 1: Improved communications can be achieved by showing each
department what can be gained. The “what’s in it for me” question should 
be addressed, not just with words, but by showing how making data reliable 
and sharing reliable data can make a world of diff erence. It also opens dia-
logue between departments and eventually cultivates trust between them. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
108
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
Stage 2: Problem solving is an important fi rst step toward planning 
sales and operations. Start by bringing departments together to clear 
the problems that inhibit the sharing of the individual units’ plans. 
Addressing these problems creates a common goal to work toward and 
makes the roadblocks visible. This will start to get purposeful at this
point, and actionable intelligence has the power to be the backbone of 
visualizing problems in diff erent plans by completing, validating, and 
visualizing the plans themselves. 
Stage 3: Problem prevention is enabled by supply and demand align-
ment on a forward planning horizon appropriate for the business. After 
all, for problem prevention you need forward visibility. Aligning for the 
next year or the next two years allows companies to map the challenges 
in getting the right goods to the right place at the right time. It’s impor-
tant to get product‐level details by location—especially price, costs, and 
quantity—because these help set the priority for resource allocation, 
which is the main principle of collaboration. In Stage 3, actionable intel-
ligence will provide the collaborative business planning meeting with the 
details it needs to get that overarching plan together. It isn’t possible to 
have an eff ective collaboration without actionable intelligence. 
Stage 4: Strategic and tactical decision making is only possible when 
actionable intelligence has been established alongside collaboration at 
a global, regional, and local level. It’s about optimizing the entire com-
pany. Many companies make the mistake of optimizing just portions of 
themselves, where the data is cleaner, and where the support is more pro-
nounced. But in doing so, they may optimize one part and in the process 
deoptimize many others. This becomes apparent when they run through 
the business scorecard and realize that there are trade‐off s between, for 
example, high customer service, inventory, and shipping costs. The deeper 
work to establish relationships between the KPIs has to be done before the 
benefi ts can be fully achieved at Stage 4.  
The benefi ts of arriving at Stage 4 include truly being able to set 
targets in an optimal way, which sometimes surprisingly means reducing 
targets in one area to accelerate targets in another area. By focusing the
organization on an optimized model and putting aside the traditional
KPIs that were being approved without a thorough understanding of 
the impact, the business can achieve better performance and consistently 
allocate resources in the right way. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Time for Change
109
 A Continuing Challenge 
 Take note, this is not a one‐time eff ort. As business challenges emerge, or 
growth opportunities appear, actionable intelligence capabilities need to 
be further improved and the model revised for nimble reactions to stake-
holder needs. The best example of this is when there is a jolt or catastrophe 
in the economy. With economic models, a company can see whether the 
business might turn down, but it might not be clear what products and 
services will be impacted most or least. As a result, it is not clear what 
manufacturing capability or distribution capacity will be needed. This lack 
of information creates a very bumpy ride and leads to missed earnings 
calls, senior management turnover, and poor morale. 
 If leaders do not make fundamental changes and adjust their strategies 
and tactics, the organization simply fl ounders. Alternatively, by collaborating 
across business functions connected to the economic situation, com petitors, 
customers, and suppliers, using big data we can drill into the specifi c SKUs 
and brands that could be impacted. Based on our future plans and actionable 
intelligence we can predict where sales will occur, how much cash we need 
to tie up in inventory, and what opportunities we need to seek to improve 
margins by selling products that have a better margin with a lower cost basis. 
During lean times companies can’t make mistakes selling the wrong prod-
ucts with the wrong costs at the wrong price. However, companies with 
poor KPIs that drive the wrong behavior end up doing just that. 
 It is imperative that companies connect their end‐to‐end value chains 
in order to support the best outcomes. Once they have achieved that they 
must engage in enabling even more and better actionable intelligence.  
 Collaborative Business Planning Health Check
 To ensure your process is working well, here is a quick health check for 
the company. By answering these questions truthfully you can fi nd out
where there could be breakpoints and bottlenecks in the process. 
✓ Does your regular cadence of activities involve senior leadership? 
✓ Does the executive summary bring to life the situation and con-
sider the internal and external situations?
✓ Instead of just telling stories, are you showing facts? 
✓ Do you review an action register and is each action aligned with 
improving KPIs and answering strategic business questions? 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
110
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
✓Are proactive decisions made?
✓Are you using forward‐looking KPIs? 
✓Does the process cover all major areas of the business for the next 
18 months or an appropriate planning horizon?
✓At preparation meetings are all business units able to review the 
same data?
✓Is there a fi nancial view dashboard that allows easy access to drill into 
information at a product and service level with granular details ?
✓Are discrepancies between the business plan and the fi nancial plan 
evaluated monthly? 
✓Does it occur on a monthly cycle? 
✓Does it include a capacity review?
✓Does it include actual versus forecasted sales?
✓Are accountabilities clearly defi ned?
 In the end, succeeding in collaborative business planning can be a 
challenging project of its own, a journey almost as interesting as the one 
delivering actionable intelligence. Though truth be told, actionable intelli-
gence is a foundational element of collaborative business planning, and 
they can really complement each other by having similar requirements 
and a similar process. The hard benefi ts of properly implementing both 
can transform the business, and the soft benefi ts are simply priceless. 
 However, implementing either project is not free and nobody has 
unlimited resources. Therefore, we also need governance of the action-
able intelligence project. 
 Summary and Considerations 
Point to Ponder: Collaboration between business functions 
and across regions will deliver tremendous value. 
Quote to Remember: “Business leaders have made careers 
out of massaging data.” 
Question to Consider: What common strategic business 
question could be sponsored by a senior leader and bring people
from across the company to deliver actionable intelligence? 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
111
 Chapter  7
Governance: Funding
Intelligence, Protecting
the Results
 Key Points and Questions
• Governance should be a facilitator of communication, priority, and 
oversight. If it’s seen as a block or a hassle, it’s broken. . . . fi x it. Like a 
referee, the best project managers are in the middle of the game, but 
not noticeable except when needed. 
• Governance’s biggest responsibility should be to review past projects 
for the business results achieved. This is the only way to validate new
business cases. 
• Change the mindset from one of risk avoidance to seizing opportu-
nity, and governance will be established correctly and deliver: 
- Insights during crisis with all stakeholders
- Faster view on capability to leverage competitor mistakes
- Appropriate pricing of goods and services
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
112
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
• Never use the term “postmortem” on a project, unless you really 
want it dead. When a project is delivered, that’s when the most 
important support for adoption and benefi ts capture begins!
• Defi nitely use post‐governance for intelligence projects! 
• Tighten security. Secure your newfound strategic insights by 
classifying data and reducing access to a need‐to‐know basis. Any-
thing connected to the Internet is up for grabs by hackers. Take
your most critical data offl  ine.  
 An Actionable Intelligence 
Governance Methodology
 If you are the leader governing projects or 
a professional pitching a project, here are 
some key performance indicators (KPIs) 
you need to consider: 
• What is the situation today? 
• What should it be? 
• How to improve it?
• Who needs to improve it?
• How will they be compensated for improving it? Is it a simple pat 
on the back or it is an increase in salary? 
 I’m so frustrated with our governance process, we should scrap it and start it all 
over again. 
 —Senior business executives, most companies, 
most places in the world 
A governance model provides a blueprint for how a company decides 
to manage its resources to fund projects that would provide the best
return on investment, are best aligned to support the strategy, and have 
the highest likelihood of success. The fi nal goal of pitching projects for 
the project’s leader is twofold. First, you want your project to be accepted 
by the business leaders so you can start. Second, you want them to give 
you a budget to work with. 
 Actionable intelligence should 
be lightly governed, quickly 
delivered, and heavily used. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Governance: Funding Intelligence, Protecting the Results 
113
 To objectively assess whether a project has a high or a low chance of 
being accepted by management, put yourself in management’s shoes and ask 
yourself: What should a project aim to deliver for you to be able to accept 
it? Would you say it fi ts into the company’s strategy? Now think of how the 
actionable intelligence projects fi t into that criterion. Would they be accepted? 
 Note here that I see every iteration of actionable intelligence as a 
separate project. Every time you answer a new strategic business ques-
tion for a new sponsor, get a new budget and a new review of the results. 
This is what “govern lightly” means, and it is also the approach that 
results in the highest chance of acceptance for your fi rst project. Think 
of it this way: management would much rather spend a small sum, so run 
a low risk, than be confronted with a giant budget application. If you 
apply for one small project at a time, you can much more easily show 
fast results to support starting up the next. Due to the synergies of the 
individual actionable intelligence projects, total costs for these projects 
tend to go up linearly or even become cheaper, while the results grow 
exponentially. 
 An excellent intelligence governance model will give money now 
and ask questions later!
 Now I will show what to keep in mind when going through the 
governance of your projects. 
 Before you start, bear in mind that for our project of actionable 
intelligence against all the other projects, leaders need to adhere to three 
main concepts: 
 1.  Not all categories of projects should be governed in the same way. 
 2.  Every project should have a measurement for success. 
 3.  There should be a methodology for fast‐tracking projects. 
 Unlike Table   7.1  , which displays diff erent levels of engagement based on 
the category of project, the typical project management process has only one 
methodology that engages all involved regardless of the project. The man-
agement process starts off  with the registration of a new project, then con-
tinues with fi nding a business sponsor who will support it with a budget for 
the project’s execution, actually executes the project, and concludes with a 
review. There are three project categories:  (1) intelligence, (2) infrastructure, 
and (3) fast‐track unbudgeted. The fi rst category consists of intelligence 
projects that are projects involving mostly intellectual change but usually 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
114
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
no big investment in capital to sponsor tangible results, as the deliverable is 
intelligence. 
Normally, intelligence projects will be registered and approved, as are all 
the projects. Then the tasks of getting a sponsor, budget, and execution will 
be fast and easily checked before reaching the ultimate goal of the review. 
The second type of project will be infrastructure projects, aimed at deliv-
ering tangibles like machines and equipment. Compared to the fast checks 
of intelligence projects, these are typically slow processes whereby the per-
son in charge at every stage will review before passing to the next stage. 
The third category is fast‐track unbudgeted. As its name suggests, 
this is very similar to an intelligence project with fast-process approvals, 
except that there are no allocated intelligence budgets granted, and it 
goes straight from getting a business sponsor to execution and then to 
review. During the review phase, the results are monetized and com-
pared against the amount of budget ultimately used. 
 Methodology for Fast‐Tracking Projects 
 Whenever business leaders become frustrated with the slow pace of gov-
ernance they start to look for ways to shortcut the approval process. 
This becomes clear when invoices show up without purchase orders or 
vendors are placed in the system without due diligence or budgets used 
without prior approval. Typically there are several symptoms: 
• There are several approval levels that are diffi  cult to get past, but 
that actually never say “no” in the end. They just ask a lot of ques-
tions, annoy the heck out of you, and add no value to the validation 
 Table 7.1  Governance Applied Selectively Based on Project Category
Project Category
PMO*
Sponsor
Budget
Execution
Review Results
Intelligence
Register
✓
✓
✓
✓
Infrastructure
Register
✓
✓
✓
✓
Fast‐track
intelligence
Skip
✓
Skip
✓
✓
And budget
 * Project Management Offi  ce  .
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Governance: Funding Intelligence, Protecting the Results 
115
 process . . . but they’ve always done it and have made a career out of 
it so live with it!
•   The paperwork to fi ll out for a project is onerous and doesn’t actu-
ally provide clarity on the measurable benefi ts. 
•   Governance meetings bring lots of people together but little gets done 
and everyone leaves unsatisfi ed with the outcome, because no one 
comes prepared. Everyone in the meeting is reading the documenta-
tion, so comments become subjective, confused, and of little value. 
•   There exists lack of clarity on who can actually approve a project. 
This is especially true in multinational companies. Is the money
being spent locally? Does the region need to approve? Is the impact 
global? Does corporate need to approve? The favorite one is when
a local organization wants to use a new, cool software tool, but cor-
porate IT doesn’t have it as a standard. Who gets to approve—the
business leaders or IT? 
 All these and more cause IT governance to fail miserably . . . but 
there’s hope! Simply remove the “yes men,” clarify the ownership of 
benefi t delivery, and fi nally make sure the results can be measured. 
 Introducing “post‐governance,” a fast‐track model for intelligence 
projects. To validate that the project qualifi es, we ask a series of questions: 
•   Is this an actionable intelligence project or something else?
•   If this is an actionable intelligence project, then confi rm with the 
sponsors the measure of success and review their past performance 
in delivering success. If both are good, then execute. 
•   If this is another type of project, confi rm there is a budget. 
•   If there is a budget, then confi rm what is the measure of success 
with the sponsors and review their past performance in deliver-
ing success. If both are good, then execute. 
•   If no budget exists, wait for next budget round for approval. 
•   Is there an Accountable Consulted, Execution (ACE) chart with one 
single “yes” in each role so it is very clear? 
 By using the ACE chart (Table   7.2 ) to clearly outline the account-
abilities and measurements up front, the governance model becomes 
much faster, and the goal of communicating the types of projects that are 
going on is still achieved. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
116
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
Accountable as the business sponsor, he/she uses the capabilities deli-
vered by the project to improve business results. 
Consulted: This two‐way communication ensures everyone is on the 
right page but doesn’t slow down progress. It allows peers and seniors to 
have their say and be engaged in the project. Engagement enables team 
work and promotes support for the project. 
Execution team members make the project happen. 
Note, this assumes three things: 
 1. There is an agreed‐upon strategy that everyone is working toward. 
 2. There are agreed‐upon KPIs that support the strategy. 
 3. There are approved budgets that can be used for the projects (except 
for actionable intelligence, which is self‐funding). 
Whoa, actionable intelligence is self‐funding? Yes, if you’ve followed 
the model in this book you will achieve far more savings than it costs. 
All you need is a budget to get the fi rst pieces of actionable intelligence 
started to answer the fi rst strategic business questions. However, if you
don’t follow the model, you will fail and be fi red, and your fi ring will 
fund the project. So even though actionable intelligence is not funded, 
you still need to deliver. Unoffi  cially allocated resources, like man‐hours, 
are also a form of funding. You still have to spend them wisely and deliver 
on the project goals. 
One winter morning, Estée Lauder’s head of     IT development and I met 
at Starbucks to lay out how we would work together. We brought a ven-
dor along as a mediator. We had ownership and communication challenges 
across our teams as well as mixed expectations regarding who would deliver 
what. By meeting, we were able to draw lines that gave us much more solid 
footing and enabled us to work together well for the next several years.  
 Table 7.2  Accountable, Consulted, Execution Chart for Projects
Accountable
Consulted
Execution
Business manager and team
Yes
IT leader and team
Yes
Business sponsor
Yes
Other business units and IT leaders
Yes
C‐level
Yes
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Governance: Funding Intelligence, Protecting the Results 
117
 Governing Does Not Stop with Approving
 When fast‐tracking or in the regular governing path, you will come to 
a point where your project is approved and you reach the execution 
phase. During this execution stage of the project, governance is most 
importantly good communications. Managing the actionable intelligence 
project well means telling your boss what you are up to, regardless of 
whether this is your fi rst actionable intelligence project or your 15th. 
 Governing the project is not always smooth sailing; you could run 
into problems like these: 
•   Data acquisition can be unexpectedly diffi  cult. 
•   Iterative development of visualizations can require more iterations, 
or fewer, depending on user imagination, needs, and capabilities. 
•   Scope can change rapidly as benefi ts are captured and shown in one 
area, which results in additional work. Normally, “pre‐governance” 
really slows down the project, because the additional spend requires 
rejustifi cation through governance boards and so on. 
 To be successful, a high level of communication about what is being 
done and the priorities of the projects in the queue is needed to set expec-
tations. Again, keep the business sponsors engaged. Not only will you 
keep their attention and stay top‐of‐mind, you will also build their trust 
in you and subsequently their continued support of your project. 
 The project does not end once the company has implemented the 
business intelligence tool. Leaders and teams need to make sure the proc-
ess is usable and workable; if not, the project is not going to succeed and all 
the eff ort and money spent will be wasted. In fact, a survey by SAS showed 
that only 12 percent of data management professionals had actually imple-
mented a big data strategy, because most of them don’t understand it, don’t 
understand the benefi ts, or do not have the necessary support.  1
 Every Project Should Have a Measurement for Success
 What have the IT projects we approved delivered to us? 
 —A Fortune 500 chief fi nancial offi  cer 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
118
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
With this one question, thousands of hours of IT work and thou-
sands more hours of governance of the IT work were challenged. There 
weren’t any good, well‐documented answers. 
Most IT projects are considered hard to measure because they are part 
of improving execution effi  ciency. How can the benefi ts of the project 
be separated from the benefi ts of business performance, the external envi-
ronment, and other mitigating circumstances?
It can be done and it must be done to answer a savvy CFO’s ques-
tion, but the problem doesn’t belong in the lap of IT. You know what 
I am going to say next: It is the business sponsor who needs to set the 
measurement and be accountable for the results. 
Earlier in the book we linked collaborative business performance with 
fi nancial performance. So it is also possible to link project performance 
to overall business performance. Before the project gets approved, leaders 
need to think through the following: What are the impacts? What are
the soft benefi ts? And what are the hard benefi ts? After the project is 
completed, make sure that both soft and hard benefi ts have been derived 
from the project before any further money is invested. The results have 
to justify the investment spending. 
Once you have committed to the benefi ts to be achieved, you are now 
able to measure the results. While you execute the IT project, keep in view 
how the project will be measured and make sure the business process, 
training for people, and technology will enable the measurement. 
For intelligence projects, the achievement of the goal is the most impor-
tant indicator of success. The challenge is that the goals are often very 
soft, such as: 
• React quickly to changes in the business environment with action-
able intelligence. 
• Protect customer value by meeting their needs based on social media 
with actionable intelligence. 
• Avoid loss by performing a thorough risk management assessment 
with actionable intelligence. 
• Understand what the best outcomes could be based on current 
planning. 
• Reduce the amount of time and e-mails needed to come to consensus 
about the current situation. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Governance: Funding Intelligence, Protecting the Results 
119
 Each of these are measurable. Here are some comments we received 
from business users at companies that have applied the lessons from this book: 
 “An ad campaign caused a 50 percent increase in the forecast. We have 
weekly discussions with demand planning, materials planning, and resource 
planning about supporting this growth—a signifi cant forecast increase 
compared to three months ago, worth $2.23 million. We’re coming to 
the table with actionable intelligence to discuss; what do we need to 
build towards?”—Leading cosmetics manufacturer 
 “By linking social media tweets from our consumers into the customer 
service department we were able to respond to tweets about discon-
tinued and hard‐to‐fi nd products, setting the consumers’ expectations. 
Sometimes we saved sales by shipping the product especially to the 
customer”—Online shoe retailer 
 “Our end‐to‐end visibility during the Japan crisis was magic! We iden-
tifi ed the entire sales and supply chain risk on the same day, and we 
were able to make specifi c contingencies based on facts.”—Crisis man-
agement team member at a consumer products company
 “We’ve been conducting inventory evaluation with corporate business 
intelligence and supply chain to understand why inventory for a spe-
cifi c brand has increased so dramatically over the past year. Using 
actionable intelligence, we were able to identify the root cause of left-
over pieces after a project was completed, worth $27,000 in excess. It’s 
a good example that we need to align and have process defi ned for any 
demand changes to limited life products. We’re now working on ham-
mering out best practices and how to foster more dialog in the global 
supply chain.”—Leading fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) supply
planning lead
 “I used to have to wait for days to know whether we would have enough 
product to meet a retailer’s increased demand. Now I can simply look 
at our global actionable intelligence and the discussion instantly starts 
with, ‘May I have some of the inventory?’”—Country‐level sales team 
member at an FMCG company 
 As you can see, every project can be measured by its value and tracked 
for performance, thus justifying the spend. This is why  actionable 
 intelligence projects can be fast‐tracked and reviewed after the fact. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
120
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
Doing so makes both the business and IT accountable for delivering 
business results. For IT, tie the success of past and current projects to 
future funding and bonuses to make the linkage very clear. By doing this 
you will raise the morale of the IT department, because they will be able 
to show tangible successes of their work. 
 Governance Does Not Stop with Results Either 
 The methodology of post‐governance ensures the actionable intelligence 
project start and fi nish quickly and the results are weighed against the 
costs. Measuring benefi ts and costs shows the real usefulness of the project 
and builds trust for upcoming projects. This allows the team to move fast 
on answering the strategic business question, because new approvals will 
be received for setting up actionable intelligence projects for new 
questions. 
Even if you have booked one success, you still need the right follow‐
through to guarantee the second project’s success will follow automati-
cally. Here are some pointers to keep in mind as to how you should 
follow up on the fi rst iteration of actionable intelligence: 
•   Prioritize the work with the senior leadership team to ensure you are 
working on the hottest strategic business questions. By focusing on the 
strategic questions you ensure senior management is backing you up 
and trusts you will deliver. It also provides you with some pressure, so be 
warned. After a project is done, you should go back to senior leadership, 
both to prove the results and to get the next strategic business question. 
• A business sponsor is required for each actionable intelligence capa-
bility. They do not just provide project development funding but 
also post‐development funding. Just donating funding to start up 
the project is not enough to keep it alive. You will need money to 
upgrade the project to the current business need and to provide 
training in the long run, too. 
• Post‐govern by reviewing the usage of the new capabilities. If it’s not 
being used, or the quality isn’t there, then dig in to fi nd root cause, 
and make the appropriate changes in either the intelligence team or 
the business team. Results are born from usage, so this is an impor-
tant next step. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Governance: Funding Intelligence, Protecting the Results 
121
•   Work with sponsors and supporters who have a clear vision of how 
intelligence will be used and have the power to ensure you have the
data you need to make it come alive.  
 In practical terms, when using the results of the fi rst project to deter-
mine the requirements for the second, keep in mind that each project
is diff erent. A great approach here would be combining the information 
you have, namely the output of ideation sessions, as well as the results 
from your fi rst iteration(s) of iterative development of actionable intelli-
gence. People can help you decide what should be required outside of 
the benchmark of your fi rst project. The added bonus is that this practice 
basically eliminates the need for the project charters and pre‐governance 
approvals normally required during software development. 
 In short: Governance starts with getting the instant approval for the 
actionable intelligence project and continues with you monitoring the 
project, documenting the results, and delivering these documented 
results when you apply for a new actionable intelligence project. You 
post‐govern by assessing the way actionable intelligence is used and the 
results it delivered. 
 Governance and post‐governance only work if you have enough 
money to work with on the right budget lines.  To that end, we take a 
closer look at the budgeting aspect. 
 Intelligence Budgeting 
 Every project costs money, even creating actionable intelligence capabilities. 
So the actionable intelligence project should also be budgeted properly. You 
do not want to be halfway through your project, hit some roadblock, and 
fi nd your money is used up. So it is time to convince the business sponsors 
to give you enough to work with in order to be able to deliver. You might 
even ask for leeway to overspend . . . or just do it and ask for forgiveness later. 
 There are a number of reasons why most intelligence budgets are 
rarely exposed to the public: 
 1.  It is diffi  cult to explain why the budget is what it is. Because it is rapid 
and iterative, it’s very diffi  cult to estimate how much a budget should be. 
 2.  The results of actionable intelligence are sometimes embarrassing 
and at other times frightening, so you can only share so much of it. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
122
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 3. No one would believe the tremendous benefi ts actionable intelli-
gence provides until they see it for themselves. 
 4. The data clean‐up work is always harder than expected and requires 
funding for work that is normally considered the jobs people are 
paid to do. 
Nevertheless, to get a budget you should be able to sell the project. 
So think of it the following way: 
The usual questions you’ll face: How much does it cost? What is 
the benefi t? To be honest, you probably will have no idea—absolutely 
no clue. You could quote similar projects, but each one will be diff erent. 
But asking those two questions is the same thing as asking: What 
is the cost of food? And what is the benefi t? To someone in a devel-
oping country it might cost three days’ labor to make enough money 
for a decent meal. Whereas in developed countries people have already 
earned enough to pay for their meal by the time the morning coff ee
break arrives. Would it make sense to ask for the cost and benefi t of the 
food for these two diff erent situations? No! People in both situations
need to eat to survive. And whatever the cost, it’s worth the benefi t, 
especially in the long run. You can go without food for a day or two but
not for months, even if its costs outweigh its perceived direct benefi ts. 
 Remember the Key Points of the UPS Story
 For actionable intelligence roughly the same holds. In the long run, and 
I cannot stress this enough, each and every one benefi ts. In the long run, 
competitors with the capabilities will have the edge over companies with-
out any actionable intelligence. To overcome the budgeting challenge, here 
are my three recommendations for budgeting for actionable intelligence: 
 1. Start small and conservative.  The eff ort needs to grow like
Google did, slowly, keeping costs low, and delivering results to key 
team members. Your main challenges will be: 
• Usage and buy‐in by the business users
• Stakeholder support
• Capturing demonstrated results
• Access to accurate data 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Governance: Funding Intelligence, Protecting the Results 
123
 No amount of money can help capture these points faster, but 
with some good old‐fashioned patience and perseverance, you will 
get the desired results. Furthermore, you will need money for this
to start up: 
•   The right small team composed of corporate stakeholder, data acqui-
sition, visualization, and change management needs to be in place. 
•   Implement a temporary central data repository that you fully control. 
•   Acquire a data visualization tool like QlikView with enough client 
access licenses for your team, boss, stakeholders, and a few more to 
spare. You’ll need them. 
 2. Build fast.
•  Establish a baseline for data support and data acquisition expense. 
•  Bring in a consulting team that can visualize quickly. Invest in that 
quantitative whiz who creates fast algorithms. Invest in a business
analyst to deliver great visualizations to answer business questions. 
•   Buy ready‐to‐use visualization tools like the QlikView tools men-
tioned in this book. 
 3. Create intelligence capabilities as a shared service.
•   Ensure the intelligence organization is funded by the core func-
tion where it started plus external functions so you can have some
objective use of funds. This also ensures the stakeholders’ money is
good for their requests. 
•  Insist on training and support budgets as well as travel and expenses 
for your evangelist so the value of actionable intelligence can be
shared far and wide. 
 In following these principles, you will have a framework to get the 
budget to deliver actionable intelligence. Now all you need is cost justi-
fi cation, which you develop by dividing your budget over the diff erent 
budget categories. 
 Key Budget Categories
 This is a list of the resources and capabilities needed to sustain an action-
able intelligence organization. It is modeled after the Central Intelligence 
Agency organization and budget.2 Then it was tweaked for a corpo-
rate environment and the need to achieve high adoption and monetize 
results.  
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
124
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 Core Capabilities   Provide data acquisition resources for constant test-
ing and data acquisition. No need to have an actionable intelligence 
system if you can’t deliver the data accurately and in a timely fashion. 
This requires funding. The intelligence stops working if this aspect is not 
100 percent accurate all the time. 
 Technology
 The right technology at the right scale, at the right time. 
Actionable intelligence is not big data, where “build a bigger mousetrap 
and they will come” applies. Users do not care about the cloud and huge 
data warehouses. They want answers, now. Start small and focus the dollars 
on intelligence and answers. Then, as the user engagement increases, 
build the technology infrastructure to match. It is a responsible way to 
deliver IT. 
We all know faster technology becomes cheaper quickly, so why 
invest in big, cool systems when they become slow and cheap soon after 
a purchase? Start with just the power you need and scale quickly. 
During our project, the breaking point for governance was when the 
IT department asked how many CPU cycles I would need so they could 
spec out a server—at the beginning of the project. We simply couldn’t 
hazard a guess. Instead, we used some decommissioned servers and set up a 
parallel processing confi guration. As we grew, we simply added more servers 
in parallel. It worked, fast, cheap, and scaled with growing requirements. 
Remember, speed is critical to success.   
 Change Management
 Defi nitely have a very good change manage-
ment team and change management approach. You should overspend
and overdo change management. You need to provide more support than 
you expect: help-desk information, online documentation, and so on. 
Go to the users’ desks. 
When I fi rst started at Estée Lauder I was inspired by the legend of 
the founder, Joseph Lauder, “walking the fl oor” to check on how the 
people in the company were faring. Every project I’ve seen succeed has 
this as a component. It is often overlooked and cut when the project is 
delivered, but, in fact, this is the most important part. 
Imagine a world where Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCG) 
companies made a product, placed it in the warehouse and on the shelves, 
and then just stopped. No support, no advertising, that’s it. The products
wouldn’t sell to expectations, right? But this is the model of many 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Governance: Funding Intelligence, Protecting the Results 
125
business intelligence projects. There’s even that word “postmortem”—
why call a project dead when it is just beginning? 
 This budget line is a critical and ongoing component to the success 
of actionable intelligence. 
 For proven success, follow my Sustainable Training Model. It just 
works. (See the model in Chapter  8 .) 
 Also, establish a culture in which people are rewarded for both creat-
ing best practices as well as adopting best practices. 
 Travel and Expenses
 Participation at business unit and regional meet-
ings is part of the walk‐the‐fl oor methodology mentioned earlier. The 
in‐person presence helps the actionable intelligence team assess where 
there are needs and understand directly from the users how the intelli-
gence will be used. 
 Putting these budget lines in place with agreed‐upon fl exibility from 
the senior sponsor keeps the delivery organization in place for the long‐
term and makes it as exciting as possible for the analysts. 
 This list is a good place to start. To stretch your dollars, confi rm the 
application of capital versus expenses with your fi nance department. 
 Governing the Use of Actionable Intelligence 
and Establishing Data Security 
 Governance is not just about managing the funds and budgets in the right 
way. Sometimes, it requires the selection of the right projects to achieve 
regulatory compliance and sometimes the wrong analyses are made, lead-
ing to the wrong projects being picked. Those projects may then lead to a 
damaged reputation. 
 In the United States, for example, intelligence is used in law enforce-
ment where agents track activity on social media platforms to determine
whether there is a chance of an upcoming riot or a threat. This is sup-
ported by reports about a National Security Agency project known as 
PRISM whereby the U.S. and British governments have been  requesting 
information from nine U.S. companies, including Facebook, Google, 
Apple, and Microsoft. 3
 As a result of this revelation about the government, the public has 
expressed concern about their use of such services due to fear of privacy 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
126
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
leaks. This can be a cause for concern for companies like Google, whose 
business models rely on customer trust. 
But notice that the public use of cell phones, e-mail, and social media 
has continued to grow in spite of the intrusion on privacy. 
The backstory, which isn’t being covered, is how governments and com-
mercial entities are using this intelligence to spy on commercial entities to: 
• Gain insider knowledge ahead of public announcements
• Know about plans and new business models
• Position themselves to take advantage
If a 20‐something‐year‐old has access to intelligence and shows it 
to a newspaper as did Eric Snowden, how many more young people in 
positions to retrieve commercial information use it for fi nancial gain? 
This brings to mind the question of how intelligence should be used. 
 For Better, for Worse
 There is always more than one way to do something. It all depends on 
what is valued. Should we make a decision that would ensure the long‐
term greater good of people, or should the decision be made based on 
the short‐term gains? Similar decisions must be made regarding the use 
of intelligence. Should intelligence be used to improve the welfare of 
employees, or should it be used to limit the use of employee benefi ts?
I once came across a company where they used business intelligence 
the wrong way. They used their business intelligence capabilities to track 
whether employees were using the lower or higher cost option for their 
health care choice. The audit showed that there were branches where 
employees used the more expensive option on a regular basis. The cor-
porate offi  ce used that data to reprimand management in those branches 
and made them set a target use number for the cheaper alternative. A 
year later, that target had been achieved, and the company saved money. 
However, decreasing the health care services that a company promised 
to its employees at the time of hiring doesn’t seem a good use of this 
intelligence. A better method would have been to: 
• Show the more expensive health care providers that they were 
receiving more business and renegotiate the contracts. 
• Analyze the reasons for the health care usage and then spend money 
to educate that offi  ce about prevention or healthy lifestyles that
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Governance: Funding Intelligence, Protecting the Results 
127
would have a double positive eff ect of reducing days off  and improv-
ing morale through better health. 
•   Understand the causes and predispositions of various common ill-
nesses to ensure new employees are screened and, if hired, educated 
as part of their employment agreement to ensure that they take the 
necessary and appropriate steps to protect themselves. 
 Make the right call when deciding how you use your business intel-
ligence capabilities. It will leave an impact on your journey, be it via 
team morale or company reputation. 
 Google Cheat View 
 In 2009 a woman fi led for a divorce from her husband after looking at the 
street view of Google Maps. She recognized her husband’s Range Rover 
at her female friend’s house when the husband was supposed to be away 
on business. Other similar examples include a man being caught leaving 
a sex shop while another was caught smoking under a no smoking sign. 4
 To the public this can be alarming, since it feels as if your every move 
and action is being watched. In reality, these images tend to be static pic-
tures that will not be updated for several years. However, Big Brother is 
always watching us. 
 Today, Google provides an app called Google Now. It allows you to, for 
free, track your location and archive where you went every day and night. 
This data can be exported and analyzed. If a company registered its company 
phones into this app, the employees could be seen, let’s say, on their “sick day” 
to confi rm their location is at the infi rmary and not the horse racetrack. 
 The availability of data doesn’t automatically mean it should be used. 
Make sure to deliver on the strategic business questions. This should 
provide enough purpose-driven work without diving into employees 
lives intrusively. 
 Safety First 
 Safe Internetbanking ran a campaign in 
Brussels, Belgium, featuring a “mind reader” 
named Dave.5 Unsuspecting individuals 
were invited into a tent and told that Dave 
would be reading their minds. Dave was 
 Your whole life is on the 
Internet, and it might be used 
against you. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
128
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
able to reveal personal information about the motorcycles they owned, 
the butterfl y tattoos on their lower backs, the schools or homes that they 
study or live in. More incredibly, he was able to reveal what they had 
spent money on, their bank account numbers, and how much they had 
in their accounts. 
During the big reveal when the screens came down, viewers could see 
a team of individuals with computers and large screens googling various 
websites to provide Dave with all the information he needed to con-
vince people that he was a mind reader. 
In this day and age the Internet is so accessible that it makes it easy 
for individuals to obtain information about us. The threat is out there, 
and we need to be protecting ourselves. 
 Protect the Hard Work 
 If our personal data can be accessed by these malignant individuals, then 
what about the project we worked so hard on creating? Data security 
is important to your project, rather, it is essential. You cannot build an
advantage with your actionable intelligence if the public at large or your 
major competitors are accessing the same intelligence. So data security is 
not only important, it is essential. 
Many people working with data have no idea how important it is to 
protect it. Those who do have an idea how valuable security is usually 
don’t know the facts; they believe the myths. They believe they are safe. 
This is the same fallacy that actually got you on the road to actionable
intelligence, remember? No facts, just myths. 
Oracle released a paper that dispelled some of the myths about data 
security: 6
Myth: Hackers cause most security breaches. 
 In fact, 80 percent of data loss is caused by insiders.
Myth: Encryption makes your data secure. 
 In fact, encryption is only one approach to securing data. Security also requires 
access control, data integrity, system availability, and auditing.
Myth: Firewalls make your data secure. 
 In fact, 40 percent of Internet break‐ins occur in spite of a fi rewall being in place. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Governance: Funding Intelligence, Protecting the Results 
129
 I hope this has convinced you personally to take data security seriously, 
even if your company already has measures in place. I encourage you to 
think critically about the data security of your brainchild. I will not treat you 
to the hows of data security; that is outside the scope of this book. But here 
are a few widely touted security methods that don’t work. 
 Data Security That Doesn’t Work
•   Supposedly superstrong passwords that don’t provide context for the 
user to remember them. These end up on Post‐it notes stuck to the
computer. 
•   Passwords that expire every 90 days. These end up on Post‐it notes, 
too, and increase help desk tickets. 
•   Blocking senior management’s access to data or taking weeks or 
months to provide it ends up making the IT department look bad. 
•  Blocking access for political reasons. This quickly becomes patently 
obvious and ends up making the person doing the blocking look petty. 
 Those approaches don’t work well because people need to access 
data to do their work. When the wrong barrier to entry is put in place, 
users create work‐arounds or establish bad habits. Or worse, they simply 
do not adopt the new capabilities. Security is a culture, not just a lock, 
and it requires a mentality of security to be ingrained into everyday 
activities. 
 Encounter with an Alleged Russian FSB Agent 
 While I was on a speedboat going from Phuket to James Bond Island for 
a tour, I met a man who wore a Yankees cap and spoke with a Russian 
accent. As the boat sped past idyllic scenery, he took out a long cigarette 
and started smoking at the back of the boat by the engine. I noticed that
there was a certain unique hardness to him unlike any I had encountered 
in others. We discussed U.S., African, and local politics. At one point, 
he revealed to me that he was an ex‐FSB agent. The FSB is the princi-
pal security agency of the Russian Federation and the main successor 
agency to the USSR’s Committee of State Security (KGB). Its main 
responsibilities are within the country and include counterintelligence, 
internal and border security, counterterrorism, and surveillance, as well 
as investigating various other types of grave crimes. 7
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
130
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
He had worked in Africa, and his job was to convince U.S. CIA 
agents to become double agents for Russia. At the same time he knew
that others were attempting to do the same thing to Russian spies. 
In talking with John Ritchie, ex‐CIA agent, and now managing 
director of Global Security and Investigations at a global fi nancial insti-
tution, I learned that convincing people to share what they know is part 
of the business of intelligence gathering. 
How much information do you share with the key members on your 
intelligence team? How do you prevent them from turning against you 
and sharing the actionable intelligence that you have created with your 
competitors?
If I fl ew to Thailand, passed through immigrations where I would be 
highlighted as an American, used my cell phone to reserve a hotel room, 
and later used the hotel phone to book a tour, anyone with the access to 
data at these points will be able to use actionable intelligence and acquire
the human intelligence about me. 
Here is where we bring in big data. In 2012, the German Interior 
Minister Hans‐Peter Friedrich acknowledged that the German police 
and intelligence had been sending 44,000 SMS messages to determine
where people were located.8 Had this or the GPS tracking been moni-
tored in real time, the crime would have been prevented by: 
• Observing where the cell phone of the policeman went during the 
day of the murders and how that matched the location of the cell 
phones of the victims. 
• Linking the thefts at the safe‐deposit box with cell phone monitoring 
to the policeman or one level deeper where the policeman’s contact
was in the area committing the crime and reporting success or failure. 
• Highlighting that the location of the policeman at the time of the 
murders was unusual as an interview in an open, unsolved case would 
have generated some paperwork. 
 Everyone on Security Detail
 From a security perspective, the Human Resources (HR) department, 
physical security team, and IT security team should all be engaged as 
soon as you publish actionable intelligence. The skill sets of employees 
in these three areas need to be upgraded so as to allow them to monitor, 
access, and mitigate risk of intelligence theft. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Governance: Funding Intelligence, Protecting the Results 
131
 Everyone understands why the IT security team has to be on board, 
but the need for HR and physical security to be included may be less clear. 
 As you will read in Chapter   8 , if HR has not done an analysis of cur-
rent employees to determine whether any are exploitable or might already 
be violating the confi dentiality agreement, it is time to make sure that 
happens. HR should have as part of its processes examining current com-
munications and exploring big data about employees so as to uncover any 
illicit activity that might be going on. 
 The IT security team should be analyzing and capturing all data on 
the networks in the company.     They should be analyzing internal communi-
cations to see if there are proscribed communications taking place. Should 
an individual be suspected of engaging in such activity, IT should check 
the following: 
•   Has the employee ever sent attachments to people outside the com-
pany and if so what was in the attachment?
•   Did the employee use his USB to download company information? 
•   Are there encrypted entries on the employee’s online calendar? 
•  Can IT use the company‐provided cell phone to track where the 
employee has been? 
•   Is the employee friends with competitors or friends of friends of com-
petitors (which should naturally be the case) on social media and are 
there any patterns of inappropriate information sharing occuring?
•   Run a credit check and a net worth check of the employee and close 
family to see if there is any indication of money issues. 
 As for the physical security team, they have the necessary expertise 
to conduct the investigations, skill sets that the IT security team lacks. In 
addition, should there be any security breach, the physical security team 
will also provide the security lockdown of physical infrastructure in sync 
with any IT lockdown that the IT security team activates. 
 Spying on Your Intelligence Organization, 
the Most Important Work! 
 Intelligence organizations have the most information and the best insight 
into current and future business situations. Thus the individuals with access 
to this information become part of an elite and highly trusted class within 
the company. Together, they will know more ahead of time than all levels 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
132
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
of management. It is imperative to have the right monitoring in place to 
prevent information leakage that would damage the company. 
For example, recently there was a police offi  cer who committed a 
double murder in Singapore. The facts of the case as reported by The Straits 
Times are as follows: 
s
• The offi  cer recently declared bankruptcy. 
• One of the victims was an owner of a company and a private land 
owner indicating he had some wealth and means. 
• The same victim had his safe‐deposit box broken into last fall during 
a rash of break‐ins at a secure location. No deeper police informa-
tion about these break‐ins was provided. 
• This policeman had looked into the safe‐deposit theft even though 
the case was not assigned to him. 
• Early on the morning of the day of the murder, the victim emptied 
the safe‐deposit box. He was murdered at his home that very day. His 
son was wounded and later died. 
An offi  cer with fi nancial problems is privvy to intelligence about a 
wealthy crime victim. What could have been done to stop this crime? 
Two Singapore telecom companies, Starhub and Singtel, acknowledged 
in the same newspaper that they keep track of cell phone  locations in real 
time. In fact, in the famous 1997 case where a National Serviceman took 
an automatic weapon from his base to go fi nd and kill his ex‐girlfriend, 
his cell phone broadcast his position as he travelled through Singapore, and 
the police easily caught him and prevented the crime. 
To prevent this crime from happening, the following controls should 
have been in place: 
•  All offi  cers should register their net worth. In Singapore, this is dead easy. 
All salary payments are tracked by the Central Provident Fund and 
Inland Revenue Authority of Singapore and deducted automatically. 
The fi ling of Singapore taxes is a fi ve‐minute exercise: yes I made this 
much, yes I paid this much in rent/loans, yes these are my accounts, 
submit . . . done. So we have a full picture of the offi  cer’s fi nancial 
position, but wait there’s more. 
• All bank accounts are already registered under the National Regis-
tration Identity Card (NRIC) so an individual’s savings position, or 
lack thereof, plus all outstanding loans can be easily discovered. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Governance: Funding Intelligence, Protecting the Results 
133
 With these two pieces of information we can project bankruptcy 
like a nine‐year‐old can add fractions. 
 We know the family birth certifi cates, insurance, and other registra-
tions are also centrally kept by the employer. So the same analysis can 
be done across the family members who might be in a position to assist 
the individual. 
 Maybe a friend will help out? Enter, social media. Because every phone 
is registered to the NRIC as well as all home online accounts, all friends and 
family who he is connected to on social media can also be identifi ed and 
investigated. After determining the net worth of these friends, it is easier to 
know if they can help. Answer found. 
 But just because he doesn’t get any help, that’s no cause to pick him 
up for a crime he hasn’t committed, right? 
 None of this is rocket science; we don’t need rock star, hard core 
data scientists to catch unusual, highly visible activity like this. Let us 
prevent the 80 percent of the crimes that are highly visible fi rst, then 
invest in trying to predict the remaining 20 percent. Not the other 
way around.  
 Summary and Considerations 
 Notes 
 1.  “Big Data Survey Research Brief,” 2013.
 2.  “Black Budget,” The Washington Post, September 2013, www.washingtonpost
.com/wp-srv/special/national/black-budget/. 
Point to Ponder: Post‐governance emphasizes monetized benefi ts 
and results. It also allows for fact‐based evaluation of the actionable 
intelligence project. 
Quote to Remember: Did our IT projects deliver their ROI? 
Did we measure? 
Question to Consider: Changing governance models may require
cultural change and signifi cant senior support. What needs to occur 
to position actionable intelligence to follow post‐governance?
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
134
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 3.  Barton Gellman, Laura Poitras, “British Intelligence Mining Data from Nine 
U.S. Internet Companies in Broad Secret Program,” The Washington Post, June
6, 2013, http://articles.washingtonpost.com/2013-06-06/news/39784046_1_
prism-nsa-u-s-servers. 
 4.  Veronica Lorraine, “Google Cheat View,” The Sun, March 6, 2009, www
.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/2350771/Cheating-husband-caught-on-
Google-Street-View.html. 
 5.  “Amazing Mind Reader Reveals His ‘Gift,’” Safe Internetbanking, Febelfi n, 
2012. 
 6.  Oracle, “Oracle9i Security Overview,” March 2002, http://docs.oracle.com/
cd/B10501_01/network.920/a96582/overview.htm. 
 7.  Encyclopeadia Britannica, http://global.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/203373/
a
Federal-Security-Service-FSB. 
 8.  Fabien Soyez, January 27, 2012, owni.eu/2012/01/27/silent-sms-germany-
france-surveillance-deveryware/. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
135
 Chapter  8
 Sustaining Delivery of 
Actionable Intelligence 
 Key Points and Questions
• Keep the business sponsors engaged 
• Encourage your ambassadors to speak up and share the good news
• Enable fact‐based hiring decision for new employees, beyond the 
interview and the background check 
• Implement the Sustainable Training Model I’ve developed, which 
has demonstrated success for fi ve years and counting 
• Spark cultural change to inspire others to maintain your eff orts
 I
n Luo Guanzhong’s  Romance of the Three Kingdoms, Liu Bei, Guan Yu, 
s
and Zhang Fei took an oath of fraternity in the Peach Garden (in the 
modern-day Zhou Zhou, Hebei) to become sworn brothers. 
When saying the names Liu Bei, Guan Yu, and Zhang Fei, although 
the family names are diff erent, we have come together as brothers. 
From this day forward, we shall join forces for a common purpose: 
to save the troubled and to aid the endangered. We shall avenge 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
136
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
the nation above, and pacify the citizenry below. We seek not to 
be born on the same day, in the same month, and in the same 
year. We merely hope to die on the same day, in the same month, 
and in the same year. May the Gods of Heaven and Earth attest 
to what is in our hearts. If we should ever do anything to betray 
our friendship, may heaven and the people of the earth both strike 
us dead.  
The three sworn brothers worked together on a noble purpose: to unite 
the country of China for the people and instill justice and peace through-
out the land. Their eff ort grew from just the three of them in a garden to 
running a third of the country. They inspired others to action, built their 
reputations among the people with quick wins, and brought in an excellent 
consultant named Zhuge Liang to further enhance their team. 
Determine what your purpose is and stick to it.1 If the book’s three
main characters worked in a business, Liu Bei, the revolutionary leader 
of the group, would be the leader of actionable intelligence. He wants to 
change the entire culture to become fact‐based. General Guan Yu would be 
the business leader, helping to visualize the necessary information and change 
the processes so that the business can become fact‐based. Lastly, Zhang Fei 
would be the IT leader who will bring the technology and capability to life. 
The brilliant consultant Zhuge Liang would be a great mentor who guides 
the team through the politics and challenges it will face. 
 With a team like this, actionable intelligence eff orts can be sustained. In 
people, process, and technology, it’s the technology that builds the action-
able intelligence. It’s the process that integrates it with the company. But 
to sustain actionable intelligence you also need people who are hired and 
trained to work with the actionable intelligence system. Even more so, you 
need people who trust, people who believe in the new system. That belief 
is what will truly sustain your eff orts. It all starts and ends with the belief 
that this system you have built from scratch is the solution to data problems. 
 Leading Intelligence 
 Belief starts with a leader. Buddha, Moses, Jesus, Muhammad all have one 
thing in common: They stood fi rmly for their beliefs and shared with all 
those who were willing to listen. In his TED talk, Simon Sinek stresses 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Sustaining Delivery of Actionable Intelligence 
137
that great leaders stand for something; they believe. Sinek explains it using 
a concept called “the golden circle:” three circles inside each other that 
mimic people’s thought process. The outer circle, the easiest for people to 
grasp and use is the “what.”  To survive, it is extremely useful to have basic 
skills in recognizing what something is. Everybody can do it.  The middle 
circle is the “how.” By determining how the world works we learn about 
it.  This is already less explicit.  The inner circle is the “why.”   The message. 
It is what links to feelings we have. Gut feelings you could say. 
 Sinek articulates the what, how, and why model in Figure   8.1 in his 
TED Talk using Apple as an example. 2
 Figure 8.1
What, How, and Why of Actionable Intelligence 
Rational thoughts are
controlled by the
neocortex of the brain
Decision making and emotions
are controlled by the limbic part of
the brain
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
138
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
If Apple were like everybody else, a marketing message from 
them might sound like this: “We make great computers [what]. 
They’re beautifully designed, easy to use and user friendly 
[how]. Want to buy one [why]?” . . .  That’s how most marketing 
is done. . . .  it’s uninspiring.  
 Here’s how Apple actually communicates: “Everything we do, 
we believe in challenging the status quo; we believe in thinking 
diff erently [why]. The way we challenge the status quo is by mak-
ing our products beautifully designed, simple to use, and user 
friendly [how]. We just happen to make great computers: want 
to buy one [what]?”  
All prophets of the world, all great business leaders have a message. 
They do not tell you what they off er, they tell you what they believe in. 
They tell you the “why.” So a leader in actionable intelligence does not 
sell “what he sells,” he focuses on “why he sells it,” what he believes in. 
As a leader in actionable intelligence I believe I am making lives easier 
(why). I do that by providing answers to the most important strategic 
questions (how). I happen to deliver that with actionable intelligence 
capabilities (what). I am not just showing you fi gures on how well my 
actionable intelligence tool is doing, I tell you that I believe in what I am
saying. I believe I make lives easier. 
By now we have determined you are that leader in the eff ort to 
deliver actionable intelligence, the one to spark enthusiasm for the 
project throughout the company. To be honest, I believe in the concept 
of “leading from every chair,” in which everyone in the organization 
takes ownership of his or her area of responsibility by delivering excel-
lence and striving for continuous improvement. That said, it can and 
should still be your job to inspire all those leaders and give them a sense
of direction. 
Develop your own mission and message. When the message is your 
own, you can sell it best to your employees, business leaders, and sponsors. 
Vital to support the “why” question is the “how” question, something 
this book has been painting a picture of through its change in people
(Chapter   7 ), process (Chapter   6 ), and technology (chapters 2 through 5). 
But we have never really answered what it takes to lead the eff ort. Of 
course all leaders are diff erent and have their own style. That does not
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Sustaining Delivery of Actionable Intelligence 
139
mean there are not any universal guidelines for leaders. So here are some 
pointers for you: 
•   Focus your energy. 
•   What should the company be emphasizing, prioritizing?
•  How much commitment is required for the company to solve the 
problem? 
 Just as a SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats) Frame-
work makes sure you identify the strategic questions, it’s important 
to communicate with senior leaders regarding their needs. Confi rm 
whether those needs can be addressed and do a force‐rank on the 
priorities. Don’t be satisfi ed with multiple number one priorities, 
unless they are giving you multiple number one resources. Instead, set 
expectations clearly so you can succeed and gain the trust we talked 
about earlier.  
•   Secure early wins 
•  What should you be doing and what should you be avoiding?
•  Does/can the organization bring together the right team to the 
right place at the right time? 
•  How does the team convince the top management to accept the 
need for change and understand the urgency of the issue?
•   What are the key factors of success and how can they be main-
tained or improved to ensure their sustainability? 
 So you’ve focused on an issue, the biggest problem typically 
is getting yourself and the needed resources to focus. That’s why 
you need to have senior management support in the fi rst place. 
But don’t let the means interfere with achieving the end.  
 Take the risks you think are necessary to deliver while the need to 
provide the answer is hot. You may need to break down new silos and 
battle against so‐called regulations, but remember you are part of the 
same company. Engage with that as the foundation and you’ll fi nd that
even as nervous, turf‐protecting senior leaders block access, their junior 
counterparts who see you are bringing fresh ideas and new capabilities 
will support you. They will start to believe. At a senior level, ensure your 
boss is also supporting the eff ort so if someone does get off ended you’ll
have the upper level support to protect you. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
140
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
Remember: Focus plus determination plus senior support on a sin-
gle issue equals a quick win that will lead to a sustainable solution. 
 Quick Wins to Build Trust
 Execution is following through on promises made. James Bond is excellent 
at infl uencing good and bad guys/girls to make good on their promises. 
He is a great salesman. He sells to gain the right support from British 
Foreign Intelligence Agency Military Intelligence Section 6 (MI6). He sells 
to infi ltrate the bad guys’ headquarters. He sells to escape from the bad 
guys’ headquarters and typically closes on other deals on his private yacht 
in the Caribbean, but we can’t mention those here. 
Why does “M” trust James Bond so much? Because he always deliv-
ers quick wins, and he always beats the bad guys at the end of the day. As 
a business leader campaigning for change, you need to build intelligence 
into the process and make it grow from there. Deliver the quick wins 
like James Bond does. 
If you focus on delivering answers to the most critical questions senior 
management asks, you can build a great reputation. Senior management 
can’t tell customers and Wall Street, “We will give you an answer soon. 
Our IT department is building a huge data warehouse that will store lots 
of data. After that we’ll create complex algorithms that we won’t be able 
to explain to you, and we still will not know the quality of the data that 
feeds those algorithms. We won’t have eliminated the human gaming that 
goes on, and we still haven’t ironed out how to resolve the unexpected 
gaps in our fi nancial plans versus our demand plan, but then we’ll have 
the answer.” 
Naturally, the answer either comes but can’t be explained or just never 
comes. In his book,  The Signal and the Noise,4 Nate Silver shares why pre-
dictions based solely on data and intelligence are so often wrong. Execu-
tives who invest in optimization systems wonder why at fi rst they could 
show return on investment (ROI), but, soon after the consultants leave, the 
system starts making bad predictions and business teams return to gaming 
the system nullifying the initial benefi ts. 
Sustaining any system implementation requires one key ingredient: 
high adoption stemming from ease of use and real usefulness. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Sustaining Delivery of Actionable Intelligence 
141
 In the Bible, the leaders of the day wanted to eliminate Jesus and 
his followers because they feared if his teachings spread, it might cause 
the Roman rulers to crack down on the community. One leader said, 
“There’s no reason to fi ght against it. If it is not from God then 
this new religion will fade away just as so many other cults have in 
the past.” 
 The rest, we know, is history and Christianity still exists 2,000 years later 
because it is easy to use and provides real usefulness to those who believe. 
 In contrast, some systems are implemented for reasons of political 
expediency. For example, one or more executives may have thrown their 
support behind a big enterprise resource planning and business intel-
ligence system that has not delivered. But the last thing these executives
want is someone pointing out a better solution. 
 It should be clear that leveraging some form of bargaining power 
cannot guarantee the success of a system, because, in the end, the people
without the bargaining power are the ones using it. Even though a leader 
might have a vested interest in a system, it doesn’t mean the system should be 
maintained. I am a big believer in the phrase, “Don’t throw good money 
after bad.” Try to evangelize this phrase, and you’ll help your business
move faster than your competitors. 
 In the end, your system will be measured by its success. That’s what 
determines a well‐used, sustainable project. 
 How can we be objective about delivering quick wins? Use a score-
card, or better, use Scorecard and upgrade to Cockpit to make this 
project visible and mandatory. 
 Scorecards allow and require that you measure the benefi ts, or else the 
scorecard in turn will become based on hunches and guesswork, a result 
that is completely undesirable in an intelligence project or frankly any-
where at all. So, to measure the quick wins, measure the benefi ts your 
projects have achieved so far. 
 Measuring Successful Business Intelligence
Implementations: the Dos
•   Do measure the speed of getting to an answer. The online retailer 
Amazon has the goal of being Earth’s most customer‐centric com-
pany. One of its key metrics is the product load time. Amazon found 
that even a 100‐millisecond increase reduced sales by 1 percent. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
142
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
Imagine what happens to adoption when every action takes three to
fi ve seconds and the expectation of users is milliseconds!3
• Do measure the number of users regularly accessing your solution. 
How many people regularly log in at a standard cadence, for exam-
ple, just before the sales and operations planning meeting. 
• Do measure the soft benefi ts. Has the amount of e-mail needed to 
fi nd an answer been reduced? Has the number of e-mails containing 
spreadsheets been reduced? Map the old and new process to show
the diff erence. 
• Do measure the hard benefi ts. How much in revenue or savings have 
you achieved?
 Dashboards and Cockpits
 In football, players don’t look at a scoreboard all the time; from time to 
time, they glance at it so that they can make the right plays based on the 
time left on the clock. At the minimum, scorecards should tell you where 
you are. Nowadays scorecards—and their close cousins—dashboards—are 
becoming more and more popular. And now, dashboards can be upgraded 
to cockpits to be even more interesting and informative to the users. 
 Dashboard versus Cockpit
• A dashboard shows the status and rate of change of metrics. 
• A cockpit allows the business leader to input what‐if scenarios on 
top of the dashboard metrics and see how various levers can impact
future results. 
The best scorecard should have the capabilities of a cockpit. It allows 
you to see where you could be and has interrelationships or levers that you 
can adjust, and it can show you where you might go when you adjust the 
levers. To achieve this higher level, the business owners need to analyze 
the relationships between business units, transactions, and nonfi nancial 
to fi nancial performance. This is where you need a very solid business 
analyst as well as great intelligence analysts to pull the business rules 
together into a tool/cockpit tool. 
Here is an example of a more complete scorecard. First we have the 
relationships we are establishing between supply chain and fi nance. This 
way we can talk across business units easily using the same measurements. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Sustaining Delivery of Actionable Intelligence 
143
 The chief fi nancial offi  cer speaks of economic value added (EVA), 
which is an estimate of a fi rm’s economic profi t. It is the value created in 
excess of the required return of the company’s investors (shareholders and 
debt holders). EVA is the profi t earned by the fi rm less the cost of fi nanc-
ing the fi rm’s capital. 
 The chief supply chain offi  cer speaks in the terms of the supply 
chain operations reference (SCOR), which is the basis for all supply
chain management. The metrics in SCOR provide a solid foundation 
for measuring performance and identifying priorities; the processes are
the common language in your supply chain operations. 
 Remember collaborating across business functions requires trust, shar-
ing, and a common language. These two models are brought together in 
Figure  8.2 . 
 Next,   Table   8.1  provides a detailed scorecard with performance ratings. 
 This table shows the directional relationships between SCOR and 
EVA. Now when it comes to measuring the organization, we set targets 
and track the performance. 
 Scorecards should not change (at least not in the short run) but the 
scores on the board should be changing and improving. Hence, you 
should make sure that you carry out collaborative business planning to 
identify the items on the scorecard. You can tally these to show that the 
subordinate‐level data is correct to show the senior executives that the 
plan is working. 
 Now, it is time for some fi nal steps: Empower the right people with 
the right skills and spark in those people a firm belief in what you 
delivered. 
 Figure 8.2
Economic Value Added and SCOR Matched Together 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
144
 Table 8.1  SCOR Impact on EVA 
Metric
Defi nition
Income Statement
Balance Sheet
Sales
COGS
SG&A
Inventories Receivables Cash
Payables
+ Means 
higher sales
+ Means lower 
COGS
+ Means 
lower 
SG&A
+ Means 
lower 
inventory
+ Means 
less 
receivables
+ Means 
more 
cash
+ Means 
less
payables
Category: People
% Trained in their 
discipline at their level
# of staff  attending 
human resources‐
arranged training for each 
business unit and level 
versus year plan.
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
Category: Financial
Sales revenue to plan 
YTD
% of sales YTD versus 
planned sales YTD.
+
+
0
0
0
+
0
Cost of goods YTD % Cost of goods or services 
as a % of revenue.
0
+
0
+
0
+
0
Complexity
Count of active products 
and services. Active 
means earns revenue and 
has a cost to serve.
0
+
+
+
0
0
0
% Attainment of 
forecast
Value of shipments/value 
of forecast at a selected lag.
+
0
0
+
0
+
0
% Forecast accuracy at 
product/location level
Forecast accuracy by 
product or service at a 
selected lag.
+
0
0
+
0
+
0
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Sustaining Delivery of Actionable Intelligence 
145
 Hiring Done Right for Big Data with Big Data 
 Based on the diagnosis of the business situation, culture, demand for intelli-
gence, and other factors we need to bring in new team members and 
make sure the current ones are up to par. Are you up for hiring some 
new talent?
When you are considering expansion, step one is always to clearly 
determine what is needed in the project. By mapping out what you already 
have and what skills you need you can make the process a lot simpler and 
smoother for yourself. After all, you  do need someone with the particular 
set of skills you are lacking now. 
So assess and inventory your current personnel’s skills and how pro-
fi cient they are in those skills. Then match them up with whatever skills 
you need to clear the job at hand or for future projects. Is there a gap? 
Yes?  Time to source the skills, either by training or bringing in a new 
member to the team. 
If you decide your team needs someone new, human resources and 
team leaders need to assess potential team members with good old‐
fashioned interviewing as well as scanning big data both internally and 
externally. We need to consider the non‐captured data as well as the
captured as Nate Silver notes in The Signal and the Noise. 
e 4
 The reason for the full review is: 
•  We are creating a new environment where pace and speed are higher 
than usual. Whereas IT departments used to be able to deliver intel-
ligence tools in months or even years, now the expectations being 
set by the best companies are days or at most weeks. The latitude and 
creativity they need to have now is much higher than they’ve been 
used to in the past. 
•  Knowledge of how to use and develop tools in the toolset is critical 
to success. If you don’t know the tools you can’t be a worker. If you
can’t be a worker, you cannot be a leader. Everyone, top to bottom, 
should understand the tools of the craft. People unfamiliar with the
tools cannot identify opportunities to expand the capabilities. When 
questions arise as to whether the tool can do this or that, everyone 
on the project should be able to say yes or no and whether the capa-
bilities are possible in the short, medium, or long term. Knowledge
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
146
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
of capabilities impacts the ability to deliver on time and on budget. 
More information is better; expectation setting is important. 
• As mentioned in Chapter   6 , data security is critical, and lost data is tan-
tamount to failure. It must remain secure. The amount of data you’ll 
be exposing to the team is tremendous and needs to be well protected. 
• To ensure the potential employee is free of corrupting infl uences that 
might cause the person to be forced to hand over sensitive data. Ask 
about any hidden accounts they may have. As a big data organization, 
you should establish the ability to comb social media and data within 
the company.  
Do not just interview the candidate; take the person through a two‐
week training process. Ask him or her to create an actionable intelligence 
tool and tell a story about it. Your expectation for the tool capability 
and the story strategy depends on the level of expertise you are hiring. 
Consider these points on what to look for in the talent: 
 Higher Level Leaders and Managers 
• A higher level person should deliver a great story, be business‐driven, 
results‐oriented, and articulate a complete strategy. 
• Be great at assessing the business needs. 
• Creative in driving ideation sessions to determine the needs. 
 Technical Resources 
• A lower level person should deliver a highly technical tool with all 
the right capabilities for the job and more, but the story may be basic. 
• They should come in ready to deliver. Establish a strong two‐ to 
four‐week training program so they learn business basics as well as
critical technology skills. 
In addition, comb through social media information on your lat-
est potential employees on sites like Facebook, LinkedIn, and other 
social media platforms. Then ask a second time for any hidden accounts. 
Review these accounts to see who is in the discussions, what activities 
are discussed, and who they are connected with. Ensure that competitors 
are not well connected to your candidate. 
When going deeper into social media, all companies should have an 
IT user policy in place that states all communications are owned by the 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Sustaining Delivery of Actionable Intelligence 
147
company. Go to the IT department and review the person’s fi les, e-mails, 
and websites visited to understand their profi le. Follow these steps: 
 1.  Run a sentiment analysis and events. 
 2.  Check what attachments were sent to noncompany e-mail addressess. 
Are there any caustic e-mails that may cause a problem?
 3.  Even if the individual has sent problematic e-mails, it may not be a 
reason not to hire him, but rather, be prepared to coach him in a parti-
cular way. 
 Finally, none of this completely replaces good old detective work. 
Who does your candidate know? What do people think about your 
candidate?
 If there are some red fl ags that pop up, but you feel the situation can 
be turned around, you may still want to take a chance on the candidate. 
Perhaps the manager can coach the new hire on ways to improve. 
 By doing this exercise, you will strengthen your security and on‐
boarding process, and you will give great feedback to people. Simply by
being rigorous in your hiring process you will improve your people 
factor in people, processes, and technologies. Well done! But don’t stop 
there. After hiring the right workers, you will still need to provide the 
right training. Proper training encourages proper use and avoids big 
mistakes. You owe that to the team. 
 Wait! Don’t Hire That Guy Too Fast! 
 Does anyone else see Eric Snowden’s release of classifi ed information to the 
Washington Post and the  
t
Guardian about government spying as a human 
resources issue? Whoever let this guy through the vetting process should 
reevaluate their hiring process. 
 I sat down with John Ritchie, ex‐CIA, current APAC managing 
director of global security and investigations for a global fi nancial serv-
ices organization, in his offi  ce at Changi Point in Singapore. His view
on the change in the intelligence community was point of fact. When 
he joined the CIA, he trained with a class of 35 people. By the time he
left the CIA, the class sizes were up to 500. He felt that the vetting and 
regular review process might have become overwhelmed, which let Mr. 
Snowden have too much access. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
148
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
Eric Snowden and other data leakers speak to the diffi  culty of scal-
ing the human resources on‐boarding process to control quality while 
at the same time meeting the demands of the business to deliver results. 
Snowden was a wake‐up call. 
All your hard work on collecting information can be sent to a com-
petitor with the click of a button. Do your very best to hire and train 
the right people. 
 Training 
 An important part of sustaining the advantage of having actionable intelli-
gence is to keep equipping people with it. If you give people the right 
tools, but not the instructions to use them, it would have the same eff ect as 
giving your CEO a welding torch. It is a very useful tool, but not for the 
specifi c function, because the CEO is not trained to use it. For a CEO, a 
welding torch has the intrinsic value of garbage, whereas to a welder, BI
tools would have no intrinsic value. 
So far that all sounds logical, however, we hit a bump if we fi nd out 
the CEO is not trained to wield BI tools. In that case, the CEO cannot 
capture the benefi ts and create actionable intelligence, and the BI tool has 
the intrinsic value of, again, garbage. This is why training is so immensely 
important, not only for the CEO, but for everyone in the company using 
BI tools to make more out of their everyday jobs. 
There is another potential bump further down the road. As people 
leave and are replaced, they may have no clue as to what the previous 
generation did with this so‐called actionable intelligence and start from
scratch. Slowly, dilution of the knowledge sets in, and regular business 
practices take over. To help combat this dilution and build an advantage 
that lasts, I created the sustainable training model for you. 
 Sustainable Training Model 
 This model can be used to deliver training to the loyal and enthusiastic 
team members involved in day‐to‐day business execution. It’s simple, 
comprehensive, and complete. The people who work in your company
are not just employees, they are human beings. They are people with 
lives outside of work. They may like their jobs, not necessarily love 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Sustaining Delivery of Actionable Intelligence 
149
them. They are people who want to succeed but are sometimes let down 
because of weak processes, poor systems, and incomplete training. 
 Cliff , Donald, and I have implemented change for years, and 
we’ve seen success and failure. Successful implementations have great 
training, support, and to‐the‐point documentation. 
 In 2005, I developed the sustainable training model for our supply 
base to support the rollout of SAP to more than 3,000 people world-
wide. The key principles are: 
•   People learn in diff erent ways: hearing, writing, doing, testing. 
•   People need a reason to learn new things. 
•   Eff ective post‐training documentation is critical. 
•   “By‐your‐desk” support must be available.  
 The four actions needed to implement the Sustainable Training 
Model are: 
 1.  Ensure the audience recognizes the purpose and need to engage 
through the executive call to action. 
 2.  Provide training with multiple touch points to build a strong experi-
ence foundation. 
 3.  Assess knowledge gained by using certifi cation testing. 
 4.  Follow up and provide easy refreshers to reinforce learnings and solve 
problems quickly. 
 We invested in this model for the SAP implementation with great 
success. So we used it again to deliver actionable intelligence. Business unit 
leads gave executive calls to action to their teams to use the new tools. 
We followed up with web conferences, training, FAQs, and town‐hall 
reviews to ensure implementation went smoothly. 
 Figure   8.3 shows a typical learning curve for a diffi  cult system. An 
easy‐to‐use tool set can take less time to learn. 
 Figure  8.4 shows the types of supporting resources we provided. 
 Business Cultural Change
 Training eff ectively is not simple. What if the people go to the training 
meetings, eat the gourmet sandwiches, drink the coff ee, go back to their 
stations, and do what they did all along? Telling people what is required 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
150
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
of them can be easy; getting them to consistently do what is required can
be hard. Especially because nobody else in the company is intrinsically 
motivated to change his or her patterns and habits. So here’s another 
challenge, one of the last obstacles. Cultural change. You must convince 
people that using actionable intelligence will make their lives easier and 
more transparent, which is more than just top‐down governance change. 
 The book, Competing on Analytics , by Thomas H. Davenport and
Jeanne G. Harris,5 rightly places signifi cant emphasis on the people skills 
required on the intelligence team. They also mention the need to pro-
vide a variety of projects to keep the intelligence team members engaged 
by constantly learning. 
 We venture here a bit further by proposing to establish the actionable 
intelligence team as a shared service. It helps connect business units to sup-
port sales and operations, product portfolio management, crisis manage-
ment, and other enterprise‐wide initiatives, which require cross‐discipline 
collaboration. 
 Actionable intelligence comes to life when areas of the business that 
don’t normally share information begin to do so. There is also a cultural 
shift required as visibility worries executives. 
 During business meetings, when a question is asked, in response we 
sometimes hear, “Let me tell you. . . .”   Then we’ll hear stories or num-
bers that someone spouts off  the top of his head. 
 Figure 8.3
 Sustainable Training from Start to Go‐Live 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Training Time Line
Web-Based 
Training
Online 
Testing
Executive
Call to Action
Go 
Live!
Education Retention
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
151
 Figure 8.4
 Sustainable Training Resources
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
152
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
To become fact‐based we need to insist on seeing facts, so the responses 
to questions should be, “Let me show you.” And then she pulls out a 
mobile device or a computer with the up‐to‐date facts quickly enough to 
maintain the momentum of the meeting. 
Procter & Gamble provides a wonderful example of this in the arti-
cle, “P&G Turns Analysis into Action,” by Doug Henschen. 6 In the arti-
cle, Henschen writes that a leader on the business intelligence team said, 
“Wouldn’t it be great if we could give our lead teams all the data they 
need to make decisions during meetings?” 
P&G went ahead and provided a way for remote executives to see 
the same data visualizations displayed in the meeting room on their lap-
tops or iPads. P&G created, and to this day sustains, a culture of transpar-
ency, where information is readily available to all and everyone can and 
wants to use it. 
 Use Actionable Intelligence as a Tool, Not a Weapon 
 Not every company is like P&G; not every company is open to sharing its 
information. Usually this has one cause: fear. The fear of sharing information 
comes from the diffi  culty of accessing it using old business intelligence 
systems. When there is little sharing, intelligence is seen as the property 
of the specifi c business unit and used to make that specifi c business unit 
shine. This leads to it being used as a defensive weapon against the rest of 
the company. This sounds far‐fetched, yet it is a real threat.  
The effi  ciencies gained by having facts at our fi ngertips means more 
time can be spent looking for opportunities to make the appropriate changes 
to deliver better results!
Actionable intelligence organizations should have a senior leader in 
the business who supports the team, but budget should come from each 
area of the enterprise that is receiving the results. 
This exposes the team to business leaders throughout the company, 
which raises morale and visibility as the successes bloom, resulting in
signifi cant benefi ts throughout the company. 
 How You Can Enact Cultural Change with Psychology
 Organizational culture refers to the behaviors, values, visions, norms, beliefs, 
working systems, and more that are developed over time by the people 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Sustaining Delivery of Actionable Intelligence 
153
 An Example of Using Intelligence as a Weapon 
 The head of purchasing, John, called me into his offi  ce on a rainy 
day. He looked frustrated. Suppliers had been asking him why the 
company kept on violating lead times and said it would be diffi  -
cult to give price breaks if everything needed to be expedited. He 
asked me for a report that would show whether the planning team 
launched purchase orders on time or late. 
 Using older BI systems it took a long time to consolidate a glo-
bal report as various planning teams used various systems through-
out the world. Finally, the report showed the planning teams were 
placing some purchase orders too late. 
 The purchasing executive exclaimed, “Ah‐ha! So the suppliers 
are right!” 
 I called the head of planning and said, “Dan, I just created a re-
port that shows your teams are placing orders late most of the time. 
Just wanted to let you know.” 
 Dan thought for a moment and said, “Keith, run me a report 
that shows the purchasing team always places the agreement late.” 
 The report my team created showed that indeed purchasing 
was placing agreements late. 
 These two executives were using reports as weapons, because it 
took time to run business queries. They could go into meetings armed 
with hard‐to‐get data and win political battles with a few facts, emo-
tion, and strength of will. 
 In comparison, after the company visualized the answers to stra-
tegic business questions asked by the various business units and made 
sure there was cross‐functional sharing, the fi nger‐pointing stopped 
and collaboration started. 
 No one could hide behind a special report, nor could people 
just say things in meetings; they had to show the facts, giving eve-
ryone the same footing. 
working in the organization. So you might think you have no power 
over those elements and, hence, no power over the organizational culture. 
However, there is a lot you can do to guide behavior, and subsequently 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
154
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
guide values, visions, norms, and beliefs of people. Top management can 
subtly infl uence the organizational culture with nothing more than a 
memorandum being handed down. 
But rather than settle for top management issuing memos demand-
ing cultural change, you need to transform the organization’s psychology 
and create communities of change to sustain the adoption of the new 
change. By guiding people’s moods in diff erent parts and at diff erent 
stages of the company and the project you can subtly infl uence culture. 
In order to do that, you need to know what you are going to trans-
form. There are diff erent types of companies with diff erent types of busi-
ness units working with each other. In the end, it’s your job to give every 
community of practice, whether they are the size of companies, business 
units, or individuals, the solution to the specifi c problems they have. It’s 
your time to shine and off er them what they need. 
Start with diagnosing your organization’s actionable intelligence capa-
bilities by answering the questions posed by Michael Watkins in his book, 
The First 90 Days: 
s 7
• Where does each part of the organization belong : STaRS (Start‐up, 
Turnaround, Realignment or Sustaining success, see Table  8.2 )?
• What are the challenges or opportunities present, and what are the 
resulting implications? 
• Where are the problems coming from? 
• What is the cause of the problems? 
• Are there any projected solutions, budgets, or time lines for the issue?  
Transform the people into successful users, and the adaptation will go 
more smoothly. This way, you can slowly massage the culture into shape. It’s 
your task to steer diff erent needs toward the common goal. See Table   8.3  
 You have the power, the control, and the belief. Leverage those to 
help people with your actionable intelligence. Help them and steer them, 
and they will become your advocates. 
 Table 8.2  STaRS
Start‐up (unit at the beginning phase)
Turnaround (unit in a downfall)
Realignment (unit continuing 
steadily)
Sustaining success (unit in an
upward trend)
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Sustaining Delivery of Actionable Intelligence 
155
 One last tip: Do not forget the message you are steering toward; have 
it clear at all times when infl uencing others. Remember to be the bridge
for business units to share information and the shining source of infor-
mation for those same business units to eventually answer the important 
strategic business questions. 
 Communication
 Are the diff erent departments communicating with each other? Or are 
they just talking amongst themselves? One important point about creat-
ing a culture of sustaining transformation is to make sure that everyone 
is communicating with each other. 
 Table 8.3  Transforming Organization Psychology
Stage
Prevailing mood
Transformation
Start‐up
Excited confusion: 
Passionate individuals 
with a lot of enthusiasm 
and new ideas fl owing 
freely and in all directions.
•  Focus and decide what not to do. 
•  Select the appropriate ideas and
projects to develop. 
•  Channel employee energy into the
appropriate projects. 
Turnarounds
Close to despair: Team 
members and stakeholders 
are getting demoralized 
from one or more setbacks 
and failures in projects.
•  Motivate and encourage teams to
keep going and not give up. 
•  Become the light at the end of the
tunnel. 
Realignments Denial: Strong individuals 
who are comfortable 
with the existing culture
and strategy and are 
resistant to change and 
realignments.
•  Identify the right approach and 
combination to push the right buttons. 
•  Persevere and defl ect all possible 
resistance and denials to change. 
•  Help the organization to confront
the need to reinvent the business. 
Sustaining 
success
Complacent individuals: 
Employees are beaming 
with the success that
they have achieved and are
becoming complacent.
•  Create innovation contests to inspire 
teams to stay hungry, keep thinking. 
•  Challenge individuals to fi nd new
growth opportunities to improve
themselves organizationally and 
personally. 
•  Combat complacency and reignite
the fi ghting spirit. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
156
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
As C. W. Miller wrote in an article, “Actionable Intelligence,” in HR 
Professional Magazine, 
e 8 in order for intelligence to be actionable, it needs to 
be accurate. However, it can be diffi  cult for people to tell the honest truth 
whenever they are giving opinions and feedback. Likewise, employees 
may be apprehensive about telling the truth to their fellow employees 
and, more importantly, their direct supervisors, because they are afraid of 
the consequences. They may fear that others will become unhappy or 
off ended if they tell the truth, so they make up excuses like: “I don’t know 
them well enough to be giving comments.” 
In order for an organization to sustain its success, it needs an open 
culture where people are communicating with each other and telling the 
truth. Hiding mistakes or telling the CEO that the company is growing 
when it is falling is not going to help the business. Instead, it may result 
in more problems over time. Here is an example that illustrates my point. 
A friend of mine, Robert Hewardt, was at the time head of product 
marketing at a software company, Red Hat software. He was trying to
establish actionable intelligence to understand the needs of the customers. 
The strategic question was: When will our customers need our products, 
so we can be in the bidding process before contracts are awarded?
To gather this data, he needed to pull past contracts and expiration 
dates, sales quantities, as well as the current sales pipeline and match those 
with the new capabilities in the updated versions and the planned software 
release dates from R&D. At fi rst, the eff ort went smoothly. The head of 
R&D had no problem sharing the highly confi dential release calendar and 
the product road map. My friend’s internal department, of course, let him 
have the marketing data, and then he had to reach out to IT to gather sales 
data from the customer relationship management (CRM) system. 
The IT person was cordial and understanding. He agreed that indeed, 
during their own purchasing cycles, the companies that were on top of 
getting in front of buyers at the right time had a higher chance of suc-
cess. The meeting went well, and the IT person said he would investigate 
how to deliver the data for this eff ort. There were questions such as how 
the data should be stored, and the timing of updates, and, of course, 
which IT staff  member could be spared to work on the extraction. 
The following week the IT person said that the CRM data could 
not be shared and that no resources would be available for the project. 
What happened?
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Sustaining Delivery of Actionable Intelligence 
157
 Mr. Hewardt found out from his boss, the head of marketing, that the 
head of sales would not share the CRM data. There was, after all, nothing 
for him to gain. He knew when the contracts would expire and could 
ensure his team was chasing down opportunities. It wasn’t optimal but it 
had worked for years. In addition, by having the sales data and pipeline, the 
marketing team would have seen the true potential sales volume, which 
may not have matched the lower, but easier to achieve, sales predictions. 
 To break the silo of sales required that R&D and marketing work 
together to gain the CEO’s support. Although they were all in the same 
company, they were not yet working in concert. No optimizer can solve 
this. This requires ongoing teamwork at the sales and operations table. 
 So in order for the technology to work, you need to align the various 
department leaders with your goal, and to align the senior management
with the goal, you will be supported with the right processes. This is 
where not only business units need to work in concert, but where you 
need everything in your project to work in concert with the existing 
business to achieve and sustain success. Ultimately, that is the main chal-
lenge you face. I found success by breaking down the eff ort into tiny 
challenges throughout the journey. 
 Knowledge Lock‐In
 After establishing a strong foundation of people, processes, and techno-
logy you may feel great about having sponsorship, delivering results, and 
making an impact on the company. If you had been following the advice 
in earlier chapters about capturing the results from actionable intelli-
gence you may even have saved some actual dollars. 
 Now it is time to build the capabilities of the organization at large and 
also bring in knowledge from outside to fi ll in any gaps you may or may 
not know exist. 
 Medium Term
•   Have people attend executive education courses like the one I teach. 
•  One of the best ways to really lock in knowledge and experience 
that was gained in the heat of battle is by going back for review 
in a formal training class. Universities like the National University 
of Singapore are beginning to off er actionable intelligence courses 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
158
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
tailored for business leaders. These courses go into the details of 
delivering results leveraging big data and are best taught by prac-
titioners who have actually been in the trenches, fought through
the politics, and delivered the results. 
• Often‐cited case studies certainly provide the class with some founda-
tion, but the personal experiences allow the students to delve deeper 
into the real details of delivery, which case studies typically lack. 
• Another training option for more junior members or business team 
members who aspire to deliver game‐changing results is pursuing a 
master’s degree in business analytics. This off ers students the theory, 
concepts, and methods needed to become world‐class decision makers. 
• The students graduating from these courses are bringing incredible 
knowledge back to their organizations. So select candidates or send 
yourself to formalize your actionable intelligence skillset. 
• Bring in external best practices and share internal best practices. 
• After implementing Qlikview and the entire actionable intelligence 
set of capabilities, I started speaking at conferences about the experi-
ence. I’ve always learned a lot at these conferences both from listen-
ing to other presenters as well as networking with professionals who 
were facing the same challenges. Sharing insights helped me take the 
implementation much further than I would have without doing so. 
Reevaluate your team and now add data and intelligence to the 
corporate strategy. 
 Long Term (Share Externally) 
• Participate in building the workforce of tomorrow. 
• Add Qlikview to the classroom. The courses that Keith Carter and I 
teach are a combination of course material in the area of my exper-
tise and an introduction into the fi eld of business intelligence. This 
way, I share a new area of business and prepare my students for the 
future. They are the next generation and can learn a lot from our 
struggles and successes.  
• Present at conferences. 
• When seasoned in the game of implementing actionable intelli-
gence in companies, you might want to think about sharing not just 
with students but also with practitioners who are currently facing 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Sustaining Delivery of Actionable Intelligence 
159
the same challenges you had. Your guidance at conferences can 
teach others and help you learn from others as well. I have spoken 
at the following conferences and found them very engaging and 
informative: 
•   FINLAND: 600 Minutes Supply Chain
•   SINGAPORE: Healthcare and High Tech Conference by Eye 
for Transport
•   SINGAPORE: Logisym by the Logistics & Supply Chain Man-
agement Society
•   APAC and EUROPE: Global Supply Chain Management Con-
ference by Terrapinn 
•   SINGAPORE: Educators Forum by Innovatus
•   USA: Gartner Business Intelligence by Gartner 
•   APAC and EUROPE: Big Data Conference by Terrapinn
•   Publish white papers and articles. 
•   If talking is not really your thing or if there are no conferences in 
town, you could also always opt for writing white papers. Usually 
white papers are published by companies having had fi rsthand 
experience with actionable intelligence and its great benefi ts. You
could write about specifi c aspects and subjects that intrigued you. 
There’s a lot of literature about actionable intelligence but most of 
it is written by academics and marketing people who haven’t actu-
ally lived through delivery of the results, the politics, the meetings, 
the sleepless nights, and the sweat. Join me and contribute with
practical experience! 
 What’s Next?
 It’s in your power to sustain what you have built; it will be your respons-
ibility to sustain your actionable intelligence capabilities. With the Sus-
tainable Training Model you will create your fi rst batch of practitioners 
that will eventually teach each other. Hiring the right people and for-
mally training them creates great follow‐up for many years to come. You
have the power to sustain and truly embed actionable intelligence into 
the organization by changing the organizational culture from within. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
160
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
Fortunately, some academic institutions are working to fi ll the gap. In 
late 2013, I was interviewed by Craig Stires of IDC. In the resulting article 
based on that interview,9 he wrote of the University of Singapore’s model: 
Organizations continue to face a limited pool of resources with 
eff ective business analytics skills. Most are facing the need to blend 
their approach to resolve this between hiring people already hold-
ing the right skills, and training existing staff  in new disciplines. 
Singapore is driving towards being an information infrastructure 
center within the region. It also is home to a number of educa-
tional institutions, which are driving to build a stream of resources 
with the right skills. These programs are critical for laying the 
right foundations in the people entering the market, particularly in 
applying technologies and processes to data. Deconstructing busi-
ness challenges into questions that can be answered with analytics 
is the art and science of these programs.  
Addressing what I am working on specifi cally, Stires wrote: 
The process that Carter teaches is aimed at building a specifi c 
mentality of new resources entering the market. He wants  people 
to “dollarize” problems, and make decisions through that lens. 
Understanding a quantifi ed fi nancial impact to the business of the
delay of a particular product launch is what will drive urgency. 
Statistical relevance may be the underpinning, but attaching 
opportunities and consequences in strict dollar terms is what will
drive action. Carter envisions a near future with waves of students 
hitting the market, who can build business cases, based on real 
impacts along the whole value chain. 
If business and academic institutions work together, we can improve 
the teaching and learning programs to graduate students with the skills 
we need. Indeed, it is unacceptable that after four years of university 
a student today could still be missing the core skills needed to deliver 
immediate business results with real‐world tools. (The notable exception 
here is computer science programs.) 
The next chapter will make your cultural shift explicit through a mis-
sion, vision, and strategy. It will also wrap things up to give you a clear 
image of what you can achieve.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Sustaining Delivery of Actionable Intelligence 
161
 Summary and Considerations 
 Notes 
 1. Tom Hulme, Slideshare, July 22, 2013,  www.slideshare.net/thulme/ideo‐
workshop‐for‐techstars . 
 2 . Simon Sinek, Start with Why: How Great Leaders Inspire Everyone to Take Action
(New York: Penguin, 2009). 
 3 . Hulme, Slideshare. 
 4. Nate Silver, The Signal and the Noise (New York: Penguin, 2010). 
e
 5 . Thomas H. Davenport and Jeanne G. Harris,  Competing on Analytics: The New 
Science of Winning (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2007). 
g
 6 . Doug Henschen, “P&G Turns Analysis into Action,” Information Week, September 14, 
k
2011. 
 7 . Michael Watkins,  The First 90 Days: Critical Success Strategies for New Leaders at 
All Levels (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2003). 
 8 . C.W. Miller, “Actionable Intelligence,”  HR Professionals Magazine,  http://
hrprofessionalsmagazine.com/actionable‐intelligence/ . 
 9 . Craig Stires, “Buyer Conversation: Addressing the Skills Gap for Actionable 
Intelligence from National University of Singapore,” IDC, 2013. 
Point to Ponder: Share the spotlight. Make sure others are 
shining brightly. 
Quote to Remember: “‘Walk the fl oor’: See with your own 
eyes how the new capabilities are being used day to day.” 
Question to Consider: Have you engaged all the resources in
the organization to be purpose‐driven about delivering action-
able intelligence? 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
163
 Chapter  9
Tying It All Together 
 Key Points and Questions
• Marketing actionable intelligence
• Making a vision, mission, and strategy 
• The recipe for success 
 Cliff ord Siegel’s Journey at Lifetime Brands
 Cliff ord (Cliff ) Siegel is executive vice president of the global supply chain 
at Lifetime Brands, Inc. He leads the sales and operations planning 
(S&OP) process and enables delivery of thousands of SKUs to customers 
throughout North America and Europe. Always on the road or busy
with family, he was hard to catch up with for this book, but I feel his 
contribution will help support my contention that actionable intelli-
gence through QlikView is a possibility for any size company in any 
industry. 
I met Cliff  through a series of coincidences. I met Linda Levine, sales-
woman for Lifetime Brands in early 2009. She arranged a lunch dis-
cussion about sales and operations planning with Dan Siegel, executive
vice president, Lifetime Brands. During the discussion, Linda and Dan 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
164
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
talked so excitedly about their intelligence tools that we simply had to 
see them. We went back to their offi  ce and Cliff  kindly took time out of 
his day to share the tools with us. The tool was amazing, and he is a true 
evangelist for actionable intelligence and QlikView. 
Several years earlier, Lifetime Brands began using SAP R/3 as its 
back‐end business system. 
Following standard SAP implementation guidelines, Cliff  and his IT 
team led the implementation of SAP throughout the enterprise. The key
benefi ts of SAP included the powerful capabilities of business intelli-
gence one would expect from a big business system. 
SAP was implemented successfully, but the business faced a signifi -
cant visibility challenge: 
• Where were the reports?
• What would they look like?
• Where was the central visibility promised? 
Cliff  and team worked tirelessly and intensely as scrutiny and frustra-
tion increased. 
Still the reports they struggled to deliver weren’t providing the 
end‐to‐end business visibility and needed constant revisions. Cliff  and
his team looked at examples of SAP reports that cost signifi cant amounts
of money but weren’t what he expected; for the price, the reporting 
capabilities were underwhelming. (This was before SAP’s HANA, which 
looks to be impressive.)
Cliff  happened to come across a reference call they were doing on 
behalf of a service provider, and shortly after had a “seeing is believing” 
event with QlikView—he was duly impressed. Within days, Cliff  saw 
the beginnings of the reports he needed to manage the entire Lifetime 
business. He purchased the server software and licenses, implemented 
the QlikView SAP Connector, and placed the server in‐house. Then he 
started to deliver visibility. He realized all this with a small team consist-
ing of himself and several IT people. 
Lifetime Brands addressed the critical need for consolidated sales 
reporting and analysis in its fi rst QlikView application, which tracks 
sales by specifi c time periods, months, division, materials, current versus 
historical, and forecast versus actual—in addition to trend analysis. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Tying It All Together
165
r
 He told me, “We are now able to view and analyze sales in every way 
you could possibly imagine.” 
 Lifetime Brands is using its QlikView sales analysis application to con-
nect data from its budgeting system with data from its customer and sales 
systems. For example, a single report can access forecast data from the budge-
ting system and provide a comparison with actual sales from the customer 
system, providing an integrated view of customer activity. According to 
Cliff , “Employees at every level are using QlikView every day.” 
 Lifetime Brands has deployed QlikView reports in all functional 
areas including sales/distribution, fi nance, and materials management. 
 Lifetime Brands had a battle plan, a strategy, and acted upon that. That 
plan allowed the company to build up the key capabilities for actionable 
intelligence. On top of that, Cliff  knew how to sell the idea, the capabili-
ties, and the results to stakeholders. 
 Cliff ord Siegel had, at every point, a clear understanding of what he 
needed to do, how he needed to do it, and where he could get the right 
people to do it. This is what every business leader needs to be sure of. 
 Leaders need to aspire and inspire. They need to be able to visualize 
the big picture and convince the business sponsors, top management, and 
the rest of the team that they are moving in the right direction. They need 
the right vision, the right strategy, the right pitch, and the right recipe. 
 For more information on Lifetime Brands and its success, you 
can listen to Cliff ord’s story, which is recorded as the Lifetime Brands
Qlikview Success Story.1
 Starting the Right Way 
 By following Michael Watkin’s First 90 Days, 
s 2 you can take a fl edgling 
actionable intelligence eff ort and turn it into a well‐supported and sus-
tained eff ort. Take a look through these steps, and at the end we will walk 
through an exercise to determine how to tailor your eff orts for your 
current situation. 
 As Watkins says , companies need to have a structure to implement
actionable intelligence. So here is a summarized seven‐step strategy to 
start with: 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
166
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 Step 1. Build a reputation for delivery of fast actionable intelligence. 
Let people know what you are doing. 
 Step 2. Accelerate learning. Learn actionable intelligence quickly. Learn 
as much as you can about the people, process, and systems strategy. 
 Step 3. Match your sustaining strategy to the culture and business situation. 
 Step 4. Negotiate success. Be clear that actionable intelligence alone 
doesn’t bring success; people actually have to take action. It’s a joint 
success. 
 Step 5. Build your team. Evaluate your needs and put together your 
team from both the people you’ve inherited and people you will hire to 
form a complete small team and then deliver improvements and scale 
as necessary. 
 Step 6. Create coalitions. Bring together IT and business leaders 
and make sure they all get credit and are all incentivized to support 
your eff ort. 
 Step 7. Motivate everyone. Make sure that you instill a sense of urgency 
within everyone who’s engaged. And the urgency is not just to see results 
but also for them to increase their skills, knowledge, and capabilities.  
As mentioned throughout this book, earn credibility fast by deliver-
ing results immediately. 
 Finding the Right Pitch 
 The marketing of actionable intelligence is as important as the delivery. 
Here we wrap up the capabilities we’ve been talking about into the com-
munications tools used by senior management: a catchy phrase, a mission 
statement, a strategy, and a call to action. 
First, the wording is important. I called the capabilities actionable 
intelligence and our team supply chain intelligence because when 
we think of business intelligence we immediately think of IT deliver-
ing reports. 
Actually, we should have the feeling of confi dent, fact‐based business 
decisions. Business intelligence is too IT focused, and the landscape is 
littered with business intelligence failures. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Tying It All Together
167
r
 How about analytics? Getting closer, but the word analytics gives the 
impression of a scientist, sitting for days, months, or years analyzing while
managers sit paralyzed without information . . .  indefi nitely. 
 Tell people that you are in intelligence. Their minds immediately 
jump to James Bond’s line of work. The word intelligence elicits the
feeling of speed, crispness, focus, even danger, and rightly so; every day 
we make decisions impacting careers, lives, and safety. 
 Adding a descriptor to the word intelligence is important to shape the 
impression. Corporate intelligence, competitive intelligence, market intelli-
gence, supply chain intelligence—these are phrases that indicate the work 
we do provides businesses with the actionable intelligence needed to make 
fact‐based decisions right now. 
 Be bold, do not just settle for the phrase of the day. Create one that 
matches the capabilities you provide!
 Developing a Mission and Strategy 
for Intelligence Capabilities 
 You will not turn around the entire company with a phrase. So why not 
make your change explicit with your plan to win! By providing your 
team with a mission, vision, and strategy you will create strong morale. 
Now, how should we go about doing that? 
 Gary Hamel, in a  Harvard Business Review article,
w
3 suggests recogniz-
ing three kinds of companies. What he dubbed the “Industry Lords” are
current market leaders and usually large conglomerates. Then come the 
“Industry Peasants,” whose main goal is to become the future Industry 
Lords. And last, though especially not least, are the “Revolutionaries” or 
the “Rule Changers.” This is the group in which strategy takes fl ight, 
according to Hamel. 
 Hamel says the focus on incremental improvements can potentially 
be deadly, when competition is focused on reinventing the wheel and
revolutionizing the way customers see the product. The issue is mainly 
a psychological one. Challenging resident beliefs might invoke change, 
for better or worse. Inherently this brings about some form of stress, 
risk, and uncertainty. Why rock the boat when the company can simply 
remain a profi table, leading organization in its market. The problem with 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
168
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
this is, whereas people inherently dislike change, companies welcome 
all help to beat competition by changing everything in the game, up to
the game itself. This revolutionizing is worthy of the name “strategy,” 
according to Hamel; everything else is called tactics. 
The following four steps formulate a strategy to create actionable 
intelligence. 
 Step 1: Let People Provide Ideas 
 Companies are led by people with ideas, and can, in turn, encourage or 
discourage the creative process. To quote Leonardo DiCaprio from the 
movie  Inception : “An idea is like a virus: resilient, highly contagious. The 
smallest seed of an idea can grow. It can grow to defi ne or destroy you.” 
This quote captures the pure essence of ideas, the starting point of 
strategy creation. The right ones might be strong enough to defi ne you, 
the wrong ones can destroy your worth. However, having people with great 
ideas might not be enough to revolutionize a company. Here is where 
further steps come into play. 
 Step 2: Ensure Collaboration between the Business and IT 
 Ron Price 4 accurately identifi es these steps, starting with the notion that 
none of us, however brilliant the idea may seem, should put all our eggs 
in one basket. People always refl ect on their own ideas more positively
than others do. Price says that reaching instant consensus does not auto-
matically signal a good thing going. 
After critical deliberation and the creation of alternatives to choose 
from, it might be sensible to ask stakeholders in the future strategy for buy‐
in through their perceptions of the new (radical) strategy. There might be 
some resistance. Perhaps even a lot of resistance to what you are about to 
deploy. Giving up now doesn’t get you anywhere. Instead, challenging resis-
tance helps deliver revolutionary change. Challenging your own beliefs also 
provides fresh, new direction. Challenging your own beliefs transcends a 
personal level. Business functions should hold ideation sessions with other 
functions, not just themselves. In particular, they should brainstorm with IT 
to reach the best technology‐challenging ideas of today for the company 
of tomorrow.  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Tying It All Together
169
r
 Step 3: Defi ne How to Measure Success
 One of the most powerful tools in business is benchmarking. In each 
meeting, look at industry best practices. Set the goals of the desired 
strategy and try to avoid using past goals, which may not drive the right
behavior to deliver the new strategy. 
 Benchmarking delivers the sense of urgency and accountability peo-
ple need to drive strategy and new ideas through the process of being 
incorporated and executed properly. Because what good would ideas be, 
if they always stay ideas? 
 Step 4: Engage the Organization Top to Bottom and, 
as Usual, Work Iteratively
 Keep these points in mind: 
•   Strategy creation is an iterative process, which sometimes goes faster 
than you would want. New revolutionary waves of strategy creation 
can start even before the last wave has subsided. 
•   Great ideas do not always come from key executives. Anyone can be 
an advocate of change, thus everyone needs a platform to share their 
ideas. In universities, Google has always been considered an exemplary 
company, closely abiding by this rule.  
 Strategy creation is the process of daring to challenge all you believe 
in for the sake of better results. There will be bumps in the road to posi-
tive, lasting, and radical change, though many good ideas up until this 
day have been a major success story. 
 So let us take a look at an example so that you can have a clearer idea 
of what I am trying to convey. Use these as guides, but make your own. 
The buy‐in and understanding of the people you work with is more 
important than the words! 
 A Sample Mission Statement of Delivering 
Actionable Intelligence Capabilities  
 Deliver actionable intelligence at the speed our business needs to 
make fact‐based decisions and attain our business goals. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
170
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 A Possible Actionable Intelligence and Data 
Management Strategy  
 1.  Ensure the organization has timely, accurate data needed to run 
the business and deliver improvements with excellence. 
 • Create and maintain a dedicated business‐led organization 
to support the data management and reporting processes. 
Align the organization with IT to drive results. 
 • Create and maintain a data management strategy to clarify 
data ownership, standardize the business language, and pro-
mote integration across all business processes. 
 2.  Leverage actionable intelligence for fast, accessible, and relevant 
facts. 
 • Provide facts to set priorities, select tactics, execute with 
excellence, and monitor success. 
 • Promote agility by accelerating information fl ow. 
 3.  Enable the organization with capabilities for fact‐based insights, 
decisions, and actions. 
 • Leverage information capabilities to support accuracy, effi  -
ciency, and adoption of modernized processes, drive out 
non‐value‐added costs, and help better understand business 
needs and performance results. 
 • Build the capabilities, and take action on intelligence. 
 • Stay focused on the biggest opportunities with governance. 
Now try to formulate your own mission statement and strategy. 
 TIE: The Intelligent Enterprise at STATS 
ChipPAC with Elizabeth Lim 
 Let us take a look at STATS ChipPAC, a turnkey semiconductor packag-
ing, design, bump, probe, assembly, test, and distribution solutions service 
provider based in Singapore. With manufacturing plants across Asia, the 
company has been recognized for excellence in delivering technology 
innovation, manufacturing excellence, and cost competitiveness. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Tying It All Together
171
r
 I met Elizabeth Lim at the Qlikview Business Discovery World Tour. 
She was a fellow presenter whose presentation caught my interest. They 
had gone through the same journey as I had but with Information Techno-
logy (IT) leading the eff ort instead of the business. Important to note is 
that Elizabeth was a director at this time. 
 I met her at her offi  ce in Ang Mo Kio, Singapore, nestled in an indus-
trial park nicely landscaped with palm trees and overlooking a grassy 
fi eld with a view of the city beyond. It was a serene place to discuss a 
business intelligence strategy. 
 When the company started off  on its business intelligence journey, it 
was driven by the need for three things: 
 1.  A decision support system that would help with executing projects, 
expanding the strategic global footprint, and improving process and
quality controls. 
 2.  Single and integrated information about all SKUs by category, type, 
site, and more. 
 3.  Faster and eff ective information delivered to decision makers and 
leaders across all sites to support supply chain strategizing, material
cost management, and competitive pricing. 
 With that, the company started The Intelligent Enterprise (TIE) that 
was designed to help the company be equipped with the actionable 
intelligence to maximize the quality of revenue, capacity, and opportuni-
ties, and minimize costs. 
 The objectives?
•   Enable speed and agility to business questions 
•   Establish data quality to support business questions 
•   Integrate data for holistic analysis
•   Establish information security 
•   Establish data governance 
•   Reskill and retool knowledge workers
 They focused on three main areas: 
 1.  Demand management information integration for insights on histori-
cal revenue versus forward forecasts to maximize capacity allocations
 2.  Operational capacity utilization and cost minimization 
 3.  Test as part of turnkey 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
172
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
STATS ChipPAC’s actionable intelligence eff ort was successful because 
of fi ve factors: 
 1. The CEO had the vision and provided the strategic directives for TIE. 
 2. The COO and CIO on the TIE Steering Committee acted as the 
business sponsors and spent time reviewing and dealing with the 
situation. 
 3. There are user champions or subject matter experts who advise on 
where to get the data from, ensure the quality and accuracy of the 
information, and determine how to best use it. 
 4. A data governance team that includes data owners and is directed by 
the corporate fi nance team. 
 5. IT-initiated and business-engaged. They are maturing to the point 
where the business is taking ownership, and that is when they will 
start to see real dollars as a result of their implementation. 
In addition, the company measured report usage and conducted business 
scenario training as well as mass trainings through self‐service videos 
to equip its people with the right skills. Ms. Lim’s IT department also 
shared project key performance indicators (KPIs) to ensure cooperation 
and integrated the entire company from data to functions, people and
similar objectives. Qlikview provided the information automation while 
export to Excel from Qlikview reports are practical for large tables and 
what‐if analysis. Two major challenges were the momentum required to 
overcome user reluctance to start using the system and the response time 
degradation as more users got on board. 
After setting up the critical mass of data and the technical infrastruc-
ture, STATS ChipPAC leveraged Qlikview to deliver dashboards that 
showed employees the level of performance, for example, loss utilizations; 
how customers were aff ected; the specifi c products involved; and the 
source of the issue. This allowed them to zoom in and take action quickly 
and achieve their objectives. 
A key point that you should be taking note of is that even though the 
project was IT initiated, the business was engaged during the process. 
The results weren’t just tangible for the company. I met with Elizabeth 
Lim several months after implementation and she had been promoted to 
chief information offi  cer (CIO). It’s wonderful to see a company support 
the growth of a person who leads game‐changing results. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Tying It All Together
173
r
 Now STATS ChipPAC has matured as a company to the point where 
it needs the business users to deliver insights from the intelligence tools. 
The business users and leaders in the best companies embed intelligence 
analysis and storytelling into their regular business reviews. With rapid intel-
ligence, companies can be more nimble, but only when they also update 
their processes such as moving from annual to monthly business reviews or 
establishing weekly cadences for collaborative business planning.  
 Business‐Led versus IT‐Led 
 The business needs to take charge of the process of leveraging big data 
and actionable intelligence because it is the one in charge of delivering 
results, not IT. 
 Projects can be started by anyone in the company, be it the business 
executive who wants to have his problems solved or the smart IT guy 
with an idea that can help the company. Regardless of in which depart-
ment the project is started, the ultimate goal is to have the business take
accountability for delivering results with the new capabilities. Figure   9.1 
should be used to select which business unit should be accountable. 
 So why can it not be IT? Because IT is only a support department, 
which typically is not responsible for delivering results. IT’s KPIs are neces-
sarily diff erent from those of the business. Sometimes, they are in confl ict 
with each other. Between the IT team in charge of the success of the IT 
 Figure  9.1  Shared Services Ownership Should Be Based with an Innovative
Leader Who Understands the Greatest Needs
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
174
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
network upgrading project and the manufacturing offi  cer in charge of the 
production of 10,000 SKUs, their needs, challenges, and targets are diff erent. 
The IT team may be able to infer from the stories they hear what 
the problems are. However, the nuances of how an intelligence tool will 
be used in the various processes are only known by the business and
sometimes those employees do not even know until they try it out. 
Business units need to take charge and learn how to take ownership 
of not only the results but also the journey. They need to be inculcated 
with the use of actionable intelligence to make the right decisions that 
IT cannot make. 
If IT continues to lead the project: 
• The business will never fully appreciate actionable intelligence, and 
it will slowly fade away as a project. 
• The culture of being fact‐based won’t be instilled. 
• The change in business processes won’t be sustained. 
• The main benefi ciary of these capabilities won’t appreciate owning 
the responsibility. 
The next best thing is for IT to exchange staff  into the business and 
bring some business people into IT. This way, both organizations benefi t 
from cross‐integration. 
The biggest risk is not completely syncing the capabilities with the 
business needs. That will lead to low adoption, and during an economic 
downturn the business will ask to make cuts without fully understanding 
the impact. 
 The Recipe to Greatness 
 Whether you are leading, supporting, or part of delivering actionable 
intelligence at your fi rm my advice is this: Do not get caught up with
words like big data or the dollar signs accompanying big systems. Stay 
focused on delivering answers to the strategic business questions that are 
most important but are hard to answer without a full picture. 
Engage the business and make them strong partners in design, usage, 
and benefi ts achieved. Break the habit of gut instinct and replace it with 
fact‐based decision making that relies on actionable intelligence. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Tying It All Together
175
r
 Engage IT and break the mold of the software development life cycle. 
Break down the silos by encouraging IT staff  to rotate into the business 
and share responsibility for business results. 
 Finally, deliver actionable intelligence, capture the monetized ben-
efi ts, and improve the business. 
 And one more thing. What follows is a recipe of ingredients proven 
to deliver actionable intelligence: 
• One spoonful of purpose‐driven passion
•   What drives you? Select your own personal mission, and remem-
ber that people adopt products and services that help them achieve 
their dreams and bring them closer to achieving their aspirations. 
•   Have the drive to embark on delivering actionable intelligence to the 
company as well as the perseverance to deliver the intended results.  
• One or two strategic business questions to focus on
•   The business leaders need to be part of the project. Don’t start with-
out a specifi c question. Don’t start if the vision of using actionable 
intelligence hasn’t been made clear. 
•   Don’t start with too many projects. You will be better off  under-
promising and overdelivering than the other way around. 
• Organization leaders who know they can do better
•   Gain support at the C‐level and the support of several of those 
executives’ direct reports in order to break down silos. When lead-
ers are providing the strategic directives to the project, it lays the 
foundation for change management and facilitates the sharing of 
data across business silos. 
• One or more senior leaders/business sponsors  to support the 
eff ort by removing obstacles and enabling results
•  The senior leader will become your background support so that 
when business units are not willing to share or IT security is con-
cerned with regulatory policies, he or she will provide you with 
some of the information that you need or simply change the poli-
cies in your favor. 
•  This leader should be a seasoned executive, skilled in maneuvering 
around politics, and regarded as an infl uencer and a mentor. 
• They will spend time reviewing and utilizing the answers to stra-
l
tegic business questions. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
176
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
• One business‐led approach to support the culture and mindset
change required when new technologies are implemented and stra-
tegic business questions are being answered
• Why business‐led over IT‐led? The business already has ownership 
of the results. Thus, these employees need to be educated to also take
ownership of the journey. They cannot survive by always executing 
the old way. They need to be trained to use actionable intelligence 
to make decisions. While IT can guide the business—even serving 
as the pilot in the beginning—it is more like the driving instruc-
tor teaching a student to drive. At the right point, the student takes
the wheel of the car as a business leader takes the wheel of the 
business unit. 
• Implement one mission, one team methodology and galvanize 
around a call to action; team name; or some image, symbol, or fl ag; 
and make sure to always align to the corporate strategy. This ensures 
that you are seen as part of the company’s success. 
• One budgeting process that supports actionable intelligence
• Businesses need to have a post‐governance model to support quick 
achievement of results in iterative, reviewable increments while 
avoiding the slow paperwork of standard governance models. 
• Budget line items include core functions like on going sup-
port, licensing, and testing; new capabilities like future enhance-
ment; new tools and insights captured; transformation governance; 
master data management; training, development, and travel and
expense for onsite change management. 
• One or more advisors who know where the relevant data resides 
• They know where the data is throughout the systems, what it is 
called, who to ask to get the data security permission, and how 
often it is refreshed. 
• One data acquisition team to manage the data needed to answer the 
m
question. The team also provides a trusted, verifi ed source of the truth 
• Every great intelligence organization has a strong acquisition team, 
whether it is the U.S. National Security Agency or the Singapore
Internal Security Department, they have a mandate to aggressively
acquire data. 
• Corporations need to enable the same capability in the actionable 
intelligence team. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Tying It All Together
177
r
• One data dictionary to act as a cross‐reference between business 
terms and related data fi elds
•   Have the same names and terms for all the data fi elds so that the 
diff erent departments are able to speak the same language and com-
municate with one another better. 
• One central repository , dead simple to use, easy to control, edit, 
update, and cheap
•   In order to ensure that information can be easily accessed, organi-
zations should have a central repository to store all the data in one
location. No more phone calls, e-mails, and waiting for days to go 
through diff erent people in order to get the information. 
•  Be careful not to create more siloed functions in the process of 
acquiring the central repository. 
• One visualization team responsible to deliver rapid, iterative answers
m
in a business discovery tool 
•   What is more important than acquiring information is understand-
ing the information. When complex and complicated pieces of 
information are delivered to decision makers, the lack of time and 
understanding of the data may encourage them to revert to using 
gut and intuition. Hence, it is important for companies to have 
a business discovery tool that can help to visualize the informa-
tion into simple-to-understand business insights and facts and do 
it quickly and eff ectively to support the decision-making process.  
• One business discovery software tool that is easy to install and 
able to start small and scale big. Today, that tool is QlikView. 
•  Businesses need to be able to discover the information within 
their four walls and outside. Relying on Microsoft Excel spread-
sheets to handle the data is no longer suffi  cient . Business needs 
to have a business discovery tool that will enable it to adopt easily 
and develop to grow greater.  
• One or more forward‐looking intelligence tools made by the 
team mentioned previously to provide answers to the strategic ques-
tions asked by the sponsor 
•  Every company is diff erent, and every department or team requires 
a diff erent intelligence tool to cater to its needs and answer its 
strategic questions. When tools are self‐developed, they tend to be 
more user‐friendly and better suited to the team’s needs, because
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
178
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
the team developing them knows that they are the ones using the 
tools. Make better proactive decisions with the tools; do not just 
perform reactive fi re‐fi ghting. 
• One adoption and insights person who engages business people 
in value realization 
• One of the most important individuals on the team who ensures 
the delivery of results but is commonly deprioritized. 
• One data management team acting as air‐traffi  c control to orche-
strate success
• Go to each person’s desk and monitor the use of actionable intelli-
gence tools to see how they use them and help them monetize
the use. 
Remember to start small, and demonstrate fast success. With the 
right foundation, you will achieve signifi cant benefi ts. 
The result of the recipe: 
• Monetized business improvements making the whole team 
proud. 
• Passionate business ambassadors who share the results with
their colleagues. 
• A joyful you, who has joined us on the purpose‐driven journey to 
improve the lives of others by giving them the answers they need to 
make better decisions faster and easier. 
Table   9.1 can be used to assess where you are. Please feel free to fi ll 
this in online at:  www.keithbcarter.com  so you can share your situation, 
challenges, or successes with me. 
 Table 9.1  Checklist of Capabilities 
Recipe Item
Estee
Lauder
STATs 
ChipPac
Lifetime
Brands
Your
Company
Type of company
Luxury
FMCG
IT 
Semiconductor
Consumer 
Products Mfg.
Purpose‐driven passion
✓
✓
✓
Business questions to 
focus on
✓
✓
✓
Company leader who
believes they can do better
✓
✓
✓
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
Tying It All Together
179
r
Point to Ponder: Use benchmarking to know what great 
looks like. 
Quote to Remember: “The tipping point is that magic moment
when an idea, trend, or social behavior crosses a threshold, tips, and 
spreads like wildfi re.” —Malcolm Gladwell 
Question to Consider: What is your strategy for actionable
intelligence?
 Here’s a mini quiz for you: 
 Who is accountable for the data strategy? 
 a.  C‐level executives 
 b.  Line‐of business executives/VPs
 c.  IT executives
 Answer available at www.keithbcarter.com. 
Recipe Item
Estee
Lauder
STATs 
ChipPac
Lifetime
Brands
Your
Company
Senior manager who can 
clear obstacles
✓
✓
✓
Business sponsor
✓
✓
✓
Business‐led
✓
IT‐led, business 
enabled
Shared 
leadership
Advisors to support with
data acquisition
✓
✓
✓
Data acquisition team
✓
✓
✓
Data dictionary
✓
✓
✓
Central repository
✓
✓
✓
Visualization team
✓
✓
✓
Business discovery tool
✓
✓
✓
Forward‐looking 
intelligence tool
✓
✓
✓
Adoption and insights in 
charge
✓
✓
Data management team
Successful Successful
Successful
 Summary and Considerations 
Table 9.1 (Continued)
d
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
180
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 Notes 
 1.  QlikView, “Lifetime Brands Unlocks Data in SAP and Other Systems for Seamless 
Analysis with QlikView,”     http://www.qlik.com/us/explore/customers/customer-
listing/l/lifetime-brands. 
 2.  Michael Watkins,  The First 90 Days: Critical Success Strategies for New Leaders at 
All Levels (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2003). 
 3.  Gary Hamel, “Strategy as Revolution,”  Harvard Business Review, 1996. 
w
 4.  Ron Price, “The Four Ps of Strategy Creation,” 2009, http://callcenterinfo.
tmcnet.com/analysis/articles/55147‐four‐ps‐strategy‐creation.htm. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
181
 Chapter  10
 Next Frontiers
 Key Points and Questions
• With the advent of digitized information, we now have the capability 
to integrate, analyze, and exploit both structured and unstructured data. 
Our ability to understand and learn from data has been transformed, 
enabling us to move from the era of information to the era of insight. 
• What kind of information would enable leaders in any industry to 
make better decisions? Whether health care, education, transporta-
tion, manufacturing, banking, or retail, there are constant basic ques-
tions: “What is the current situation?” and “What should we do next
with limited resources?” 
• “The rise of human‐computer cooperation in solving big problems
“
has never been about simply fi nding the right algorithm but rather 
fi nding the right interface between the data‐crunching capability of 
machines and human ingenuity.”  1
• The future and possibilities with big data and actionable intelligence 
are endless. 
 H
ow do you feel about a cashless society? One where everyone 
has a global identifi cation number based on their DNA. No 
need to carry wallets fi lled with credit cards, and various 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
182
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
countries’ currency. Just walk up to a retailer and transact business or 
even look at a particular item with Google Glass and subtly click with 
your eye movement to make the purchase. 
In 1995, I was on a bus with my fellow Andersen Consulting start‐
group members and, as usual, I wanted to take a poll. Would they enjoy 
a cashless society? Everyone said “yes” emphatically! When I asked why, 
they cited convenience and safety as the key reasons. Not surprisingly, 
privacy was not top of mind for these 20‐something‐year olds . . . and 
20 years later, it still really isn’t so much as demonstrated by social media’s 
up take. 
Harnessing big data about people at a DNA level would allow our 
products and services sector to use actionable intelligence at every turn. 
The ultimate unique identifi er would make travel easy. Pickpockets would 
become an anachronism, and ATM would fade away. 
Insurance companies, banks, and hospitals would be at the ready to 
react to the needs of people as they foresee opportunities. The utopia of 
human services would no longer be a dream but a very real reality. 
More than 2,000 years ago, John, a disciple of Jesus, wrote in Revela-
tions that a time would come when all buying and selling would require 
a mark on the hand or forehead. This globally unique number would be 
used in all transactions. 
Even today it is diffi  cult to imagine the speed and connectivity of a 
global transaction system for all countries and a single currency. But it is 
much easier to demonstrate with the global banking system, ease of using 
ATMs, or swiping a credit card. 
All this leads to capabilities we should provide to achieve actionable 
intelligence. 
 Intelligence can no longer just be restricted to specialists; it has to be accessible for 
everyone. 
 — Keith Carter 
Here are some key deliverables of actionable intelligence when all 
the previously mentioned activities are put in place: 
• Actionable intelligence executed rapidly at all levels in organizations. 
Sitting on top of big data and stacks of so‐called business intelligence
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Next Frontiers 
183
reports with the business leading the way to deliver game‐changing 
insights. 
•   The organization will receive answers to strategic business questions 
in hours instead of days. Minutes to refresh tools not hours or weeks. 
•   Data should be refreshed every second and every moment. 
•   Data needs to be validated at all times  before it is published for decision
making, and if it is wrong, alerts need to be communicated and prob-
g
lems resolved. 
• Corporate leadership will be receiving daily briefs similar to the senior 
leadership brief that senior government leaders receive daily from 
their intelligence organization. The intelligence would be in the right 
format, security, and level of detail for the receiver whether it’s sent
to a department/division/function/global head. Both the internal 
and external aspects of their business are viewed and people on their 
teams follow playbooks to take actions. 
•   Answers will be as accessible as walking down the hall, like the hospital 
information system. Everyone is able to answer questions with “let
me show you” facts by immediately using a secure mobile device or 
conveniently located computer. 
•   Everyone has a big data device that visualizes the situation at any 
time and matches a dynamically updating set of actions to take based
on the situation with a feedback loop to further improve the pro-
posed actions. 
 “Actionable intelligence is not a one‐way street. In the future, once 
you make a decision you should be able to make a change directly from the 
intelligence system into the transactional system,” added Cliff ord Siegel, 
senior VP, Lifetime Brands. 
 Following are some ideas that show the practical applications of 
actionable intelligence outside a business context, because actionable intelli-
gence can aff ect all of us. 
 A Healthier Lifestyle with Actionable Intelligence
 In the movie,  The Island, human clones conduct simple medical tests
d
like blood tests every morning to track their overall health. The infor-
mation is passed on to the cafeteria ladies who will be empowered 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
184
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
with the data to restrict their diets, like banning bacon if the sodium 
levels are too high. 
In hospitals today, doctors will order diet restrictions for certain 
patients with certain medical conditions. This ensures that patients are eat-
ing right during their stay. But what happens about everyone else outside 
the hospital?
If you are a patient with high cholesterol, high blood pressure, and 
high blood sugar who loves to eat, it can be hard to resist the aromatic char 
kway teo . A In addition, since there is no one monitoring you, you might 
just join the queue even though the doctors said that it is unhealthy for 
you. What if there is a form of technology available to guide you with 
those restrictions? What if the moment you join the queue, a warning 
sign appears on your Google Glass that directs you toward the healthier 
vegetarian food stall or the salad bar?
Sounds restricting, but as little kids we sometimes needed guidance to 
eat our veggies. Do we really think that as adults we have full freedom to 
ruin our health or cause others the pain of seeing us make bad life choices?
 The Street‐Smart Cabbies 
 When I was in New York, it was always very diffi  cult to fl ag a cab. Some 
of the taxis would drive by even though they had no passengers—a 
common situation in almost every country in the world. I once asked
a taxi driver if drivers sometimes ignored would‐be passengers. He told 
me about the time when a teenager hired his cab to go back to his uni-
versity campus. Upon arriving, the student suddenly exited the cab and 
disappeared into the mass of students without paying. 
As humans, we will automatically fi ll in the details of the story based 
on our experience and expectations. Although I didn’t mention gender, 
you will think it was a boy, although I didn’t mention race, your brain 
will pick one automatically. Cabbies do the same thing. After all, 
there is too much information for us to treat everyone as unique 
individuals—we were made to generalize to survive a challenging 
environment. 
Cabbies in New York could have a tool that tracks who gets into their 
cab, similar to the devices that track who walks into the mall. This device 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Next Frontiers 
185
would pick up the unique identifi cation of the cell phone and store it as 
well as the reputation of the passenger. No need to capture exact details 
like name or such; although, if a fare skipper did try to get away, the 
police could be handed the information along with the pictures (cabs
in New York always take photos on entrance and exit), then they could 
easily track and apprehend the perpetrator. 
 It is inevitable that cabbies will be picky about the customers they 
pick up. There is a diff erence between the stingy person who doesn’t tip 
and the regular taxi passenger who gives a $5 tip every time. There is 
a diff erence between the good citizen with good moral values and the 
teenager who dashes out without paying the fee. There is also a diff e-
rence between the timely individual who reserves a cab and is always ready 
to be picked up and the customer who regularly is late or, worse, cancels 
his reservation frequently. 
 So what happens if we introduce big data and actionable intelligence 
for cabbies? With a big‐data‐enabled device, cabbies could be driving 
down the street looking for fares, and seeing people overlaid with cab 
usage data. Imagine on both sides of the street people outlined in green 
(1 and 3 in Figure   10.1 ) if they are “safe” based on past actions, red (4 in 
Figure   10.1 ) if they have done cabbies some wrong in the past, and gold 
(2 and 5 in Figure  10.1 ) if they are great tippers or regular customers. 
 In New York, the world renowned actor Danny Glover complained 
to the Taxi and Limousine Commission (TLC) because he got frustrated 
with cabs simply driving past him because of his race and the location 
he wanted to go to in the city.2 Privacy advocates will instantly complain
about too much information being shared with strangers, but the typical
 Figure 10.1  Being Identifi ed for Opportunities or Threats by Cabbies 
 Photo Credit: Gary McCabe, November 2010, Flickr.com Creative Commons License. 
:
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
186
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
privacy advocate is not the demographic who gets ignored by cabbies. 
The benefi ts of treating good customers well and being protected from 
bad customers may outweigh privacy concerns. 
This again is big data, but it doesn’t require prediction. In fact, prediction 
is where we can go wrong by not having a complete model. In fact, a pre-
dictive model might increase discrimination because of several key fl aws. 
• The model tends to track higher levels of demographic information 
when incidents are reported. The fi rst incident where the young person 
ran into the fancy university might not have been reported by the cab-
bie. Whereas an incident in another neighborhood could be reported, 
so we are at the mercy of the thoroughness of incident reporting. 
• There could be bias in the reporting, which may list the demographic 
information incorrectly. 
• Past performance is not an indicator of the future. The demographic 
or location that has a disproportionate number of incidents reported
can change or may have good people mixed in, which is most often 
the case. The data scientist who simply monitors data would misdi-
agnose the model and perpetuate discrimination. 
Personally, I am a big tipper of cabbies in New York, because I do want 
to change their impression of a demographic that I am associated with, 
so I take this personally and appreciate Danny Glover’s attempts to 
improve the New York TLC.  
 The Amplifi ed Customer Experience
 The profusion of smartphones and tablets in recent years has changed the 
retail landscape, contributing to an ongoing shift in the balance of power 
fi rmly toward the hands of the customer. Armed with a relatively inex-
pensive mobile device, shoppers have instant access to facts, opinions, and 
reviews and can compare prices on just about anything they might be inte-
rested in buying—be it from their local corner store or an online retailer 
operating out of giant warehouses on the other side of the world. 
The combination of mobile device and data plan eff ectively gives cus-
tomers a “big data license,” bringing ready access to a wealth of product 
and retail information. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Next Frontiers 
187
 One U.S. survey, for example, found that 59 percent of consumers said 
they regularly use their smartphones while shopping in retail stores to 
compare prices for the same or similar products. 
 But of course it is not only prices that can infl uence purchase choices. 
Having a big data license also allows customers access to a broad swathe 
of other information, including: 
•   Social media sentiments about the product in question 
•   Rumors of upcoming versions 
•   Friends’ views on the items 
•   Recent celebrity endorsements
•   How a specifi c store’s sales staff  treats people 
•   Pros and cons of competitor or alternative products
 With this depth of information at their fi ngertips, customers are now 
in a stronger position to know more about specifi c products than the 
salespeople in the store. 
 Selling Better
 In the space of just a few years then, and with relatively little conscious 
eff ort, customers have changed their processes and technology, leverag-
ing big data to enable them to make the ultimate purchase decision: “Do 
I buy this here and now?” 
 With so much data‐driven power in the hands of customers, the 
obvious question then is where does this leave the salesperson?
 Do they have the right information to sell their products to the 
customers better? And, if they do not, how do they go about getting it?
 Given the volume and value of customer information off ered by big 
data, the salesperson should also know all the details about customers as 
they walk through the door. 
 Instead of judging the customer’s outward appearance, the salesclerk 
can know: 
•   What is the value of the customer and her purchasing power?
•   Is he a repeat customer at the store or other outlets? If so, what does 
he normally like? 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
188
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
• Who are your customers’ friends and infl uencers? What products are 
their friends interested in? What have they bought previously?
• What did they tweet, post on Facebook or Instagram before, during, 
or after shopping at your store? 
• Do they normally shop at a competitor, and is this a possible conver-
sion opportunity?
• What country does she come from, and what is her preferred
language?  
Let us take a couple of examples that off er important lessons for retai-
lers in terms of the way they connect with their customers. 
At one end we have traditional owner‐operated retailers, such as the 
long‐running wet‐market stalls across Singapore. In my own neighbor-
hood, the Chan family‐owned fresh chicken stall has served customers 
for 50‐plus years. They’ve developed a comfortable familiarity with their 
customers and are able to tailor their sales to specifi c customers. 
On the other extreme, we have the online mega‐retailers such as 
Amazon.com or Singapore’s Q0010.sg, that monitor and utilize customer 
data very carefully, making recommendations to the customer when 
they return or sending targeted, personalized e-mails to bring them back 
for more. 
In both examples, customization has led to increased sales and serv-
ice levels. 
The challenge for a chain operation is that the salesperson is diff erent 
at each store. That raises the question, can—and should—customer infor-
mation be shared to provide personalized service?  
 Serve Me Better . . . But Don’t Intrude
on My Private Life
 Of course, retailers with customer data need to balance building a great 
image with the delivery of personalized service against the risk of being 
seen as invasive. 
Some of us are willing to spend a little extra time going to the cosmetics 
artist we trust, a few extra dollars to go back to that particular restaurant, or 
travel that extra mile to that nice coff ee shop that is kind of on the 
way home. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Next Frontiers 
189
 But there are days when your favorite make‐up artist isn’t in or the 
familiar coff ee barista has a day off , or times when you are just at a diff er-
ent outlet. You lose all the usual benefi ts, the warm welcome, and most 
importantly, the connection and status of a regular customer. 
 What if this personalized human touch could be applied to all retail 
stores across all of one chain’s outlets and maybe even across the world?
 When the service person was known to us, even a friend, we can be 
certain of the personal touch. But what about when it is someone we
have never met before? 
 Imagine walking into the Starbucks on the other side of town. The 
store assistant is able to welcome you back with a warm smile and address 
you by name, even though you have never set foot in the store before. 
And, even before you show them your Starbucks card or credit card 
or tell them your order, the assistant asks whether you would like your 
usual coff ee. 
 How would you feel? Impressed like a special guest with a special con-
nection and a sense of familiarity? Or violated because a perfect stranger 
knows your habits?
 It’s a fi ne line between the personal touch and the overly familiar, and 
where that line is varies enormously from person to person. It is up to the 
retailer to fi gure out if and how recognizing a regular customer in other 
retail outlets improves customer connections. 
 Getting Started
 Retailers can start with basic blocking and tackling, a big data capable 
device in the hands of the sales team that puts fast visual answers about the 
customer in front of them. There also needs to be a new sales engagement 
process that uses facts to enhance the customer experience. 
 Consider setting goals to capture real, observed facts recorded in basic 
human terms that are easy to understand. Set rules on how to engage cus-
tomers without off ending them. 
 So what do you need to deliver results? 
 If we as customers see the benefi t of leveraging big data and actionable 
intelligence to make on‐the‐spot decisions and amplify our own experi-
ences, then why don’t we as business leaders do it, too? 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
190
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 The Starbucks Experience 
 In the United States, Starbucks has created a customer loyalty card man-
agement app that: 
• Links your Starbucks cards to your phone and allows the phone to 
be used to make purchases
• Allows customers to see what amenities a particular Starbucks store 
has before entering 
• Remembers your favorite coff ee, drink, and food items. 
In exchange for this convenience, Starbucks gets to know: 
• The user’s past transactions, including regular purchases and stores 
visited
• The location of the user, if they opt into sharing this data 
But why not develop this app further to collect more valuable data 
that would enable the fi rm to amplify the customer experience? When 
a customer carrying the app sits in a particular Starbucks outlet, the app 
can also collect information such as: 
• How long the customer sits in the store and activities they do
• What searches and websites they visited
• What are their favorite music genres bases on their downloads
Right now the fi rst movers can seize opportunities that their com-
petitors don’t even know about at a very low cost. Even collecting and 
leveraging the basic actionable intelligence delivers results far ahead of the 
competition. First movers are able to connect with customers and make 
them feel so comfortable that they want to come back and thus increase 
loyalty and awareness. This translates to higher margins and volumes. As 
the early mover, you are ahead. You can be the one with the competitive 
advantage. 
However, the same is not promised to those who wait for the cost to 
come down. The benefi ts decrease as the playing fi eld levels, and action-
able intelligence becomes a must‐have to survive as opposed to a way 
to win. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Next Frontiers 
191
 Summary and Considerations 
 Notes 
 1.  TED Talk transcripts, retrieved October 2013,  www.ted.com/talks/shyam_
sankar_the_rise_of_human_computer_cooperation/transcript . 
 2.  Monte Williams, November 4, 1999,  www.nytimes.com/1999/11/04/nyregion/
danny‐glover‐says‐cabbies‐discriminated‐against‐him.html . 
Point to Ponder: The data industries are collecting can be used
to deliver uniquely positive customer experiences. 
Quote to Remember: “Intelligence can no longer just be
restricted to specialists; it has to be accessible for everyone.” 
Questions to Consider: Are you going to start now to gain
big benefi ts? Or wait and face the risk of elimination? 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
193
 Chapter  11
 Epilogue
 A
t the beginning of this book, I told you the story of my mother, 
and how the experiences we had at two diff erent hospitals when 
she fell critically ill demonstrated—in no uncertain terms—the 
power of actionable intelligence. My hope is that once you get to this 
part of the book you have the same kind of appreciation and, importantly, 
some pragmatic recommendations and tools that will help you very 
quickly and eff ectively implement an actionable intelligence strategy at
your own organization. 
I wish I could end the book by telling you that after my mother was 
cared for by the good doctors at Columbia she pulled through and went 
on to experience good health for years. We were able to take her from 
Columbia and place her in a wonderful long‐term care facility in Queens, 
New York. And we did get some more time with her, praying, singing, 
and even watching episodes of her favorite show, Murder, She Wrote. She
couldn’t participate, but she was there, and when she smiled it bright-
ened the entire world for me. 
My mother passed in December 2010. She was a believer in Christ, 
a prayer warrior for our family, and a lovely person. We sent her off  to 
heaven with a celebration at Memorial Presbyterian Church in New 
York. Alan Singer, her colleague and professor at Hofstra University, 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
194
a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
wrote a wonderful obituary about her on the Huffi  ngton Post. Hundreds 
t
of people came to her funeral, and many shared how she had touched 
their lives. 
 One of the dreams my mother had was to write a book. She had writ-
ten and published books in the 1970s, and wrote curriculum in the 
1990s. We talked about the book in passing conversation for about fi ve 
years, but we never had time to discuss it in a focused manner. We were 
just both too busy. In a cruel twist, she had all the time in the world to 
write after she had her stroke, but had lost the ability to do so. 
 I miss my mother, and she continues to be an inspiration to every-
thing I do and lives on in my children and me. 
 One of her fi nal gifts to me was perspective. From her experience I 
learned the need to follow your dreams—right now, today. When the 
National University of Singapore invited me to lecture, I jumped at the
opportunity and moved with my family to Asia. I had always wanted to
live in that part of the world, and, after 13 years in New York, it was a good 
time for my wife to return to her family, who live there. I also looked 
forward to the rigorous education that I knew my children would get in 
Singapore’s public schools. 
 I consider all of the good things that are happening to me in my life 
products of actionable intelligence. I also know that my ability to eff ectively 
deal with any bad things is a direct result of actionable intelligence. So, you 
can see why I am such an ardent evangelist. 
 I hope that you can follow your own dreams, and that one of them 
is to deliver—and live by—actionable intelligence!
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
195
Four Steps of 
Actionable Intelligence 
I
know how valuable your time is, and I truly hope that the moments 
you spend with this book provide a signifi cant return on investment—
both now and in the future as you apply the model across business 
 
functions, processes, and roles, and as you share the model with colleagues 
and partners up, down, and across the chain. 
If there is one thing that you take away and share with colleagues in 
all areas of your business ecosystem, it is the SWAT framework. Taking 
the time to work through those four simple yet highly eff ective steps 
will help your business cut through the big data complexity and hype to 
get to the heart of the matter: relevant, contextual, meaningful informa-
tion that you can use to make strategic decisions. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
196
f o u r  s t e p s  o f  a c t i o n a b l e  i n t e l l i g e n c e
 S
Ask strategic 
business questions
•  What is the “burning platform” at my company? 
 W
Wrangle data
•  What is the strategic business question?
•  Where can the data be found?
• What are the IT infrastructure tools and policies 
needed?
•  Who in the company has the required  skill set 
to analyze the data? 
•  How can this data wrangling be done in a cost‐
eff ective way?
 A
Answer with
visualization
•  What tools will help me best visualize the data?
•  How will the answer be used?
•  What report types/content are needed across
business disciplines?
•  How will standard operating procedures change?
•  Are the right critical issues being highlighted for 
review? 
 T 
Take action
•  What actions can we take right now? Can we 
capture the value saved or earned?
•  Does the current process and organization need
to change to start making fact‐based decisions? 
 Remember that the fi rst answers generated by the SWAT framework 
will help you and your colleagues develop more and deeper questions. 
The trick is to quickly start the SWAT process again to come up with 
answers to those questions in order to equip your colleagues and busi-
ness partners with a complete big picture. 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
197
 About the Author 
 K
eith B. Carter lectures, writes, invents, and mentors from indus-
try and corporate experience. He teaches both executive educa-
tion and undergraduate purchasing and materials management. 
He also delivers results by leading several industry/academic big data and
sales and operations planning projects in retail, high‐tech, transportation, 
and chemicals. 
He is Visiting Senior Fellow of Decision Sciences at the NUS Busi-
ness School, as well as principal advisor to KPMG and board member of 
Mentorica Technology Pte. Ltd. (a retail sales, mobile, big data solution 
provider) and board member of 1st Call Consulting, a competitive intelli-
gence fi rm specializing in fi nance and supply chain. He recently received 
a patent on a fi nancial intelligence tool design. 
From 1999 to 2012, Keith worked for the Estée Lauder Companies’ 
Global Supply Chain Center of Excellence, to improve the overall perform-
ance of the company. Keith has led global supply chain initiatives: supply 
chain intelligence, knowledge management, transformation governance, 
supplier collaboration, audit, and data management—all to achieve end‐to‐
end supply chain visibility. 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
198
a b o u t  t h e  a u t h o r
 From 1995 to 1998 Keith Carter worked as a consultant for Andersen 
Consulting in New York, now known as Accenture. His clients included 
Goldman Sachs, Smith Barney, Solomon Brothers, and the state of New York. 
 Keith holds a master’s degree in Business Administration from Cornell 
University and a bachelor’s degree in Electrical and Computer Systems 
Engineering from Rensselaer Polytechnic. 
 He enjoys an exciting life with his wife and two boys, as a private 
pilot, fencer (sword fi ghting), and snowboarder. 
 More information can be found on LinkedIn or his website,  www
.keithbcarter.com . 
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
199
 About the Contributors
Donald Farmer is the QlikView product advocate, working with cus-
tomers and partners to establish QlikView as the leading solution for 
business discovery. Donald has over 20 years of experience in analytics 
and data management. In that time, he has worked as a consultant, in
start‐ups, and as a leader of Microsoft’s BI product teams. He is a speaker 
at many international events on business intelli gence, data integration, 
and data management; a blogger; and an author of several books. In addi-
tion to his career in business intelligence, Donald has worked in fi elds
as diverse as fi sh farming and archaeology in Scotland. He is also a guest 
professor at South Western University in Chongqing, China, and advises 
on several academic boards. He lives near Seattle in an experimental 
woodland house, with his wife Alison, an artist. 
He can be found on LinkedIn, Twitter (@donalddotfarmer), and his 
blog,  www.donalddotfarmer.com . 
Cliff ord Siegel  is senior vice president of Lifetime Brands, a publicly 
traded company (NASDAQ: LCUT). He is an innovator who has 
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
200
a b o u t  t h e  c o n t r i b u t o r s
consistently delivered improvements to the company. He has success-
fully led: 
•   Integrations of acquisitions 
•   Improvements to supply chain business units 
•   Implementation of enterprise resource planning 
•   Delivery of actionable intelligence 
 Currently, he is completing ground‐breaking capabilities in visualiz-
ing the compliance of suppliers to specifi cations, regulations, and supply 
agreements. 
 He graduated from Northeastern University and Emerson College. 
He has a wife and two children and lives in Long Island, New York. 
QlikView provides a powerful, accessible business intelligence solution 
w
that enables organizations to make better and faster decisions. QlikView 
delivers enterprise‐class intelligence and search functionality with the simpli-
city and ease of use of offi  ce productivity software. The in‐memory associa-
tive search technology it pioneered makes calculations in real time, enabling 
business professionals to gain insight through intuitive data exploration. 
Unlike traditional business intelligence products, QlikView can deliver 
value in days or weeks rather than months, years, or not at all. It can be 
deployed on premise, in the cloud, or on a laptop or mobile device—from a 
single user to large global enterprises. QlikTech is headquartered in Radnor, 
Pennsylvania, with offi  ces around the world ( www.qlik.com ). 
Lifetime Brands is North America’s leading resource for nationally 
branded kitchenware, tableware, home décor, and lifestyle products. 
Its products make it easier for you to prepare food, serve meals, entertain 
guests, and decorate your home. It off ers brands you trust, value without 
compromise, and an unwavering commitment to innovation. 
 The company markets its products under such well‐known kitchenware 
brands as Farberware® , KitchenAid ® , CasaModa ® , Cuisine de France ® , 
Fred ® , Guy Fieri® , Hoff ritz ® , Kizmos™, Misto ® , Mossy Oak ® , Pedrini ® , 
Roshco®, Sabatier ®
r  , Savora™ and Vasconia ® ; respected tableware brands
such as Mikasa ®, Pfaltzgraff  ®
fff  , Creative Tops® , Gorham ® , International 
Silver ®
r , Kirk Stieff  ®
fff  , Sasaki ® , Towle Silversmiths® , Tuttle ® , Wallace® , V&A ® , 
and Royal Botanic Gardens Kew ® ; and home solutions brands, including 
Elements® , Melannco ® , Kamenstein ® , and Design for Living™. The 
company also provides exclusive private-label products to leading retailers 
worldwide ( www.lifetimebrands.com ).  
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
201
Index
A
Accountable, consulted, execution (ACE), 
115–116
ACE. See Accountable, consulted, execution
e
(ACE)
Actionable intelligence, 7–9, 13–19, 21–22, 
25–29, 48–49, 89, 103–110, 112–113, 
116–125, 136–138, 148–150, 163–169, 
173–176, 181–183, 193–195
benefi ts of, 52, 89, 96, 109, 122, 190
budgets, 114
capabilities, 16, 25, 28, 74, 77, 85–86, 
106–107, 109, 120–121, 136, 138, 159, 
165–166, 169, 172
creating, 16, 52, 77
cross-functional, 102
data management strategy, 125, 170
delivered, 14, 37, 43, 106, 110, 138, 146, 
159, 161, 166, 174–175, 178
delivery, 199
generating, 15, 119
implementing, 4, 35, 38, 62, 65, 89, 113, 115, 
117, 119–121, 150, 152, 158, 170, 175
leveraging, 24
marketing, 163
master data, 29, 54, 62–64
self-funding, 116
sustaining, 136
Amplifi ed customer experience, 
186
Analysts, 27, 91, 123, 125, 142
Answers, 1–5, 12–14, 18–22, 31, 35–38, 
42, 45, 50–53, 65–66, 70–71, 78–80, 
85–86, 139–142, 174–179, 196
basic, 78
business questions, 2, 123
delivering, 85, 106, 140, 174
providing, 138
ready, 40
real, 42
right, 38, 77
visual, 20
well-documented, 118
B
back-end business system, 164
Benchmarking, 169, 179
benefi ts, 3–4, 13–14, 32–34, 44, 70, 72–73, 
86–89, 99, 101, 105, 108, 117–118, 122, 
141, 189–191
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
202
i n d e x
Benchmarking (continued)
d
hard, 89, 110, 118, 142
key, 44, 164
massive, 22
monetized, 87, 89, 133
organizations, 174
soft, 4, 85, 110, 118, 142
BI. See Business intelligence (BI)
e
Budget, 4, 42, 44–45, 51, 95, 112–116, 
121–123, 125, 146, 152, 154
Business, 3–5, 7–8, 14–17, 19–20, 25–26, 
28, 35–38, 40–43, 48–49, 56, 62, 
97–98, 106–110, 155–158, 167–177
analytics, 158
basics, 146
collaborative, 106–107
current, 120
ecosystem, 195
fact-based, 166
regular, 148
strategic, 18, 23, 37, 45
transacting, 182
Business capabilities for insurers, 96
Business case, 13, 18, 26, 71
Business challenges, 109
Business context, 183
Business cultural change, 149
Business decisions, 23, 37
Business discovery. See also Discovery
example, 41
performing, 14
process, 42
tool, 20, 177, 179
Business intelligence (BI), 1–2, 22, 41, 49, 
68, 85, 158, 182, 199
capabilities, 126, 164
corporate, 119
failures, 166
implementing, 18
journey, 171
projects, 125
strategy, 171
team, 152
tool, 117, 141, 152
traditional, 38, 126
Business intelligence products, traditional, 199
Business KPIs, 25
Business language, 56, 170
Business-led approach, 176
Business questions, 14, 37, 40, 42, 52, 71, 
153, 171, 178, 196
sponsored, 42, 51
strategic, 103, 109–110, 113, 120, 153, 
155, 175–176
Business scorecard, 108
Business silos, 175
Business sponsors, 19, 72, 89, 113–114, 
116–118, 120–121, 135, 165, 172, 179
C
Caleb, 47–48
Canaan, 47–48
Cao Cao, 6–7
Capabilities, 3–4, 16–17, 37, 42, 44, 86, 120, 
122–123, 145–146, 156–158, 166–167, 
170, 173–174, 176, 181–182
Cashless society, 181–182
CBP. See Collaborative business planning
e
(CBP)
Central Intelligence Agency. See CIA
e
(Central Intelligence Agency)
CFO. See Chief fi nancial offi  cer (CFO)
e
Chain, information supply, 65
Chief fi nancial offi  cer (CFO), 37
Chief information offi  cer (CIO), 93, 172
CIA (Central Intelligence Agency), 
102–103, 147
CIO. See Chief information offi  cer 
e
(CIO)
Classifi ed information, 147
Collaborative business planning (CBP), 
103–110, 143, 173
Columbus, Christopher, 31–32
Complexity, 60
Consumers, group of, 92–93
Cost Accounting, 64
Crisis management team, 86
CRM. See Customer relationship
e
management (CRM)
Culture, 24, 36, 125, 129, 136, 145, 152, 
154–155, 166, 174, 176
organizational, 133, 135, 150, 152–154, 159
Customer experience, 189–190
Customer loyalty cards, 15, 190
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Index 
203
Customer relationship management
(CRM), 156–157
Customers, 8, 10, 13, 15, 21–22, 36, 62–63, 
76–77, 86–87, 90, 92, 94–98, 119, 156, 
185–190
Customer service, 13, 17–18, 41, 50, 82, 87, 90
Customs, 49–50
D
Dashboard, 23, 49, 60–61, 110, 142, 172
Data acquisition, team, 57, 179
Data dashboard, 51, 56, 60
Data dictionary, 49, 51–56, 62, 72, 177, 179
Data governance team, 172
Data management, 24, 37, 49, 170, 197, 199
strategy, 170
Data quality, 3, 23–24, 47, 51, 57, 60, 63, 
65, 171
Data repository, 20, 52, 54, 123
Data Stewards, 64
Data visualizations, 20, 152
Demographics, 76, 186
Digitized information, 181
Disaster, 85–86
Discovery, 14–15, 31–33, 35, 37–38, 40–41, 
43, 45, 66, 72, 199
Documentation, 18, 43, 49, 53, 71
E
Economic value added. See EVA (economic
e
value added)
Enterprise resource planning (ERP), 15, 
88, 199
ERP. See Enterprise resource planning 
e
(ERP)
Estée Lauder Companies, 17, 42–44, 73, 89, 
124, 178–179, 197
ETL. See Extract, transform, load (ETL)
e
EVA (economic value added), 143
Extract, transform, load (ETL), 23
F
Facebook, 7, 90, 125, 146, 188
Fact-based decisions, 3, 23, 31, 35, 42, 101, 
167, 169, 174
Fact-based enterprises, 25, 29
Fallacy, post hoc, 81
Farmer, Donald, 65, 67, 149, 199
Fast moving consumer goods (FMCG), 
119, 124, 178
Fast-tracking projects, 113–114
FMCG. See Fast moving consumer goods
e
(FMCG)
Foundation of data, 49–68
Framework, 20, 73–74, 83, 123
Funding, 116, 120, 122, 124
project development, 120
Funding intelligence, 111, 112, 116, 120, 
122–124
G
GE. See General Electric (GE)
e
General Electric (GE), 16
Global Positioning System (GPS), 77–78
Google, 82, 122, 125–127, 169
Google Flu Trends, 82
Governance, 25, 37, 103, 110–111, 
113–115, 117–121, 123–125, 127, 129, 
131, 133, 170
Governance Applied Selectively Based on 
Project Category (table), 114
Governance model, excellent intelligence, 113
Government intelligence, 34
GPS. See Global Positioning System (GPS)
e
Guan Yu, 135–136
H
Harvard Business Review, 3, 161, 167, 180
Helgerson, John L., 101–102
Hospital information system, 183
HR. See Human resources (HR)
e
Human Centered Design Toolkit, 74–75
Human resources (HR), 101, 130–131, 
144–145, 147–148, 156
I
Information acquisition, 35
Information silo, 22, 79
INFORMATION technology, 26, 171
Intelligence, 5–6, 15–16, 23–26, 40, 72–73, 
86–87, 91–98, 102–103, 113, 124–126, 
136, 140, 152–153, 182–183, 189–191
Intelligence budgeting, 121
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
204
i n d e x
Intelligence organizations, 2, 123, 131, 
176, 183
Intelligence projects, 35, 73, 110, 112–114, 
118, 141
Intelligence team, actionable, 88, 125, 
150, 176
Intelligence tools, 56, 87, 145, 164, 
173–174, 177
forward-looking, 177
J
Journey, 4, 22, 45, 48, 79, 110, 127, 157, 
171, 174, 176, 178
K
key performance indicators (KPIs), 25–26, 
61, 63, 103, 108, 112, 116, 172–173
shared project, 172
Key requirements for actionable 
intelligence, 105
KPIs. See Key performance indicators (KPIs)
e
L
Lifetime Brands, 163–165, 183, 199
Lim, Elizabeth, 170–172
Linking collaboration to actionable
intelligence, 106
Liu Bei, 5, 135–136
Long Island, 11, 66, 199
M
Management, 71–72, 80, 88, 104, 106–107, 
113, 132, 156
Managers, 64, 111, 146–147, 167
Manufacturing Resource Planning 
(MRP), 88
Measuring successful business intelligence
implementations, 141
Mission and strategy for intelligence
capabilities, 167
Mission statement of delivering actionable
intelligence capabilities, 169
Model, 28, 33, 38, 71, 76, 109, 116, 124–125, 
137, 143, 148–149, 186, 195
iterative business discovery, 42
sustainable training, 125, 135, 148–149
Monetized business improvements, 178
MRP. See Manufacturing Resource
e
Planning (MRP)
N
National Security Agency (NSA), 35, 
125, 176
Newsome, Earl, 73
NSA. See National Security Agency (NSA)
e
NUS Business School Think Business, 83
O
Offi  ce, 43, 87, 102, 114, 126, 147, 153, 164, 
171, 199
Offi  cer, 93, 132, 172
ORION (On-Road Integrated
Optimization and Navigation), 71–72
P
PDB. See President’s Daily Brief (PDB)
e
P&G. See Procter & Gamble (P&G)
e
Plans, 3, 32, 48, 52, 74, 77, 90, 95, 104, 
108–109, 126, 143–144, 165, 167
business function, 104
standard business language, 72
PMO. See Project management offi  ce
e
(PMO)
Post-governance, 112, 120–121, 133
President’s Daily Brief (PDB), 102
Procter & Gamble (P&G), 152, 161
Profi les in actionable intelligence, 26
Project management offi  ce (PMO), 114
Project Vision SWAT Iteration Framework, 
70–71
Q
QlikView, 14, 20, 38, 42, 50, 123, 158, 
163–164, 172, 177, 180, 199
QlikView Business Discovery, 38–39, 45
QlikView Business Discovery World
Tour, 171
R
Retailers, 12, 15, 98, 119, 182, 186, 
188–189, 199
Retail stores, 8, 50, 187, 189
www.it-ebooks.info

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
 
Index 
205
S
SAP, 54, 149, 164
SAS Institute survey, 24
SCLT. See Supply Chain Leadership Team
e
(SCLT)
SCOR. See Supply chain operations
e
reference (SCOR)
SDLC. See Software Development Lifecycle
e
(SDLC)
Security, 103, 112, 128–129, 131, 147, 
175, 183
Skills, 145, 150, 160, 166
eff ective business analytics, 160
right, 143, 160, 172
SKUs, 86, 109, 163, 171, 174
Smith, William, 62
Snowden, Eric, 147–148
Social media, 7, 27, 89–91, 97–98, 118, 126, 
131, 133, 146, 182
Social media information, 146
Software Development Lifecycle (SDLC), 74
solutions, 76–77, 136, 142, 154
accessible business intelligence, 199
Spanish monarchs, 32
Spying on intelligence organization, 131
Stages of actionable intelligence, 22
Starbucks, 116, 189–190
STATS ChipPAC, 170, 172–173, 178–179
Supply Chain Leadership Team (SCLT), 44
Supply chain operations reference
(SCOR), 143
SWAT framework, 21, 195–196
T
Takashimiya, 10–12
Taxi and Limousine Commission (TLC), 185
Think Business magazine, 40
TLC. SeeTaxi and Limousine Commission 
e
(TLC)
Tools, 14, 16, 18–22, 38, 40, 43–44, 71, 
73–74, 80, 88–89, 145, 148, 164, 
177–178, 193
business discovery software, 177
global inventory, 42–44
truth, 44, 62, 110, 156, 176
single source of, 2
U
UPS, 71–72
V
Visibility, 5, 7, 18, 23, 40, 43, 88, 92, 101, 
152, 164
end-to-end business, 164
Vision of actionable intelligence, 17, 20, 
26, 29
Visualizations, 18, 20–21, 38, 42, 65, 69–71, 
73, 77, 79–83, 105, 117, 123, 177, 196
great, 70, 123
Visualization team, 72, 179
Visualizing information, 2, 4, 21–22, 34, 41, 
57, 66, 69–70, 77–80, 90, 98, 108, 123, 
177, 183
W
Wrangle Data, 18–19, 196
Z
Zhang Fei, 135–136
Zhou Yu, 6–7
Zhuge Liang, 6–7, 136
www.it-ebooks.info
www.ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.ebook777.com
WILEY END USER LICENSE
AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook
EULA.
www.it-ebooks.info

