ADD A RADIATOR 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Basic plumbing skills are needed to cut and join pipes. You 
also need to know about your heating system and how to 
drain it down 
  
 
 
Check for pipes and electric cables before drilling. Always 
make certain you have identified the pipe properly before 
cutting it. Know where to turn off the gas, water and 
electricity before you start work. If you use plastic pipes or 
fittings to join metal pipes, make sure you link the metal 
with an earth wire. 
  
 
 
Add a radiator to your central-heating system to provide 
extra heat. 
  
A radiator can be teed into any part of the central-heating 
flow-and-return pipes, but it is important that adding a 
radiator doesn't rob existing radiators of their share of the 
boiler output. Once you have established where to join the 
new pipes to the circuit, you can set about hanging the 
radiator on the wall. The best direction to work in is from the
radiator to the heating circuit. Only when you reach the 
existing pipework do you need to drain down and cut the 
pipes. 
 
2  - Where to connect 
Working out flow rates in 
pipes can be complicated but 
as a rule of thumb, a 15mm 
(1/2in) flow and return 
should serve no more than 
three radiators. If the 
radiators are more than 
1000mm (40in) across or t
pipe runs to the radiators are 
more than 4 metres (13ft
then the number of radiator
served must be reduced to
two. This means that any 
15mm (1/2in) heating pi
serving more than this must
not be used to connect an 
additional radiator. Instea
you need to go back to the 
22mm (3/4in) section of p
or extend the 22mm (3/4in
run so it takes in one of the 
excess radiators. If you follow
this advice your radiators
heat up efficiently (1).  
he 
) 
s 
 
pe 
 
d, 
ipe 
) 
 
 will 
 
3 - What size radiator do you need? 
 

Radiator outputs are given in British Thermal Units and 
Kilowatts. Select a radiator to suit the heat you require. A 
4m x 3m (13ft x 10ft) living room with two outside 
uninsulated cavity walls needs around 3kw to give 21oC 
when it is minus 1oC outside. The bedroom above it needs 
just 2.2kw because it doesn't need to be as hot and there is 
some gain from the heated room below. It is customary to 
add 10% to the figures above for exposed sites or very cold 
weather. If you select a radiator with a larger output, it can 
be controlled with a thermostatic radiator valve.  
 
 
 
A very rough rule of thumb is: the volume of the room in 
cubic feet multiplied by 5 = temperature requirement in 
BTUs.  
 
4 - Positioning a radiator 
 
Radiators work best in the coldest part of the room. Ideally 
this will be on an outside wall, usually under a window 
where the cold air drops to the floor. If you have long 
curtains or don't want to put a radiator beneath a window, it 
is perfectly acceptable to place one where it will suit your 
furnishing arrangements. Modern convector radiators with 
fins at the back will still work well in any position. If you 
haven't got enough room for the right-sized radiator, choose 
two smaller ones and spread the heat more evenly.  
 
5 - Fitting the valves 
 
Fit the valves before you hang the radiator so you can see 
where the pipes will come up through the floor. If the valve 
is directly above a floor joist you might be able to move the 
position of the radiator slightly to one side in order to miss 
the joist. If you can't do this you will have to bend the pipe.  
 
 
 
Remove the protective plugs from the radiator. Wrap at least
five turns of PTFE tape around the threaded tails of the 
valves and screw them into the radiator. Some valves 
require a large allen key to screw them in, others have flat 
sections for a spanner. Screw the valve tails tightly into the 
radiator.  
 
 
 
Make sure the PTFE tape 
stays on the thread rather 
than just running along it as 
you tighten. If it does run, 
undo the valve and roughen 
the thread slightly with a 
hacksaw blade then re-tape 
the thread more tightly (2).  
 
When the tails are tight 
attach the valve bodies. One 
valve will have a lockshield 
head and the other will have 
a knob for turning the valve 
on and off.  

 
6  - Hanging a radiator 
The radiator is supplied with 
brackets, but you must 
choose the right plugs and 
screws to suit your walls. 
50mm No12 wood screws 
with ordinary wall-plugs will 
be fine for brick or block 
walls. For plasterboard-
covered timber-stud walls, 
you need to select special 
heavy-duty plasterboard 
fixings and limit the size of 
the radiator so it doesn't 
exceed the permitted weight 
for the fixings. If possible screw into timber supports (3).  
 
 
 
Place the radiator on the floor in the position you want to 
hang it. Check the top is level and if necessary pack up one 
side to level it. Draw a pencil line on the wall along the top 
of the radiator. Look at the back of the radiator and draw 
two vertical marks directly above the centre line of the 
bracket straps. You now have two crosses on the wall to 
position the tops of the wall brackets.  
 
 
 
Take care when lifting large radiators. You will need help to 
lift them onto the brackets. Wear strong shoes to protect 
your toes and, better still, keep your feet clear when lifting 
heavy objects.  
 
 
 
Place the radiator to one side and line up the brackets with 
the marks, so you can drill a hole through the slot of each 
bracket. Screw the brackets on the wall and hang the 
radiator. Check it is level. If it is, you can remove the 
radiator and drill through the round holes in the brackets to 
keep them in position. If the radiator wasn't quite level, tap 
one of the brackets to compensate.  
 
 
 
There is no need to tilt the radiator towards the air release 
point. The air can always be removed from a level radiator 
 
7 - Marking holes for drilling 
 

There are two ways to run 
pipes - from beneath the fl
or along the surface of a wall.
If the pipes are coming f
beneath a wooden floor, 
need to mark and drill holes
(4). The best way to do this 
is with a right angle of some 
kind. Hold a try square in l
with the centre of the valve in 
two positions and mark the 
points on the floor. Where th
lines cross on the floor 
indicates the centre line of the valve. Remove the radiator 
from the wall brackets so you can drill the floor. Use an 
18mm wood bit (or larger) to allow clearance around the 
pipe. If the hole is too small the pipes will creak.  
 
oor 
 
rom 
you 
 
ine 
e 
 
heck that there aren't any pipes or cables where you want 
 - Connecting pipework 
s. Where access is 
ese 
 
ake 
 
 - Soldering 
 joints, make sure you have a heat
ws 
 
here it is impossible to pre-fabricate pipe runs with joints, 
 
 
C
to drill. Once the holes are drilled, you can insert two 
lengths of copper pipe to protrude beneath the floor.  
 
8 
here are several ways to join pipe
T
restricted it is often easier to use push-fit joints (5). Th
are reliable, provided the pipe ends have been cut evenly so
they can't damage the rubber seals when the pipes are 
pushed in. Use a pipe cutter rather than a hacksaw to m
sure you get a clean smooth cut. Avoid getting dirt on the 
pipe ends and in the fittings.  
 
 
 
9 
f you prefer to use solder
I
resistant mat to protect the surrounding area from the 
flame. If possible make up two lengths of pipe with elbo
and solder them outside. You should then be able to push 
them though the holes and into the radiator.  
 
 
W
you can solder the joints in situ using fittings with integral 
solder.  
 

 
Smear a small amount of self-cleaning flux to the pipe ends 
 
se a small plant spray to damp down any wood before 
 
un the pipes back from the radiator to the main flow-and-
 
rain the system and, when you are sure all the water has 
 
 
ou need to cut out a section of pipe just large enough to fit 
ecause solder won't run properly if there is even the 
 use 
 
0 - Bending pipes 
Pipes can be bent by 
ring of 
ver-
n 
 
 you want to make the job a lot easier, use plastic heating 
1 - Draining down the system 
pansion tank 
re
and push them into the fittings. Apply gentle heat until you 
see a ring of solder appear around each mouth of the joint. 
If the solder forms all the way round the joint is sound. 
Don't disturb the joint until it cools.  
 
 
U
soldering and again afterwards.  
 
 
R
return arteries, finishing them ready to tee in.  
 
 
D
gone, cut the pipes with cutters or a junior hacksaw. Be 
ready to catch a small amount of residual water from the
pipes.  
 
 
Y
a tee in. If there is enough movement in the pipe you might 
not need to make two cuts in each pipe - just slide it along.  
 
 
 
B
slightest trace of water in the joints, it is often easier to
compression fittings. If the pipes are old imperial 3/4in 
(20mm) pipes, buy some substitute rings for the 22mm 
rings fitted in the compression fittings.  
 
 
 
1 
inserting a bending sp
the correct size and gently 
bending the pipe over a 
rounded object. Slightly o
bend past the angle and the
bend back to release the 
spring (6).  
 
 
If
pipe which can be threaded under floorboards. 
 
1 
Turn off the water supply to the feed and ex
which is the smaller of the two cold tanks in the loft. If the
 
isn't a valve to turn it off, tie up the float valve arm to stop 
the tank refilling as you drain it.  
 
 

 
Turn off the heating system at the mains electricity supply. 
 
 you can't find a drain-off point, you can drain through a 
If
It is not enough to turn off the programmer because many 
systems have an override function. Attach a hose pipe to a 
drain point lower than the point you want to tee into, and 
run it out to a drain - the lower the better.  
 
 
If
radiator by turning off the valves and removing a radiator.  
all else fails, buy a self-tapping washing-machine valve and 
screw it into a heating pipe at the lowest point on the 
system. You can then attach a hose pipe to the valve. 
 
 
 
pen the drain cock and let the water out. It will speed 
 
ll the system with cold water and check for leaks before 
er
 
O
things up if you can open some of the venting points on the 
radiators, but remember to shut them again afterwards so 
you don't have lots of open points when you come to refill 
the system.  
 
 
Fi
turning on the boiler. You can run the heating with the boil
 
turned off. This will allow you to remove air from radiators 
without the risk of being scalded.  
 
 
2 - Refilling 
 the feed and expansion tank and the 
 you have a sealed system or combination boiler, turn on 
he 
 
ts 
 
 
1 
Let water back into
system will fill. You will need to bleed all the radiators.  
 
 
 
If
the filling loop and let water into the system until the 
pressure gauge reads 2 bar, then go round and bleed t
radiators. You will have to top up as you go by opening the
filling valve , but eventually you need a cold pressure of 
around 1 bar which will rise slightly when the system hea
up.  
 

