ADDING A SOCKET 
ADDING A SPUR TO AN EXISTING CIRCUIT 
Part P of the new building regulations could involve a check on any additional circuitry 
by qualified electricians when you sell your home. This can affect your sale, you could 
be breaking the law and your house insurance may not be valid. Please be absolutely 
sure you know what you are doing and get all of your work checked by a qualified 
electrician. 
Very often we find we do not have enough sockets at home. It is not a difficult 
job to add another but there are certain rules to follow.  
A spur can be connected to an existing socket, on either a ring main or a 
radial circuit, providing that socket does not already have a spur. That is only 
one spur per socket is allowed and the number of spurs must not exceed the 
number of sockets. If this is necessary in any part of your home the only way 
you can do this is by adding another ring main or by extending one of the 
ring mains you have. 
The spur must be connected to the existing circuit using the same cable as 
used in the main circuit. You can see how to wire a spur to an existing socket 
from the images below. The first image is how the back of your double socket 
should look and the second is the wiring for a spur. A general rule for a ring 
main is that if you only have two cables in the back of an existing socket then 
it is ok to spur...However, if you have a radial circuit with two cables coming in 
and out, this may be the last socket on that circuit and already has a spur. 
Please check with a qualified electrician if you are not sureIf there are 3 
cables coming out of any socket then it is not ok to spur. 
  

    
 
A spur can be added to any part of the circuit providing the rules above are followed. If there 
is not an existing socket near enough, you can connect into the cable by means of a junction 
box for your new spur. 
Junction boxes come rated for different uses by the amps they are allowed to carry. A 30amp 
junction box should be used on a ring or radial circuit feeding sockets only. The junction box 
must be fixed solidly to a suitable surface and must not just "float around suspended by the 
cables it joins. 
The cables to and from any spurs you connect must be protected by a conduit of some kind; 
be it on the surface or buried in the wall. If you bury cables in the wall they must only run 
vertically, not horizontally. Cables may be placed in floor or ceiling voids but not amidst, or 
wrapped in, insulation where they may become too hot. 
Please also check the rules very carefully for ring mains and radial circuits. You are 
limited in the length of cable you are allowed to use in both circuits and long spurs 
could make you exceed the limit. If this is the case you are asking the circuit to use 
much more energy than the circuit is designed for. More energy = more heat and 
cables can catch fire. Part P of the new building regulations could involve a check on 
any additional circuitry by qualified electricians when you sell your home. This can 
affect your sale, you could be breaking the law and your house insurance may not be 

valid. Please be absolutely sure you know what you are doing and get all of your work 
checked by a qualified electrician. 
 

