IT-SC book 
 
  
ADO: ActiveX Data Objects 
Jason T. Roff  
Publisher: O'Reilly  
First Edition June 2001 
ISBN: 1-56592-415-0, 618 pages  
 
 
This book is a one-stop guide to ADO, the universal data 
access solution from Microsoft that allows easy access to data 
from multiple formats and platforms. It includes chapters on 
the Connection, Recordset, Field, and Command objects and 
the Properties collection; ADO architecture, data shaping, and 
the ADO Event Model; brief introductions to RDS, ADO.NET, 
and SQL; and a comprehensive alphabetic reference to every 
ADO object, method, property, and event.  

IT-SC book 
2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

IT-SC book 
3
Copyright © 2001 O'Reilly & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved.  
Printed in the United States of America. 
Published by O'Reilly & Associates, Inc., 101 Morris Street, Sebastopol, CA 95472. 
Nutshell Handbook, the Nutshell Handbook logo, and the O'Reilly logo are registered trademarks 
of O'Reilly & Associates, Inc. Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to 
distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this 
book, and O'Reilly & Associates, Inc. was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have 
been printed in caps or initial caps. The association between the image of an ivory-billed 
woodpecker and ActiveX Data Objects is a trademark of O'Reilly & Associates, Inc.  
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher assumes no 
responsibility for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the information 
contained herein. 

IT-SC book 
4 
 
Preface 
   Introduction and Organization 
   Conventions Used in This Book 
   Comments and Questions 
   Acknowledgments 
 
I: Learning ADO  
 
1. Introduction to ADO 
   1.1 ADO in Context: Universal Data Access 
   1.2 ADO and COM: Language Independence  
   1.3 When to Use ADO 
   1.4 Summary 
 
2. The ADO Architecture 
   2.1 An Overview of the ADO Architecture 
   2.2 ADO Components 
   2.3 Summary 
 
3. Accessing ADO with Various Languages 
   3.1 Accessing ADO with Visual Basic 
   3.2 Accessing ADO with Visual C++ 
   3.3 Accessing ADO with Visual J++ 
   3.4 Accessing ADO with VBScript 
   3.5 Accessing ADO with JScript 
   3.6 Summary 
 
4. The Connection Object 
   4.1 Opening and Closing a Connection: Implicit Versus Explicit 
   4.2 Configuring Connections  
   4.3 Choosing a Data Provider 
   4.4 Executing Commands 
   4.5 Managing Multiple Transactions  
   4.6 Determining the Layout of Your Data Source 
   4.7 Summary 
 
5. The Recordset Object 
   5.1 Cursors: Viewing a Recordset 
   5.2 Working with Recordsets 
   5.3 Navigating a Recordset 
   5.4 Working with Records 
   5.5 Lock Types: Managing Access to a Recordset 
   5.6 Summary 
 
6. Fields 
   6.1 The Fields Collection Object 
   6.2 Field Specifics 
   6.3 Determining Field Object Functionality 
   6.4 Summary 
 
7. The Command Object 
   7.1 Specifying Commands 

IT-SC book 
5
   7.2 Executing Commands 
   7.3 Parameters 
   7.4 The Parameters Project 
   7.5 Asynchronous Execution 
   7.6 Summary 
 
8. The ADO Event Model 
   8.1 Introduction to Events 
   8.2 The ConnectionEvent Family 
   8.3 The RecordsetEvent Family 
   8.4 Canceling Operations 
   8.5 Turning Events Off 
   8.6 Summary 
 
9. Data Shaping 
   9.1 An Introduction to Data Shaping 
   9.2 The Microsoft Data Shaping Service 
   9.3 Shaping Commands 
   9.4 Example: Accessing Shaped Recordsets 
   9.5 Summary 
 
10. Records and Streams 
   10.1 The Record Object 
   10.2 The Stream Object 
   10.3 Summary 
 
11. Remote Data Services 
   11.1 RDS Object Model 
   11.2 An Example in RDS 
   11.3 More Information About RDS 
   11.4 Summary 
 
12. The Microsoft .NET Framework and ADO.NET 
   12.1 The Microsoft .NET Framework 
   12.2 ADO.NET 
   12.3 ADO.NET Features 
   12.4 Summary 
 
II: Reference Section  
 
13. ADO API Reference 
   13.1 Finding the Reference Page 
   13.2 Using the Reference Pages 
 
III: Appendixes  
 
A. Introduction to SQL 
   A.1 Record Selection 
   A.2 Data Manipulation 
   A.3 Database Modification 
 
B. The Properties Collection 
   B.1 The Property Example 

IT-SC book 
6 
 
C. ADO Errors 
   C.1 Working with Errors in ADO 
   C.2 The Errors Example 
 
D. The ADO Data Control 
   D.1 The ADO Data Control Property Pages 
   D.2 Creating Connection Strings with the ADO Data Control 
   D.3 The ADO Data Control Example 
 
E. Enumeration Tables 
 
Colophon

IT-SC book 
7
Preface 
This book is about ActiveX Data Objects (ADO), including Version 2.6, the latest release of 
ADO from Microsoft at the time of publication. In this Preface, I will first briefly introduce ADO 
and explain how the book is organized.  
Introduction and Organization 
This book is organized into three parts, as described in the following sections.  
Part I: Learning ADO  
ADO is Microsoft's advanced universal data-access solution, consisting of an object model-based 
wrapper around OLE DB, which is a technology that allows data-access functionality to different 
types of data sources. This allows companies such as Oracle, Microsoft, and Sybase to develop 
what are called "data providers," to do just that -- provide data to the OLE DB technology. OLE 
DB technology can work with all kinds of data sources, including relational databases such as 
SQL Server or an email system such as Exchange. OLE DB and ADO can even deal with plain 
text files and Excel spreadsheets. Chapter 1, and Chapter 2, provide more information on ADO, 
related technologies, and the structure of key ADO components.  
ADO adds a common programming interface to OLE DB, thus allowing developers to use 
existing skills with multiple languages. ADO can be used with virtually any development 
language that supports COM, such as Visual Basic, Visual C++, J++, JScript, and VBScript. 
Developing with ADO in each of these languages is discussed in Chapter 3. ADO was designed 
to encourage DAO and RDO developers to migrate to this new technology, without the burden of 
the many different objects of DAO and RDO.  
ADO is a lightweight, disconnected object model, which means that it has few objects, as 
compared to DAO or RDO, and that the objects do not necessarily rely on each other. For 
instance, one of the most common objects of ADO is the Connection object (Chapter 4). This 
object establishes a physical connection with a data source. But you don't need it: the other 
objects of ADO, such as the Command object, which issues textual commands to the data source, 
and the Recordset object (Chapter 5), which is used to store a result set, can create their 
Connection objects internally if they need to. Of course they use some default options, and hence 
the advantage of creating your own Connection -- more power and control over your data access.  
The Fields Collection object represents, unsurprisingly, a collection of fields contained in every 
Recordset object. Chapter 6, explains the Fields Collection object, as well as the Field objects.  
Another example of ADO disconnected object model is the Command object, covered in 
Chapter 7. The Command object issues commands such as SQL statements. You can actually 
issue statements through the Connection object if you don't mind using the default values. In this 
case the Connection object creates its own Command object internally to get the job done.  
Asynchronous operations are a very big selling feature with a data-access technology -- and ADO 
definitely does not fall short in this category. With the ability to fire events when asynchronous 
operations are executing and when they complete, ADO offers much greater control of your data 

IT-SC book 
8 
access than did previous data-access technologies such as DAO. In addition to asynchronous 
operations, events can be fired for transactions, connecting and disconnecting to a data source, as 
well as moving around a recordset and changing values within it. Events are covered in Chapter 
8.  
One of the unique features of ADO is its ability to use the Data Shaping data provider, which 
allows you to write code that can store hierarchical data within a single Recordset object. It 
allows you to shape result sets into parent-child relationships, where a single field value can 
contain an entire child recordset. Data shaping is covered in Chapter 9.  
A newer functionality in ADO is the ability to connect to web resources with not only the 
Recordset object, which stores result sets, but with the Record object, which stores individual 
rows, and the Stream object, which represents the actual content of a resource, such as a file or a 
directory. Chapter 10, explains these topics.  
Remote Data Services (RDS) extends ADO functionality to three-tier web applications. Chapter 
11, provides an overview of RDS.  
Chapter 12, offers a glimpse into the next generation of ADO and related technologies, in the 
form of ADO.NET and the .NET Framework and how they will interact with today's ADO 
projects.  
Part II: Reference Section 
Part II consists of Chapter 13. For this chapter, I have compiled an exhaustive list of every 
object, method, property, event, and enumeration in an easy-to-use alphabetical reference. See 
also Appendix E.  
Part III: Appendixes 
Appendix A, provides just that -- an introduction to using SQL with the Microsoft Jet Engine 
SQL language, including record selection, data manipulation, and database modification.  
In Appendix B, I explain the Properties collection, which exists within and provides information 
about ADO objects. ADO is a flexible framework that exposes the functionality of the data 
provider. Nothing guarantees what functionality a data provider will actually provide your 
application, but ADO does dictate the interface used for supported functionality. ADO has what it 
calls "dynamic properties," which can be used to understand the functionality supported by the 
data provider and to set data provider specific properties that aren't part of the ADO framework. 
This flexibility that ADO offers contributes to its longevity.  
Appendix C, lists trappable errors and data-provider errors, as well as methods for handling them.  
Appendix D, explains the ADO Data Control Property Pages and how to create connection 
strings with the Data Control property, including an example application.  
The companion to the Chapter 13 reference is Appendix E, which alphabetically lists 
enumerations used by ADO objects and collections.  
About the Book 

IT-SC book 
9
This book covers ActiveX Data Objects up to Version 2.6. It covers every class, method, property, and 
enumeration included with this release. This book has three sections; the first is a tutorial that explains how 
each of these components work, with examples in Visual Basic along the way. The second part of this book 
is a practical reference guide that allows you to easily look up any component to see every piece of detailed 
information available for it. The third part of this book contains several appendixes providing related 
information, as well as reference tables.  
Although this book includes small sections on Remote Data Objects (RDO), ADO.NET (from 
Microsoft's .NET Framework), and SQL, it by no means attempts to cover these subjects to any degree of 
completeness.  
Audience 
While this book is intended for any person interested in learning about ADO, it is targeted more 
specifically to the experienced Visual Basic developer who understands the basic principles 
behind data access and manipulation. This book provides many introductions to secondary topics, 
including SQL (Appendix A), RDS (Chapter 11), and others, in order to help the less-
experienced reader understand all facets of ADO in context.  
This book assumes that you know how to develop in Visual Basic -- or you at least understand how to read 
it. Knowledge of one of Microsoft's early database technologies (DAO or RDO) is helpful, but not 
necessary.  
Conventions Used in This Book 
I use the following font conventions in this book: 
Italic is used for:  
New terms where they are defined 
Internet addresses, such as domain names and URLs 
Pathnames, filenames, and program names 
Constant width is used for:  
Code examples for Visual Basic, C++, Java, and other languages 
Specific names and keywords in Visual Basic programs, including method names, property 
names, variable names, enumeration names, constants, and class names  
Constant width italic is occasionally used for placeholder items in code, replaceable by a 
specific item in your code.  
Comments and Questions 
I have tested and verified the information in this book to the best of my ability, but you may find that 
features have changed (or even that I have made mistakes!). Please let me know about any errors you find, 
as well as your suggestions for future editions, by writing to:  
O'Reilly & Associates, Inc.  

IT-SC book 
10 
101 Morris Street  
Sebastopol, CA 95472  
(800) 998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)  
(707) 829-0515 (international/local)  
(707) 829-0104 (fax)  
There is a web page for this book, which lists errata, any plans for future editions, or any additional 
information. You can access this page at:  
http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/ado/  
To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email to: 
bookquestions@oreilly.com  
For more information about books, conferences, software, Resource Centers, and the O'Reilly Network, see 
the O'Reilly web site at:  
http://www.oreilly.com  

IT-SC book 
11
Acknowledgments 
The people I need to acknowledge the most are the good folk at O'Reilly & Associates, starting with Ron 
Petrusha, who put up with me while still insisting on a quality piece of work. John Osborn and Nancy 
Kotary brought it home. Thank you very much for your expertise, guidance, persistence, and understanding.  
I need to thank the technical reviewers who -- while they didn't go easy on me -- didn't beat me up too bad, 
either. This includes Bob Beauchemin and Ben Willet's MDAC team over at Microsoft: Steve Hoberecht, 
Rick Feinauer, and Irene Smith. I'd also like to thank the O'Reilly Production staff. Specifically, thanks to 
my Production Editors, Jeffrey Holcomb and Sarah Jane Shangraw, and the additional Production staff who 
worked on this book: Linley Dolby, Matt Hutchinson, and Claire Cloutier.  
And last but not least, my wife, who put up with me working on this book, before we were married, after 
we were married, before she was pregnant, while she was pregnant, and after she gave birth to my son, 
Zachary -- the real reason I finished this book. I love you both. 

IT-SC book 
12 
Part I: Learning ADO 

IT-SC book 
13
Chapter 1. Introduction to ADO 
In today's computing environments, data exists in many formats, ranging from Access 
and SQL Server databases to Word documents, email messages, and many others. ADO, 
or ActiveX Data Objects, data-access technology simplifies use of data from multiple 
sources, thus freeing developers from learning data, vendor-specific API calls, and any 
other coding minutiae for each data format involved. With ADO, almost any data source 
becomes accessible in a consistent way for developers creating standalone applications, 
client/server applications, or ASP pages.  
In this chapter, I define ADO in the historic and current context of Microsoft's overall 
data-access strategy and related technologies.  
1.1 ADO in Context: Universal Data Access 
Microsoft's philosophy behind ADO and a series of related technologies is Universal 
Data Access ( UDA). UDA isn't a tangible product or technology, but rather a strategy for 
attacking the problem of data access, whose goal is efficient and powerful data access, 
regardless of data source or development language. Moreover, this universal access is 
meant to eliminate the need to convert existing data from one proprietary format to 
another.  
With this lofty goal in view, Microsoft developed a series of technologies, collectively 
known as Microsoft Data Access Components ( MDAC), that allow developers to 
implement UDA. MDAC consists of the following four key pieces:  
ODBC (Open Database Connectivity)  
OLE DB (Object Linking and Embedding Databases)  
ADO (ActiveX Data Objects)  
RDS (Remote Data Service)  
These components implement the UDA vision both individually and as a whole. To best 
understand ADO in context, you should have a basic understanding of each MDAC 
technology and its relationship to ADO.  
1.1.1 ODBC 
Open Database Connectivity, or ODBC, provides access to relational databases through a 
standard API, addressing the problem of native application -- and platform-specific APIs 
and their lack of cross-application compatibility. ODBC's industry-standard architecture 
offers an interface to any Database Management System (DBMS), such as SQL Server or 
Oracle, that uses the standard ODBC API. The main drawbacks of ODBC are the amount 
of work required to develop with it and its restriction to SQL-based data sources.  

IT-SC book 
14 
Two COM components (Component Object Model -- see "ADO and COM: Language 
Independence" later in this chapter) designed to help with ODBC complications are DAO 
and RDO, described briefly in later sections in this chapter.  
1.1.1.1 Jet/DAO 
With the release of Microsoft Access 1.1 in 1993, Microsoft introduced the Jet Database 
Engine, which worked with Access databases (Microsoft Access Databases, or MDB 
files), ODBC-supported data sources, and Indexed Sequential Access Method databases 
(ISAM, which includes Excel, dBase, and a few other databases).  
Data Access Objects (DAO) was introduced as a means of interacting with Jet. DAO, 
through COM, provided an object-oriented interface to Jet and Microsoft Access.  
Jet and DAO were successful in their flexibility but added layers to the ODBC API and 
were therefore more efficient for some databases (Access/MDB and ISAM) than others, 
including Relational Database Management Systems (RDBMS). DAO is still widely used 
today, but it is most appropriate for single-user, low-traffic database applications. The 
problem with DAO, as many soon began to see, was that it was so full-featured that it 
brought with it a profusion of objects. Figure 1-1 shows the DAO object model.  
Figure 1-1. The DAO object model  

IT-SC book 
15
 
As you will see later in this chapter and in other chapters, ADO was designed to address 
this and other problems with DAO.  
1.1.1.2 RDO 
Microsoft's response to the developer's need for easier access to ODBC data sources 
came, in 1995, in the form of Remote Data Objects, or RDO. RDO provided more direct, 
and therefore faster, access to the ODBC API, as well as support for RDBMS sources. 
With RDO, the emphasis moved from data-access methods designed for ISAM databases 
toward techniques to provide for stored procedures and the results that they returned. 
RDO lacked some of the power that DAO offered with Jet (for instance, RDO is not 
designed to access ISAM sources and does not allow the creation of new databases), but 
it offered more power for newer, more robust enterprise systems.  

IT-SC book 
16 
The problem with RDO is that it is very different from the DAO architecture, which means two 
things. First, developers had to learn a new interface, and second, converting an existing DAO 
application to RDO involved a lot of additional development, because almost every piece of RDO 
differed from DAO, as you can see by comparing Figure 1-1 and Figure 1-2 (the RDO object 
model). With the introduction of RDO, developers chose between DAO and RDO instead of 
moving directly to RDO and abandoning DAO.  
Figure 1-2. The RDO object model 
 
1.1.1.3 ODBCDirect 
ODBCDirect was provided as part of a later release of DAO; to save time, it allows 
developers to work directly with Access sources without using Jet as the go-between. It is 
similar to DAO's object model but includes RDO's direct access to remote data sources.  
1.1.2 OLE DB 
ODBC provides access only to relational databases. Its successor, Object Linking and 
Embedding Databases (OLE DB), includes all other data sources. OLE DB is the 
foundation upon which ADO relies.  
OLE DB provides the following features: 
Access to data regardless of its format or location (via COM -- see "ADO and COM: Language 
Independence" later in this chapter)  

IT-SC book 
17
Full access to ODBC data sources and ODBC drivers 
A specification that Microsoft wants to act as a standard throughout the industry  
OLE DB comprises four types of components; Figure 1-3 shows their relationships, which are 
described here:  
Data consumer  
Any application or tool that accesses data from a data source. While the API calls that are 
available to access the data in your database are considered data providers, the application that 
uses that data itself is a data consumer, since it requests the data from the data provider.  
Data service provider  
The engine that makes OLE DB work; the resource necessary for a data provider to be able to 
provide data. A data service provider is a modular or add-on component that allows an 
application to deliver data through OLE DB. Data service providers are usually provided by the 
vendor for major products such as Oracle, DB2, and Informix. Microsoft promotes the creation of 
data service providers by either the manufacturer of the data provider or a third-party company.  
Business component  
A go-between for a data provider and a data consumer. In today's development environment, it is 
becoming more and more important not to develop in such a way that every object in your 
application manipulates your data. With a business component that you call to access your data, 
which in turn calls your database access component (ADO, RDO, ODBC, OLE DB, or ADO), 
then you need only modify the code in that business component.  
Data provider  
A component (application or database engine, for example) that delivers data from a data source 
(such as a database, spreadsheet, or email message) in a consistent manner.  
Figure 1-3. OLE DB component relationships 
 
ODBC, as we have just seen, is an excellent technology for accessing SQL-based data. 
OLE DB incorporates this proven technology with a particular component that allows 
OLE DB consumers to communicate directly with ODBC providers. In other words, use 

IT-SC book 
18 
OLE DB to access SQL-based data, and you gain the advantage of being able to access 
both relational and other forms of data with the same code.  
As they have done with ODBC, Microsoft is actively encouraging software vendors and 
tool developers to support the OLE DB standard within their applications and tools. 
Widespread standardization is an advantage for developers; with OLE DB, we can ensure 
that our applications become more robust and more powerful as they span the enterprise.  
Keep in mind that OLE DB was designed for software vendors who develop data-based 
applications to expose that data to you, an end-user developer, through a consistent 
interface. OLE DB is fast, efficient, and powerful. It has everything a developer looks for 
in a data-access technology. It offers access to any data source known to man (or to 
Windows, for that matter), and it provides access to these data sources with a consistent 
interface, regardless of data source. The problem with OLE DB is that, like ODBC, it is 
inaccessible to Visual Basic and other developers, because it is based on a C-style API. 
Visual Basic developers, in particular, needed more.  
1.1.3 ADO 
Enter ActiveX Data Objects (ADO). ADO, an application-level interface to OLE DB, is 
the latest, greatest piece of Microsoft's UDA strategy. It combines the best features of its 
predecessors, DAO and RDO, and adds OLE DB accessibility for VBA programmers. 
ADO provides a consistent, language-independent means to access data from almost any 
source, including text-based or other legacy data in relational and nonrelational formats. 
(You can now see why I needed to explain some of the alphabet soup before getting to 
ADO itself.)  
ADO comprises a collection of object libraries in a new, modular object model: in this 
new model, many objects can exist independently of the others, as you will see in later 
chapters of this book. The ADO object model is more flexible than the DAO object 
model, but it's similar, so programmers familiar with DAO will feel at home with ADO. 
ADO is a smaller version of DAO, generalized to allow easy access to any data source, 
not just Jet databases or ODBC data sources. The ADO object model simplifies data 
access more than DAO or RDO did by using fewer objects. See Figure 1-1 and also 
Chapter 2, for more information.  
Used with OLE DB, ADO provides fast, simple access to almost any data source. It 
allows developers to use a single, consistent interface to new and legacy databases and 
other data sources of all formats, when creating desktop -- or web-based -- applications.  
ADO can also use the OLE DB provider for ODBC. Instead of removing the already 
proven and tested code for ODBC drivers, ADO allows you to use ODBC through the 
same interface you would for OLE DB. This may be an option when you have code you 
are migrating from RDO, which already uses ODBC.  
ADO breaks the common characteristics of all data sources into easy-to-use components 
(which we will look at in Chapter 2). Consistency and language-independence are 

IT-SC book 
19
provided, so that developers can worry more about the content and quality of applications, 
rather than about the techniques used in delivering data or the type of data being used.  
What does language-independent development mean? It is quite simple -- one technology, 
one development interface. You will use the same object, method, and property names 
with ADO, regardless of the development language that you are using. The difference is 
almost unnoticeable. Under the covers, ADO, through COM (Component Object Model), 
worries about the particular language you are developing with, whether it is Visual Basic, 
Visual C++, or Java. Even scripting languages, such as VBScript and JavaScript in 
HTML pages are supported. We will look more closely into programming for these 
different languages in Chapter 3.  
With this feature, you might expect that a lot of specific functionality of data sources 
would be lost. On the contrary, ADO allows the developer to access any data source-
specific commands, methods, properties, and utilities that the vendor has made available 
through OLE DB. And yes, ADO does this in a well-structured, consistent way. Can you 
possibly ask for more?  
As we will see in chapters to come, an application can be designed to access a simple 
database, such as Access, and with a little bit of additional code, it can later access more 
intricate databases, such as SQL Server databases, Word documents, or email files. The 
only real coding necessary involves altering the connection string used in ADO to read 
the new data source. This powerful technology will help us move into the future as 
applications begin to grow across enterprises.  
1.1.4 RDS 
The final piece of data-access technology in this list of the MDAC components is Remote 
Data Services (RDS). RDS, based on existing Active Data Connector (ADC) technology 
integrated into ADO, transports ADO objects via proxy between server and client, thus 
allowing developers to create web-based applications that can access data on the server in 
new ways. Some of the advantages of RDS are:  
Client-side caching of data results 
Ability to update data from the client 
Support for data-aware ActiveX components and controls 
Client-side caching is something that we will all grow to love. With it, clients (end-users) 
are able to view data from the server without making numerous round trips. For instance, 
when you are using a search engine on the Internet, such as Yahoo!, you receive a list of 
links that relate to your search, usually in groups of tens. If you want to see the next ten 
sites from the resulting search, your browser must make another request to the server. 
With client-side caching, all of the data is sent to the client, so that the client can browse 
this data without incurring time delays that are associated with additional requests. This 
feature reduces local-area network and Internet traffic and allows the end-user to move 

IT-SC book 
20 
freely through data without unnecessary pauses and to perform operations on that data, 
such as sorting and filtering.  
With RDS, web pages can now offer the client the ability to interact with and alter data. 
This data can be sent back to the server after manipulation. At the server, the data can be 
verified and then returned to the data source. With this technology, your client/server 
applications can span the Internet (or your intranet). Clients can now invoke server-side 
automation objects through HTML, meaning that particular business rules (chosen by the 
developer) can be accessed via the client.  
RDS enables three-tier client/server applications, with the model shown in Figure 1-4.  
Figure 1-4. The three-tier client/server web-based application model 
 
With automation objects, your application can become an auto-downloaded application. 
For businesses with a large number of client-side users, you can create, maintain, and 
update your application on the server alone. When clients run your application, they can 
use an ActiveX-aware browser (Internet Explorer) to access the application. With auto-
download features built into the browser, the client receives an updated version of the 
application.  
RDS also supports data-aware ActiveX controls that can be placed within an HTML page 
on a client. For instance, if you want to allow the client to view a list of documents that 
you have stored in your data source on the server, you could link RDS to an ActiveX list 
box control that is placed in the HTML page and downloaded to the client. The control 
interacts automatically with RDS, without any additional programming, to download all 
of the document names.  

IT-SC book 
21
See Chapter 11, for a more detailed introduction to RDS.  
1.1.5 Putting It All Together 
With the addition of RDS to its MDAC family of components, Microsoft has integrated 
several useful existing technologies into the universal data-access strategy: IE data-access 
technology for data-bound web pages, remote data capability through RDS, and ASP/IIS-
related technologies for better access to data services via the Internet. The result allows 
applications to work with data offline to reduce network traffic, update data on remote 
clients, and gather data asynchronously for faster response time.  
Figure 1-5 shows the relationships and dependencies of the MDAC components.  
Figure 1-5. MDAC architecture 
 
As you can see from Figure 1-5, your application can use a number of different 
Microsoft-supplied technologies to access SQL -- as well as non-SQL and legacy -- data, 
such as that residing on a mainframe.  
Until ADO, we had four choices: DAO, RDO, ODBC, and OLE DB. DAO served its 
purpose well: it used the power of the underlying ( Jet) database engine to access 
Microsoft and other ISAM data sources. With RDO, things were even better with its 
easy-to-use interface to ODBC and ability to access almost any SQL data source. 
Accessing ODBC directly was always a possibility, but it was questionable whether the 
overwhelming amount of work was worth the extra speed gained in the process. Finally, 
OLE DB offered everything under the sun. It offered access to ISAM, SQL, non-SQL, 

IT-SC book 
22 
and legacy data. However wonderful OLE DB was, it is considered the most difficult 
interface with which to develop to access data sources. This is where ADO comes into 
play. ADO reports directly to OLE DB and no one else, meaning that it provides an 
interface to the whole complicated mess, about which we need to know little or nothing.  
ADO provides a consistent development interface to the wonders of OLE DB, and it does 
so while being language-independent.  
1.2 ADO and COM: Language Independence  
Microsoft's Component Object Model, better known as COM, is a mature technology that 
offers universal access to components, regardless of the language in which they were 
programmed. This is the backbone that allows ADO, through OLE DB, to be so versatile. 
To understand how COM allows ADO to be language-independent, you must first 
understand what COM is and what it achieves.  
1.2.1 COM 
COM is technology specification for writing software components that interact through a 
standard interface. The COM specification is strictly a binary specification. This 
guarantees that the language in which a COM object is developed has absolutely no 
importance once the object is compiled, as long as its adheres to the binary specification.  
The COM specification sets rules for creating and managing component objects. This 
specification guarantees that all COM objects are compatible and that they expose a 
minimal set of interfaces. These interfaces allow COM objects to communicate with each 
other whether they are on the same machine or supported by networks. Since the COM 
specification relies on binary compatibility, COM works across heterogeneous networks. 
In other words, COM objects can run on any machine, even without the Windows 
operating system.  
A particular type of COM implementation is OLE Automation, or simply Automation. 
Automation is a standard way for COM objects to expose their functionality to software 
products, development languages, and even scripting languages. The use of Automation 
allows applications to actually manipulate other applications through the exposed features 
and functionality of the latter's COM objects. Automation allows two applications to 
communicate with each other.  
An example of this type of manipulation is a Visual Basic add-in. Visual Basic exposes 
an object model through the COM technology to any other component that wishes to 
interact with it. You can create an add-in for Visual Basic that works seamlessly with the 
product, through the use of Visual Basic's exposed features. As a matter of fact, many of 
Microsoft's products expose their features through COM, including the Microsoft Office 
family of products. Microsoft Word, for example, exposes its functionality through COM 
and allows itself to be manipulated through scripting with VBA (Visual Basic for 
Applications).  

IT-SC book 
23
When a COM object is exposed through OLE Automation, that object is then called an 
ActiveX object or an ActiveX server. The application or tool that manipulates the ActiveX 
object is called an ActiveX client.  
1.2.2 ADO and COM 
As a COM technology, ADO has the ability to communicate with any data source that 
provides an OLE DB interface. ADO and OLE DB share the same backbone -- COM. 
Figure 1-6 shows COM at work with ADO and OLE DB. When ADO communicates 
with a data provider at the simplest level, two COM objects are exchanging information, 
regardless of the connection between them.  
Figure 1-6. ADO and COM 
 
Also, COM has the ability to send events or notifications to other COM objects. This 
capability is used in ADO, as we will see later on when we execute queries. We have the 
ability, through ADO, OLE DB, and finally COM, to send a request for a selection of 
records through SQL and then to be notified when it has completed processing.  
What is even better is that COM has been around for a long time, has gained the respect 
of application and tools developers, has a proven track record, and is supported by 
Microsoft. COM's architecture does not change between programming languages or 
operating systems; thus, neither does ADO.  
COM objects are easily distributed. They have the ability to communicate across 
machines and enterprises. This advantage is embraced with ADO through RDS, or 
Remote Data Service, which I will be talking about in Chapter 11.  
As you can see from this very limited introduction to COM, ADO stands upon OLE DB, 
which relies heavily on COM to communicate with other COM objects. This can do 
nothing but benefit us as developers, because it enables communication with objects that 
aren't necessarily written in the same language.[1]  

IT-SC book 
24 
[1] For more information, see Inside COM by Dale Rogerson (Microsoft Press, 1997). 
1.3 When to Use ADO 
ADO is language-independent, as discussed earlier. This means that no matter which 
language you are developing with -- Visual Basic, VBScript, Visual Basic for 
Applications (VBA), Visual C++, Visual J++, or JavaScript -- the development interface 
is identical. This allows developers to become familiar with the technology itself, instead 
of worrying about learning a half-dozen different programming syntaxes for that 
technology. I suggest that you use ADO whenever your application fits into any or all of 
the following categories:  
Your application accesses or may later need to access more than one data source.  
Your application accesses or may later need to access data sources other than ISAM or ODBC 
databases.  
Your application spans or may later span a heterogeneous network. 
Your application uses or may later use multiple languages. 
If your application needs to access more than one type of data source, then you should 
consider integrating ADO technology into your application. For instance, if you were 
designing an application that had to search Word documents, email messages, and a SQL 
Server database for keywords and then to show related information based on that query, 
ADO is the best choice. With ADO, you can create a component to search all three of 
these data sources using identical code, saving you time in development, as well as in 
maintenance and upkeep. This choice also provides the option of adding a fourth data 
source to your application at some later time with little or no additional overhead in 
development.  
If your application may access data sources other than conventional ISAM or ODBC 
databases, you should use ADO. With ADO, you can search through an Excel worksheet 
just as if you were searching through email messages. If you use some other technology 
besides ADO, you must not only code two different components, one for each data source, 
but you also need to learn that other technology. In this case, you would have to research 
MAPI API calls, as well as Word document file structures. And then what happens when 
Word comes out with a new version? Or what about when more APIs are added to MAPI? 
You could easily ignore these until your application becomes so outdated that it renders 
itself useless. With ADO, you simply use the data service providers supplied by 
Microsoft for both Excel and Word so that the ability to access and manipulate these data 
sources are exposed identically through ADO.  
If your application has or may spread across a heterogeneous network, such as the 
Internet or your corporate intranet, you should use ADO. For instance, consider an 
application that is deployed from your company's server to each employee. This 
application might access data stored on a mainframe containing legacy data. From this 
point, ADO serves as a driver to access data on this mainframe platform. This alone 

IT-SC book 
25
would save you valuable time and effort, because in order to access the mainframe data 
source by some other means, you would have to write custom drivers, or even worse, 
spend a fortune on a third-party tool that might not do everything that you want. Even the 
client side would benefit from ADO. Suppose you have employees that don't have a 
Windows machine in front of them, but who need access to the same data that someone 
running Windows has. Other employees might use a Sun workstation, for instance. As 
long as they use a browser that supports ActiveX technology, such as Internet Explorer, it 
is as if they are running the same application. In addition, if your application is prone to 
updates or fixes, by deploying it over the network using Internet Information Server (IIS) 
along with Active Server Pages (ASP), you can automatically (and transparently) update 
the client's version of the application each time it changes.  
If your application uses multiple languages, especially if they are in the same tier of an n-
tier client/server architecture, then ADO is the best choice. If you are the only developer 
of an application, or even if there are a handful of developers, then by sticking to a 
language-independent data-access technique, you eliminate the need to know multiple 
implementations of the same technology. For instance, if your application has business-
rule components that update the data source, query the data source, or delete from the 
data source, it is very likely in today's development environments, that each component 
could be written in a completely different language. By fully understanding ADO, you 
can make the best use of the same technology in each of these languages.  
On the other hand, there are a few cases in which you shouldn't use ADO. If your 
application falls into any of the following categories, an alternative method of data access 
might be preferable:  
Your application is already too far along to redesign and currently does not support business 
components for data access.  
Your application needs to read in only text data from a flat file, which cannot be broken down 
into logical rowsets.  
Your application saves data in your own format, and you do not wish to offer others access to 
your data through OLE DB.  
If your application is already under development, it's probably too far along to turn back 
now. If it does not support business components for data access, you might not have a 
choice in converting to ADO. If the data-access technology, whether DAO, RDO, or 
something else, has not been placed within designed business components to handle the 
data access, you would most likely spend more time rewriting your application to support 
ADO than is justified.  
By using business components in your applications, you can alter a few areas of code to 
achieve a widespread result. In this case, if your application had a component to read 
from your data source and a component to write to your data source, your application 
would call the business components rather than calling DAO, RDO, or even ADO 
directly. When a new technology such as ADO comes along, you simply change the two 

IT-SC book 
26 
components, as opposed to changing every location in your application that now calls the 
components.  
If your application will read in only text data from a flat file, which cannot be broken into 
logical rowsets of data, you may be better off using the Visual Basic Open statement, or 
the file-access statement equivalent for the language you are developing in. For instance, 
if your application displays a readme text file in a registration screen, can you imagine 
opening up a database and using the rowset methodology on streamed text? You should 
use the Open statement, if you're using Visual Basic, to read in the readme text file 
yourself. ADO is overkill in a situation like this.  
If your application is going to save state information or other data and will not allow 
others to view this data through OLE DB or any other conventional database technology 
(DAO, RDO, ODBC API, or ADO), you may not want ADO. To ensure the security of 
your data, it would be wise for you to write your own functions for storing and retrieving 
information from an encrypted binary file. This binary file would have a structure that 
only you, as the developer, would be aware of, as opposed to the structure of an OLE 
DB-enabled file, which can be read at runtime. Of course, even though nobody knows the 
structure of your binary file, people are smart -- they could figure it out. To ensure that 
people can't see the data, you must encrypt it. For instance, you might want to write an 
application that does your taxes for you (and pretend that nobody else ever wrote a 
program like this before, so that we have a reason to do it now). After a year of entering 
financial data, the user can automatically print tax reports and forms that can be sent the 
government. The data that is entered all year long obviously has to be saved somewhere, 
but the question is where. My suggestion in this case would be to create a binary file in 
your own data structure, hiding that structure from the outside world. This file will hold 
personal financial information that you really don't want other people to have access to. 
With ADO, you would be exposing it to the world, whether you wanted to or not.  
1.4 Summary 
This chapter introduced ActiveX Data Objects, along with the closely related evolution of 
Microsoft data-access technologies. You also learned when to use ADO, the newest of 
these technologies. Following is a list of some key items, pointed out in this chapter:  
ADO offers access to virtually any data source on any platform by being a data consumer of OLE 
DB. OLE DB is an industry standard promoted by Microsoft for exposing data, regardless of its 
source or format, in a uniform way. With the power of OLE DB, used via ADO, you gain access 
to any data source that provides an OLE DB interface.  
ADO offers ease of use when writing data access applications. Since ADO was created with a 
similar design to DAO (Data Access Objects), developers are familiar with the object architecture. 
And since the development interface is consistent, you can develop for any OLE DB data source 
with ADO using the same syntax.  
ADO offers language-independence and thus offers developers a choice of languages. With any 
language, including Visual Basic, VBScript, VBA, Visual C++, Java, and JavaScript, the 

IT-SC book 
27
development interface remains the same, which allows developers to focus on the ADO 
technology, not the implementation.  
Throughout the rest of this book, you will learn how to use ADO with any development 
language. You will learn every object, collection, property, and method of ADO and how 
you can use each of them to access the power of OLE DB in your applications.  

IT-SC book 
28 
Chapter 2. The ADO Architecture 
In this chapter, we take a look at the ADO architecture; in the first section, "An Overview 
of the ADO Architecture," I describe how all of the pieces of ADO fit together to perform 
all of the functions that are necessary when accessing data sources. The remainder of the 
chapter is dedicated to the introduction and brief description of each of the key 
components of the ADO architecture.  
2.1 An Overview of the ADO Architecture 
ADO is built upon layer after layer of solid, proven technologies that allow applications 
to communicate with data, regardless of where it resides or how it is structured, using any 
language or scripting language. How can one technology offer techniques to access both 
relational databases and nonrelational sources such as email?  
ADO is the lowest common denominator when it comes to data access. It makes no 
assumptions when it comes to its data sources. Because ADO cannot assume that the data 
source being accessed is even a database, it must use objects, methods, and properties 
that are relevant to all data sources.  
With ADO, the data provider (as described in the previous chapter, the connection 
between the data consumer, or application), not the data consumer, creates the driver for 
a data source. What this means is that the version of ADO does not dictate the data 
sources that are available to us; rather, it dictates the functionality that is passed through 
from the data provider to our software. The burden is on the data provider or vendor to 
create and distribute the proper resources necessary to develop with their product. ADO 
is a framework; the behavior of the OLE DB providers can vary widely. ADO does not 
require that all interfaces and functionality be offered by each provider.  
By designing the architecture of ADO as a simple generic interface, ADO is not tied to a 
specific command type, but is capable of growing with the needs and the abilities of both 
developers and data sources.  
A powerful feature of ADO is its ability to offer the functionality of a particular data 
source. If your data provider supports stored procedures, for example, then you can use 
them. In Chapter 4, we take a look at a number of popular providers and their specific 
functionality.  
ADO has already proven to be a very well-thought-out interface for data access, which is 
worth its weight in gold because it is so very robust and scalable, in addition to being so 
easy to use.  
In the second half of this chapter, I will take a closer look at how each of the major 
components of the ADO architecture fit together to achieve its desired goal of a generic 
data-access interface.  

IT-SC book 
29
ADO Versus DAO and RDO 
DAO assumes that it's working with a Jet engine and an Access database. RDO 
also makes an assumption -- specifically, that it is working with an ODBC data 
source. With DAO, a Database object is used to connect to a particular database. 
The type of database must be picked from a list that is stored in the version of 
DAO that you are using to develop your application. If a database is not 
included in the current list, you are out of luck -- you cannot access that 
database with the version of DAO that you have. ADO has been designed to 
work with any data source, regardless of version. As long as an OLE DB 
provider driver is available, you can access that data.  
The problem with DAO is that it is too tightly bound to the Microsoft Jet engine. 
The problem with RDO is that it is too tightly bound to the ODBC API. In 
contrast, ADO is fitted loosely around the concept of data access and the 
assumption that all data can be visualized as collections of fields that constitute 
records. ADO's approach to data-access interfaces allows it to remain up to date 
with new types of data structures and data-access techniques. If a new type of 
data query is later invented, as long as a particular OLE DB data provider 
supports it, ADO can take advantage of it through the use of a Command object.  
To summarize, ADO has a smaller object model than DAO because it has been 
generalized to allow easy access to any data source, not just Jet databases or 
ODBC data sources. Its architecture is very similar to that of DAO, but it 
simplifies data access more than DAO or RDO did by using fewer objects. 
Because the same interface can be used to access any type of data source, ADO 
is easier to use.  
2.2 ADO Components 
ActiveX Data Objects consists of a generic-style data-access structure that allows you to 
access any data source, regardless of its structure, with the same programming interface. 
The individual objects within the ADO object model are used to provide all of the data-
storage, manipulation, and retrieval commands needed when writing a data-based 
application. ADO includes the following objects and collections:  
The Connection object 
The Command object 
The Parameters collection and the Parameter object 
The Recordset object 
The Fields collection and the Field object 

IT-SC book 
30 
The Record and Stream objects 
The Properties collection and the Property object 
The Errors collection and the Error object 
In the next sections, I take a closer look at these objects and collections.  
2.2.1 The Connection Object 
The Connection object is the gateway for all data communications through ActiveX Data 
Objects. Figure 2-1 illustrates the Connection object's object model.  
Figure 2-1. The Connection object's object model 
 
In order to access data from any source, a connection for that source must first be 
established. ADO uses the Connection object to accomplish this. The Connection object 
uses information that you provide to establish a unique connection to a particular OLE 
DB data source. The standard information that a Connection object accepts includes 
filenames, data-provider names, usernames, and passwords. If your particular data 
provider needs additional information, this information can be passed from the 
Connection object directly to your data provider. By allowing this form of pass-through 
of connection specifications, ADO does not make any assumptions or restrict itself to one 
type of data source. All of the functionality of the chosen data provider is made available 
through the use of the Connection object.  
A Connection object is used to accomplish the following tasks: 
Select a data source and data provider 
Open and close a connection on a selected data source 
Manage transactions on a data source 
Execute queries on a data source 
Connection objects can be created explicitly and used later with the Command and 
Recordset objects, or the Connection object can be created by the Command and 
Recordset objects implicitly, behind the scenes.  
In addition, the Connection object reports errors through an Errors collection and 
provides ADO version information. The Connection object is examined in greater detail 
in Chapter 4.  

IT-SC book 
31
2.2.2 The Command Object 
The Command object is used to execute instructions -- whether for storing, manipulating, 
or gathering information -- on a specific data source. Figure 2-2 shows the Command 
object's object model.  
Figure 2-2. The Command object's object model 
 
Once you're connected to a data source, you naturally want to perform some operation on 
it. One of your options is to use the Command object, which executes commands against 
the associated data source. There are five types of commands that a Command object can 
execute:  
A SQL statement  
Probably the most popular type of command, a SQL statement can gather information, 
manipulate information, or manipulate the structure of the underlying database.  
A parameterized query (a query with input and output parameters)  
A parameterized query uses variables that set or return values that are part of a particular 
query or SQL statement.  
A stored procedure from within the current data source  
A stored procedure is a query that resides within the connected data source. By 
identifying the name of a stored procedure, you can execute, through the data provider, a 
query that is defined outside of ADO. Stored procedures can also use parameters.  
A statement to open a single table  
An open table-type statement does not query data, but instead returns all of the fields in 
all of the records belonging to the specified table. This is comparable to the DAO 
OpenTable method.  
A string command passed directly to the data provider  
A string command enables the data provider to perform a specific operation that is 
defined by the provider itself and outside of ADO. Such a command is commonly used, 
for example, when a particular data provider offers its own version of the SQL language. 
In such a situation, ADO has no idea how to process a proprietary SQL string for this 
language, so you tell ADO to forward it directly to the data provider. The data provider, 
in turn, can take this string and process a result that can be sent back through ADO to 
your application. The OLE DB provider for Internet Publishing, for instance, allows the 
passing of a URL statement to identify a data source, within the Command object.  

IT-SC book 
32 
If the Command object is used to retrieve data, then a Recordset object containing the 
requested records is created and passed back to the application.  
The Command object can be associated with a currently open connection, or it can be 
created independently of any existing Connection objects, in which case the Command 
object creates its own Connection object but does not share it with you.  
The Command object is discussed in Chapter 7. 
2.2.2.1 The Parameters collection and the Parameter object 
The Parameters collection belongs to the Command object. This collection stores 
Parameter objects that are used to make parameterized queries or to invoke stored 
procedures. Every Command object has a Parameters collection created by ADO. You 
can populate the Parameters collection, or it can be refreshed to retrieve the already 
defined parameters -- for the Command -- from the data source.  
The Parameters collection and the Parameter object's object model is displayed in 
Figure 2-3. This collection and object combination defines the characteristics of 
parameters when referring to a parameterized query or defines the input and output 
arguments when referring to a stored procedure.  
Figure 2-3. The Parameters collection and the Parameter object's object 
model 
 
With the Parameter object, you can set or read the name, value, and characteristics of a 
given parameter. If you know this information beforehand for any stored procedure or 
parameterized query, you can potentially save valuable time by creating Parameter 
objects yourself that ADO would otherwise spend trying to learn this information.  
The Parameters collection and the Parameter object are covered in Chapter 7.  
2.2.3 The Recordset Object 
A Recordset object is used to access data on a record level. Figure 2-4 illustrates the 
Recordset object model.  
Figure 2-4. The Recordset object model 
 

IT-SC book 
33
A Recordset object can be created by the developer to return data itself, or it can be 
returned from executing a command with a Connection or Command object. This 
information can be obtained from a table in the underlying data source or from a previous 
SQL statement, query, or stored procedure executed through the Command object.  
The Recordset object consists of a Fields collection of individual Field objects, each with 
its own properties, characteristics, and values. (The Recordset object may be familiar to 
you if you have worked with DAO before.)  
The Recordset object works well with all types of data because it relies on the ability of 
all data to be broken into structured records composed of one or more fields. It is easy to 
see this structure in a database, but what about a data source such as a directory? In this 
case, each file in the directory may be a record. Each field of this record might be a 
different attribute of that file, including its name, its size, its creation date, its last 
modification date, its contents, etc. It is important to realize that all stored data can have a 
structure that represents records with fields that are located within tables, just as in a 
more obviously structured database.  
With the Recordset object, we can move a virtual record pointer around a list of records, 
searching for records, placing bookmarks, and editing specific values of designated fields. 
We can also add and remove records from the recordset. We can view and edit the 
properties of the fields that make up these records.  
Recordset objects, like Command objects, can be created using an existing Connection, 
or Recordset objects can implicitly create their own Connection object, which is not 
automatically passed back to your application, unless you request it. Recordsets show you 
one record at a time. With this view, you can manipulate data any way that you would 
like through a Fields collection or Field object, which are discussed next. Multiple 
Recordset objects can access the same data, and, as a matter of fact, Recordset objects 
can even be cloned using a special method that we will look at in the Section 5.2.6 of 
Chapter 5.  
There are four types of cursors available in ADO. A cursor is a way of working within a 
result set or records. Each provides a different view of the same data, and each has its 
pros and cons. Not all providers support every type of cursor. The four types of cursors 
are:  
Forward-only cursor  
The forward-only cursor is exactly the same as the static cursor except that you can only 
move forward through the records in your recordset. Unless you specify otherwise, this is 
the default view of a recordset, and it offers the best performance of all four recordset 
types.  
Dynamic cursor  
This view of your data source allows you to see dynamically any additions, changes, or 
deletions made by other users of the data source. The dynamic cursor is the most 
resource-intensive type of recordset.  

IT-SC book 
34 
Keyset cursor  
This view of your data source only allows you to see modifications made to the data in 
your recordset by other users. It does not show you records that have been added by other 
users, and it denies you access to records that have been deleted. The keyset cursor offers 
slightly better performance than the dynamic cursor.  
Static cursor  
The static cursor offers you a snapshot of your data through the Recordset object. The 
static cursor does not show you any additions, modifications, or deletions of the records 
in your recordset, regardless of what other users are doing to it. It is generally used for 
data gathering and reporting in a multi-user environment. The static cursor offers 
abundant speed advantages over both the keyset and dynamic cursor.  
The Recordset object offers two types of data updating: immediate update mode and 
batch update mode. In the immediate update mode, changes are made one record at a 
time. Once you have indicated that you have finished updating a record, the information 
is immediately transferred to the underlying data source and written. On the other hand, 
the batch update mode allows the data provider to cache several records in memory to be 
sent to the data source in a single call, where it is then written as a batch.  
The Recordset Object is covered in detail in Chapter 5.  
2.2.3.1 The Fields collection and the Field object 
The Fields collection belongs to the Recordset object and the Record object. The Fields 
collection is a group of Field objects that represent individual columns in a recordset. 
Figure 2-5 shows the Fields collection and Field object's object model. Every 
Recordset object and every Record object has a Fields collection that is created by ADO.  
Figure 2-5. The Fields collection and the Field object's object model 
 
The Field object offers the developer complete access to the underlying data of a chosen 
recordset. The Field object makes available its field's name, value, data size, and 
attributes. With this information, we can read, alter, and verify field information within 
the current record of our recordset.  
Both the Fields collection and the Field object are discussed in Chapter 5.  
2.2.4 The Record Object 

IT-SC book 
35
The Record object is one of the newest additions to the ADO object model added with 
Version 2.5. It can represent either a single record within a Recordset object, or it can 
represent a resource within a hierarchical data source. A Record object can be obtained 
from a Recorset object (representing a single record of the complete recordset), or it can 
be created as a standalone object to represent a resource such as a file or a directory. 
Figure 2-6 shows the Record object's object model.  
Figure 2-6. The Record object's object model 
 
One of the unique features of the Record object is that it can be used to navigate 
hierarchical data sources such as a file directory. By using the OLE DB provider for 
Internet Publishing, the Record object allows the developer to access resources within a 
web server (files and directories).  
The Record object allows for file and directory manipulation, such as copying, moving, 
and deleting resources. In addition, the Record object can be used to access the actual 
data belonging to one of these resources through the exposure of a default Stream object.  
The Record object is discussed in Chapter 10. 
2.2.5 The Stream Object 
The Stream object was added at the same time as when the Record object was added to 
ADO with Version 2.5. The Stream object is used to view and manipulate text and binary 
data belonging to a resource such as a file or a buffer in memory. A Stream object can be 
obtained from a Record object or it can be created as a standalone object. Figure 2-7 
shows the Stream object's object model.  
Figure 2-7. The Stream object's object model 
 
An additional feature of the Stream object is its ability to be created independently of a 
specified data source. In other words, the Stream object can be created in memory and 
need not be tied to any predefined data. In this way, the Stream object can be used as a 
utility object such as a buffer. Added functionality allows the Stream's buffer to be 
persisted (saved to the datasource) to local files in any directory.  
The Stream object is discussed in Chapter 10. 
2.2.6 The Properties Collection and the Property Object 

IT-SC book 
36 
The Connection, Command, and Recordset objects each have their own Properties 
collection. The Properties collection consists of individual Property objects that hold 
specific information about their associated objects. These collections are supplied 
automatically by ADO. Figure 2-8 illustrates the Properties collection and Property 
object's object model.  
Figure 2-8. The Properties collection and the Property object's object model 
 
In order to fine-tune all of these objects -- the Connection, Command, Recordset, and 
Field objects -- ADO offers the Properties collection. This collection contains individual 
Property objects that allow dynamic characteristics of the data source belonging to the 
current data provider to be accessed within each object. The Property objects may inform 
you of special features that are unique to the data source and are not standard ADO 
functionality. The Property objects may also tell you what standard ADO functions are 
supported by the current data provider so that you can avoid problems when attempting 
particular commands. With this ability, we can determine at runtime the capabilities of 
the data source that we are trying to access. This allows our software to realize the full 
potential of data-source drivers.  
One of the more flexible features of ADO is that it can offer the developer data provider-
defined functions that are not part of the standard ADO specification. For instance, the 
Microsoft Cursor Service for OLE DB offers dynamic properties that are used to specify 
how often calculated and aggregate columns are calculated within a data-shaping query. 
Instead of working with only the lowest common denominator in data-access techniques, 
ADO allows your application to check for and take advantage of functions that are 
specific to a particular data provider. Each data provider uses the Property objects of the 
Properties collection differently, but they all use it to expose their special functionality. 
Consult the documentation of the data provider you are using in your application for 
more information on how to utilize the Properties collection and the Property object.  
The Properties collection and Property object are covered in many chapters throughout 
this book. For the Connection object, they are covered in Chapter 4. For the Command 
object, they are covered in Chapter 7. And for the Recordset and Field objects, they are 
covered in Chapter 5.  
2.2.7 The Errors Collection and the Error Object 

IT-SC book 
37
The Errors collection belongs to the Connection object but services all of ADO. The 
Errors collection is populated with Error objects whenever an error occurs within a single 
ADO data-access operation. Figure 2-9 shows the Errors collection and the Error 
object's object model.  
Figure 2-9. The Errors collection and the Error object's object model 
 
The Errors collection contains errors and warnings that are generated both by ADO and 
by the individual data provider being used. These messages allow us to scan and trap 
errors that arise when we access data sources. If ADO detects the error, then ADO will 
throw the error. But if the error is provider-specific, the data provider passes it back to 
ADO, which will report the error to you. What is nice about ADO's error capabilities is 
that they can tell you where an error was generated and which object produced the error.  
An Error object is added to the Errors collection whenever an error occurs within ADO. 
The Errors collection is cleared right before a method that can generate an error is called. 
An Error object provides a description of the error, an error number, the name of the 
object that generated the error, the capability to access Windows help files based on the 
particular error, and error information from SQL data sources. An error object can also 
contain a warning that does not halt the execution of your application.  
The Error collection and the Error object model are discussed in detail in Chapter 7.  
2.3 Summary 
This chapter has explained the architecture behind the ActiveX Data Objects technology. 
The following is a list of some key items pointed out in this chapter:  
ADO offers a generic data-access interface that is used to communicate with a wide range of 
proprietary data sources and providers.  
With ADO, the burden of creating efficient data access is placed upon the individual data 
provider, not the data-access technology.  
The ADO architecture is comprised of nine major components. These components include the 
Connection object, the Command object, the Parameters collection and the Parameter object, the 
Recordset object, the Fields collection and Field object, the Record object, the Stream object, the 
Properties collection and the Property object, and finally, the Errors collection and the Error 
object.  
The rest of this book walks you through the nitty gritty of application development using 
the ActiveX Data Objects technology. You will next learn how to access ADO through 
various different development languages, and then we will dive into the actual 
components of ADO.  

IT-SC book 
38 
Chapter 3. Accessing ADO with Various 
Languages 
Because ActiveX Data Objects expose their properties by means of COM interfaces, they 
can be accessed by any language that can utilize COM. In this book, we will look at 
accessing ADO from Visual Basic, Visual C++, and Visual J++, since these are the most 
commonly used tools for developing ADO applications on the Windows operating 
system.  
In addition to these three languages, there are two scripting languages that are already 
well-established: VBScript and JScript. VBScript is a lightweight subset of Visual Basic 
that's designed specifically for adding script to HTML documents. JScript is Microsoft's 
implementation of JavaScript, designed for script development within HTML documents.  
Although ADO is meant to offer the same development interface to each language from 
which it is accessed, some inconsistencies arise because of differences in their syntax and 
the development environments in which they are used. In this chapter, we will take a look 
at each of the five languages and learn how to get started developing ADO applications in 
each.  
3.1 Accessing ADO with Visual Basic 
Visual Basic is probably the most popular language in which to develop applications for 
ADO. It is also the language used in the examples and code throughout this book. Visual 
Basic is a very easy language to understand and excellent for both beginners and 
advanced developers.  
3.1.1 Referencing ActiveX Data Objects 
To write an application in Visual Basic using ActiveX Data Objects, you must first tell 
Visual Basic about them by adding ADO to the list of references that Visual Basic uses to 
run an application. You may do this by selecting the Project 
References menu item so 
that the References dialog box appears, as shown in Figure 3-1. In the Available 
References list box, select the latest version of Microsoft ActiveX Data Objects Library 
that you have installed. Now you are ready to create and use ADO objects within your 
current Visual Basic application.  
Figure 3-1. The References dialog box of Visual Basic 

IT-SC book 
39
 
When redistributing ADO applications, you should use the MDAC redistributable 
package available for download from Microsoft's web site.  
3.1.2 Creating ActiveX Data Objects 
In Visual Basic, you can create new ADO objects by simply referencing the ADODB 
classes of the Microsoft ActiveX Data Objects Library. The following piece of code 
creates a Connection and a Recordset object in Visual Basic:  
' create a reference to a Connection object 
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
 
' create a reference to a Recordset object 
Dim rst AS ADODB.Recordset 
As with any other Visual Basic objects, you must instantiate them before they can be 
used, as in the following examples:  
' create a new instance of the Connection object 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
' create a new instance of the Recordset object 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
In the previous examples, the ADODB prefix to the ADO objects is used in case your 
Visual Basic development environment references another object of the same class name 
in a different class library. The following code illustrates how a DAO Recordset and an 
ADO Recordset can be created within the same project:  
' which object model is this from? 
Dim rst As Recordset 
 
' explicitly specifying the Data Access Object Model 
Dim rstDAO As DAO.Recordset 
 

IT-SC book 
40 
' explicitly specifying the ActiveX Data Object Model 
Dim rstADO As ADODB.Recordset 
If you know for a fact that no other class library listed in the References dialog box of 
your current Visual Basic application has the same class names as ADO, you may 
remove the ADODB prefix when declaring and instantiating object variables. However, 
if you are using more than one object model with the same class definitions (as in the 
previous example), not specifying the library from which the class should be derived tells 
VB to instantiate the class from the library that comes first in the list of references to the 
project.  
In Visual Basic, it is always a good idea to remove an object from memory once it is no 
longer being used. This is done by setting the object to Nothing, as follows:  
' remove the objects  
Set con = Nothing 
Set rst = Nothing 
3.1.3 Using ADO with Visual Basic: An Example 
So that you can visualize how to work with ADO objects in Visual Basic, Example 3-1 
uses ADO to open a connection to the Jet Biblio database and to return a recordset 
containing the names of its first ten authors. Each record is then written to a list box 
before both the Connection and Recordset objects are closed. Note that the example 
makes use of dynamic control creation supported by Visual Basic 6.0 or later; if you have 
an earlier version, simply delete the code that defines, instantiates, and sets the properties 
of the list box, and place a list box named lstAuthors on the form at design time.  
To begin, create a new Application EXE project, and open the Project 
References 
menu so that you see the References dialog box shown in Figure 3-1. Select the latest 
version of Microsoft ActiveX Data Objects that you have installed, and press the OK 
button.  
Now, replace the existing source code for Form1 with the code shown in Example 3-1, 
and run the application. That's all there is to it. Make sure that you have a Biblio.mdb 
database located at C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98, or if you have it in 
another location, simply change the path in the code that points to the Access database.  
Example 3-1. A Simple Visual Basic Example  
Option Explicit 
 
Private WithEvents lstAuthors As ListBox 
 
Private Sub Form_Load(  ) 
 
    ' create new instances of the Connection and Recordset objects 
     
    Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
    Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 

IT-SC book 
41
 
    ' instantiate the Connection and Recordset objects 
    Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
    Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
       
    ' create two strings to define the connection and the recordset 
     
    Dim sConString As String 
    Dim sSQLString As String 
             
    ' Create list box control 
     
    Set lstAuthors = Me.Controls.Add("vb.listbox", _ 
                                     "lstAuthors", _ 
                                     Me) 
     
    lstAuthors.Visible = True 
 
     
    ' open the BiblioDSN data source with the Connection object 
     
    sConString = "Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " _ 
               & "Data Source=C:\Program Files" _ 
                             & "\Microsoft Visual Studio" _ 
                             & "\VB98\Biblio.mdb" 
 
    con.Open sConString 
     
    Debug.Print "Connection opened." 
 
    ' create a Recordset object from a SQL string 
     
    sSQLString = "SELECT TOP 10 Author " & _ 
                 "FROM Authors" 
     
    Set rst = con.Execute(sSQLString) 
     
    Debug.Print "SQL statement processed." 
     
    ' retrieve all the data within the Recordset object 
     
    Debug.Print "Getting data now..." 
     
    Do Until (rst.EOF) 
        lstAuthors.AddItem rst("Author").Value 
        rst.MoveNext 
    Loop 
     
    Debug.Print "End of data." 
     
    ' close and remove the Recordset object from memory 
    
    rst.Close 
    Set rst = Nothing 
     
    Debug.Print "Closed and removed " _ 
              & "Recordset object from memory." 

IT-SC book 
42 
     
    ' close and remove the Connection object from memory 
     
    con.Close 
    Set con = Nothing 
     
    Debug.Print "Closed and removed " _ 
              & "Connection object from memory." 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub Form_Resize(  ) 
     
    ' this code is added for asthetics 
     
    lstAuthors.Top = 0 
    lstAuthors.Left = 0 
    lstAuthors.Width = Me.Width 
    lstAuthors.Height = Me.Height 
 
End Sub 
A lot of this information will not make much sense to you now, but it will start to as you 
begin to learn how to use ActiveX Data Objects from the rest of the chapters in this book. 
The important technique to notice from this example is how the ADO objects are created 
in the beginning of the code example, and how the ADO objects are removed at the end 
of the code example.  
3.2 Accessing ADO with Visual C++ 
Visual C++ is a much more difficult language and environment with which to develop 
applications for ActiveX Data Objects. Because it is so difficult, Microsoft is constantly 
trying to provide developers with easier ways to access ADO components.  
By far the easiest method (and the only method described here) is one that takes 
advantage of the #import keyword. This approach offers not only the most control to the 
developer, but it also allows the developer to code in a Visual Basic programming style.  
3.2.1 Referencing ActiveX Data Objects 
The #import keyword is used in Visual C++ applications to import information from a 
type library. To make ADO.ACcessible to your C++ code, use the following #import 
directive:  
#import <msado15.dll> no_namespace rename("EOF", "EOFile") 
This statement assumes that the path to msado15.dll (usually C:\Program Files\Common 
Files\System\ADO) is already set within the Visual C++ environment; if not, select the 
Directories tab of the Options dialog box (Tools 
Options), and add it.  

IT-SC book 
43
The #import statement does a couple of things. First, at compile time it creates a header 
file with a .tlh extension, which stands for Type Library Header. This header file is 
comprised of enumerated types and definitions for the objects contained in the type 
library for msado15.dll.  
Secondly, it creates a file with a .tli (Type Library Implementation) extension that 
contains the wrappers for each function in the object model defined by the msado15.dll 
type library.  
Finally, the rename attribute in the statement:  
rename("EOF", "EOFile")  
renames the EOF keyword from the type library and calls it EOFile so that it does not 
conflict with Visual C++'s definition of the EOF property.  
3.2.2 Creating ActiveX Data Objects 
In order to invoke an ActiveX Data Object, we must first start OLE so that we can use 
OLE DB. Remember that Chapter 2, showed that ADO was simply a wrapper around the 
OLE DB technology. We do this with the following piece of code:  
struct StartOLEProcess{ 
    StartOLEProcess(  ) { 
        ::CoInitialize(NULL); 
    } 
    ~StartOLEProcess(  ) { 
        ::CoUninitialize(  ); 
    } 
} _start_StartOLEProcess; 
Placing this structure definition anywhere in our application forces the application to call 
the _start_StartOLEProcess constructor once it has started. This constructor simply 
calls CoInitialize to initialize OLE. Once our application is complete, the destructor of 
_start_StartOLEProcess will be called. This in turn will call CoUninitialize, which 
will shut down OLE.  
The next thing we must do to create an ActiveX Data Object is to declare a pointer to the 
object we wish to create, as follows:  
// define a variable that will be used as a reference to the 
// Connection object and set it to NULL 
ADODB::_ConnectionPtr  con = NULL; 
 
// define a variable that will be used as a reference to the 
// Recordset object and set it to NULL 
ADODB::_RecordsetPtr  rst = NULL; 
We then can create an ActiveX Data Object by calling the CreateInstance function of our 
ADO pointer. This function returns a result of type HRESULT to inform us whether the 
creation of the object was successful. This is illustrated in the following code fragment:  

IT-SC book 
44 
' create a new instance of an ADO Connection object 
hr = con.CreateInstance(_  _uuidof(ADODB::Connection)); 
 
' create a new instance of an ADO Recordset object 
hr = rst.CreateInstance(_  _uuidof(ADODB::Recordset)); 
Finally, just as in Visual Basic, it is always a good idea to release objects once they are 
no longer needed. In Visual C++, we accomplish this with a couple of lines of code that 
look like the following:  
' remove the objects  
con = Null; 
rst = Null; 
3.2.3 Using ADO with Visual C++: An Example 
Now let's take a look at a fully functional example of a Visual C++ application that 
utilizes ActiveX Data Objects. To try the following code, create a new Win32 Console 
Application from within Visual C++, choosing the Simple option from the wizard, and 
replace the contents of the main .cpp file with the code shown in Example 3-2.  
Remember, just as with the Visual Basic example, make sure that a copy of Biblio.mdb is 
in the C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98 directory, or that you change the 
directory in the following source code to reflect the proper path of the Access database. 
In addition, if you are having trouble with this code, make sure that you have the 
MSADO15.DLL file in the C:\Program Files\Common Files\System\ado directory or that 
you have the proper directory entered in the source code.  
Example 3-2. A Simple Visual C++ Example  
#include "stdafx.h" 
#include <stdio.h> 
 
#import "C:\Program Files\Common Files\System\ado\MSADO15.dll" _ 
    rename("EOF", "EOFile") 
 
struct StartOLEProcess{ 
    StartOLEProcess(  ) { 
        ::CoInitialize(NULL); 
    } 
    ~StartOLEProcess(  ) { 
        ::CoUninitialize(  ); 
    } 
} _start_StartOLEProcess; 
 
void main(void) 
{ 
 
    // define our variables which will be used as references to the 
    // Connection and Recordset objects 
 
    ADODB::_ConnectionPtr  con = NULL; 
    ADODB::_RecordsetPtr   rec = NULL; 

IT-SC book 
45
 
    // define variables to read the Author field from the recordset 
     
    ADODB::FieldPtr        pAuthor; 
    _variant_t              vAuthor; 
    char                   sAuthor[40]; 
     
    // create two strings for use with the creation of a Connection 
    // and a Recordset object 
     
    bstr_t                 sConString; 
    bstr_t                 sSQLString; 
     
    // create a variable to hold the result to function calls 
     
    HRESULT                hr                = S_OK; 
     
    // long variable needed for Execute method of Connection object 
     
    VARIANT                *vRecordsAffected = NULL; 
 
    // create a new instance of an ADO Connection object 
     
    hr = con.CreateInstance(_  _uuidof(ADODB::Connection)); 
     
    printf("Connection object created.\n"); 
     
    // open the BiblioDSN data source with the Connection object 
     
    sConString = L"Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; "  
                 L"Data Source=C:\\Program Files\\" 
                                 L"Microsoft Visual Studio\\" 
                                 L"VB98\\Biblio.mdb"; 
     
    con->Open(sConString, L"", L"", -1); 
     
    printf("Connection opened.\n"); 
     
    // create a Recordset object from a SQL string 
     
    sSQLString = L"SELECT TOP 10 Author FROM Authors;"; 
     
    rec = con->Execute(sSQLString, 
                       vRecordsAffected, 
                       1); 
     
    printf("SQL statement processed.\n"); 
     
    // point to the Author field in the recordset 
     
    pAuthor = rec->Fields->GetItem("Author"); 
     
    // retrieve all the data within the Recordset object 
     
    printf("Getting data now...\n\n"); 
     
    while(!rec->EOFile) { 

IT-SC book 
46 
     
        // get the Author field's value and change it  
        // to a multibyte type 
        vAuthor.Clear(  ); 
         
        vAuthor = pAuthor->Value; 
         
        WideCharToMultiByte(CP_ACP, 
                            0, 
                            vAuthor.bstrVal, 
                            -1, 
                            sAuthor, 
                            sizeof(sAuthor), 
                            NULL, 
                            NULL); 
         
        printf("%s\n", sAuthor); 
         
        rec->MoveNext(  ); 
     
    } 
     
    printf("\nEnd of data.\n"); 
 
    // close and remove the Recordset object from memory 
     
    rec->Close(  ); 
    rec = NULL; 
     
    printf("Closed an removed the " 
           "Recordset object from memory.\n"); 
     
    // close and remove the Connection object from memory 
     
    con->Close(  ); 
    con = NULL; 
     
    printf("Closed and removed the " 
           "Connection object from memory.\n"); 
 
} 
Although much of the previous example will be very foreign to you until you have a 
thorough understanding of how to develop applications with ActiveX Data Objects, it is 
particularly important to notice how Visual C++ applications must convert datatypes 
returned by a field's value. In Example 3-2, a function called WideCharToMultiByte is 
used to convert a Variant datatype to a normal char string datatype (ASCII) so that it can 
in turn be passed to the printf function.  
3.3 Accessing ADO with Visual J++ 
Like Visual C++, Visual J++ offers a number of ways to access ActiveX Data Objects. 
By far the easiest and most powerful is to use the Windows Foundation Classes, which 
expose the ADO objects and their members.  

IT-SC book 
47
3.3.1 Referencing ActiveX Data Objects 
To use the ActiveX Data Objects within your Visual J++ application through the WFC, 
you must import the type library with the following statement:  
import com.ms.wfc.data.*; 
3.3.2 Creating ActiveX Data Objects 
In order to create an ActiveX Data Object in Visual J++, you must first create a variable 
to reference that object, as follows:  
// define a variable which will be used as a reference to the 
// Connection object 
Connection  con; 
 
// define a variable which will be used as a reference to the 
// Recordset object 
Recordset   rst; 
Next, you can create a new instance of an ActiveX Data Object by using the new keyword 
and assigning it to the variable reference you just defined:  
' create a new instance of an ADO Connection object 
con = new Connection(  ); 
 
' create a new instance of an ADO Recordset object 
rst = new Recordset(  ); 
These last two steps could be combined into one step with the following code (this is one 
of the beauties of Java):  
// define a variable which will be used as a reference to the 
// Connection object and create a new instance for that variable 
Connection  con = new Connection(  ); 
 
// define a variable which will be used as a reference to the 
// Recordset object and create a new instance for that variable 
Recordset   rst = new Recordset(  ); 
As in any language, it is always a good idea to remove instances of objects that are no 
longer being used. You can do this in Java with the following lines of code:  
' remove the objects  
con = null; 
rst = null; 
3.3.3 Using ADO with Visual J++: An Example 
Example 3-3 illustrates how an ActiveX Data Objects application may be written for the 
Visual J++ development environment. To create this project, open a Visual J++ Console 
Application project, and simply replace the code within the Class1.java file with the code 
from Example 3-3.  

IT-SC book 
48 
If you are having difficulty running this example, remember to have the Biblio.mdb file in 
the C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98 directory, or have the correct 
directory for the Access database entered in the source code that you run.  
Example 3-3. A Simple Visual J++ Example  
import com.ms.wfc.data.*; 
 
public class Class1 
{ 
 
    public static void main(String args[]) { 
 
 
     
        // define our variables which will be used as references to the 
        // Connection and Recordset objects 
 
        Connection  con = new Connection(  ); 
        Recordset   rst = new Recordset(  ); 
 
 
 
 
        // create two strings for use with the creation of a connection 
        // and a recordset 
 
     
        String      sConString; 
        String      sSQLString; 
 
        // create temporary variables for Execute method call 
 
        long        lRecordsAffected; 
        int         nCmdType; 
 
        // create a new instance of an ADO Connection object 
 
        System.out.println("Connection object created.\n"); 
 
        // open the BiblioDSN data source with the Connection object 
 
        sConString = "Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " + 
                     "Data Source=C:\\Program Files\\" + 
                                     "Microsoft Visual Studio\\" + 
                                     "VB98\\Biblio.mdb"; 
 
        con.open(sConString); 
 
 
 
 
 
        System.out.println("Connection opened.\n"); 
 
        // create a Recordset object from a SQL string 
 
 
 
        sSQLString = "SELECT TOP 10 Author FROM Authors"; 
 
 
 
        rst = con.execute(sSQLString); 
 
 
 
        System.out.println("SQL statement processed.\n"); 
 
        // retrieve all the data within the Recordset object 
 
 
 

IT-SC book 
49
        System.out.println("Getting data now...\n\n"); 
 
 
 
        while (!rst.getEOF(  )) { 
            System.out.println(rst.getField("Author").getValue(  )); 
            rst.moveNext(  ); 
        } 
 
 
 
        System.out.println("\nEnd of data.\n"); 
 
        // close and remove the Recordset object from memory 
 
 
 
        rst.close(  ); 
        rst = null; 
 
 
 
        System.out.println("Closed and removed " + 
                           "Recordset object from memory.\n"); 
 
        // close and remove the Connection object from memory 
 
 
 
        con.close(  ); 
        con = null; 
 
        System.out.println("Closed and removed " + 
                           "Connection object from memory.\n"); 
 
    } 
 
} 
Notice that with the WFC, the implementation of ADO is just as easy as the 
implementation of ADO within Visual Basic.  
3.4 Accessing ADO with VBScript 
ActiveX Data Objects can be accessed from within server-side scripts via Active Server 
Pages, better known as ASP (which in this case does not stand for Application Service 
Provider). Although this book does not go into ASP in detail,[1] a brief explanation of the 
technology is needed to understand how to develop VBScript code that uses ActiveX 
Data Objects.  
[1] For more detailed information, see ASP in a Nutshell, Second Edition by A. Keyton 
Weissinger (O'Reilly & Associates, 2000), which goes into depth about how to incorporate ADO 
into your ASP pages. In addition, Developing ASP Components by Shelley Powers (O'Reilly & 
Associates, 1999) covers accessing ADO from Visual Basic and Visual J++, discussing how to 
create an OLE DB simple data provider. 
When a client requests an ASP (Active Server Page) from a server, the ASP is "executed" 
before it is sent to the calling client. If there are any scripts embedded within the Active 
Server Page, they are executed. The result of this execution of different scripts is a static 
HTML page that can be viewed by virtually any web browser.  
Active X Data Objects therefore can be embedded within a server-side script in order to 
gather and display information for the client in a low-resource-intensive manner. Because 

IT-SC book 
50 
the ADO code is run on a server, the HTML page contains only the result, not the code. 
Once the page has been dynamically created by the server, it is passed back to the client 
for static reading. Because the web server does not pass actual recordsets, or rows of data, 
the potential savings in bandwidth can be considerable.  
3.4.1 Referencing ActiveX Data Objects 
In order to use ActiveX Data Objects from within your server-side scripts, your server 
must be running IIS (Internet Information Server) Version 3.0 or better. Along with IIS, 
you must of course have installed ADO, which is part of the MDAC installation. MDAC 
and IIS are included as part of the Windows 2000 operating system.  
Also, in order to use ADO constants, you should copy the file adovbs.inc to the directory 
in which your HTML pages that use ADO reside. You can reference the adovbs.inc file 
by adding the following line of code to your HTML source:  
<!--#include file="adovbs.inc"--> 
3.4.2 Creating ActiveX Data Objects 
In VBScript, the Variant is the only datatype. This type can represent just about any type 
of information that you could possibly want it to. Although in Visual Basic developers 
usually try to avoid using the Variant datatype at all costs, it is a necessary component of 
almost any VBScript code.  
The first step in creating our ActiveX Data Objects in VBScript, as in Visual Basic, is to 
define the variables that will be used as references to our ActiveX Data Objects:  
' define our variables which will be used as references to the 
' Connection and Recordset objects 
Dim con 
Dim rst 
You should notice that I did not use the As datatype notation in the variable-declaration 
statements. This is because VBScript does not allow us to define variables as a particular 
type. Because of this, we cannot directly create our variables as ADO objects. Instead, we 
must use late binding through the CreateObject method of the Server object to assign 
ActiveX Data objects to our Variant variables:  
' create a new instance of an ADO Connection object 
Set con = Server.CreateObject("ADODB.Connection") 
 
' create a new instance of an ADO Recordset object 
Set rst = Server.CreateObject("ADODB.Recordset") 
Just as in Visual Basic, it is always good practice to remove your objects from memory 
before your code ends:  
' remove the objects  
Set con = Nothing 
Set rst = Nothing 

IT-SC book 
51
3.4.3 Using ADO with VBScript: An Example  
Example 3-4 uses VBScript along with ActiveX Data Objects to create a static HTML 
sheet that can be passed from the Microsoft Internet Information Server to a client's web 
browser. It must be assigned a filename ending with an .asp extension and it must be 
stored in an IIS virtual directory so that IIS recognizes it as an Active Server Page.  
As with the other projects, ensure that the Biblio.mdb file is located in the C:\Program 
Files\Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98 directory or that the correct location is entered in the 
ASP page that you create.  
Example 3-4. A Simple ASP Example Using VBScript  
<% @LANGUAGE="VBScript" %> 
<% Option Explicit %> 
<!--#include file="adovbs.inc"--> 
 
<html> 
 
<head> 
<title>Example of ADO using VBScript</title> 
</head> 
 
<body> 
<% 
 
    ' define our variables which will be used as references to our 
    ' ActiveX Data Objects 
 
    Dim con    
    Dim rst 
 
 
    ' create two strings for use with the creation of a connection 
    ' and a recordset 
 
    Dim sConString 
    Dim sSQLString 
             
 
    ' create a new instance of an ADO Connection object 
 
    Set con = Server.CreateObject("ADODB.Connection") 
 
    Response.Write "Connection object created.<BR>" 
 
    ' open the BiblioDSN data source with the Connection object 
 
    sConString = "Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " _ 
               & "Data Source=C:\\Program Files\\" _ 
               &                 "Microsoft Visual Studio\\" _ 
               &                 "VB98\\Biblio.mdb" 
 
    con.Open sConString 

IT-SC book 
52 
 
    Response.Write "Connection opened.<BR>" 
 
    ' create a Recordset object from a SQL string 
 
    sSQLString = "SELECT TOP 10 Author FROM Authors" 
 
    Set rst = con.Execute(sSQLString) 
 
    Response.Write "SQL statement processed.<BR>" 
 
    ' retrieve all the data within the Recordset object 
 
    Response.Write "Getting data now...<BR><BR>" 
 
    Do Until (rst.EOF) 
        Response.Write rst("Author") & "<BR>" 
        rst.MoveNext 
    Loop 
 
    Response.Write "<BR>End of data.<BR>" 
 
    ' close and remove the Recordset object from memory 
 
    rst.Close 
    Set rst = Nothing 
 
    Response.Write "Closed and removed " _ 
                 & "Recordset object from memory.<BR>" 
 
    ' close and remove the Connection object from memory 
    con.Close 
    Set con = Nothing 
    Response.Write "Closed and removed " _ 
                 & "Connection object from memory.<BR>" 
 
%> 
 
</body> 
</html> 
As with the other examples shown so far, the previous code may not mean too much to 
you yet. Right now, remember that when implementing ADO with VBScript, there are 
two important things that you should always remember. The first is that all variables are 
created as Variant datatypes. The second is that you must use late binding through the use 
of the Server.CreateObject method in order to assign a new instance of an ActiveX Data 
Object to a Variant datatype.  
3.5 Accessing ADO with JScript 
The JScript implementation of ActiveX Data Objects is almost identical to that of 
VBScript. The only difference is in the syntax. JScript server-side scripts are used within 
Active Server Pages and (with the help of Internet Information Server) are issued to a 
client web browser.  

IT-SC book 
53
3.5.1 Referencing ActiveX Data Objects 
Once difference between the VBScript and JScript implementations of ADO is the name 
of the include file for ActiveX Data Objects. In JScript, the filename is adojavas.inc. To 
add it to an Active Server Page, type the following line:  
<!--#include file="adojavas.inc"--> 
3.5.2 Creating ActiveX Data Objects 
The first thing you need to do is create the variables that will hold your objects:  
// define a variable which will be used as a reference to the 
// Connection object 
var con; 
 
// define a variable which will be used as a reference to the 
// Recordset object 
var rec; 
Once you have the variable references, you can create ActiveX Data Objects with the 
CreateObject function of the Server object just as in VBScript:  
' create a new instance of an ADO Connection object 
con = Server.CreateObject("ADODB.Connection"); 
 
' create a new instance of an ADO Recordset object 
rst = Server.CreateObject("ADODB.Recordset"); 
Again, always remove your unused objects by setting them to null:  
' remove the objects  
con = null; 
rst = null; 
3.5.3 Using ADO with JScript: An Example  
The last example in this chapter is very similar to the VBScript example. The JScript 
program in Example 3-5 illustrates how an Active Server Page can use the JScript 
scripting language to create and instantiate ActiveX Data Objects on an Internet 
Information Server in order to create standard static HTML pages to be sent back to a 
requesting client. The ASP page should be stored in a file with an .asp extension that is 
located in an IIS virtual directory.  
Once again, ensure that the Biblio.mdb file resides in the C:\Program Files\Microsoft 
Visual Studio\VB98 directory or that the directory entered in the ASP source matches the 
location of the Access database file.  
Example 3-5. A Simple ASP Page Using JScript  
<% @LANGUAGE="JScript" %> 
<!--#include file="adojavas.inc"--> 

IT-SC book 
54 
<html> 
 
<head> 
    <title>Example of ADO using JScript</title> 
</head> 
 
<body> 
<script LANGUAGE="JScript" RUNAT="server"> 
 
    // define our variables which will be used as references to our 
    // ActiveX Data Objects and instantiate a new Connection object 
 
    var con = Server.CreateObject("ADODB.Connection"); 
    var rst; 
 
    Response.write("Connection object created.<BR>"); 
 
    // create two strings for use with the creation of a connection 
    // and a recordset 
 
    var sConString; 
    var sSQLString; 
 
     
 
    // create temporary variable for Execute method call 
 
    var lRecordsAffected; 
 
    // open the BiblioDSN data source with the Connection object 
 
    sConString = "Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " + 
                 "Data Source=C:\\Program Files\\" + 
                                 "Microsoft Visual Studio\\" + 
                                 "VB98\\Biblio.mdb"; 
 
    con.Open(sConString, "", "", -1); 
 
    Response.write("Connection opened.<BR>"); 
 
    // create a Recordset object from a SQL string 
 
    sSQLString = "SELECT TOP 10 Author FROM Authors"; 
 
    rst = con.Execute(sSQLString,   
                      lRecordsAffected,       
                      adCmdText); 
 
    Response.write("SQL statement processed.<BR>"); 
 
    // retrieve all the data within the Recordset object 
 
    Response.write("Getting data now...<BR><BR>"); 
 
    while (!rst.EOF) { 
        Response.write(rst("Author") + "<BR>");     
        rst.MoveNext(  );    
    } 

IT-SC book 
55
 
    Response.write("<BR>End of data.<BR>"); 
 
    // close and remove the Recordset object from memory 
 
    rst.Close(  ); 
    rst = null; 
 
    Response.write("Closed and removed " + 
                   "Recordset object from memory.<BR>"); 
 
    // close and remove the Connection object from memory 
 
    con.Close(  ); 
    con = null; 
 
    Response.write("Closed and removed " + 
                   "Connection object from memory.<BR>"); 
 
</script> 
 
</body> 
</html> 
3.6 Summary 
This chapter has explained how to access and use ActiveX Data Objects with the five 
most commonly used Microsoft development languages: Visual Basic, Visual C++, 
Visual J++, VBScript, and JScript. The following is a list of key points:  
Visual Basic is an easy language with which to develop ActiveX Data Object applications due to 
its minimal setup.  
Visual C++ offers a keyword, #import, to help create type library information for ADO 
enumerations (groups of constants) and interfaces. In addition, OLE must be instantiated before 
any ActiveX Data Objects are created at all.  
Visual J++ uses the Java Type Library Wizard to create type library information for ADO 
enumerations and interfaces.  
VBScript and JScript can be used through Active Server Pages to provide requesting clients with 
static HTML pages based upon an OLE DB data source.  
The interface for ActiveX Data Objects is extremely similar throughout all of the languages we 
have looked at, making it easy to move your skills from one language to another.  
The next chapter in this book, Chapter 4, deals with the most fundamental object within 
ADO, the Connection object. This object is used to create a session with a data source 
and to create different views with the data source's data.  

IT-SC book 
56 
Chapter 4. The Connection Object 
Within ADO, all activity is centered on the Connection object. A Connection object 
represents a unique physical connection to a data source. The characteristics of a 
connection are defined by the values that you pass to the Connection object.[1]  
[1] For a complete list of the Connection object's methods, see Chapter 13. 
4.1 Opening and Closing a Connection: Implicit Versus 
Explicit 
The Connection object is used to establish a unique physical connection to a given data 
source. This connection defines how you can obtain, interact with, and manipulate data 
from the specified source. While a Connection object is always required, you can choose 
whether to instantiate a connection explicitly or to allow ADO to create one implicitly on 
your behalf. 
4.1.1 Opening a Connection 
Example 4-1 illustrates how to open a Recordset object on a table in a data source 
without explicitly creating a Connection object. 
Example 4-1. Implicit Creation of a Connection Object  
' declare and instantiate a Recordset 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
 
' open the Recordset object and implicitly create a Connection 
rst.Open "Titles", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenForwardOnly, _ 
         adLockReadOnly, _ 
         adCmdTable 
' 
' do something 
 
' close the Recordset and clean up 
rst.Close 
Set rst = Nothing 
Don't worry about not understanding the entire example now -- I will explain everything 
soon. Do notice, however, how easy it is to open a table within a data source. Example 4-
1 relies on no other code to first establish a connection; the simple connection string 
DSN=BiblioDSN tells ADO that the table, Titles, is in the BiblioDSN data source. 
Some objects in ADO -- in particular, the Recordset and the Command objects -- do not 
require a pre-existing Connection object to operate. Both objects can read and write data 

IT-SC book 
57
to a data source, and both need a physical connection to a data source to do so. But the 
Recordset and the Command objects can create their own Connection objects in the 
background with information that you supply. The choice of declare and establish a 
connection with the Connection object or to let the Recordset or Command object handle 
the work for you. 
By using your own Connection object, you gain greater control over your data access and 
manipulation. For instance, with a Connection object, you can execute queries through 
stored procedures that reside in a data source or through SQL statements that you 
explicitly declare to your application at runtime. The Connection object also offers 
transaction management so that at critical points in your data-manipulation code, the 
integrity of your data source can be preserved if an error were to occur. 
Take a look at Example 4-2, which first explicitly creates and opens a Connection object 
to establish a connection before opening the table from the database. 
Example 4-2. Explicit Creation of a Connection Object  
' declare and instantiate a Connection and a Recordset 
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
 
' first establish a connection to the data source 
con.Open "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
' now open the recordset using the established Connection 
rst.Open "Titles", _ 
         con, _ 
         adOpenForwardOnly, _ 
         adLockReadOnly, _ 
         adCmdTable 
 
' do something 
 
' close the Recordset and clean up 
rst.Close 
Set rst = Nothing 
 
' close the Connection and clean up 
con.Close 
Set con = Nothing 
Notice the amount of extra work that is needed to open the Connection object before 
opening the Recordset object. Instead of passing a connection string to the Open method 
of the Recordset object, we are passing the already opened Connection object. This 
longer piece of code is accomplishing exactly what the previous example did in fewer 
lines. If a connection string is passed to a Recordset, the Recordset object creates its own 
Connection object from that string. If you pass a Connection object to a Recordset object, 
a new Connection object is not created. When opening a lot of Recordset objects, it 

IT-SC book 
58 
would be advantageous to pass a Connection object, not a connection string, so that only 
one connection to the database is created. Figure 4-1 shows us the difference between 
creating Connection objects implicitly versus explicitly. 
Figure 4-1. Implicit versus explicit creation of Connection objects 
 
Creating a Connection object should be done implicitly when you need only one or a 
small number of connections to a data source. If you plan on having multiple recordsets, 
or views, of the same data source, you should create your own Connection object, which 
requires fewer system resources and offers better control, as you will learn in the 
following sections. 
4.1.2 Closing a Connection 
Although I have not specifically defined how to close a Connection object, you have seen 
it in all of the code presented thus far. You can use the Close method to close or 
disconnect the Connection object from the data source. When you use this method, the 
physical connection is lost, but the Connection object itself remains. It can be reopened 
with the same properties, or those properties can be altered before the Connection object 
is opened again. To fully remove the Connection object from memory, to free resources, 
and to remain respectable in the development community, set the object to the value 
Nothing, as shown here: 
Set con = Nothing 
Now that you know how to both establish and break a connection to a data source, we 
should take a look at the various options that we can use when connecting. These options 
dictate the ways in which our data is presented to us in the rest of our applications. 
 
When you are using a client-side Connection object with Remote 
Data Service ( RDS), the connection with the server is not actually 

IT-SC book 
59
established by the Open method. Instead, RDS waits until a 
Recordset object is opened on the Connection object. 
 
4.2 Configuring Connections  
Let's now take a look at the different ways in which we can configure the connection to a 
data source through the use of a Connection object. In this section, I will explain how to 
work with connection strings and Data Source Names (DSNs). Connection strings are 
detailed explanations of how to open a data source, while Data Source Names are just a 
name of a definition that is stored on the current machine, by the operating system rather 
than the application. In addition, I will also talk about how to obtain the version number 
for the ADO library that you are using and how to set connection options such as the 
cursor location (whether to run the cursor on the server or the client), the default database 
setting, and the permission settings. 
4.2.1 Working with Connection Strings 
All connections revolve around connection strings, which contain all the pertinent 
information to ADO concerning the establishment of a connection to our data source. The 
connection string comprises a number of arguments. There are five standard ADO 
arguments that can be used in a connection string: 
Provider  
Identifies the name of the data provider that you wish to use to establish a connection to a data 
source. The data provider indicates the type of data source. The Provider argument can be set to 
such things as Microsoft's OLE DB provider for SQL Server (SQLOLEDB.1) or Microsoft's OLE 
DB provider for Jet (Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0). (I will talk about the various types of data 
providers later in this chapter.) 
File Name  
Specifies an exact filename (including a path) with which the connection should be established. 
Because this argument forces ADO to load the data provider that is associated with the data-
source type of the file, the Provider argument cannot be used with the File Name argument; when 
the File Name argument is used, the data provider is implicit rather than explicit. 
Remote Provider  
Used only when implementing RDS from a client-side Connection object to specify the name of a 
data provider. As a matter of fact, when using a client-side Connection object, you can use only 
the Remote Provider and Remote Server arguments. 
Remote Server  
Used only when implementing RDS from a client-side Connection object to specify the path to a 
remote server. As a matter of fact, when using a client-side Connection object, you can use only 
the Remote Provider and Remote Server arguments. 
URL  

IT-SC book 
60 
Used to specify a resource, such as a file or a directory, as the data source. When using this 
argument, it must be in the form of an absolute URL (for example, http://JROFF-
NTLT/Documents/ADO.DOC.01). 
The ConnectionString is a public property of the Connection object that is set before the 
connection is opened. Here is an example of a ConnectionString that could be used to 
connect to an Oracle database, using the username of BigBear and the password, 1810: 
"Provider=MSDAORA.1; Data Source=WidgetOracle; User ID=BigBear; 
Password=1810;" 
The default data provider is the Microsoft OLE DB provider for ODBC drivers (or 
MSDASQL.1). Because it is the default provider, you don't necessarily have to name it in 
the ConnectionString. The following two connection strings are identical: 
"Provider=MSDASQL.1; Data Source=WidgetsDSN; User ID=BigBear; 
Password=1810;" 
and: 
"Data Source=WidgetsDSN; User ID=BigBear; Password=1810;" 
Example 4-3 shows the ways in which we can use the ConnectionString when we open 
the Connection object.  
Example 4-3. The Two Different Ways of Opening a Connection Object  
' declare and instantiate a Connection 
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
' set the Connection String property 
con.ConnectionString = "Provider=MSDASQL.1; " _ 
                     & "Data Source=BiblioDSN" 
     
' open the Connection object using the connection string that was just 
set 
con.Open 
     
' display the version of ADO 
MsgBox "Connection opened with ADO Version " & con.Version 
 
' close the Connection 
con.Close 
 
' set the Connection String property with the Open method 
con.Open "Provider=MSDASQL.1; " _ 
       & "Data Source=BiblioDSN" 
         
' print the version of ADO and close the Connection object 
MsgBox "Connection opened with ADO Version " & con.Version 
 
' close the Connection and clean up 
con.Close 
Set con = Nothing 

IT-SC book 
61
In the first part of the code, you can see that we set the ConnectionString as a property of 
the Connection object, and in the second part of the code, we passed the 
ConnectionString as an argument to the Open method of the Connection object. Either 
way works, and there is no real benefit to using one method over another. 
The ConnectionString property of the Connection object has another useful function, 
however. Because it has read ability as well as write ability, we can use the 
ConnectionString property to view the ConnectionString used by a Connection object 
that was implicitly created with another object, such as a Recordset object, as shown in 
Example 4-4. 
Example 4-4. Reading the ConnectionString Property of the Connection 
Object  
' declare and instantiate a Connection and a Recordset 
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
 
' open the recordset, creating a Connection object implicitly 
rst.Open "Titles", _ 
         "Provider=MSDASQL.1; Data Source=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenForwardOnly, , _ 
         adCmdTable 
 
' set con to the Connection object that was just created by 
' the Recordset object in the above Method call 
Set con = rst.ActiveConnection 
 
' print the ConnectionString of the implicitly created Connection 
object 
Debug.Print con.ConnectionString 
 
' close and clean up the Recordset object 
rst.Close 
Set rst = Nothing 
 
' close and clean up the Connection object 
con.Close 
Set con = Nothing 
After running the previous code, the ConnectionString property of the implicitly created 
Connection object is printed to the Immediate window of the VB IDE. You should get an 
output message similar to the following: 
Provider=MSDASQL.1;Data Source=BiblioDSN; 
Extended Properties="DSN=BiblioDSN;DBQ=C:\Inetpub\wwwroot\BIBLIO.MDB; 
DriverId=25;FIL=MS Access;MaxBufferSize=2048;PageTimeout=5;" 

IT-SC book 
62 
By reading the ConnectionString property, you can determine what settings are being 
used when connecting to a data source. For instance, in the previous example, you could 
parse the String for MaxBufferSize and see that it was set to 2048. 
4.2.2 Working with Data Source Names 
Another way in which to use the Open method of the Connection object is for the 
ConnectionString to be set to a valid Data Source Name (DSN). Valid DSNs are 
maintained in the ODBC applet in the Windows Control Panel. This is where all of the 
information regarding connections is stored. Using a DSN allows you to not worry about 
the actual definition of the connection string in your application. The details (such as the 
data-source type and location) are maintained by the ODBC applet on the system you are 
running your application. When using a DSN, ADO looks up the connection information 
through the ODBC applet. 
4.2.2.1 Installing the DSNs 
Throughout the rest of this book, I will be using two DSNs. The first of these two DSNs 
is BiblioDSN, which uses an ODBC driver for Microsoft Access to connect to the 
Biblio.mdb database usually located in the C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual 
Studio\VB98 directory when you install Visual Basic. The second is SQLNorthwindDSN, 
which uses an ODBC driver for SQL Server to connect to the Northwind database, 
installed with SQL Server. 
To set up the BiblioDSN: 
Open the Data Sources ODBC setup utility within the Control Panel (for Windows 9x and NT) or 
under Administrative Tools within the Control Panel for Windows 2000. 
From this dialog box, select the System DSN tab, and click on the Add button so that you get the 
Wizard shown in Figure 4-2. 
Figure 4-2. The Create New Data Source Wizard 

IT-SC book 
63
 
From here, select the Microsoft Access driver, and click Finish. This should bring up the ODBC 
Microsoft Access Setup dialog box shown in Figure 4-3. Fill out the Data Source Name 
(BiblioDSN) and the database (by clicking the Select button and navigating to the Biblio.mdb 
file). 
Figure 4-3. The ODBC Microsoft Access Setup dialog box 
 
Once you have entered this information, hit the OK button to finish. 
To set up the SQLNorthwindDSN: 
Open the Data Sources ODBC setup utility within the Control Panel (for Windows 9x and NT) or 
under Administrative Tools within the Control Panel for Windows 2000. 
From this dialog box, select the System DSN tab, and click the Add button so that you get the 
Wizard shown in Figure 4-1. Next, select the SQL Server driver and click the Finish button. 
You should see the "Create a New Data Source to SQL Server" dialog box, as shown in Figure 

IT-SC book 
64 
4-4. Fill in the Data Source Name (SQLNorthwindDSN), and choose your SQL Server of choice 
(I use my local machine). 
Figure 4-4. The Create New Data Source to SQL Server dialog box 
 
Click the Next button, which brings up the panel in Figure 4-5. Here you must fill in a username 
and password to log on to the server. If you can click the Next button again, you don't have a 
problem with these settings. 
Figure 4-5. Specifying username and password information 
 
The next screen, shown in Figure 4-6, allows you to choose your default database. Choose the 
Northwind database now, and click the Next button and then the Finish button so that you can see 
the summary screen shown in Figure 4-7. Here you can test your data source. 

IT-SC book 
65
Figure 4-6. Setting the default database 
 
As soon as you choose the OK button, your new DSN is created for you to use. 
Figure 4-7. Summary screen  
 
4.2.2.2 Opening a connection with a DSN 
Once a DSN has been created, all we have to supply ADO is the name of this DSN and 
logon information, as shown in Example 4-5. 
Example 4-5. Connecting to a Data Source Using a DSN  

IT-SC book 
66 
' instantiate a new instance of the Connection 
Set con = ADODB.Connection 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
' establish a connection using only a DSN name and logon information 
con.Open "BiblioDSN", _ 
         "Tammi", _ 
         "Rocks" 
 
' print the ConnectionString used to establish this connection 
Debug.Print con.ConnectionString 
 
' close and clean up 
con.Close 
Set con = Nothing 
This code calls the Open method of the Connection object with a ConnectionString 
containing only a DSN name. In addition, the arguments Tammi and Rocks were used as 
the username and password. After running the previous code, you should see output 
similar to the following in the Immediate window of the VB IDE: 
Provider=MSDASQL.1;Password=Rocks;User ID=Tammi;Data Source=BiblioDSN; 
Extended Properties="DSN=BiblioDSN;DBQ=C:\Inetpub\wwwroot\BIBLIO.MDB; 
DriverId=25;FIL=MS Access;MaxBufferSize=2048;PageTimeout=5;PWD=Rocks; 
UID=admin;" 
Obviously we did not send all of this information to ADO through the ConnectionString, 
but regardless, it is there. The Provider argument was obtained through the ODBC applet 
in the Windows Control Panel along with some of the other information. These are the 
default values of the Connection object. 
ADO determines that the ConnectionString argument being passed through the Open 
method is a DSN if it does not contain an equal sign (=). 
It should be noted that you can use any valid connection string when opening a 
Connection object, not just a DSN. For simplicity in our examples for this chapter, I have 
chosen to use DSNs until you learn more about the details of a connection string. 
4.2.3 Setting Connection Options 
There are four connection properties that we can specify via the Connection object: 
Default database  
The DefaultDatabase property allows you to specify which database, on a multiple-database 
connection, is to be the default. 
Data access permissions  
By using the Mode property, you can either grant or read the permissions for accessing data for 
the given connection. In other words, you can determine whether the current user has read, write, 
or both read and write access to data over the given connection. In addition, you can deny others 
any of these rights. 

IT-SC book 
67
Timeout setting  
The ConnectionTimeout property provides a way of setting the number of seconds for which 
ADO will wait until it can establish a connection with the data source we specify. 
Cursor location  
The CursorLocation property specifies where the data will be processed when referenced by your 
application. We can specify that the cursor will reside either on the server (server-side) or on the 
client (client-side). 
These properties are described in the following sections. 
4.2.3.1 Default database 
When the particular data provider that you are using allows the use of multiple databases 
per connection, I recommend that you set the DefaultDatabase property (shown in 
Example 4-6), because if you are using a DSN, it is possible that it will be pointing to a 
database that you do not care to use. This property indicates the database that is used for 
default access, via SQL statements, throughout any use of the Connection object. You 
should also set the DefaultDatabase for Recordset and Command objects that have been 
created with their ActiveConnection property set to such a Connection object. 
If your data provider allows the use of multiple databases per connection, you must 
specify the name of alternate databases in SQL statements when you access them. All 
other statements (those that do not specify a database name) will revert to the default 
database specified by the DefaultDatabase property. 
Example 4-6. Displaying the Default Database  
' instantiate a new instance of the Connection 
Set con = ADODB.Connection 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
    
' open a connection on a given DSN (Data Source Name) 
con.Open "SQLNorthwindDSN" 
 
' display the name of the current default database 
MsgBox "The default database is: " & con.DefaultDatabase 
 
' set the new default database of the currently open Connection object 
con.DefaultDatabase = "Master" 
 
' display the name of the current default database 
MsgBox "The default database is: " & con.DefaultDatabase 
 
' close and clean up 
con.Close 
Set con = Nothing 

IT-SC book 
68 
In Example 4-6, the output of the DefaultDatabase property is Master, exactly as it is 
shown being set. The location (full qualified path) and filename (minus the database file 
extension) is reported. 
If your data provider does not allow the use of multiple databases per connection, the 
DefaultDatabase property is read-only to your application. If your data provider does not 
support the DefaultDatabase property, either an empty string will be returned, or you will 
get an adErrFeatureNotAvailable error. 
 
The DefaultDatabase property is not available to a client-side 
Connection object when using RDS. 
 
4.2.3.2 Data-access permissions 
With the Mode property, you can specify the types of permissions that are allowed on a 
connection. The Mode property can be set only while the Connection object is closed and 
is read-only once it is opened. 
The Mode property can be set to one of the values specified by the ConnectModeEnum 
enumeration, which establishes the permissions for reading and writing data to the 
connection. The values of ConnectModeEnum are shown in Table 4-1. 
Table 4-1. The ConnectModeEnum Values  
Constant 
Value 
Description 
AdModeUnkown 
0 
Default. Either the permissions of the current 
connection have not been set yet, or they are 
undeterminable. 
AdModeRead 
1 
The user has read-only permission to the current 
connection. 
AdModeWrite 
2 
The user has write-only permission to the current 
connection. 
adModeReadWrite 
3 
The user has both read and write permissions to the 
current connection. 
adModeShareDenyRead 4 
Others are prevented from opening the current 
connection with read permissions. 
adModeShareDenyWrite 8 
Others are prevented from opening the current 

IT-SC book 
69
connection with write permissions. 
adModeShareExclusive 12 
Others are prevented from opening the current 
connection with either read or write permissions. 
adModeShareDenyNone 16 
Others are prevented from opening the current 
connection with any permissions at all. 
adModeRecursive 
&H400000 Used with the ShareDeny constants so that the 
permissions are recursively set to all children 
resources, such as in a file structure. 
Example 4-7 demonstrates the setting of the Mode property on a Connection object. In 
addition, this example displays a message based on the current setting of the Mode 
property. 
Example 4-7. Setting Data-Access Permissions  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Dim sPermissions As String 
 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
     
' do not allow other users to write to the data source 
con.Mode = adModeShareDenyWrite 
 
' open the Connection object with a connection string 
con.Open "DSN=SQLNorthwindDSN" 
 
' print the current Mode property setting once the connection object 
' is opened to verify the permissions 
Select Case (con.Mode) 
 
    Case adModeUnknown: 
        sPermissions = "Unkown or unset permissions." 
     
    Case adModeRead: 
        sPermissions = "User cannot read data." 
     
    Case adModeWrite: 
        sPermissions = "User cannot write data." 
     
    Case adModeReadWrite: 
        sPermissions = "User cannot read nor write data." 
     
    Case adModeShareDenyRead: 
        sPermissions = "Other users cannot read data." 
     
    Case adModeShareDenyWrite: 
        sPermissions = "Other users cannot write data." 

IT-SC book 
70 
     
    Case adModeShareExclusive: 
        sPermissions = "Other users cannot read or write data." 
     
    Case adModeShareDenyNone: 
        sPermissions = "Other users cannot do anything with data." 
 
End Select 
 
' close the connection to the data source 
con.Close 
 
' display permissions 
MsgBox sPermissions 
 
' clean up 
Set con = Nothing 
The Mode property is very useful when you need to restrict other users from accessing 
your data source. This usually occurs when yours needs to be the only application that 
allows changes to a particular database or when it is important that other applications do 
not change information that your application has changed. 
 
The constant value of adModeUnknown is the only valid value for the 
Mode property when you are using a client-side Connection object with 
RDS. 
 
4.2.3.3 Timeout setting 
The Connection object uses the value of the ConnectionTimeout property to define the 
maximum number of seconds that ADO has to attempt to open a connection to a data 
source. The default value for this property is 15, or 15 seconds. 
If the value of the ConnectionTimeout property is set to zero, then ADO will wait forever 
for a connection to complete. By setting the value of this property, you can abandon a 
connection when the network is too busy for this type of operation to take place. If the 
connection does not complete within the specified time interval, then an error is 
generated and ADO cancels the attempt. 
The code in Example 4-8 illustrates how you can use the ConnectionTimeout property to 
abandon the opening of a connection to a data source. Notice how this subroutine handles 
errors. ADO can produce multiple errors; therefore, we must loop through a collection of 
errors and handle each one. 
Example 4-8. Handling a Connection Timeout  
Public Sub OpenDataSource(  ) 
On Error GoTo ERR_OpenDataSource: 
 

IT-SC book 
71
    Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
    Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
     
    ' set the timeout period to 2 seconds 
    con.ConnectionTimeout = 2 
     
    ' attempt to open the Connection object with a connection string 
    con.Open "DSN=SQLNorthwindDSN" 
     
    ' 
    ' do something here 
    ' 
     
    ' close the connection 
    con.Close 
         
' clean up 
GoTo CleanUp: 
 
' an error has occurred 
ERR_OpenDataSource: 
 
    Dim oErr As ADODB.Error 
     
    ' there can be multiple errors in ADO; 
    ' therefore, we must look at all of them 
    For Each oErr In con.Errors 
         
        Select Case (Err.Number) 
         
            Case adErrStillConnecting: 
                ' timeout error 
                MsgBox "The connection timed out on attempting to 
open." 
                 
            Case Else: 
                ' other type of error 
                MsgBox "Other Error: " & oErr.Description 
         
        End Select 
         
    Next oErr 
     
' this code will be run whether or not there was an error 
CleanUp: 
 
    ' clean up 
    Set con = Nothing 
 
End Sub 
The ConnectionTimeout property is read-only once the Connection object is opened, and 
it can be used only if the specified data provider supports it. Writing to the 
ConnectionTimeout property while the Connection object is open will generate an error. 
4.2.3.4 Cursor location 

IT-SC book 
72 
When opening a Connection object on a given data source, you can indicate whether you 
would like either a client-side or a server-side cursor for that object. Client-side cursors 
indicate that local cursor libraries will process the data from your connection locally. 
Server-side cursors indicate that the data provider will process the data from your 
connection on the server. 
Your decision to use either client-side or server-side cursors should be based on the 
relative abilities of your local cursor libraries and those of the data provider. Usually, you 
would change the location of your cursor to take advantage of special features not 
available in another location. 
Changing the location of your cursor is done with the CursorLocation property. By 
setting the CursorLocation property to adUseClient (or adUseClientBatch for earlier 
versions of ADO), you indicate to ADO that you want your data to be client-side, 
supplied by a local cursor library. By setting this property to adUseServer, which is the 
default, you indicate that you wish ADO to use the data provider or driver-supplied 
cursors for the given data source, residing wherever the data source resides. 
CursorLocation is a read-write property. However, if you change its value, you will not 
see its effects until the Connection object's Open method is called. In other words, if the 
Connection object is already open when you change the value of the CursorLocation 
property, the location of the cursor will not change until that Connection object is closed 
and then reopened with the Open method, as Example 4-9 illustrates. 
Example 4-9. Changing the Cursor Location  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
' set the ConnectionString property to use our DSN 
con.ConnectionString = "SQLNorthwindDSN" 
 
' set the cursor location to client-side 
con.CursorLocation = adUseClient 
 
' open the Connection object 
con.Open 
 
' we are using a client-side client 
 
' do something here 
 
' change the cursor location 
con.CursorLocation = adUseServer 
 
' this has no effect yet until we reopen the Connection object 
 
con.Close 
 
con.Open 
 
' now we are using a server-side client 

IT-SC book 
73
' 
' do something here 
 
' close the current connection 
con.Close 
 
' clean up 
Set con = Nothing 
 
When you are using a client-side Connection object with RDS, the 
CursorLocation property can be set only to adUseClient. 
 
4.2.4 Determining ADO Version Number and Connection State 
You can determine the version of ADO that you are using with the Version property of 
the Connection object. The value returned by the Version property is a read-only string. 
The following code fragment prints the version of ADO: 
Dim con as ADODB.Connection 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
' print the current version of ActiveX Data Objects 
Debug.Print con.Version 
You can also determine whether the current connection is open or closed by reading the 
value of the State property of the Connection object. This property returns a long value 
that can be used to check the state of the Connection object. The connection can either be 
opened or closed, as represented by the constants adStateOpen and adStateClosed, 
respectively. 
The following piece of code displays the state of the current Connection object: 
If (con.State & adStateClosed) Then 
    Debug.Print "The con object is currently closed." 
End If 
 
If (con.State & adStateConnecting) Then 
    Debug.Print "The con object is currently connecting." 
End If 
 
If (con.State & adStateExecuting) Then 
    Debug.Print "The con object is currently executing." 
End If 
 
If (con.State & adStateFetching) Then 
    Debug.Print "The con object is currently fetching." 
End If 
 
If (con.State & adStateOpen) Then 
    Debug.Print "The con object is currently open." 
End If 

IT-SC book 
74 
4.3 Choosing a Data Provider 
As of this writing, Microsoft supplies ten OLE DB providers with ADO. These providers 
are listed in Table 4-2. Other companies supply their own OLE DB providers. In this 
book, I will focus on the OLE DB provider for ODBC drivers and the OLE DB providers 
for SQL Server and Microsoft Access. 
Table 4-2. Available Microsoft OLE DB Providers  
Provider 
Value 
Microsoft OLE DB provider for ODBC 
MSDASQL.1 
Microsoft OLE DB provider for Microsoft Indexing Service MSIDXS 
Microsoft OLE DB provider for Microsoft Active Directory 
Service 
ADSDSOObject 
Microsoft OLE DB provider for Microsoft Jet 
Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0
Microsoft OLE DB provider for SQL Server 
SQLOLEDB 
Microsoft OLE DB provider for Oracle 
MSDAORA 
Microsoft OLE DB provider for Internet Publishing 
MSDAIPP.DSO 
Microsoft Data Shaping Service for OLE DB (ADO Service 
Provider) 
MSDataShape 
Microsoft OLE DB Persistence Provider (ADO Service 
Provider) 
MSPersist 
Microsoft OLE DB Remoting Provider (ADO Service 
Provider) 
MS Remote 
The OLE DB provider for ODBC, supplied by Microsoft, is probably the most popular 
type of data source used today and is the default data provider of ADO. In other words, if 
you do not specify a data provider before opening a connection, ADO will assume you 
wish to use the ODBC OLE DB data provider. The ODBC OLE DB provider allows 
ADO to access any data source that has an ODBC-compliant driver, including, among 

IT-SC book 
75
others, flat files, Microsoft SQL Server, Microsoft Access, Microsoft FoxPro, Paradox, 
dBase, Oracle databases, and Microsoft Excel worksheets. 
To explicitly choose the OLE DB provider for ODBC, set the value of the Provider 
argument in the ConnectionString of the Connection object to MSDASQL.1, as shown in 
Example 4-10. Additionally, this example illustrates the use of the ConnectionString to 
include arguments for usernames (UID) and passwords (PWD) with Connection objects 
con1 and con2. 
Example 4-10. Specifying the Microsoft OLE DB Provider for ODBC Drivers  
Dim con1 As ADODB.Connection 
Dim con2 As ADODB.Connection 
Dim con3 As ADODB.Connection 
Dim con4 As ADODB.Connection 
 
Set con1 = New ADODB.Connection 
Set con2 = New ADODB.Connection 
Set con3 = New ADODB.Connection 
Set con4 = New ADODB.Connection 
 
' connect without using a DSN (Data Source Name) 
con1.Open "Provider=MSDASQL.1; " _ 
        & "DRIVER={SQL Server}; " _ 
        & "Database=Northwind; " _ 
        & "Server=JROFF-NTLT; " _ 
        & "UID=sa; " _ 
        & "PWD=" 
     
' connect using a DSN and use the default provider 
con2.Open "DSN=BiblioDSN; " _ 
        & "UID=BigBear; " _ 
        & "PWD=1810" 
     
' connect using a DSN and specify the provider 
con3.Open "Provider=MSDASQL.1; " _ 
        & "DSN=BiblioDSN; " _ 
        & "UID=Jason; " _ 
        & "PWD=1810; " _ 
         
' connect using a File DSN and specify the provider 
con4.Open "Provider=MSDASQL.1; " _ 
        & "FileDSN=C:\Program Files\Common Files\ODBC\" _ 
                   & "Data Sources\BiblioDSN.dsn" 
 
' close all connections 
con1.Close 
con2.Close 
con3.Close 
con4.Close 
 
' clean up all connections 
Set con1 = Nothing 
Set con2 = Nothing 
Set con3 = Nothing 

IT-SC book 
76 
Set con4 = Nothing 
Data providers offer their own options for the syntax of the ConnectionString argument 
and property of the Connection object. The OLE DB provider for ODBC drivers is no 
exception. There are two ways to access a data source with this data provider through the 
connection string -- the first with a DSN, the second without. 
The following can be used to correctly specify a DSN: 
"Provider=MSDASQL.1; DSN=dsn_name; [DATABASE=database_name]; " _ 
& "UID=user_name; PWD=password" 
 
  "Provider=MSDASQL.1; FileDSN=dsn_file; [DATABASE=database_name]; " _ 
& "UID=user_name; PWD=password" 
As you can see, either a DSN name or a DSN filename can be given. The Provider 
argument is shown in both of these examples, but it is optional, since the OLE DB 
provider for ODBC drivers is the default data provider for ADO. 
The DATABASE argument is optional. It refers to the name of the database to be used with 
the DSN, although one is already provided within the DSN itself. The DSN must be 
specified in the ODBC applet in the Windows Control Panel. Using the DATABASE 
argument in a DSN connection string actually alters the DSN definition, so it is important 
to use it whenever you can to ensure that you are getting the database that you need, in 
case someone else has altered the DSN definition. 
An alternative syntax for an ODBC drivers data-provider connection string, a DSN-less 
connection, is as follows: 
"Provider=MSDASQL.1; DRIVER=driver; SERVER=server; " _ 
& "DATABASE=database; UID=user_name; PWD=password;" 
Connections of the preceding types do not need to include the Provider argument, 
because the OLE DB data provider for ODBC drivers is assumed to be the default. The 
DRIVER argument refers to the actual data-source driver for the connection. The SERVER 
argument refers to the name of the server chosen as the data source, and the DATABASE 
argument refers to the database name within the chosen server. See also the portion of 
code that opens the con1 Connection object in Example 4-10.  
4.4 Executing Commands 
ADO can work with data, or execute commands, in several ways: 
Data can be queried or gathered based on a specific list of qualifications (selection commands). 
Data can be manipulated with an action query that usually changes data in some common way 
throughout your data source (update commands). 
Data can be restructured with statements that alter the way the data resides in a particular data 
source (restructuring commands). 

IT-SC book 
77
These three types of data gathering and manipulation can be done through either SQL 
statements or stored procedures. The Connection object allows the execution of both SQL 
statements and stored procedures directly, through the use of an Execute method. The 
Execute method can also be used to open an entire table from your data source. 
The following sections describe in detail execution of commands. 
4.4.1 The Execute Method 
There are two different syntaxes for the Connection object's Execute method. The first is 
for commands that return information in the form of a Recordset object (see Chapter 5 ), 
and the second is for commands that do not return anything. 
The correct syntax for a call to the Execute method that returns a Recordset object is: 
Set recordset = connection.Execute (CommandText, RecordsAffected, 
Options) 
The correct syntax for a method call that does not return any records is: 
connection.Execute CommandText, RecordsAffected, Options 
Table 4-3 describes each of the components found in these syntaxes. 
Table 4-3. The Components of the Execute Method  
Component 
Description 
connection 
A currently open Connection object. 
CommandText 
A string value containing a SQL statement, a table name, or a stored 
procedure command. 
RecordsAffected Optional. A long value that returns the number of records that were 
affected by the call to the Execute method. 
Options 
Optional. A long value that indicates the precise content of the 
CommandText argument. See Table 4-4. 
Table 4-4 describes the different values for the Options argument of the Execute method, 
which are values of the CommandTypeEnum. 
Table 4-4. The CommandTypeEnum Values  
Constant 
Value Description 
adCmdText 
1 
Indicates that the CommandText string is a data provider-specific 

IT-SC book 
78 
command and will pass it onto that data provider for evaluation and 
execution. This value would be used when passing a SQL statement 
to a SQL data provider. 
adCmdTable 
2 
Indicates that the CommandText string is evaluated as a name of a 
table in the current database. This type of CommandText string, 
when used with the Execute method of the Connection object, will 
result in a recordset that includes the entire table specified. 
adCmdStoredProc 4 
Indicates that the CommandText string is evaluated as a name of a 
stored procedure located within the current database. 
adCmdUnknown 
8 
Default. Indicates that you have no clue what kind of 
information you are passing to the data provider and that the 
data provider will have to figure it out itself. This usually 
indicates that the Options flag was not set. 
adCmdFile 
256 Indicates that the CommandText string is evaluated as a name of a 
file that contains a previously persisted Recordset object. This 
option can be used only with the Open and Requery methods. 
adCmdTableDirect 512 Indicates that the CommandText string is evaluated as a name of a 
table that you are requesting all of the columns to be returned. This 
option can be used only with the Open and Requery methods. 
If you do not specify a value for the Options argument, then ADO has to communicate 
with your data provider to determine whether the CommandText string is a SQL statement, 
a stored procedure name, or a table name. This could take a considerable amount of time; 
therefore, it is recommended that you always specify the kind of information that you are 
sending to the data provider through the CommandText argument. 
Example 4-11 illustrates how the Execute method can be used to execute each type of 
command matching those indicated in Table 4-4. 
Example 4-11. Executing Different Command Types with the Connection 
Object  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
 
' use this variable to record the number of records affected by the 
' Execute method 
Dim lRecordsAffected As Long 

IT-SC book 
79
 
' open the DSN (Data Source Name) 
con.Open "SQLNorthwindDSN" 
 
' execute a SQL statement on the database 
Set rst = con.Execute("SELECT * FROM Orders;", _ 
                      lRecordsAffected, _ 
                      adCmdText) 
 
' execute an open table command 
Set rst = con.Execute("Orders", _ 
                      lRecordsAffected, _ 
                      adCmdTable) 
 
rst.Close 
Set rst = Nothing 
 
' execute a stored proceudre 
' notice that we did not specify the options argument, therefore, 
' the data provider must determine what type of command this is 
con.Execute "Invoices" 
 
con.Close 
Set con = Nothing 
The OLE DB provider for ODBC can utilize the CommandText argument of the Execute 
method to access stored procedures with a special syntax. An example of this syntax 
appears in Example 4-12 where it is used to execute a Microsoft Access select query. (I 
will discuss the CommandText property of the Command object in Chapter 7.) 
The Parameters collection belongs only to a Command object, not to a Connection object. 
For this reason, we cannot pass parameters to stored procedures via a Connection object. 
We can execute queries that do not require parameters, using this special syntax or by 
naming the stored procedure as in Example 4-12. 
Example 4-12. Executing Stored Procedures  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
 
Dim lRecordsAffected As Long 
 
con.Open "SQLNorthwindDSN" 
 
' use just the name of the stored procedure 
Set rst = con.Execute("[Ten Most Expensive Products]", _ 
                      lRecordsAffected, _ 
                      adCmdStoredProc) 
                                
' use OLE DB Provider for ODBC Drivers special stored procedure 
' call syntax 

IT-SC book 
80 
Set rst = con.Execute("{call SalesByCategory(1)}", _ 
                       lRecordsAffected, _ 
                       adCmdText) 
                    
rst.Close 
Set rst = Nothing 
 
con.Close 
Set con = Nothing 
The code that is emphasized in Example 4-12 illustrates the syntax used for calling 
stored procedures with the OLE DB provider for ODBC drivers.  
4.4.2 The CommandTimeout Property 
The behavior of the Connection object's CommandTimeout property is very similar to the 
ConnectionTimeout property, although the setting for one does not affect the other. As 
described earlier, the ConnectionTimeout property indicates the maximum number of 
seconds allowed when completing a connection on a specified data source. The 
CommandTimeout property represents the maximum number of seconds allowed for 
ADO to complete a given command with the Execute method. 
The default value for the CommandTimeout property is 30, representing 30 seconds. If 
the execution of a command exceeds the number of seconds specified in the 
CommandTimeout property, then the command is abandoned and an error is raised. This 
permits your command to timeout if network traffic is too busy to carry out such an 
operation. 
Example 4-13 shows the use of the CommandTimeout property. 
Example 4-13. The CommandTimeout Property  
Public Sub CommandTimeout(  ) 
On Error GoTo ERR_CommandTimeout: 
 
    Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
    Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
    ' set the timeout period to 2 seconds 
    con.CommandTimeout = 2 
     
    ' attempt to open the Connection object with a connection string 
    con.Open "BiblioDSN" 
 
    con.Execute "[All Titles]" 
     
    ' close the connection 
    con.Close 
         
GoTo CleanUp: 
 
' an error has occurred 

IT-SC book 
81
ERR_CommandTimeout: 
 
    Dim oErr As ADODB.Error 
     
    ' there can be multiple errors in ADO; we must look at all of them 
    For Each oErr In con.Errors 
         
        Select Case (Err.Number) 
         
            Case adErrStillConnecting: 
                ' timeout error 
                MsgBox "The command timed out on attempting to 
execute." 
                 
            Case Else: 
                ' other type of error 
                MsgBox "Other Error: " & oErr.Description 
         
        End Select 
         
    Next oErr 
     
' this code will be ran whether there was an error or not 
CleanUp: 
 
    ' clean up 
    Set con = Nothing 
 
End Sub 
The CommandTimeout property is read-only once the Connection object is opened, but 
while it is closed, you can either read or set its value. 
4.5 Managing Multiple Transactions  
Transaction management is used to maintain the integrity of a data source when 
operations on one or more data sources need to be treated as a single operation. 
The most common example of transaction management comes from banking. Take, for 
instance, the steps involved in transferring money from a savings account to a checking 
account. First, you must remove the desired amount of money from the savings account, 
and then that amount must be added to your checking account. Suppose that somebody 
walked by and pulled the plug of the ATM machine just when it had completed removing 
your money from your savings account, but before it added it to your checking account. 
By using three methods (BeginTrans, CommitTrans, and RollbackTrans), you can create 
single transactions from multiple operations. 
 
The BeginTrans, CommitTrans, and RollbackTrans methods are not 
available when you are using a client-side Connection object with RDS. 
 

IT-SC book 
82 
4.5.1 Starting a Transaction: The BeginTrans and CommitTrans 
Methods 
A transaction begins with a call to a Connection object's BeginTrans method and ends 
with a call to the CommitTrans method. The CommitTrans method indicates that the 
transaction is completed and that the data should be saved, or committed, to the data 
source. 
The following code illustrates the use of the BeginTrans and CommitTrans methods: 
' begin a new transaction 
con.BeginTrans 
 
' 
' do some manipulation of the data here 
' 
 
' commit the manipulations of the data to the data source now 
con.CommitTrans 
Not all data providers support transactions, and you should check before using them. You 
can tell whether the current data provider supports transactions by checking for the 
Transaction DDL dynamic property by using the Properties collection of the Connection 
object. If it appears in the Connection object's Properties collection, then your data 
provider supports transaction management through the BeginTrans, CommitTrans, and 
RollbackTrans methods. 
Example 4-14 shows how you can test for the support of transactions by your data 
provider, and how you can work with or without it depending on the result of your test. 
Example 4-14. Testing for Transaction Support  
Public Sub TestForTransactionSupport(  ) 
  
    Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
    Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
  
    ' open the connection on a given data source 
    con.Open "BiblioDSN" 
      
    ' if the data provider supports transactions, begin one 
    If (SupportsTransactions(con)) Then con.BeginTrans 
      
    ' manipulate data here 
    ' 
    ' if the data provider supports transactions, commit changes 
    If (SupportsTransactions(con)) Then con.CommitTrans 
     
    ' close the Connection and clean up 
    con.Close 
    Set con = Nothing 
      
End Sub 

IT-SC book 
83
  
Private Function SupportsTransactions( _ 
                    conConnectionToTest As ADODB.Connection) As Boolean 
On Error GoTo ERR_SupportsTransactions: 
  
    Dim lValue As Long 
      
    ' simply try to access the property to verify whether the data 
provider  
    ' supports transactions 
    lValue = conConnectionToTest.Properties("Transaction DDL").Value 
      
    ' if we got this far, the property exists and the data provider  
    ' supports transactions 
    SupportsTransactions = True 
      
Exit Function 
  
ERR_SupportsTransactions: 
  
    Select Case (Err.Number) 
          
        ' property does not exist, therefore the data provider does not  
        ' support transactions 
        Case adErrItemNotFound: 
            SupportsTransactions = False 
              
        Case Else: 
            ' another error 
              
    End Select 
  
End Function 
4.5.2 Canceling a Transaction: The RollbackTrans Method 
It doesn't make sense to keep track of transactions if you cannot cancel them, so the 
Connection object implements the RollbackTrans method. The RollbackTrans method 
cancels the current transaction, which is defined as the entire set of operations performed 
on the data source since the last call to the BeginTrans method. Once the RollbackTrans 
method is called, your data source will never see the changes that were made during the 
last transaction. 
A common time to use the RollbackTrans method is immediately following an error that 
has occurred during the processing of data. Example 4-15 demonstrates the 
RollbackTrans method. 
Example 4-15. The RollbackTrans Method  
Public Sub Rollback(  ) 
On Error GoTo ERR_Rollback: 
 
    Dim con As ADODB.Connection 

IT-SC book 
84 
    Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
    ' open the connection on a given data source 
    con.Open "BiblioDSN" 
     
    ' begin a transaction 
    con.BeginTrans 
     
    ' 
    ' manipulate data here 
    ' 
     
    ' commit changes 
    con.CommitTrans 
     
    ' skip rollback and close the connection 
    GoTo CloseConnection 
         
ERR_Rollback: 
 
    ' an error has occurred, abort changes 
    con.RollbackTrans 
         
CloseConnection: 
 
    ' close the Connection and clean up 
    con.Close 
    Set con = Nothing 
     
End Sub 
4.5.3 Nesting Transactions 
If your data provider supports transactions, there is a good chance that it also supports 
nested transactions. For instance, Microsoft Access can support nested transactions up to 
five levels deep. 
The BeginTrans method returns a Long value that represents the level of nesting for the 
newly created transaction. The first level is considered level one (1), not zero (0). When 
you nest transactions, you must resolve the more recently created transaction with either 
the CommitTrans or RollbackTrans method before you can resolve previously created 
transactions. 
Example 4-16 illustrates the use of nested transactions. 
Example 4-16. Nested Transactions  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
 
Dim lLevel As Long 
 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 

IT-SC book 
85
' the connection must be open to utilize transactions 
con.Open "Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " _ 
       & "Data Source=C:\Program Files" _ 
                     & "\Microsoft Visual Studio" _ 
                     & "\VB98\Biblio.mdb" 
 
' record the level of the newly created transaction and print it 
lLevel = con.BeginTrans(  ) 
Debug.Print lLevel 
 
' inside level 1 transaction 
 
    ' record the level of the newly created transaction and print it 
    lLevel = con.BeginTrans(  ) 
    Debug.Print lLevel 
     
    ' inside level 2 transaction 
     
        ' record the level of the newly created transaction and print 
it 
        lLevel = con.BeginTrans(  ) 
        Debug.Print lLevel 
         
        ' inside level 3 transaction 
         
        ' commit changes to the level 3 transaction 
        con.CommitTrans 
         
    ' commit changes to the level 2 transaction 
    con.CommitTrans 
     
' commit changes to the level 1 transaction 
con.CommitTrans 
 
' close the Connection and clean up 
con.Close 
Set con = Nothing 
4.5.4 Setting Transaction Options 
There are two types of options that we can specify when using transactions through ADO: 
Attributes  
The Attributes property specifies the automatic creation of new transactions. By using the 
Attributes property of the Connection object, we can define whether new transactions are created 
when the current one has ended. 
IsolationLevel  
By setting the value of the IsolationLevel property, you can determine whether the current 
transaction can read the changes that are as of yet not committed by another transaction. 
4.5.4.1 Automatic creation of new transactions 

IT-SC book 
86 
When you call either the CommitTrans or the RollbackTrans methods, you are ending the 
current transaction. By default, you must call BeginTrans once again to start another 
transaction, but you can change this behavior by setting the value of the Attributes 
property. Table 4-5 lists these values. 
Table 4-5. The XactAttributeEnum Values of the Attributes Property  
Constant 
Value 
Description 
none 
0 
Default. Indicates that neither of the following 
constants have been chosen. 
adXactCommitRetaining 131072 Indicates that a new transaction will be created after 
the CommitTrans method is called. 
adXactAbortRetaining 262144 Indicates that a new transaction will be created after 
the RollBackTrans method is called. 
You can use both the adXactCommitRetaining and the adXactAbortRetaining 
constants at the same time, as shown in Example 4-17. 
Example 4-17. Using the Attributes Property with Multiple Constants  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
' the connection must be open to utilize transactions 
con.Open "BiblioDSN" 
 
' set the attributes to automatically create a new transaction 
' when both the CommitTrans and the RollbackTrans methods are 
' called 
con.Attributes = adXactCommitRetaining _ 
               + adXactAbortRetaining 
 
' start transaction #1 
con.BeginTrans 
 
' do something here 
 
' commit transaction #1, start transaction #2 
con.CommitTrans 
 
' do something here 
 
' rollback transaction #2, start transaction #3 
con.RollbackTrans 
 
' do something here 
 

IT-SC book 
87
' set the attributes so that neither CommitTrans nor RollbackTrans 
' will create a new transaction 
con.Attributes = 0 
 
' commit transaction #3 
con.CommitTrans 
 
' close the Connection and clean up 
con.Close 
Set con = Nothing 
 
The Attributes property is not available to a client-side Connection 
object when using RDS. In addition, not all data providers support 
the transactions, and, therefore, they won't support the Attributes 
property. Be sure to check for the Transaction DDL property in the 
Properties collection of your Connection object to see whether your 
data provider supports transactions before you attempt to use the 
Attributes property. 
 
4.5.4.2 Isolation level 
The IsolationLevel property is used to indicate how transactions relate to each other. By 
setting its value, you can determine whether the current transaction can read the changes 
that are as of yet not committed by another transaction. 
IsolationLevel is a read/write property that can take any one of the following 
IsolationLevelEnum constants shown in Table 4-6. 
Table 4-6. The IsolationLevelEnum Values  
Constant 
Value 
Description 
adXactUnspecified 
-1 
Indicates that the data provider is using an isolation 
level that cannot be determined. 
AdXactChaos 
16 
Indicates that you cannot write over changes that 
have been made by higher level transactions. 
AdXactBrowse 
256 
Indicates that you can view changes that have not yet 
been committed by other transactions. 
adXactReadUncommitted 256 
Same as adXactBrowse. Kept for compatibility with 
earlier versions of ADO. 
adXactCursorStability 4096 
Default. Indicates that you can only view changes 

IT-SC book 
88 
from other transactions once they have been 
committed. 
adXactReadCommitted 
4096 
Same 
as 
adXactCursorStability. 
Kept 
for 
compatibility with earlier versions of ADO. 
adXactRepeatableRead 65536 
Indicates that from one transaction, you cannot see 
changes that have been made in other transactions 
until they are committed, but you can requery the 
data source to see newly created records. 
AdXactIsolated 
1048576 Indicates all transactions are completely isolated 
from each other. 
adXactSerializable 
1048576 Same as adXactIsolated. Kept for compatibility with 
earlier versions of ADO. 
 
 
The constant adXactUnspecified is the only valid value for the 
IsolationLevel property when you are using a client-side Connection 
object when using RDS. 
 
Example 4-18 shows how you can use the IsolationLevel property to determine the level 
of isolation for the current transactions. 
Example 4-18. Using the IsolationLevel Property  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
Dim sLevel As String 
 
' open the connection 
con.Open "BiblioDSN" 
 
' select message based on the current isolation level 
Select Case (con.IsolationLevel) 
 
    Case adXactUnspecified: 
        sLevel = "Isolation level cannot be determined." 
     
    Case adXactChaos: 
        sLevel = "You cannot write over changes that have been " _ 
               & "made by higher level transactions." 
     

IT-SC book 
89
    Case adXactBrowse Or adXactReadUncommitted: 
        sLevel = "You can view changes not yet committed by other " _ 
               & "transactions." 
     
    Case adXactCursorStability Or adXactReadCommitted: 
        sLevel = "You can only view changes from other " _ 
               & "transactions that have been committed." 
     
    Case adXactRepeatableRead: 
        sLevel = "You can only view changes from other " _ 
               & "transactions that have been committed and you " _ 
               & "can requery data to see new records." 
     
    Case adXactIsolated Or adXactSerializable: 
        sLevel = "All transactions are isolated from each other." 
 
End Select 
 
' display isolation level message 
MsgBox sLevel 
 
con.Close 
Set con = Nothing 
The IsolationLevel property is both read- and write-enabled, but it does not take effect 
until you call the BeginTrans method of the Connection object. It is possible that the data 
provider will automatically change the level of isolation when it cannot establish the level 
requested. In such a case, the level will be changed to the next higher level of isolation. 
4.6 Determining the Layout of Your Data Source 
Your data source has many characteristics that can be exposed to your applications via 
ADO. For instance, some data sources have table names, field names, and indexes. You 
can use the OpenSchema method of the Connection object to enumerate the 
characteristics that make up the structure of your data source. The OpenSchema method 
has the following syntax: 
Set recordset_name = connection_name.OpenSchema(QueryType, Criteria, 
SchemaID) 
Table 4-7 describes each of the components found in the previous syntax declaration. 
Table 4-7. The Components of the OpenSchema Method  
Component 
Description 
recordset_name A valid Recordset object. 
connection_name A currently open Connection object. 

IT-SC book 
90 
QueryType 
Indicates what type of schema query to perform on the associated 
connection object. This value must be a valid constant that belongs to the 
SchemaEnum enumeration. Not all QueryType values are supported by 
every data source. See the OpenSchema method in Appendix C, for more 
information. 
Criteria 
Optional. Indicates a specific constraint used to perform the query as 
defined by the QueryType argument. Criteria values are specific to 
each QueryType value, and, because not all QueryTypes are 
supported by every data source, neither are all Criteria values. 
SchemaID 
Optional. A GUID for a provider-specific schema that is used only with the 
QueryType constant, adSchemaProviderSpecific. 
In most cases, your data provider will not support all of the Criteria constraints. As a 
matter of fact, the data provider must supply you with only the adSchemaTables, 
adSchemaColumns, and adSchemaProviderTypes constants, according to the OLE DB 
specification. For a list of all the constraints available, refer to the SchemaEnum 
enumeration in Appendix E. 
Example 4-19 utilizes the OpenSchema method to create a viewer for all possible 
QueryType and Criteria combinations for a given data source. 
To create this example, first open up a new Application EXE project within Visual Basic, 
and add the latest version of Microsoft ActiveX Data Objects through the Project 
References tool item. Next, add the controls listed in Table 4-8, and name them 
accordingly. 
Table 4-8. The Components of the OpenSchema Method  
Control 
Name 
ListBox Control 
lstQueryType 
ListBox Control 
lstCriteria 
ListBox Control 
lstValue 
Command Button 
cmdClose 
Now, replacing the code that is already in the Form1 form dialog box, enter the code for 
the modular-level object variables, as shown in Example 4-19. This example will use the 
OLE DB provider for ODBC connections and the SQL Server DSN, SQLNorthwindDSN. 

IT-SC book 
91
If you do not have SQL Server, you can replace this DSN with the BiblioDSN DSN (see 
Section 4.2.2.1 earlier in this chapter). 
Example 4-19. The Schema Viewer Example  
Option Explicit 
 
Private con As ADODB.Connection 
Private rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
Private Sub Form_Load(  ) 
 
    Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
    Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
 
    ' connect to our data source 
    con.Open "SQLNorthwindDSN" 
         
    ' populate the query types list box with valid query type values 
for 
    ' this particular data source 
    Call PopulateQueryTypes 
         
End Sub 
 
Private Sub PopulateQueryTypes(  ) 
     
    lstQueryType.Clear 
     
    ' call the CheckQueryType function for each possible query type 
value 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaCatalogs: " & adSchemaCatalogs 
     
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaCharacterSets: " & adSchemaCharacterSets 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaCheckConstraints: " & 
adSchemaCheckConstraints 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaCollations: " & adSchemaCollations 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaColumnPrivileges: " & 
adSchemaColumnPrivileges 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaColumns: " & adSchemaColumns 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaColumnsDomainUsage: " _ 
                   & adSchemaColumnsDomainUsage 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaConstraintColumnUsage: " _ 
                   & adSchemaConstraintColumnUsage 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaConstraintTableUsage: " _ 
                   & adSchemaConstraintTableUsage 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaCubes: " & adSchemaCubes 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaDBInfoKeywords: " & adSchemaDBInfoKeywords 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaDBInfoLiterals: " & adSchemaDBInfoLiterals 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaDimensions: " & adSchemaDimensions 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaForeignKeys: " & adSchemaForeignKeys 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaHierarchies: " & adSchemaHierarchies 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaIndexes: " & adSchemaIndexes 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaKeyColumnUsage: " & adSchemaKeyColumnUsage 
    CheckQueryType "adschemaLevels: " & adSchemaLevels 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaMeasures: " & adSchemaMeasures 

IT-SC book 
92 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaMembers: " & adSchemaMembers 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaPrimaryKeys: " & adSchemaPrimaryKeys 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaProcedureColumns: " & 
adSchemaProcedureColumns 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaProcedureParameters: " _ 
                   & adSchemaProcedureParameters 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaProcedures: " & adSchemaProcedures 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaProperties: " & adSchemaProperties 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaProviderTypes: " & adSchemaProviderTypes 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaReferentialContraints: " _ 
                   & adSchemaReferentialContraints 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaSchemata: " & adSchemaSchemata 
     
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaSQLLanguages: " & adSchemaSQLLanguages 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaStatistics: " & adSchemaStatistics 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaTableConstraints: " & 
adSchemaTableConstraints 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaTablePrivileges: " & 
adSchemaTablePrivileges 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaTables: " & adSchemaTables 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaTranslations: " & adSchemaTranslations 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaUsagePrivileges: " & 
adSchemaUsagePrivileges 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaViewColumnUsage: " & 
adSchemaViewColumnUsage 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaViews: " & adSchemaViews 
    CheckQueryType "adSchemaViewTableUsage: " & adSchemaViewTableUsage 
     
End Sub 
The CheckQueryType method determines if a schema is available by attempting to open 
it with the OpenSchema method: 
Private Sub CheckQueryType(sQueryType As String) 
On Error GoTo ERR_CheckQueryType: 
     
    ' if we can open the schema without getting an error, the data 
source 
    ' will support it, otherwise, do not add it to the list box 
    Set rst = con.OpenSchema(GetQueryTypeValue(sQueryType)) 
     
ERR_CheckQueryType: 
    Select Case Err.Number 
        Case 0: 
            lstQueryType.AddItem (sQueryType) 
        Case adErrFeatureNotAvailable: 
            ' not supported 
    End Select 
     
End Sub 
When a user clicks on a query-type list box, the corresponding schema is opened and 
used to populate the criteria list box: 
Private Sub lstQueryType_Click(  ) 
     
    Dim lTemp As Long 

IT-SC book 
93
    Dim fld As ADODB.Field 
     
    lstCriteria.Clear 
    lstValue.Clear 
     
    ' get the value of the query type from parsing the string  
    ' that is selected 
    lTemp = GetQueryTypeValue(lstQueryType.List(lstQueryType.ListIndex)) 
     
    ' open the schema for the query type chosen 
    Set rst = con.OpenSchema(lTemp) 
     
    ' add criterias that are available for the query type to the list 
box 
     
    For Each fld In rst.Fields 
        lstCriteria.AddItem fld.Name 
    Next fld 
     
End Sub 
In turn, as the criteria list box is selected, the individual values for the criteria are added 
to the values list box: 
Private Sub lstCriteria_Click(  ) 
     
    lstValue.Clear 
     
    ' populate the values list box with the values for the selected 
    ' query type and criteria 
    If (Not (rst.EOF And rst.BOF)) Then rst.MoveFirst 
    Do Until (rst.EOF) 
        lstValue.AddItem _ 
                ConvertToString(rst.Fields(lstCriteria.ListIndex).Value) 
        rst.MoveNext 
    Loop 
 
End Sub 
Now enter the remaining utility and termination methods, and you are done: 
Private Function ConvertToString(vInput As Variant) As String 
     
    ' return the 'Null' string if the value is null, otherwise return 
the 
    ' actual string 
    If IsNull(vInput) Then 
        ConvertToString = "Null" 
    Else 
        ConvertToString = vInput 
    End If 
 
End Function 
 
Private Function GetQueryTypeValue(sQueryType As String) As Long 
 
    Dim sTemp As String 

IT-SC book 
94 
     
    ' take the number (value of the query type) off of the string 
    sTemp = Right$(sQueryType, Len(sQueryType) - InStr(1, sQueryType, 
":")) 
     
    GetQueryTypeValue = Val(sTemp) 
     
End Function 
 
Private Sub cmdClose_Click(  ) 
     
    ' clean up recordset object 
    rst.Close 
    Set rst = Nothing 
     
    ' clean up connection object 
    con.Close 
    Set con = Nothing 
     
    ' end the application 
    Unload Me 
     
End Sub 
When this application is compiled and run, it should produce a result similar to Figure 4-
8, assuming your data source is similar to mine. 
Figure 4-8. The Schema Viewer application in action 
 
The OpenSchema method is very useful for finding such information about the data 
source as table names, stored procedure and query names, index information, table names, 
as well as a number of other valuable pieces of information. I suggest that you use the 
Schema Viewer application from Example 4-19 on your data source to see what is 
available and what you would find useful within your own application. 

IT-SC book 
95
 
The OpenSchema method is not available to a client-side Connection 
object when using RDS. 
 
4.7 Summary 
This chapter has introduced the Connection object -- the first of the nine major 
components of ActiveX Data Objects. You have learned how to establish connections 
with any type of OLE DB data provider. The following list summarizes key points: 
You can create a Connection object either explicitly within your own code, or implicitly, through 
instantiation of a Recordset or Command object. 
Each Connection object represents a single unique connection to a particular OLE DB data source 
through a data provider, both of which you have specified in a connection string. 
With the Connection object, you can execute commands against the associated data source. There 
are three types of commands that can be executed: a SQL statement, a stored procedure, or a 
parameterized query. In addition, you can open a simple table or pass a data provider-specific 
string to the particular data provider, which will provide its own analysis and resultset. 
The Connection object controls the utilization of transaction management through three methods: 
BeginTrans, CommitTrans, and RollbackTrans. Transactions are used to manage the integrity of 
one or multiple data sources when data is manipulated. Like If...Then statements, transactions 
can be nested. 
You can use the Connection object to obtain information about the structure of a given data 
source with the use of the OpenSchema method. This information can be helpful when querying 
for table, procedure, or index names. 
The next chapter of this book, Chapter 5, explains how to manipulate and read data that 
is stored in record form, each of which is a collection of fields. 

IT-SC book 
96 
Chapter 5. The Recordset Object 
This chapter explains the Recordset object (familiar to users of DAO), which is used to access 
and manipulate data on the record level. As you learned earlier, all data can be broken down into 
logical rows, each containing one or more fields. Each field, in turn, describes one specific piece 
of data that falls into a specific category that is common throughout all the other rows in that 
rowset. For instance, the Authors table of the Biblio.mdb Access database supplied with Visual 
Basic contains one row per Author in the table. It also has a field called Name, which is an 
attribute of every Author. 
With the Recordset object, you can navigate through the multiple rows that make up a 
rowset. You can search for particular rows, move to a row that you previously marked, or 
move to the beginning or the end of your logical rowset, all with the Recordset object. 
The Recordset object is also used to add, edit, or delete records. We can specify how the 
data provider executes batch commands, and we can also run queries on our data source 
to provide a customized, filtered view of records. 
ActiveX Data Objects allows us to view our records, selected from our data source, in a 
number of different ways. The way in which our data is present ed to us is described by a 
cursor. 
5.1 Cursors: Viewing a Recordset 
Cursors present a logical view of a particular recordset. Once the records have been 
selected for us from our data source by opening our Recordset object, we must decide on 
how we would like them presented. This is done through a cursor. In ADO, there are four 
types of cursors: 
Dynamic cursor 
Keyset cursor 
Static cursor 
Forward-only cursor 
In the following sections, the different cursor types are explained and an example at the 
end displays the various functions of each. To prepare your Recordset object to open with 
a particular cursor, use the CursorType property. The CursorType property is both read- 
and write-enabled while the Recordset object is closed, but once it is opened, the 
CursorType property becomes read-only. 
Not all providers support all cursor types. When the data provider cannot provide you 
with the cursor that you have specified because prerequisites could not be met, the data 
provider may automatically assign a different cursor type. When this occurs, you can read 

IT-SC book 
97
the CursorType property to see the kind of cursor that was actually used when opening 
the recordset. 
5.1.1 Dynamic Cursor  
The first type of cursor is a dynamic cursor. A dynamic cursor allows you to move freely 
throughout your recordset, without restrictions, except when your provider does not support 
bookmarks -- in this case, you cannot use bookmarks with the Dynamic cursor (see Section 
5.3.5 later in this chapter for more information). 
"Moving freely through the recordset" means that you may move the record pointer 
forward or backwards and to the beginning and end of the recordset. This may seem like 
an obvious functionality, but as you will soon see, not all cursors allow you to move the 
record pointer this freely. 
One of the biggest benefits of using the dynamic cursor is that it allows you to see, in real 
time, all additions, changes, and deletions made by other users in your recordset. For 
instance, if another user adds a row to a data source, and that row would have been part 
of your recordset if you recreated it, that row immediately becomes part of your recordset. 
The dynamic cursor is by far the most versatile cursor available to the ADO developer. 
The major drawback of the dynamic cursor is that it is extremely resource- and time-
intensive because of its ability to show, in real time, changes made by other users. I 
strongly recommend that you use the dynamic cursor only on the rare occasions when 
speed is not a concern and you need the added functionality that this cursor alone offers. 
To prepare your Recordset object to open a dynamic cursor, set the CursorType property 
to adOpenDynamic: 
rst.CursorType = adOpenDynamic 
5.1.2 Keyset Cursor 
The keyset cursor is very similar to the dynamic cursor in functionality, with the 
exception of the real-time viewing of new records created, deleted, and modified by other 
users. This cursor is the most resource-intensive cursor available in ADO. 
The keyset cursor thus allows changes made by other users to be visible to your currently 
opened recordset and blocks access to records that have been deleted by other users, just 
as with a dynamic cursor. However, when a record is added by another user to your data 
source, when you have an open keyset cursor, you will not see the new record until you 
recreate the recordset. 
Unlike with the dynamic cursor, the ability of the data provider to offer the use of bookmarks is 
mandatory. This is so that the keyset cursor can offer something called batch updates, which will 
be covered in more detail later in this chapter. 
Use the keyset cursor instead of the dynamic cursor whenever possible to conserve 
resources. 

IT-SC book 
98 
To prepare your Recordset object to open a keyset cursor, set the CursorType property to 
adOpenKeyset: 
rst.CursorType = adOpenKeyset 
Figure 5-1 shows us the functionality supported by the keyset cursor. (The code for creating this 
informational dialog box is in the section "Cursor Type Example.") 
Figure 5-1. Keyset cursor functionality 
 
5.1.3 Static Cursor 
The static cursor is vastly different than the previous two. It still allows your application to move 
freely through the recordset. The difference is that you are unable to dynamically view changes 
made to the records by other users within your static recordset. 
The static cursor is like a snapshot of the data within your data source at a specific point 
in time. You could open a static recordset on your data source and immediately afterward 
have the entire data source deleted, but your static cursor would never see the changes. 
To prepare your Recordset object to open a static cursor, set the CursorType property to 
adOpenStatic: 
rst.CursorType = adOpenStatic 
As with keyset cursors, Static cursors require that bookmarks are supported by the data provider. 
Figure 5-2 shows the functionality supported by the static cursor. 
Figure 5-2. Static cursor functionality 

IT-SC book 
99
 
The static cursor is excellent when you need to generate reports on data, which cannot 
dynamically change. It is also very good when you are using a data source that you know 
for sure no other users will access while you are. 
The static cursor is significantly faster than both the dynamic and the keyset cursors 
because it does not constantly check the data source to ensure that changes have not been 
made. 
 
When you are using a client-side Recordset object with Remote Data 
Service ( RDS), your only choice of cursor type is the static cursor. 
 
5.1.4 Forward-Only Cursor 
The forward-only cursor is the fastest available. It is similar to the static cursor in that it 
presents a snapshot of the data at a particular point in time, but it lacks the ability to move 
the record pointer backwards. The forward-only cursor is the only type of cursor that 
does not allow the record pointer to be moved in this way. 
Because the forward-only cursor is so limited in its abilities, there are no prerequisites to 
opening one. To prepare your Recordset object to open a forward-only cursor, set the 
CursorType property to adOpenForwardOnly: 
rst.CursorType = adOpenForwardOnly 
Figure 5-3 indicates the functionality supported by the forward-only cursor. 
Figure 5-3. Forward-only cursor functionality 

IT-SC book 
100 
 
The forward-only cursor is very useful when you need to make only a single pass through 
your recordset, such as in some reporting scenarios. I strongly recommend using the 
forward-only cursor whenever your application can deal with its lack of abilities, because 
it is so fast. 
5.1.5 CursorType Example 
The example in this section will demonstrate the different available functions for each of 
the four cursor types. 
First, create a new project with one form. Add the controls listed in Table 5-1, setting their 
values as specified in the second and third columns. Figure 5-4 shows the result. 
Figure 5-4. The CursorType example in design mode 
 
Table 5-1. The CursorType Example Control Settings  

IT-SC book 
101
Control 
Property 
Value 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdCursorType 
  
Index 
0 
  
Caption 
ForwardOnly 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdCursorType 
  
Index 
1 
  
Caption 
Keyset 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdCursorType 
  
Index 
2 
  
Caption 
Dynamic 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdCursorType 
  
Index 
2 
  
Caption 
Static 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdClose 
  
Caption 
&Close 
Label 
Caption 
Cursor Opened: 
Label 
Name 
lblCursorType 
Label 
Caption 
Add New: 

IT-SC book 
102 
Label 
Caption 
Approx. Position: 
Label 
Caption 
Bookmark: 
Label 
Caption 
Delete: 
Label 
Caption 
Find: 
Label 
Caption 
Hold Records: 
Label 
Caption 
Move Previous: 
Label 
Caption 
Notify: 
Label 
Caption 
Resync: 
Label 
Caption 
Update: 
Label 
Caption 
Update Batch: 
Label 
Name 
lblBoolean 
  
Index 
0 
  
Tag 
16778240 
Label 
Name 
lblBoolean 
  
Index 
1 
  
Tag 
16384 
Label 
Name 
lblBoolean 
  
Index 
2 

IT-SC book 
103
  
Tag 
8192 
Label 
Name 
lblBoolean 
  
Index 
3 
  
Tag 
16779264 
Label 
Name 
lblBoolean 
  
Index 
4 
  
Tag 
524288 
Label 
Name 
lblBoolean 
  
Index 
5 
  
Tag 
256 
Label 
Name 
lblBoolean 
  
Index 
6 
  
Tag 
512 
Label 
Name 
lblBoolean 
  
Index 
7 
  
Tag 
262144 
Label 
Name 
lblBoolean 
  
Index 
8 

IT-SC book 
104 
  
Tag 
131072 
Label 
Name 
lblBoolean 
  
Index 
9 
  
Tag 
16809984 
Label 
Name 
lblBoolean 
  
Index 
10 
  
Tag 
65536 
Once you have all of the controls in place and you have set the necessary properties, you 
can begin to enter the code. Begin by entering the cmdClose_Click event to end the 
application: 
Private Sub cmdClose_Click(  ) 
    Unload Me 
End Sub 
Next, enter the bulk of the code in the cmdCursorType_Click event: 
Private Sub cmdCursorType_Click(Index As Integer) 
         
    Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
    Dim nCount As Integer 
     
    Const FORWARD_ONLY = 0 
    Const KEYSET = 1 
    Const DYNAMIC = 2 
    Const STATIC = 3 
     
    Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
 
    Select Case (Index) 
        Case FORWARD_ONLY: 
            rst.CursorType = adOpenForwardOnly 
            lblCursorType.Caption = "Forward Only" 
        Case KEYSET: 
            rst.CursorType = adOpenKeyset 
            lblCursorType.Caption = "Keyset" 
        Case DYNAMIC: 
            rst.CursorType = adOpenDynamic 
            lblCursorType.Caption = "Dynamic" 
        Case STATIC: 
            rst.CursorType = adOpenStatic 

IT-SC book 
105
            lblCursorType.Caption = "Static" 
    End Select 
     
    If (rst.State & adStateOpen) Then rst.Close 
    rst.Open "Authors", _ 
             "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
             , _ 
             adLockPessimistic 
              
    For nCount = 0 To 10 
        If (rst.Supports(lblBoolean(nCount).Tag)) Then 
            lblBoolean(nCount).Caption = "Supported" 
        Else 
            lblBoolean(nCount).Caption = "---" 
        End If 
    Next nCount 
     
    rst.Close 
    Set rst = Nothing 
             
End Sub 
This code determines which button has been pressed by the Index variable passed to the function. 
With this information, the application opened the Authors table of the DSN with the correct 
cursor type. Once the recordset is opened, the application loops through all of the lblBoolean 
labels on the form. Each label represents a function that the current cursor may or may not 
support. By the value stored in that label's Tag property, the Recordset can determine whether the 
functionality is supported. Each of the values in the Tag properties directly corresponds to the 
functions enumeration value from the CursorOptionEnum enumeration shown in Table 5-2.  
Table 5-2. The CursorOptionEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adAddNew 
Indicates that the recordset can use the AddNew method to add new 
records. 
adApproxPosition Indicates that the recordset supports the AbsolutePosition and 
AbsolutePage properties. 
adBookmark 
Indicates that the recordset supports the Bookmark property. 
adDelete 
Indicates that the recordset can use the Delete method to delete 
records. 
adHoldRecords 
Indicates that the recordset allows more records to be modified 
before committing current changes. 

IT-SC book 
106 
adMovePrevious Indicates that the recordset can use the MovePrevious method to 
step backwards in a recordset. 
adResync 
Indicates that the recordset can use the Resync method to update the 
records in the recordset from the underlying data source. 
adUpdate 
Indicates that the recordset can use the Update method to update 
information that has been modified within the recordset. 
adUpdateBatch 
Indicates that the recordset can use the UpdateBatch and 
CancelBatch methods to support batch processing of edits. 
Finally, enter the code for the Form_Load event, which kicks off the application by 
invoking the Forward Only command button: 
Private Sub Form_Load(  ) 
    cmdCursorType_Click (0) 
End Sub 
Once this project is built, press the Dynamic button to see the application illustrated in Figure 5-
5. 
Figure 5-5. Dynamic cursor functionality 
 
If you are having trouble starting the application, you may need to set up a System DSN (Data 
Source Name) -- see "Installing the DSNs" in Chapter 4.  
 
The examples in this chapter use the Biblio.mdb Access database 
extensively. In order for these examples to work correctly (and to maintain 
their simplicity), it is necessary to remove all relationships from within the 
tables of the Biblio.mdb database. It is suggested that you make a copy of 
the Biblio.mdb database (in a working directory), open it up with Access, 

IT-SC book 
107
and remove all of the relationships. Once this is done, you can use the 
ODBC Data Source Administrator to set the System DSN, BiblioDSN, to 
your copy of the Biblio.mdb database as described in Chapter 4. 
 
5.2 Working with Recordsets 
The first thing you want to do with a recordset is open it, of course. In order to open a 
recordset, you must specify, with the Recordset object, what information you want, where 
your information is located, and how to open your information. 
5.2.1 The Open Method 
The following syntax describes the Open method of the Recordset object: 
Recordset.Open [Source], [ActiveConnection], [CursorType], _ 
               [LockType], [Options] 
Notice that all of the parameters of the Open method are optional. The parameters all 
relate directly to the respective properties of the Recordset object. You can set their 
values through the corresponding parameter or property. However, specifying the 
parameter will override previously set properties. In addition, these properties are 
read/write while the Recordset object is closed but read-only once the object has been 
opened. 
Setting the Source property of the Recordset object indicates the information you wish to 
open in your recordset. The ActiveConnection property tells the Recordset object where 
it can find the information that you want to open. Both the CursorType and LockType 
properties tell the Recordset how to open and use the information in the recordset. The 
following code opens a Recordset object and sets its properties: 
rst.Source = "Authors" 
rst.ActiveConnection = "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
rst.CursorType = adOpenKeyset 
rst.LockType = adLockOptimistic 
 
rst.Open 
' do something here 
rst.Close 
As you can see, there is not much involved with opening recordsets. 
 
All of the examples in this chapter are assuming that you have already 
instantiated the Recordset object with the New keyword. 
 
Alternatively, you can specify all of these values as parameters to the Open method of the 
Recordset object as shown: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 

IT-SC book 
108 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic, _ 
         adCmdTable 
 
' do something here 
rst.Close 
Notice that this example has an extra parameter (adCmdTable), called the Options parameter. 
This parameter is used to indicate the type of the Source property or parameter's value. In the 
previous example, the adCmdTable value indicates that the "Authors" Source is a table name. 
The complete list of valid Options is shown in Table 5-3. 
Table 5-3. The CommandTypeEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
AdCmdFile 
Indicates that the Source value will be evaluated as a filename. 
adCmdStoredProc Indicates that the Source value will be evaluated as a stored 
procedure. 
adCmdTable 
Indicates that ADO will create a SQL statement to return all rows of 
the table specified by Source. 
adCmdTableDirect Indicates that the Source value will be evaluated as a table name. 
AdCmdText 
Indicates that the Source value will be evaluated as a SQL statement 
or another string value that should be understood by the data source.
adCmdUnknown 
Indicates that the type of the Source value is unknown. 
The following piece of code shows us how we can pass a SQL statement through the Source 
parameter of the Open method. Notice that the fifth parameter, Options, is set to adCmdText to 
indicate that the Source parameter contains a string that should be evaluated as a SQL statement 
by the data source: 
rst.Open "SELECT * FROM Authors;", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         , _ 
         , _ 
         adCmdText 
 
Debug.Print "Number of records: " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
             
rst.Close 

IT-SC book 
109
There is no member property for the Options parameter of the Open method as there is 
for Source, ActiveConnection, CursorType, and LockType. Although it is optional, I 
recommend that you always specify the Options parameter. If you do not specify its value, 
ADO has to make several calls to the data source to determine how to open the Source, 
which can cause significant delays in performance. 
 
The Option parameter has been omitted from most of the remaining code 
examples for simplicity and ease of reading. Although this chapter's 
examples rarely use the Option parameter, it is a good idea to indicate it in 
your applications. 
 
The ActiveConnection property can be set to a Variant value that evaluates to an open 
Connection object or a String value that evaluates to a valid connection string (see Section 
4.2.1). 
The following piece of code demonstrates how the ActiveConnection property can be set 
to an already opened connection object: 
con.Open "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
rst.Source = "Authors" 
rst.ActiveConnection = con 
rst.Open 
 
rst.Close 
con.Close 
If the ActiveConnection property is not set to an already open Connection object, you can 
pass the Recordset object a connection string. The Recordset object will then use the 
connection string to create its own Connection object: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
Set con = rst.ActiveConnection 
 
If (con.State & adStateOpen) Then 
    Debug.Print "Connection object open." 
End If 
 
Debug.Print "Number of records: " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
rst.Close 
con.Close 
Notice that the previous example also indicates how the Connection object can be 
referenced directly through the ActiveConnection property of the Recordset object. 
In the previous two examples, you should notice that the ActiveConnection property 
accepts either a String or a Connection object. When a String is passed (a valid 

IT-SC book 
110 
connection string), the code is telling ADO to create a new Connection object with the 
connection string for the Recordset object. When you pass the Connection object, the 
code is telling ADO to use the reference to the existing Connection object for the 
Recordset object.  
5.2.2 The Save Method 
A very interesting method of the Recordset object is the Save method, which saves the 
recordset to a file. This method takes two optional parameters: the first is a filename to 
which to save the recordset. The second is a parameter, PersistFormat, indicating the 
format of the saved recordset. The two options for this parameter are adPersistADTG 
(default) and adPersistXML. The following code illustrates how to use the Save method: 
rst.CursorLocation = adUseClient 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
rst.Save "AuthorsRecordset", adPersistXML 
 
' alter recordset 
 
rst.Save 
 
rst.Close 
It is not necessary to specify a filename in subsequent calls to the Save method. This 
example's second call to Save will save the recordset to the same location as the first. 
It is always a wise idea to set the CursorLocation property to adUseClient (to use a cursor 
engine recordset). When you do this, you get better behavior, as some providers have limitations 
when saving metadata. In addition, you are bringing all the records locally anyways, so you'll get 
a little better performance when letting the cursor engine handle the entire rowset. 
To open the saved recordset from a file, specify the filename in either the Source property 
of the Recordset object (while the object is closed) or the Source parameter of the Open 
method of the Recordset object. It is not necessary to indicate the Options parameter as 
adCmdFile, because this is the default value of the parameter if the ActiveConnection 
property is not set. 
rst.Open "AuthorsRecordset" 
 
Debug.Print "Number of records: " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
rst.Close 
5.2.3 Determining the State of the Recordset Object: The State 
Property 
You can determine the state of a Recordset object with the State property. The State property 
returns a value from the ObjectStateEnum enumeration as shown in Table 5-4. 

IT-SC book 
111
Table 5-4. The ObjectStateEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adStateClosed 
Indicates that the object is closed. This is the default value. 
adStateConnecting Indicates that the object is still connecting. 
adStateExecuting 
Indicates that the object is still executing a command. 
adStateFetching 
Indicates that the object is still fetching rows from the source. 
adStateOpen 
Indicates that the object is opened. 
Example 5-1 shows how the State property of the Recordset object can be used to print the 
object's state. 
Example 5-1. The PrintRecordState Subroutine  
Private Sub PrintRecordsetState(rst As Recordset) 
 
If (rst.State & adStateClosed) Then 
    Debug.Print "The rst object is currently closed." 
End If 
 
If (rst.State & adStateConnecting) Then 
    Debug.Print "The rst object is currently connecting." 
End If 
 
If (rst.State & adStateExecuting) Then 
    Debug.Print "The rst object is currently executing." 
End If 
 
If (rst.State & adStateFetching) Then 
    Debug.Print "The rst object is currently fetching." 
End If 
 
If (rst.State & adStateOpen) Then 
    Debug.Print "The rst object is currently open." 
End If 
End Sub 
The following code uses the PrintRecordState subroutine shown in Example 5-1 to let us see the 
state of a Recordset during the process of opening and closing a data source: 
PrintRecordsetState rst          ' State & adStateClosed 
 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN"         ' Open the recordset 

IT-SC book 
112 
 
PrintRecordsetState rst          ' State & adStateOpen 
 
rst.Close                        ' Close the recordset 
 
PrintRecordsetState rst          ' State & adStateClosed 
The output from running this piece of code first shows that the recordset is closed prior to 
the Open method call. Once the call has been made, the recordset is opened (the State 
property is equal to adStateOpen) and then closed once the Close method is called. 
5.2.4 Fine-Tuning Performance of the Recordset Object 
The Recordset object has numerous properties used to fine-tune performance with the 
connection to the data source. One of these properties is the CacheSize property. 
5.2.4.1 The CacheSize property 
The CacheSize property can be set at any time, while the Recordset object is opened or 
closed. 
The CacheSize property indicates how many records are cached by ADO. The default 
setting for this property is 1, and its value cannot be set to 0. If the value of the CacheSize 
property is changed while the Recordset is open, it will not affect the caching of records 
until the Recordset object needs to cache more records when the record pointer moves to 
a location outside the cached group of records. In other words, if the CacheSize property 
has been set to 5 and then to 10, the Recordset will not cache 10 records until it reaches 
the sixth record. 
The following code illustrates how to use the CacheSize property: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
rst.CacheSize = 10 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print "Author: " & rst.Fields("Author").Value 
    rst.MoveNext 
Until 
 
rst.Close 
5.2.4.2 The MaxRecords property 
The number of records returned by a Recordset object can be limited by using the 
MaxRecords property. The MaxRecords property accepts a Long value, which indicates 
the maximum number of records to be returned to the recordset. 
The following code counts the number of records returned after setting the MaxRecords 
property to 100: 

IT-SC book 
113
Dim lRecords As Long 
 
rst.MaxRecords = 100 
 
rst.Open "SELECT Au_ID FROM Authors;", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
lRecords = 0 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    lRecords = lRecords + 1 
    rst.MoveNext 
Loop 
 
Debug.Print "There were " & CStr(lRecords) & " retrieved." 
 
rst.Close 
The default value of the MaxRecords property is 0, which indicates that there is no limit 
to the number of records returned to the Recordset object. 
5.2.4.3 The CursorLocation property 
Another useful property of the Recordset object is the CursorLocation property, which tells ADO 
where to create the recordset, either on the server (adUseServer -- the default) or the client 
(adUseClient). 
The following example prints the time it takes to establish a connection to the Author 
table using a server-side cursor: 
rst.CursorLocation = adUseServer 
 
dTime = Now 
 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         , _ 
         , _ 
         adCmdTableDirect 
 
' do something 
rst.Close 
 
Debug.Print "Time taken: " & _ 
            Format$(Now - dTime, "hh:mm:ss") 
The next code fragment indicates the time taken to establish a connection to the Author 
table using a client-side cursor: 
rst.CursorLocation = adUseClient 
 
dTime = Now 
 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 

IT-SC book 
114 
         , _ 
         , _ 
         adCmdTableDirect 
 
' do something 
rst.Close 
 
Debug.Print "Time taken: " & _ 
            Format$(Now - dTime, "hh:mm:ss") 
The CursorLocation property is both read- and write-enabled while the Recordset object 
is closed, but is read-only once the object has been opened. 
The Connection object also has a CursorLocation property (see "Cursor location" under "Setting 
Connection Options" in Chapter 4). If you decide to open your Recordset object with an already 
opened Connection object and the ActiveConnection property, the Recordset object will 
automatically inherit the value of the CursorLocation property from the Connection object. 
 
When you are using a client-side Recordset object with RDS, your only 
choice of cursor location is the client. 
 
5.2.5 Sorting, Filtering, and Finding Rows in a Recordset 
The Recordset objects also include properties that allow recordset manipulation, such as 
sorting and filtering records in already created recordsets. 
5.2.5.1 The Filter property 
The Filter property of the Recordset object allows you to filter a recordset even after it 
has been created. This very useful property allows us to filter our recordset down into a 
smaller subset of records. 
The Filter property can be set to a number of values. The first of these values is the 
criteria search string. This is a value that closely resembles the WHERE clause of a SQL 
statement. The following code illustrates how the Filter property is used with a criteria 
search string: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset 
 
Debug.Print "Number of records: " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
rst.Filter = "[Year Born]=1970" 
 
Debug.Print "Number of records: " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
rst.Close 

IT-SC book 
115
When this piece of code is executed, the number of records in the Recordset object is originally 
very large (assuming there are a large number of records still in the Biblio.mdb database). Once 
the filter is applied with the [Year Born]=1970 clause, the number of records drops 
significantly because the Recordset is now filtering out all other values. 
Other acceptable values for the Filter property include the values of the FilterGroupEnum 
enumeration shown in Table 5-5. 
Table 5-5. The FilterGroupEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adFilterNone 
Indicates that there is no filter on the recordset. This 
value is equivalent to an empty string ("") and can be 
used to remove a filter and restore the recordset to its 
original contents. 
adFilterPendingRecords 
Indicates that the filter on the recordset is for records 
that have changed and have not yet been sent to the 
server. This value is for batch update mode only (see 
"Batch Optimistic" later in this chapter for more 
information). 
adFilterAffectedRecords 
Indicates that the filter on the recordset is for records 
that have been affected by the last call to Delete, 
Resync, UpdateBatch, or CancelBatch methods. 
adFilterFetchedRecords 
Indicates that the filter on the recordset is only for those 
records in the current cache. 
adFilterConflictingRecords Indicates that the filter on the recordset is for those 
records that have failed the last attempt at batch update.
The next piece of code illustrates the use of the adFilterPendingRecords constant as the 
value for the Filter property in order to see only those records that have not yet been 
posted to the data source: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockBatchOptimistic 
 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Steven" 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Patrice" 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Tammi" 
 
rst.Filter = adFilterPendingRecords 

IT-SC book 
116 
Debug.Print "Number of records: " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
rst.Filter = "" 
Debug.Print "Number of records: " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
rst.UpdateBatch 
Debug.Print "Number of records: " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
rst.Close 
In this example, after the filter is applied, only the three newly added records are visible through 
the Recordset object because the adFilterPendingRecords constant value was used. 
5.2.5.2 The Sort property 
You can also sort an opened recordset by the Recordset object by using the Sort property. The 
Sort property accepts a list of comma-delimited fields that correspond to fields in the recordset. In 
addition, a space followed by either DESC or ASC can be added to each field in the list to specify 
the order in which the records will be sorted. The Sort property works only with client-side 
cursors. 
The following code uses a client-side cursor to create a temporary index on the local machine 
based upon the sorting criteria [Year Born] DESC, Author: 
rst.CursorLocation = adUseClient 
 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
rst.Sort = "[Year Born] DESC, Author" 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print rst.Fields("Author").Value, _ 
                "" & rst.Fields("Year Born").Value 
    rst.MoveNext 
Loop 
 
rst.Close 
5.2.5.3 The Resync method 
Another useful method of the Recordset object is the Resync method. The Resync 
method repopulates the Recordset object with data from the data source. The Resync 
method accepts two parameters, AffectRecords and ResyncValues. 
The values for the AffectRecords parameter can be one of the AffectEnum enumeration values 
listed in Table 5-6. 
Table 5-6. The AffectEnum Enumeration  

IT-SC book 
117
Value 
Description 
adAffectCurrent Indicates that only the current record will be refreshed. 
adAffectsGroup Indicates that the records within the group specified by the Filter 
property will be refreshed. 
adAffectAll 
Indicates that all of the records within the Recordset object (even 
those outside of the applied Filter) will be updated. This is the default 
value. 
The value for the second parameter, ResyncValues, can be set to one of the ResyncEnum 
enumeration values shown in Table 5-7. 
Table 5-7. The ResyncEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adResyncAllValues 
Indicates that the recordset is populated with the data from 
the data source, overwriting any pending changes. This is 
the default value. 
adResyncUnderlyingValues Indicates that pending changes are saved to the database 
and then the recordset is repopulated. 
In the following code example, the Resync method is called with the adAffectGroup 
value for the AffectRecords parameter so that only the modified record is repopulated. In 
addition, the adResyncAllValues value is used for the ResyncValues parameter. This 
value causes the record that has been modified to be repopulated with the original data 
from the data source, thus canceling the update batch: 
Dim lNumRecords As Long 
 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockBatchOptimistic 
 
rst.Find "Author='Jason'" 
rst.Update "Author", "Joey" 
rst.Filter = adFilterPendingRecords 
Debug.Print "Number of records: " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
rst.Resync adAffectGroup, _ 
                adResyncAllValues 

IT-SC book 
118 
Debug.Print "Number of records: " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
Debug.Print rst.Fields("Author").Value 
 
rst.Close 
In order to repopulate the recordset with the one record that was modified and to post the update 
to the data source, the Resync method should be called with the adResyncUnderlyingValues 
value for the ResyncValues parameter. This is shown in the following code: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockBatchOptimistic 
 
rst.Find "Author='Jason'" 
rst.Update "Author", "Joey" 
rst.Filter = adFilterPendingRecords 
Debug.Print "Number of records: " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
rst.Resync adAffectGroup, _ 
                adResyncUnderlyingValues 
Debug.Print "Number of records: " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
Debug.Print rst.Fields("Author").Value 
 
rst.Close 
5.2.5.4 The Find method 
The Find method of the Recordset object can be used to locate the first occurrence of a 
condition within a Recordset object. The Find method has four arguments: 
Criteria (String)  
Indicates a column name from the Recordset, a comparison operator (<, >, =, >=, <=, <>, or like). 
SkipRows (Long)  
Optional. Indicates how many records to skip before beginning the search. The default value for 
this argument is 0. 
SearchDirection  
Optional. A SearchDirectionEnum (adSearchBackward or adSearchForward). 
Start (Variant)  
Optional. A bookmark that specifies where the search should begin. 
The following example illustrates how the Find method can be used to find the first author in the 
Authors table, named Jason: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 

IT-SC book 
119
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockBatchOptimistic 
 
rst.Find "Author='Jason'" 
 
. 
. 
. 
 
rst.Close 
5.2.6 Working with Multiple Recordset Objects 
You can clone a Recordset object with the Clone method of the Recordset object. 
By cloning Recordset objects, as shown in the next code fragment, you can easily look at 
multiple records within the same recordset. If you add records to the original or to the 
clone, the new records are instantaneously available to the other: 
Dim rstClone As ADODB.Recordset 
Set rstClone = ADODB.Recordset 
 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic 
 
Set rstClone = rst.Clone 
 
Debug.Print "Number of records before AddNew (original): " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
Debug.Print "Number of records before AddNew (clone): " & _ 
            CStr(rstClone.RecordCount) 
 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Jason" 
 
Debug.Print "Number of records after AddNew (original): " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
Debug.Print "Number of records after AddNew (clone): " & _ 
            CStr(rstClone.RecordCount) 
 
rst.Close 
rstClone.Close 
Recordsets can be cloned as many times as you wish. You can close the clones or the 
originals without affecting the other. When a clone is created, the record pointer is moved 
to the first record of the cloned recordset. 
The Clone method accepts an optional parameter, the LockType parameter. The default value for 
this parameter is adLockUnspecified, which tells ADO to use the same locking scheme on the 

IT-SC book 
120 
clone as was used on the original. The only other value specified for this property is 
adLockReadOnly, which, as it sounds, sets the locking scheme of the clone to read-only. 
Another method that is of some interest within the Recordset object is the NextRecordset 
method. This method allows you to query multiple SQL statements from within a single 
compound recordset. The following code illustrates how to use the NextRecordset 
method: 
rst.Open "SELECT * FROM Authors; " & _ 
         "SELECT * FROM Publishers;", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenForwardOnly, _ 
         adLockReadOnly, _ 
         adCmdText 
 
While (Not rst) 
    Do Until (rst.EOF) 
        Debug.Print rst.Fields(1).Value 
        rst.MoveNext 
    Until 
 
    Set rst = rst.NextRecordset 
Wend 
 
rst.Close 
Notice that the two SQL statements in this code example are separated by a semicolon (;). The 
first time through, the rst Recordset object is set to a recordset created by the first SQL 
statement. With the first call to the NextRecordset method (which returns a Recordset object), the 
rst Recordset object is set to a recordset created by the second SQL statement. Upon the second 
call to the NextRecordset method, the rst Recordset object is set to Nothing. 
5.3 Navigating a Recordset 
Moving around in a recordset is one of the most basic actions. There are many ways you 
can move within a recordset, but the basic concept for each technique is the same. 
Regardless of where or how you want to move around in a recordset, there is always a 
place pointed to by a record pointer. 
5.3.1 The Record Pointer 
The record pointer indicates the current record. Imagine a record pointer as the needle on 
a record player. It points to the current song so that you can access that song's 
information. In a recordset, a record pointer points to a record (most of the time) so that 
you can access that records information. 
Two important properties of a Recordset object, which have appeared in previous examples 
without full explanation, are the BOF (Beginning Of File) and EOF (End Of File) properties. 
These are Boolean properties that indicate that you have stepped out of the bounds of the 
recordset. Figure 5-6 shows you that the BOF property is True when the record pointer is before 

IT-SC book 
121
the first record in the recordset and that the BOF property is True when the record pointer is past 
the last record in the recordset. 
Figure 5-6. A typical recordset with BOF and EOF Properties 
 
If, when you open a recordset, there are no records in that recordset, both the BOF and EOF 
properties are set to True. We can check for this situation with the following code: 
If (Not (rst.BOF And rst.EOF)) Then ... 
The BOF and EOF properties are very important when moving around within a recordset. 
We will take a closer look at them in the next section as we begin to explore how they 
interact with functions that allow us to change the position of the record pointer. 
5.3.2 The MoveFirst, MovePrevious, MoveNext, and MoveLast 
Methods 
The four most common methods for moving the record pointer in a recordset are the MoveFirst, 
MovePrevious, MoveNext and MoveLast methods. The functionalities of these methods are 
described in Table 5-8. 
Table 5-8. The MoveFirst, MovePrevious, MoveNext, and MoveLast Methods  
Method 
Description 
MoveFirst 
The MoveFirst method moves the record pointer to the first record in a 
recordset. 
MovePrevious 
The MovePrevious method moves the record pointer to the ordinal position 
located directly before the current one. If there is no record at this location 
(meaning that the current record is the first record in the recordset), the BOF 
property is set to True and the record pointer no longer points to a valid record.

IT-SC book 
122 
MoveNext 
The MoveNext method moves the record pointer to the ordinal position located 
directly after the current one. If there is no record at this location (meaning that 
the current record is the last record in the recordset), the EOF property is set to 
True and the record pointer no longer points to a valid record. 
MoveLast 
The MoveLast method moves the record pointer to the last record in the 
recordset. 
The following code is a typical example of how the MoveFirst and MoveNext methods 
can be used (with the BOF and EOF properties) to step from the beginning to the end of a 
recordset: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print "Author: " & rst.Fields("Author").Value 
    rst.MoveNext 
Loop 
 
rst.Close 
Notice what is happening in this code. First, we check the recordset to see whether it is empty. If 
it's not, the record pointer is set to the first record in the recordset. Next, a Do Until statement, 
while the record pointer points to a valid record, prints the Author name and moves to the next 
record (by means of the MoveNext method). If the recordset is empty, the Do Until statement 
never executes, because the EOF property is true. 
Use the same concept to move from the end of a recordset to the beginning: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset 
 
Do Until (rst.BOF) 
    Debug.Print "Author: " & rst.Fields("Author").Value 
    rst.MovePrevious 
Loop 
 
rst.Close 
In this example, if the recordset is not empty, a call to the MoveLast method moves the record 
pointer to the end of the recordset. Also, the Do Until statement checks whether the record 
pointer is pointing to the beginning of the file, thus making the BOF property True. 
During each call to the MovePrevious method, the record pointer is moved to the record directly 
before the record to which it was pointing. When the record pointer points to the first record in 
the recordset and the MovePrevious method is called, the record pointer moves to the position 
located directly before the first record. When the record pointer is in this position, the BOF 
property is set to True as shown in Figure 5-6. The Do Until loop does not execute again 
because there are no more records available in the recordset. 

IT-SC book 
123
Notice that in the last example, we opened the recordset with a keyset cursor. Remember from the 
previous section on cursors (Section 5.1) that the keyset cursor is one of the three cursors that 
allow you to move the record pointer backward within a recordset. 
Sometimes it is necessary to check for the ability to move backward within a recordset. 
We can do this with the Supports method: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenForwardOnly 
 
If (rst.Supports(adMovePrevious)) Then 
    rst.MoveLast 
 
    Do Until (rst.BOF) 
        Debug.Print "Author: " & rst.Fields("Author").Value 
        rst.MovePrevious 
    Loop 
Else 
    Debug.Print "Cursor does not support bookmarks." 
End If 
 
rst.Close 
This code never prints an Author name, because a forward-only cursor does not support 
the MovePrevious method.  
5.3.3 The Move Example 
This example uses a model that is very typical to many database applications. Figure 5-7 shows 
the Move Example in action. 
Figure 5-7. The Move Example 
 
Each of the four buttons that allow the user to move to a different record in the recordset 
are called navigation buttons. Each of these buttons corresponds to a Move method 
introduced in the last section. 
Begin by adding the controls and setting their property values as shown in Table 5-9. Remember 
to make the four navigation buttons part of a control array. 
Table 5-9. The Move Example Control Settings  

IT-SC book 
124 
Control 
Property 
Value 
Label 
Caption 
Author ID: 
Label 
Name 
lblAuthorID 
Label 
Caption 
Author: 
Label 
Name 
lblAuthorName 
Label 
Caption 
Year Born: 
Label 
Name 
lblYearBorn 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdMove 
  
Index 
0 
  
Caption 
<< &First 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdMove 
  
Index 
1 
  
Caption 
< &Previous 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdMove 
  
Index 
2 
  
Caption 
&Next > 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdMove 
  
Index 
3 

IT-SC book 
125
  
Caption 
&Last >> 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdClose 
  
Caption 
&Close 
Now enter the code shown in Example 5-2. 
Example 5-2. The Move Next Example  
Option Explicit 
 
Private m_rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
Const FIRST = 0 
Const PREVIOUS = 1 
Const NEXT = 2 
Const LAST = 3 
 
Private Sub cmdClose_Click(  ) 
    m_rst.Close 
    Set m_rst = Nothing 
     
    Unload Me 
    End 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub cmdMove_Click(Index As Integer) 
 
    Select Case (Index) 
        Case FIRST: 
            m_rst.MoveFirst 
        Case PREVIOUS: 
            m_rst.MovePrevious 
        Case NEXT: 
            m_rst.MoveNext 
        Case LAST: 
            m_rst.MoveLast 
    End Select 
 
    PopulateAuthorInformation 
     
    AdjustNavigationButtons 
     
End Sub 
 
Private Sub PopulateAuthorInformation(  ) 
 
    lblAuthorID.Caption = m_rst.Fields("Au_ID").Value 
    lblAuthorName.Caption = "" & m_rst.Fields("Author").Value 
    lblYearBorn.Caption = "" & m_rst.Fields("Year Born").Value 
     

IT-SC book 
126 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub AdjustNavigationButtons(  ) 
     
    m_rst.MovePrevious 
    If (m_rst.BOF) Then 
        cmdMove(FIRST).Enabled = False 
        cmdMove(PREVIOUS).Enabled = False 
    Else 
        cmdMove(FIRST).Enabled = True 
        cmdMove(PREVIOUS).Enabled = True 
    End If 
    m_rst.MoveNext 
     
    m_rst.MoveNext 
    If (m_rst.EOF) Then 
        cmdMove(LAST).Enabled = False 
        cmdMove(NEXT).Enabled = False 
    Else 
        cmdMove(LAST).Enabled = True 
        cmdMove(NEXT).Enabled = True 
    End If 
    m_rst.MovePrevious 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub Form_Load(  ) 
     
    Set m_rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
 
    m_rst.Open "Authors", _ 
               "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
               adOpenKeyset, _ 
               adLockReadOnly 
                
    If (m_rst.BOF And m_rst.EOF) Then 
        MsgBox "There are no records in this recordset.", _ 
               vbOKOnly, _ 
               "Error" 
        cmdClose_Click 
    End If 
     
    cmdMove_Click FIRST 
                
End Sub 
In this example, the navigation buttons move the record pointer within the recordset. The 
AdjustNavigationButtons method changes the Enabled property for the buttons based on whether 
they can be used. If the record pointer is before the first record in the recordset, then the First and 
Previous button's Enabled property is set to False. If the record pointer is past the last record in 
the recordset, then the Last and Next button's Enabled property is set to False. 
Take a close look at the code in the AdjustNavigationButtons method. Notice that when 
testing to determine if BOF is True, the record pointer is first moved back one ordinal 
position and then is moved back to its original position once the test is completed: 

IT-SC book 
127
m_rst.MovePrevious 
If (m_rst.BOF) Then 
. 
. 
. 
End If 
m_rst.MoveNext 
The reason for this, as you may recall, is that the BOF property is True when the record pointer 
is at the position immediately before the first record in the recordset. What this code does is 
disable the First and Previous buttons before the user moves the record pointer to the position 
after the last record in the recordset, which would be an invalid record. 
The same goes for the EOF property. In this example, the record pointer is moved forward one 
position to check to see whether it is at position directly after the last record in the recordset. 
Once this check is complete, the record pointer moves back to the original record position. If the 
EOF property becomes True during this check, it means that the original position pointed to was 
the last record in the recordset. 
Notice that in the Form_Load event, after the recordset is opened, there is a check whether there 
are any records in the recordset at all. The reason for this is simple. If the recordset was empty 
when it was opened, the code just described would not work properly. You cannot use MoveFirst, 
MovePrevious, MoveNext, or MoveLast in an empty recordset. In an empty recordset, the BOF 
and EOF properties are set to True.  
5.3.4 Ordinal Position 
The ordinal position of the record pointer can be set with the AbsolutePosition property 
as shown: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset 
 
rst.AbsolutePosition = 1234 
 
Debug.Print "Author at record 1234: " & _ 
            rst.Fields("Author").Value 
 
rst.Close 
The AbsolutePosition property returns a value ranging from 1 to the number of records in the 
recordset. To obtain the number of records in a recordset, use the RecordCount property: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset 
 
Debug.Print "Number of records: " & _ 
            CStr(rst.RecordCount) 
 
rst.Close 

IT-SC book 
128 
The AbsolutePosition property can also return one of the constants from the PositionEnum 
enumeration shown in Table 5-10. 
Table 5-10. The PositionEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adPosBOF 
Indicates that the record pointer is at the position directly before the first record 
in the recordset, and that the BOF property is True. This value is not returned if 
the recordset is empty. 
adPosEOF 
Indicates that the record pointer is at the position directly after the last record in 
the recordset and that the EOF property is True. This value is not returned if the 
recordset is empty. 
AdPosUnknown 
Indicates one of three things: 
The recordset is empty. 
The current position of the record pointer is unknown. 
The data provider does not support the AbsolutePosition property. 
Once the AbsolutePosition property has changed, ADO recaches the number of records 
indicated by the CacheSize property, the first record in the cache being that pointed to by 
the AbsolutePosition property. 
The value of the AbsolutePosition property should never be used as a marker or a record 
number, because you cannot rely on the value of this property being the same even if you 
read it twice for the same record. Once a record is added or deleted from the recordset, 
this value changes. Instead, use the Bookmark property to perform such actions. 
5.3.5 Bookmarks 
When a recordset is created, each record is given a unique identifier, called a bookmark, which 
can be accessed with the Bookmark property. The Bookmark property returns a Variant datatype, 
which does not always evaluate to a readable String. The Bookmark property is not meant to be 
read directly: its implementation is dependent upon the data provider. The data provider is 
required only to allow you to read and set the values properly -- not to allow you to read and 
make sense of the value. 
 
Not all data providers or cursors support bookmarks. Use the Supports 
method of the Recordset object to check for the availability of bookmarks 
within a recordset. However, when you are using a client-side Recordset 
object with RDS, the Bookmark property is always supported. 
 

IT-SC book 
129
The following code illustrates how the Bookmark property is used: 
Dim vBookmark As Variant 
 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", adOpenKeyset 
 
rst.Find "Author='Jason'" 
 
If (rst.Supports(adBookmark)) Then 
 
    vBookmark = rst.Bookmark 
    rst.MoveFirst 
    rst.Bookmark = vBookmark 
 
    Debug.Print rst.Fields("Author").Value 
 
End If 
 
rst.Close 
The value of a recordset's bookmark is unique to the currently opened recordset. You 
cannot use a bookmark within two different recordsets or even two instances of the same 
recordset and expect predictable results. (The only exception to this rule is when you 
create one recordset from another with the Clone method.) 
The same record can be pointed to by two different bookmarks; therefore, you should 
never directly compare two bookmark's values. Instead, use the CompareBookmark 
property: 
Dim vFirstBookmark As Variant 
Dim vSecondBookmark As Variant 
Dim lCompareResult As Long 
 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset 
 
rst.MoveFirst 
rst.Find "Author='Jason'" 
vFirstBookmark = rst.Bookmark 
 
rst.MoveFirst 
rst.Find "Author='Tammi'" 
vSecondBookmark = rst.Bookmark 
 
lCompareResult = rst.CompareBookmarks(vFirstBookmark, _ 
                                      vSecondBookmark) 
 
If (lCompareResult = adCompareLessThan) Then 
    Debug.Print "Jason comes before Tammi" 
Else 
    Debug.Print "Tammi comes before Jason" 
End If 
 
rst.Close 

IT-SC book 
130 
In this example, the result of the CompareBookmarks method was compared to the 
adCompareLessThan constant to see the position of one bookmark in relation to the other. In 
addition to this constant, the CompareBookmark method can also return any value from the 
CompareEnum enumeration shown in Table 5-11. 
Table 5-11. The CompareEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adCompareLessThan 
Indicates that the first bookmark comes before the second in 
order. 
adCompareGreaterThan Indicates that the second bookmark comes before the first in 
order. 
adCompareEqual 
Indicates that the first bookmark is in the same position as 
the second. 
adCompareNotEqual 
Indicates that the first bookmark is not in the same position 
as the second and furthermore that the records are not 
ordered. 
adCompareNotComparable Indicates that the first bookmark cannot be compared to the 
second bookmark. 
5.3.5.1 The Move method 
Another method for navigating a recordset is the Move method. This method takes two 
parameters. The first parameter is a Long value that indicates the number of records to move. The 
second parameter can be either a valid bookmark Variant value or a valid value from the 
BookmarkEnum enumeration shown in Table 5-12. 
Table 5-12. The BookmarkEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adBookmarkCurrent Indicates that the Move method should begin counting records 
from the current record pointed to by the record pointer. This is the 
default value. 
adBookmarkFirst Indicates that the Move method should begin counting records 
from the first record in the recordset. 
adBookmarkLast 
Indicates that the Move method should begin counting records 

IT-SC book 
131
from the last record in the recordset. 
For you to pass a bookmark for the second parameter of the Move method, the recordset 
must support bookmarks. The following example illustrates how the Move method is 
used: 
Dim lNumRecords As Long 
 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset 
 
lNumRecords = 230 
 
rst.Move lNumRecords, adBookmarkFirst 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print "Author: " & _ 
                rst.Fields("Author").Value 
    rst.Move lNumRecords, adBookmarkCurrent 
Loop 
 
rst.Close 
This code starts at the first record in the recordset (indicated by the adBookmarkFirst constant 
value) and moves ahead 230 record positions. Within the Do Until loop, the Move method is 
continually called with the adBookmarkCurrent value that tells ADO to start from the current 
position within the recordset. This continues until the EOF property is True. 
If the number of records in the recordset is not evenly divisible by 230, attempting to move past 
the last record in the recordset sets the EOF property to True. Another attempt to move forward 
in a recordset by the Move method would result in an error, as would a call to the MoveNext 
method. 
You can also pass a negative number to the Move method as its first parameter: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset 
 
lNumRecords = -230 
 
rst.Move lNumRecords, adBookmarkLast 
 
Do Until (rst.BOF) 
    Debug.Print "Author: " & _ 
                rst.Fields("Author").Value 
    rst.Move lNumRecords, adBookmarkCurrent 
Until 
 
rst.Close 
Notice the second parameter to the Move method, the adBookmarkLast constant. This constant 
indicates that the Move method will begin counting records from the last record in the recordset. 

IT-SC book 
132 
This example is almost identical to the previous one, except the negative number passed to the 
Move method indicates that the record pointer is moving backwards in the recordset. The Move 
method then uses the adBookmarkCurrent constant, as in the last example, from within the Do 
Until loop to move from the position to which the record pointer is currently pointing. When the 
Move method attempts to move the record pointer before the first record in the recordset, the 
BOF property is set to True.  
5.3.6 Paging 
Pages logically divide the recordset into groups. The size of a page is determined by the value 
passed to the PageSize property. The number of logical pages within a recordset is indicated by 
the PageCount property. These properties are not available in a forward-only cursor. 
Both of these properties are illustrated in the following code: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic 
 
rst.PageSize = 25 
 
Debug.Print "Pages: " & CStr(rst.PageCount) 
Debug.Print "Page Size: " & CStr(rst.PageSize) 
 
rst.Close 
You can jump to the beginning of any page by using the AbsolutePage property to set the 
current page: 
Dim lPageNumber As Long 
 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic 
 
rst.PageSize = 25 
 
For lPageNumber = 1 To rst.PageCount 
    rst.AbsolutePage = lPageNumber 
    Debug.Print "The first author on page " & _ 
                CStr(lPageNumber) & " is " & _ 
                rst.Fields("Author").Value 
Next lPageNumber 
 
rst.Close 
5.4 Working with Records 
When working with data sources, the majority of your work revolves around adding, 
editing, or deleting records. In addition, you may find the need to retrieve many records 

IT-SC book 
133
at once. Let us begin learning how to work with records by learning how to add them to 
our recordset. 
5.4.1 Adding New Records 
To add a new record to a recordset, use the AddNew method. The AddNew method 
creates a new record at the end of your recordset and points the record pointer to it. The 
following code illustrates the most basic way in which the AddNew method can be used: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic 
 
rst.AddNew 
rst.Fields("Author") = "Jason" 
rst.Fields("Year Born") = 1973 
rst.Update 
 
rst.Close 
Notice that before the recordset is closed and after the information has been loaded into 
the fields of the recordset, the Update method is called. The Update method tells ADO 
that the record currently being edited is ready to be updated in the database. 
The AddNew method can also be used with a set of parameters as shown in this example: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic 
 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Kimberly" 
 
rst.Close 
This example passes two parameters to the AddNew method. The first parameter is the 
name of a field and the second parameter is the value for that field. There is no need to 
call the Update method when using this syntax because ADO knows that you are creating 
a new record with only one field value specified. 
Finally, the third and final syntax for adding new records with the AddNew method also 
accepts two parameters, but it allows you to set multiple fields' values in a single method 
call. This is accomplished with the use of arrays as follows: 
Dim sFields(1) As Variant 
Dim sValues(1) As Variant 
 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic 
 
sFields(0) = "Author" 

IT-SC book 
134 
sFields(1) = "Year Born" 
 
sValues(0) = "Tamara" 
sValues(1) = "1975" 
 
rst.AddNew sFields, sValues 
 
rst.Close 
Notice that the sFields array has the same dimension as the sValues array and that each 
ordinal position in the sFields array (beginning with 0) corresponds to an ordinal position in the 
sValues array. 
As in the previous example, there is no need to call the Update method, because ADO 
assumes that it has all the information it needs and automatically updates this information 
in the data source. 
It may seem obvious, but it is important to realize that a read-only data source does not 
allow you to update the recordset. This includes adding new records. The ability of a 
recordset to add new records can be checked with the Supports method by passing the 
adAddNew constant: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockReadOnly     ' read only... cannot add a record 
 
If (rst.Supports(adAddNew)) Then 
    rst.AddNew "Author", "New Author" 
Else 
    Debug.Print "Cannot add a new record." 
End If 
 
rst.Close 
As stated earlier, once a new record has been added to the recordset, the record pointer 
points to this new record so that the application can immediately read information from 
the newly added record. The following code displays the name of the newly added record, 
illustrating that the record pointer is automatically moved to point to the new record: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset 
 
If (rst.Supports(adAddNew)) Then 
    rst.AddNew 
    rst.Fields("Author") = "John" 
    rst.Update 
 
    Debug.Print rst.Fields("Author") 
Else 
    Debug.Print "Cannot add a new record." 
End If 
 

IT-SC book 
135
rst.Close 
5.4.2 Updating and Editing Records 
Earlier in this chapter, the Update method was described as the method that indicates to 
ADO that the application is ready for it to save the information for the edited record. 
There is also a method that tells ADO to cancel the pending modifications and to discard 
any new information to the data source. This method is the CancelUpdate method, which 
is illustrated in the following code: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic 
 
Dim lResponse As Long 
 
If (rst.Supports(adAddNew)) Then 
 
    rst.AddNew 
    rst.Fields("Author") = "Kaitlyn" 
    rst.Fields("Year Born") = "1997" 
 
    lResponse = MsgBox("Are you sure you want to add this record?", _ 
                       vbYesNo, _ 
                       "Add Record") 
 
    If (lResponse = vbYes) Then 
        rst.Update 
    Else 
        rst.CancelUpdate 
    End If 
 
End If 
 
rst.Close 
This example creates a new record in the recordset and then asks the user to confirm that 
they want to create a new record. If the answer is yes, the Update method is called. If the 
answer is no, the CancelUpdate method is called. 
Besides working in conjunction with the AddNew method, the Update method can also 
be used to edit an existing record in the recordset. By passing two parameters (just like 
the AddNew method), the Update method can alter the contents of a single field. 
The following example queries a data source to create a recordset that contains all records where 
Author is equal to Tamara. The Do Until loop then changes each of the records in the recordset 
so that the Author field is Tammi, instead of Tamara. 
rst.Open "SELECT Author " & _ 
         "FROM Authors " & _ 
         "WHERE Author='Tamara';", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 

IT-SC book 
136 
         adLockOptimistic 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    rst.Update "Author", "Tammi" 
    rst.MoveNext 
Loop 
 
rst.Close 
Just as the AddNew method had various syntaxes for its parameters, so does the Update 
method. Two Variant arrays can be passed to the Update method so that multiple fields 
can be updated immediately within a single record. The following piece of code 
illustrates how this can be done: 
Dim sFields(1) As Variant 
Dim sValues(1) As Variant 
 
rst.Open "SELECT Author, [Year Born] " & _ 
         "FROM Authors " & _ 
         "WHERE Author='Kimberly';", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic 
 
sFields(0) = "Author" 
sFields(1) = "Year Born" 
 
sValues(0) = "Kim" 
sValues(1) = "1975" 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    rst.Update sFields, sValues 
    rst.MoveNext 
Until 
 
rst.Close 
This example changes the value of the Author field to Kim and the Year Born field to 1975 for all 
records where the Author field was originally Kimberly. 
The EditMode property returns a value representing the current state of the recordset; this value is 
a valid EditModeEnum enumeration value as shown in Table 5-13. 
Table 5-13. The EditModeEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
AdEditAdd 
Indicates that the AddNew method has been called to add a new 
record to the current recordset, but either the Update or the 
CancelUpdate methods have not yet been called to save the new 
record to the underlying data source. 

IT-SC book 
137
AdEditDelete 
Indicates that the record that is pointed to by the record pointer has 
been deleted. 
AdEditInProgress Indicates that the data within the record that is currently being 
pointed to has been edited but not yet saved. 
AdEditNone 
Indicates that there is no editing taking place on the current record. 
The EditMode property can be used to print a text message indicating the mode of editing 
for a given recordset, at any time, by using a procedure like this one: 
Private Sub PrintEditMode(rst As Recordset) 
 
    Select Case (rst.EditMode) 
        Case adEditNone: 
            Debug.Print "Edit None" 
        Case adEditInProgress: 
            Debug.Print "Edit In Progress" 
        Case adEditAdd: 
            Debug.Print "Edit Add" 
        Case adEditDelete: 
            Debug.Print "Edit Delete" 
    End Select 
 
End Sub 
Now, take a look at a piece of code that has utilizes the PrintEditMode function to 
indicate the mode of a recordset at particular key places in our editing routines: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
If (rst.Supports(adAddNew)) Then 
 
    PrintEditMode rst               ' EditMode = adEditNone 
     
    rst.AddNew                      ' Add a new record 
    PrintEditMode rst               ' EditMode = adEditAdd 
     
    rst.Fields("Author") = "Justin" 
    rst.Update                      ' Update the new record 
    PrintEditMode rst               ' EditMode = adEditNone 
     
    rst.AddNew "Author", "Tyler"    ' Add a new record (and update it) 
    PrintEditMode rst               ' EditMode = adEditNone 
     
    rst.AddNew                      ' Add a new record 
    rst.Fields("Author") = "Lisa" 
    PrintEditMode rst               ' EditMode = adEditAdd 
     
    rst.AddNew                      ' Add a new record (update the 
other) 

IT-SC book 
138 
    PrintEditMode rst               ' EditMode = adEditAdd 
     
    rst.Fields("Author") = "Jessie" 
    rst.Update                      ' Update the last new record 
    PrintEditMode rst               ' EditMode = adEditNone 
 
End If 
 
rst.Close 
5.4.3 Deleting Records 
In ADO, the Delete method is used to remove records from the underlying data source. The 
Delete method can accept one of the AffectEnum enumeration values shown in Table 5-6. 
The following code shows how the Delete method can be used to delete a number of records. In 
this case, the Delete method is used to delete all records from the data source whose Year Born 
field is equal to 1975: 
rst.Open "SELECT Author, [Year Born] " & _ 
         "FROM Authors " & _ 
         "WHERE [Year Born]=1975;", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    rst.Delete adAffectCurrent 
    rst.Requery 
Loop 
 
rst.Close 
5.4.4 Retrieving Records 
Multiple records of a recordset can be retrieved with a single call to ADO in one of two 
ways. The first is by using the GetRows method. This method accepts three parameters. 
The first parameter is the number of rows that you would like to retrieve. The second 
parameter indicates the position in the recordset from which ADO should begin to 
retrieve rows. The third parameter indicates which fields to return from the recordset. 
The following example shows how the GetRows method is used: 
Dim vAuthor As Variant 
Dim lCount As Long 
 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, adLockOptimistic 
 
vAuthor = rst.GetRows(20, _ 
                      adBookmarkFirst, _ 
                      "Author") 
 
For lCount = 0 To UBound(vAuthor, 2) 
    Debug.Print vAuthor(0, lCount) 

IT-SC book 
139
Next lCount 
 
rst.Close 
The first parameter in the previous example indicates that 20 records should be returned. The 
second parameter, adBookmarkFirst, indicates to the GetRows method that ADO should start 
retrieving records starting from the first record. In addition to the example shown, the second 
parameter of the GetRows method can be a valid bookmark or any one of the BookmarkEnum 
enumeration values indicated in Table 5-14. 
Table 5-14. The BookmarkEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adBookmarkCurrent Indicates that the GetRows method will begin retrieving records 
starting with the current record in the recordset. 
adBookmarkFirst Indicates that the GetRows method will begin retrieving records 
starting with the first record in the recordset. 
adBookmarkLast 
Indicates that the GetRows method will begin retrieving records 
starting with the last record in the recordset. 
The third and last parameter of the GetRows method can set to a valid field name -- as in 
the last example, an ordinal position of a field name, an array of field names, or an array 
of ordinal positions of field names. 
Along with the GetRows method, there is a method that returns the entire recordset in a 
string format. This method is called the GetString method:  
Dim vRecordset As Variant 
 
rst.Open "SELECT * FROM Authors " & _ 
         "WHERE ([Year Born]<1970) " & _ 
         "AND   ([Year Born]<>0); ", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic 
 
vRecordset = rst.GetString 
 
Debug.Print vRecordset 
 
rst.Close 
Although not shown in this example, the GetString method can accept as many as five 
parameters: 

IT-SC book 
140 
The first parameter, the StringFormat parameter, can be set to a valid StringFormatEnum 
enumeration value. Currently, the only value defined within ADO for this enumeration is 
adClipString. 
The second parameter, the NumRows parameter, indicates the number of rows in the recordset 
that should be returned by the GetString method. If the NumRows value is not specified (or if it is 
greater than the number of records in the recordset), then the entire recordset will be returned in a 
string format. 
The third parameter, the ColumnDelimiter parameter, is used to indicate the character in which 
the columns are divided. If this parameter is omitted, the TAB character is used. 
The fourth parameter, the RowDelimiter parameter, is used to indicate the character in which the 
rows are divided. If this parameter is omitted, the CARRIAGE RETURN character is used. 
The fifth parameter, the NullExpr parameter, is used to indicate the character in which to display 
a NULL value. An empty string is used if this parameter is omitted. 
5.5 Lock Types: Managing Access to a Recordset 
There are four record-locking schemes in ADO. Each has its own advantages and 
disadvantages, as described in the following sections. The record lock type is indicated 
by either the LockType property of the Recordset object or the LockType parameter of 
the Open method of the Recordset object. The LockType parameter of the Open method 
is the fourth parameter in the parameter list. 
Either one of these (the parameter or the property) can be set to one of the four valid constants 
from the LockTypeEnum enumeration shown in Table 5-15. 
Table 5-15. The LockTypeEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adReadOnly 
Indicates that the recordset will use a read-only record-locking 
scheme. 
adLockOptimistic 
Indicates that the recordset will use an optimistic record-
locking scheme. 
adLockPessimistic 
Indicates that the recordset will use a pessimistic record-
locking scheme. 
adLockBatchOptimistic Indicates that the recordset will use a batch optimistic record-
locking scheme. 
5.5.1 Read-Only Locks 

IT-SC book 
141
A read-only record-locking scheme is the simplest locking scheme of the four available. 
Basically, a read-only recordset does not allow adding or editing of records; therefore, the 
records themselves do not need to be locked for editing at all. 
The following example illustrates how to open a recordset with the read-only record-
locking scheme: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockReadOnly 
 
' cannot alter data 
 
rst.Close 
You should use read-only locking whenever you do not plan on updating the data with 
the recordset. This can save system resources and speed up the data access because ADO 
does not have to handle multiple users editing the data. 
5.5.2 Pessimistic Locks 
A pessimistic record-locking scheme is one in which the data provider usually locks the 
data source, record by record, as soon as a record begins to be edited: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockPessimistic 
 
rst.AddNew                              ' record locked 
rst.Fields("Author").Value = "Lindsay" 
rst.Update 
                                        ' record unlocked 
rst.Close 
The previous example illustrates how the data provider locks a newly created record 
immediately while the call to AddNew is made. The record is unlocked once the Update 
method (or the CancelUpdate method) is called. 
You might choose to use pessimistic locking when your updates are going to be quick, as 
with an automated import process. Since pessimistic locking locks the record 
immediately, you don't have to wait until you have processed all the data and attempt to 
update the record to find out that it is locked by another user. However, pessimistic 
locking can cause delays in multi-update applications, creating lock contention. 
5.5.3 Optimistic Locks 
An optimistic record-locking scheme is one in which the data provider usually locks the 
data source, record by record, only during the Update method call: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 

IT-SC book 
142 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic 
 
rst.AddNew 
rst.Fields("Author").Value = "Lindsay" 
rst.Update                              ' record locked 
                                        ' record unlocked 
rst.Close 
Notice how this example differs from that of the pessimistic locking example. The newly 
created record is locked only during the Update method call rather than during the entire 
time between the AddNew and Update method calls. 
You might use optimistic locking when the user has interaction with the editing process. 
Because optimistic locking does not lock the record until the update is being performed, 
you can tie your code that modifies field values directly to the user interface that the user 
is modifying. By using optimistic locking, you don't need to lock a record if the user 
decides to take an hour to modify data -- instead, when the user attempts to save the data, 
the record would be locked momentarily. 
5.5.4 Batch Optimistic Locks 
Batch optimistic locking is very similar to optimistic locking in that the data provider 
locks the underlying data source only when updates are made, rather than when editing 
begins. The difference, however, is that updates are done in batches. 
Batch optimistic locking is advantageous when the user is making a lot of changes and 
wants to commit them all at once: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockBatchOptimistic 
 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Christopher" 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Charlie" 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Frankie" 
rst.UpdateBatch 
 
rst.Close 
Notice how the previous example adds three new records. Because the LockType parameter of 
the Open method call of the Recordset object was set to adLockBatchOptimistic, the records 
aren't actually written to the data source until the UpdateBatch method of the Recordset object is 
called. In addition, the data source is not locked until this method is called. 
Just as the Update method has a CancelUpdate method, the UpdateBatch method has the 
CancelBatch method, which accomplishes basically the same job: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 

IT-SC book 
143
         adLockBatchOptimistic 
 
rst.AddNew "Author", "David" 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Danny" 
rst.CancelBatch 
 
rst.Close 
In the preceding example, neither of the two records created by the AddNew method was 
added to the recordset because the CancelBatch method was called. 
The UpdateBatch and CancelBatch methods can also accept a valid AffectEnum enumeration 
value as shown in Table 5-6. The following example illustrates the use of a parameter with the 
CancelBatch and UpdateBatch methods: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockBatchOptimistic 
 
rst.AddNew "Author", "David" 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Danny" 
rst.CancelBatch adAffectCurrent     ' cancels Danny 
 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Marie" 
rst.UpdateBatch adAffectAllChapters ' updates David and Marie 
 
rst.Close 
Notice that the call to the CancelBatch method only cancels the last editing function, the AddNew 
method that was used to add a record with an Author field set to Danny. The UpdateBatch 
method uses the adAffectAllChapters value to update the two remaining, newly created 
records. 
The Status property displays the status of the current record's editing by returning a sum of one or 
more valid RecordStatusEnum enumeration values as shown in Table 5-16. 
Table 5-16. The RecordStatusEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adRecCanceled 
Indicates that the record was not saved because the last 
batch operation was canceled. 
adRecCantRelease 
Indicates that the new record was not saved because of 
conflicts with record locks. 
adRecConcurrencyViolation Indicates that the record was not saved because 
optimistic concurrency was used. 

IT-SC book 
144 
adRecDBDeleted 
Indicates that the record has already been removed from 
the data source. 
adRecDeleted 
Indicates that the record has been deleted. 
adRecIntegrityViolation Indicates that the record was not saved because the 
application violated integrity constraints. 
adRecInvalid 
Indicates that the record was not saved because its 
bookmark was invalid. 
adRecMaxChangesExceeded Indicates that the record was not saved because there 
were more pending records than the data provider 
supported. 
adRecModified 
Indicates that the record was not modified. 
adRecMutlipleChanges 
Indicates that the record was not saved because it would 
have affected multiple records. 
adRecNew 
Indicates that the record is new. 
adRecObjectOpen 
Indicates that the record was not saved because it 
conflicted with an open storage object. 
adRecOK 
Indicates that the record was successfully updated. 
adRecOutOfMemory 
Indicates that the record was not saved because the 
computer has run out of memory. 
adRecPendingChanges 
Indicates that the record was not saved because it 
references a pending insert. 
adRecPermissionDenied 
Indicates that the record was not saved because the 
application did not have sufficient permissions. 
adRecSchemaViolation 
Indicates that the record was not saved because it 
conflicted with the underlying structure of the database. 

IT-SC book 
145
adRecUnmodified 
Indicates that the record was not modified. 
The Status property can be used to print a textual description of the status of the 
Recordset object, at any time, by using a subroutine similar to the one listed here: 
Private Sub PrintRecordStatus(rst As Recordset) 
 
    Select Case (rst.Status) 
        Case adRecUnmodified: 
            Debug.Print "Record is unmodified" 
        Case adRecNew: 
            Debug.Print "New record" 
        Case adRecDBDeleted: 
            Debug.Print "Record has been deleted" 
        Case Else: 
            Debug.Print "Other" 
    End Select 
The PrintRecordStatus method can be used in our code to see the status of our records as 
we constantly add and edit them, as shown in this example: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockBatchOptimistic 
            
PrintRecordStatus rst' Status = adRecUnmodified 
 
rst.AddNew "Author", "David" ' Add a new record 
PrintRecordStatus rst' Status = adRecNew 
 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Danny" ' Add a new record 
PrintRecordStatus rst' Status = adRecNew 
 
rst.CancelBatch adAffectCurrent' Remove the previous record 
PrintRecordStatus rst' Status = adRecDBDeleted 
 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Marie" ' Add a new record 
PrintRecordStatus rst' Status = adRecNew 
 
rst.UpdateBatch adAffectAllChapters' Update all pending records 
PrintRecordStatus rst' Status = adRecUnmodified 
 
rst.Close 
When working with client-side cursors, an Update method of some kind can send a lot of 
unnecessary information back to the server. In particular, by default, the Update methods return 
all of the records to the server, even if they were not modified. To alter this behavior, the 
MarshallOptions property can be set to adMarshallModifiedOnly value, which allows the 
client-side cursor to return only the modified records to the server -- this setting can potentially 
save a lot of time and resources: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 

IT-SC book 
146 
         adOpenStatic, _ 
         adLockBatchOptimistic 
 
rst.MarshalOptions = adMarshalModifiedOnly 
rst.AddNew "Author", "Patrice" 
 
rst.Close 
 
 
The MarshalOptions property is used only when you are using a client-side 
Recordset object with RDS. 
 
5.6 Summary 
This chapter showed you the second of the seven major components of ActiveX Data 
Objects, the Recordset object and its functions. After reading this chapter, you should be 
able to fully understand the Recordset object and the following key points: 
There are four different types of views, or cursors, into a data source's information. These are the 
dynamic, keyset, static, and forward-only cursors. 
Recordsets are opened with the Open method. Before a recordset is opened, the way in which it 
can be opened can be fine-tuned with multiple properties, and once a recordset is opened, it can 
be filtered and sorted. 
The standard ways in which you can move around within a recordset are the MoveFirst, 
MovePrevious, MoveNext, and MoveLast methods. In addition, the record pointer can be set to a 
particular ordinal position within a recordset or a valid bookmark. 
Records can be added, modified, and deleted. The status of a particular record can be identified -- 
and multiple records can be returned -- by the single method calls GetRows and GetString. 
There are four different types of record-locking schemes: read-only, pessimistic, optimistic, and 
batch optimistic record locking. 
The next chapter of this book, Chapter 6, explains how to work with individual fields of a 
recordset. In addition, this chapter will show how these fields can be manipulated from within an 
application. 

IT-SC book 
147
Chapter 6. Fields 
6.1 The Fields Collection Object 
6.2 Field Specifics 
6.3 Determining Field Object Functionality 
6.4 Summary 
6.1 The Fields Collection Object 
Every Recordset object contains a collection of fields represented by the Fields collection 
object. Within the Fields collection object, there is a collection of Field objects, each 
representing a column in the recordset. Through the Fields collection object, each 
individual Field object can be accessed. 
Every value within one column of a recordset shares a common group of characteristics, 
which define that field. These characteristics for each column are stored in a 
corresponding Field object within the recordset's Fields collection object. 
6.1.1 The Field Object 
In its simplest form, a Field object has a name and a value. A field's name uniquely 
identifies a column within the recordset. The name of a given field can be accessed 
through Field object's Name property, for example: 
Dim fld As Field 
 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
Set fld = rst.Fields(1) 
 
Debug.Print fld.Name 
 
rst.Close 
Set fld = Nothing 
The value of a Field object changes depending on which record the record pointer is 
pointing to. The value of a field can be obtained by the Value property of the Field object: 
Debug.Print rst.Fields!Author.Value 
Debug.Print rst.Fields!Author 
Both of these statements would print the same value, because the two lines are identical 
in meaning: because the Value property is the default property for the Field object. 

IT-SC book 
148 
When you add new records to a recordset, you can use the Value property to set the value 
for a particular field in the new record: 
rst.AddNew 
rst.Fields("Author").Value = "Jason" 
rst.Update 
And, as mentioned earlier, since the Value property is the default property for the Field 
object, it can be omitted, as in the following example: 
rst.AddNew 
rst.Fields("Author") = "Kimberly" 
rst.Update 
6.1.2 Working with the Fields Collection 
The Fields collection object of a Recordset object contains a collection of Field objects 
for the given recordset, once the Recordset object is opened. The number of Field objects 
with the Fields collection object can be obtained with the Count property: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic 
          
Debug.Print rst.Fields.Count 
 
rst.Close 
Individual Field objects can be accessed with the Item method of the Fields collection 
object: 
Debug.Print rst.Fields.Item(1).Name 
Debug.Print rst.Fields.Item("Author").Name 
Alternatively, the Item method can be omitted, because it is the default property of the 
Fields collection object: 
Debug.Print rst.Fields(1).Name 
Debug.Print rst.Fields("Author").Name 
In addition, the following syntax can be used to access a particular Field object in the 
Fields collection object: 
Debug.Print rst.Fields!Author.Name 
To add a new Field object to the Fields collection object, use the Append method: 
rst.Fields.Append "Dirty", _ 
                  adChar, _ 
                  10, _ 
                  adFldMayBeNull + adFldUpdatable 
Notice the use of the parameters in this example. The first parameter gives the newly created 
Field object a name. The second parameter indicates the new Field object's datatype. The optional 

IT-SC book 
149
third parameter indicates the defined size of the new Field object. The fourth and last parameter is 
a combination of FldAttributesEnum values. All of these parameters are described later in this 
chapter. 
The Append method cannot be called on a recordset that is already open or has had the 
ActiveConnection property previously set. 
To remove a Field object from the Fields collection object, use the Delete method of the 
Fields object with a single parameter indicating the name of the Field to delete from the 
collection: 
rst.Fields.Delete "Dirty" 
6.2 Field Specifics 
The Field object, as stated earlier, contains all of the information that corresponds to a single 
column of data within the recordset. The most important type of field characteristic is the field's 
datatype. 
6.2.1 Field Datatypes 
The datatype of a field specifies the type of information stored in the field within the recordset. 
There are many different datatypes available from many different data sources. ADO contains a 
list of datatypes that encompasses the majority of the datatypes known to developers. This list is 
shown in Table 6-1. These values are constants that represent the different datatype values that 
the Type property of the Field object can be set to. 
Table 6-1. The DataTypeEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adArray 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a safe array of 
another type that is joined to the adArray value by a logical Or. 
adBigInt 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is an 8-byte signed 
integer value. 
adBinary 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a binary value. 
adBoolean 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a Boolean value. 
adByRef 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a pointer to 
another type which is joined to the adByRef value by a logical Or.
adBSTR 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a null-terminated 

IT-SC book 
150 
character-string value. 
adChar 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a String value. 
adCurrency 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a currency value, 
which is stored in an 8-byte, signed integer. 
adDate 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a date value, 
which is stored in a Double. 
adDBDate 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a date value represented 
in the format yyyymmdd. 
adDBTime 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a date value represented 
in the format hhmmss. 
adDBTimeStamp 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a date-time stamp 
represented in the format yyyymmddhhmmss and a fraction value that 
represents billionths of a second. 
adDecimal 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is an exact numeric 
value with a fixed precision and scale. 
adDouble 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a double-precision 
floating-point value. 
adEmpty 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is unspecified. 
adError 
Indicates a 32-bit error code. 
adGUID 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a globally unique 
identifier (GUID). 
adIDispatch 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a pointer to an 
Idispatch interface on an OLE object. 
adInteger 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a 4-byte signed 
integer value. 

IT-SC book 
151
adIUnknown 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a pointer to an 
unknown interface on an OLE object. 
adLongVarBinary 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a long binary 
value. 
adLongVarChar 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is long String value.
adLongVarWChar 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a long null-
terminated string value. 
adNumeric 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is an exact numeric
value with a fixed precision and scale. 
adSingle 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a single precision 
floating-point value. 
adSmallInt 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a 2-byte signed-
integer value. 
adTinyInt 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a 1-byte signed-
integer value. 
adUnsignedBigInt Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is an 8-byte 
unsigned-integer value. 
adUnsignedInt 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a 4-byte 
unsigned-integer value. 
adUnsignedSmallInt Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a 2-byte 
unsigned-integer value. 
adUnsignedTinyInt Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a 1-byte 
unsigned-integer value. 
adUserDefined 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a user-defined 
variable. 

IT-SC book 
152 
adVarBinary 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a binary value. 
adVarChar 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a String value. 
adVariant 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is an Automation 
Variant value. 
adVector 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a structure that 
contains a count of elements and a pointer to a value of another 
other type, which is joined to the adVector value by a logical Or. 
adVarWChar 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a null-terminated 
Unicode character-string value. 
adWVhar 
Indicates that the datatype of the Field object is a null-terminated 
Unicode character-string value. 
You can use the Type property of the Field object to print the datatype for a given object 
with a function, as shown here: 
Private Sub PrintFieldDataType(fld As Field) 
 
    Dim sTemp As String 
     
    Select Case (fld.Type) 
        Case adBigInt: 
            sTemp = "8-Byte Signed Integer" 
        Case adBinary: 
            sTemp = "Binary" 
        Case adBoolean: 
            sTemp = "Boolean" 
        Case adBSTR: 
            sTemp = "Null Terminated String" 
        Case adChar: 
            sTemp = "String" 
        Case adCurrency: 
            sTemp = "Currency" 
        Case adDate: 
            sTemp = "Date (Double)" 
        Case adDBDate: 
            sTemp = "Date (yyyymmdd)" 
        Case adDBTime: 
            sTemp = "Time (hhmmss)" 
        Case adDBTimeStamp: 
            sTemp = "Date/Time (yyyymmddhhmmss and a billionths " _ 
                  & "of a second fraction)" 
        Case adDecimal: 
            sTemp = "Decimal" 

IT-SC book 
153
        Case adDouble: 
            sTemp = "Double Precision Floating Point" 
        Case adEmpty: 
            sTemp = "Not Specified" 
        Case adError: 
            sTemp = "32-Bit Error code" 
        Case adGUID: 
            sTemp = "Globally Unique Identifier" 
        Case adIDispatch: 
            sTemp = "Pointer to an IDispatch Interface" 
        Case adInteger: 
            sTemp = "4-Byte Signed Integer" 
        Case adIUnknown: 
            sTemp = "Pointer to an IUnknown Interface" 
        Case adLongVarBinary: 
            sTemp = "Long Binary" 
        Case adLongVarChar: 
            sTemp = "Long String" 
        Case adLongVarWChar: 
            sTemp = "Long Null Terminated String" 
        Case adNumeric: 
            sTemp = "Numeric" 
        Case adSingle: 
            sTemp = "Single Precision Floating Point" 
        Case adSmallInt: 
            sTemp = "2-Byte Signed Integer" 
        Case adTinyInt: 
            sTemp = "1-Byte Signed Integer" 
        Case adUnsignedBigInt: 
            sTemp = "8-Byte Unsigned Integer" 
        Case adUnsignedInt: 
            sTemp = "4-Byte Unsigned Integer" 
        Case adUnsignedSmallInt: 
            sTemp = "2-Byte Unsigned Integer" 
        Case adUnsignedTinyInt: 
            sTemp = "1-Byte Unsigned Integer" 
        Case adUserDefined: 
            sTemp = "User Defined Variable" 
        Case adVarBinary: 
            sTemp = "Binary" 
        Case adVarChar: 
            sTemp = "String" 
        Case adVariant: 
            sTemp = "Variant" 
        Case adWChar: 
            sTemp = "Null Terminated Unicode String" 
    End Select 
     
    Debug.Print fld.Name & ":", _ 
                sTemp 
                 
End Sub 
The PrintFieldDataType function can be used to display the datatype of each of the Field 
objects in a given Fields collection object: 
For Each fld In rst.Fields 

IT-SC book 
154 
    PrintFieldDataType fld 
Next fld 
If we were to take a look at the output of running the previous code segment, we might 
see something like this: 
Au_ID:        4-Byte Signed Integer 
Author:       String 
Year Born:    2-Byte Signed Integer 
For fields with numeric datatypes, the Precision property allows you to see the number of 
bytes that can be used to represent the information within the field. The following code 
will print the precision for each of the three fields in the Fields collection object: 
For Each fld In rst.Fields 
    Debug.Print fld.Name & ":", _ 
                fld.Precision 
Next fld 
with output something like: 
Au_ID:         10  
Author:        255  
Year Born:     5 
The Au_ID field can hold the maximum value that can be shown in 10 digits 
(2,147,483,647). The Author field does not have precision -- thus the 255 value. The 
Year Born field's largest value (32,767) can be shown in a maximum of 5 bytes. 
The NumericScale property is used to determine how many bytes are used after the 
decimal point for fields with numeric datatypes. If the following code was run on the 
same table, values of 255 would appear for each since Long Integers, Strings, and 
Integers do not have a numeric scale: 
For Each fld In rst.Fields 
    Debug.Print fld.Name & ":", _ 
                fld.NumericScale 
Next fld 
6.2.2 Field Sizes 
There are two sizes associated with each Field object: defined and actual. 
The defined size of a field is the size, in bytes, that the field obtains within a data source 
to hold the field's information. The actual size of a field is the size, in bytes, that is used 
by the field to hold the field's information. In other words, the defined size indicates the 
allotted space for the field information while the actual size is the space that is actually 
used. The actual size can be equal to or less than the defined size. 
The defined size of a field can be obtained by using the DefinedSize property. The actual 
size of a field is determined by the ActualSize property: 
For Each fld In rst.Fields 

IT-SC book 
155
 
    Debug.Print "Name:", _ 
                fld.Name 
                 
    Debug.Print "Value:", _ 
                fld.Value 
                 
    Debug.Print "Actual Size:", _ 
                fld.ActualSize 
                 
    Debug.Print "Defined Size:", _ 
                fld.DefinedSize 
                 
    Debug.Print "Room Left:", _ 
                (fld.DefinedSize - fld.ActualSize) 
                 
    Debug.Print 
     
Next fld 
If this code were run on our data source, the following output would be generated: 
Name:          Au_ID 
Value:         16587 
Actual Size:   4 
Defined Size:  4 
Room Left:     0 
 
Name:          Author 
Value:         Kimberly 
Actual Size:   8 
Defined Size:  50 
Room Left:     42 
 
Name:          Year Born 
Value:         0 
Actual Size:   2 
Defined Size:  2 
Room Left:     0 
Notice that the fields that are of numeric datatypes have no room left, even if they aren't 
holding any information (Year Born). Also notice how the actual size is different from 
the defined size for the field Author, which is a string datatype. 
6.2.3 Large Datatypes 
Sometimes a field's data is too large to obtain all at once. Sometimes we don't know the 
actual size of a field's data. A good example of this is the Microsoft Access datatype 
"Memo." This datatype is used to hold a large amount of string information, and the 
amount varies from record to record. 
Conventional field access would tell us to use the Value property to obtain this data, but 
ADO gives us a couple more functions to deal with these datatypes. The AppendChunk 
and GetChunk methods are used to store and retrieve chunks of information in datatypes 

IT-SC book 
156 
that contain large binary information. In order to use either the AppendChunk or 
GetChunk methods, the field must be able to support them. To check for this 
functionality, use the Attributes property as shown in the following example: 
If (rst.Fields("BigField").Attributes And adFldLong) Then 
 
    rst.MoveFirst 
     
    rst.Fields("BigField").AppendChunk "This is the first part of the 
data" 
    rst.Fields("BigField").AppendChunk "This is another" 
    rst.Fields("BigField").AppendChunk "This is another" 
    rst.Fields("BigField").AppendChunk "This is another" 
     
    rst.Update 
     
End If 
This code segment moves to the first record within a recordset and appends data to a field, 
BigField, if the field has an attribute of adFldLong. The first AppendChunk method call replaces 
the information within the field, while each subsequent call adds information onto the last. Finally, 
the Update method of the recordset is called to save the information. 
After running this code, the value of the BigField field would be, "This is the first part of 
the dataThis is anotherThis is anotherThis is another". In this example, this value makes 
little sense, but in real-world applications, the AppendChunk method can be used to 
append log information, note fields, or even binary image information. 
The sister method of AppendChunk, GetChunk, is used to retrieve the information within a large 
binary field. Just as with AppendChunk, the attribute flag adFldLong must be set in order to use 
the method. The following example uses the GetChunk method to retrieve the information stored 
within the BigField field: 
If (rst.Fields("BigField").Attributes And adFldLong) Then 
     
    Dim sTemp As String 
     
    rst.MoveFirst 
    sTemp = rst.Fields("BigField").GetChunk(5) & "" 
    While (sTemp <> "") 
        Debug.Print sTemp; 
        sTemp = rst.Fields("BigField").GetChunk(2) & "" 
    Wend 
    Debug.Print 
     
End If 
In this example, an initial call to the GetChunk method is made with the parameter 5, which 
indicates how many bytes of information to retrieve from the field. With this method call, 
GetChunk will return five bytes of information if it exists. If less than five bytes of information 
exists, then the remainder will be returned. If there is no more information to return, the value 
returned from the GetChunk method is Null. 

IT-SC book 
157
This return value from the GetChunk method is concatenated with an empty string ("") so that we 
do not get an error if this information returned Null. We cannot assign a Null value to a String, 
but by concatenating a Null value and empty string, we are left with an empty string, which can 
be assigned to a String variable. 
The previous code then performs a While loop, which checks for an empty string value to 
indicate completion. Within the loop, the GetChunk method retrieves two bytes at a time, until a 
Null value is returned and concatenated with our empty string, thus ending the While loop. 
6.2.4 Batch Updates 
When working with batch updates, sometimes it is desirable to know what was in the 
field before changes were made. ADO offers two different properties to check this value: 
UnderlyingValue and OriginalValue. 
The OriginalValue property returns the value that was originally returned to the 
Recordset object. This value is used to restore the field value when a CancelUpdate or 
CancelBatch method is called. If the Update or UpdateBatch method is called, then the 
OriginalValue will return this new value. 
The UnderlyingValue property returns the value that is stored in the data source. This 
value can change (perhaps by another user) and differs from the OriginalValue, which 
returns the value last stored in the recordset. 
To see the difference between the two properties, look at the following code fragment: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockBatchOptimistic 
                   
rst.MoveFirst 
PrintFieldValues rst.Fields("Author") 
 
rst.Fields("Author") = "Jason" 
PrintFieldValues rst.Fields("Author") 
 
rst.Fields("Author") = "Kimberly" 
PrintFieldValues rst.Fields("Author") 
     
    ' modify the first record, assuming its Year Born field is 1973 
    con.Open "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
    con.Execute "UPDATE Authors SET Author = 'Tammi' WHERE [Year Born] 
= 1973;" 
    con.Close 
 
PrintFieldValues rst.Fields("Author") 
 
rst.Fields("Author") = "Kaitlyn" 
PrintFieldValues rst.Fields("Author") 
 
rst.UpdateBatch 
PrintFieldValues rst.Fields("Author") 

IT-SC book 
158 
 
rst.Close 
Here the record pointer is positioned to the first record in the recordset. Its value is changed to 
Jason, then to Kimberly. At this time, a second transaction updates all records to Tammi, where 
the Year Born field value is 1973 (we are assuming the first record has this value for Year Born). 
Next, the Author name is changed to Kaitlyn and then updated. 
Between the commotion, calls to the method PrintFieldValues are made. This method 
simply displays the name, value, underlying value, and original value of the field as 
follows: 
Private Sub PrintFieldValues(fld As Field) 
     
    Debug.Print "Name:             " & fld.Name 
    Debug.Print "Value:            " & fld.Value 
    Debug.Print "Underlying Value: " & fld.UnderlyingValue 
    Debug.Print "Original Value:   " & fld.OriginalValue 
    Debug.Print 
     
End Sub 
If we took a look at the output of the previous pieces of code, we would see something 
like this: 
Name:             Author 
Value:            Sydow, Dan Parks 
Underlying Value: Sydow, Dan Parks 
Original Value:   Sydow, Dan Parks 
The first call to the PrintFieldValues prints what we would expect -- the value, 
underlying value, and original value are all the same: 
Name:             Author 
Value:            Jason 
Underlying Value: Sydow, Dan Parks 
Original Value:   Sydow, Dan Parks 
Now, the code has changed the value of the field to Jason. Notice that the recordset is in batch 
updating mode and the information will not be saved until the UpdateBatch method is called. 
Name:             Author 
Value:            Kimberly 
Underlying Value: Sydow, Dan Parks 
Original Value:   Sydow, Dan Parks 
Again, the value of the field is changed, this time to Kimberly: 
Name:             Author 
Value:            Kimberly 
Underlying Value: Tammi 
Original Value:   Sydow, Dan Parks 

IT-SC book 
159
Notice how the underlying value and the original value part ways. Now the underlying 
value in the data source has been changed by the Update method from a separate 
transaction. The original value is the value that was originally returned to the recordset. 
Name:             Author 
Value:            Kaitlyn 
Underlying Value: Tammi 
Original Value:   Sydow, Dan Parks 
Once again, the value of the field is changed -- this time to Kaitlyn: 
Name:             Author 
Value:            Kaitlyn 
Underlying Value: Kaitlyn 
Original Value:   Kaitlyn 
Finally, the UpdateBatch method is called, resetting all three values to the value that is in 
the field, in the data source, and the value that has been returned to the recordset. 
6.3 Determining Field Object Functionality 
Earlier, the Attributes property of the Field object was introduced as a method to identify 
functionality available to a particular field. In the earlier example, the Attributes property 
was used to see whether a field contained long binary data prior to using the 
AppendChunk and GetChunk methods. 
In addition to this attribute, the Attributes property can identify any combination of valid 
FieldAttributeEnum enumeration values as listed in Table 6-2. 
Table 6-2. The FieldAttributeEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adFldMayDefer 
Indicates that the field value is returned only when the value is 
accessed rather than with the rest of the record. 
adFldUpdatable 
Indicates that the field value is updateable. 
adFldUnknownUpdatable Indicates that ADO cannot determine if the field value is 
updateable. 
adFldFixed 
Indicates that the field contained a fixed length of data. 
adFldIsNullable 
Indicates that the field value can be set to Null. 
adFldKeyColumn 
Indicates that the field value is a key in the data source. 

IT-SC book 
160 
adFldMayBeNull 
Indicates that the Null values can be returned by this field 
value. 
adFldLong 
Indicates that the field value is a long binary value. This 
attribute must be set in order to use AppendChunk and 
GetChunk methods on a field. 
adFldRowID 
Indicates that the field value is a unique row identifier that 
cannot be set. 
adFldRowVersion 
Indicates that the field value is a type of time and/or date 
stamp used to track changes in the record. 
adFldCacheDeferred 
Indicates that the field value is cached. 
In order to check for a particular FieldAttributeEnum value, use the logical And operator on the 
Attributes property as shown in the following code segment: 
For Each fld In rst.Fields 
 
    Debug.Print "Name:", _ 
                fld.Name 
                 
    Debug.Print "Attributes:" 
     
    If (fld.Attributes And adFldMayDefer) Then 
        Debug.Print , "Deferred" 
    End If 
     
    If (fld.Attributes And adFldUpdatable) Then 
        Debug.Print , "Updateable" 
    End If 
     
    If (fld.Attributes And adFldUnknownUpdatable) Then 
        Debug.Print , "Update capability unknown" 
    End If 
     
    If (fld.Attributes And adFldFixed) Then 
        Debug.Print , "Fixed-length data" 
    End If 
     
    If (fld.Attributes And adFldIsNullable) Then 
        Debug.Print , "Accepts Null values" 
    End If 
         
    If (fld.Attributes And adFldMayBeNull) Then 
        Debug.Print , "Field may be null" 
    End If 
     

IT-SC book 
161
    If (fld.Attributes And adFldLong) Then 
        Debug.Print , "Long binary data" 
    End If 
     
    If (fld.Attributes And adFldRowID) Then 
        Debug.Print , "Row identifier" 
    End If 
         
    If (fld.Attributes And adFldKeyColumn) Then 
        Debug.Print , "Key column" 
    End If 
     
    If (fld.Attributes And adFldRowVersion) Then 
        Debug.Print , "Time or date stamp for versioning" 
    End If 
         
    If (fld.Attributes And adFldMayBeNull) Then 
        Debug.Print , "Cached" 
    End If 
     
    Debug.Print 
     
Next fld 
In this code, separate If...Then clauses are needed to check for each FieldAttributeEnum 
value. Because the Attributes property can contain multiple FieldAttributeEnum values, I do 
not recommend checking for an attribute with equality. For instance, if the following code were 
used to check for the adFldRowVersion value, it would not work if the Attributes property 
contained both the adFldRowVersion and adFldKeyColumn flags:  
' will not detect adFldRowVersion + adFldKeyColumn 
If (fld.Attributes = adFldRowVersion) Then 
        Debug.Print , "Time or date stamp for versioning" 
End If 
6.4 Summary 
After reading this chapter, you should understand the Fields collection object, as well as 
the Field object, and the following key points about the two: 
The Fields collection object contains a collection of Field objects, which each represent a column 
in the data source. 
There are many different datatypes for fields, all of which can be identified with the Type 
property. For many types, alternate properties such as Precision and NumericScale can be used to 
better explain the definition of the field. 
The supported functionality of a given Field object can be obtained using the Attributes property. 
The next chapter of this book, Chapter 7, explains how commands can be sent to the data source 
in order to execute SQL statements, stored procedures, and other data source-specific commands.

IT-SC book 
162 
 
Chapter 7. The Command Object 
The Command object performs one of three tasks. First, it can query the data source and 
return a Recordset object. By giving the Command object the name of a parameterized 
query, a stored procedure, or even a table, the Command object can execute instructions 
and return to your application a Recordset object with the results of the operation. 
Although we have learned to pass SQL statements and open tables with other objects 
from ADO (e.g., Recordset objects), as we will soon learn, the Command object is the 
only object that can use Parameter objects. 
Second, the Command object can execute bulk operations such as an UPDATE or INSERT INTO 
SQL statement. Again, the Recordset object can provide the same functionality, but the Command 
object will allow the persistence of its command text for re-execution, unlike the Recordset object. 
Finally, the Command object can alter the state of the underlying data source using SQL 
statements. Appendix A, introduces the Structured Query Language (SQL) and provides 
examples of commands that can alter the structure of a data source. 
7.1 Specifying Commands 
Commands are set, through Command objects, with two properties. The first of these properties, 
CommandText, holds either the String value representing the command's text or the name of a 
stored command text as the data provider references it. In other words, either the SQL statement 
SELECT * FROM Authors; can be assigned to the CommandText property, or this string can be 
stored in the data source and referenced, through the data provider, by a name such as "Get All 
From Authors". The CommandType property tells ADO what kind of value resides in the 
CommandText property. This property would indicate if the value within the CommandText 
property was a SQL statement or a name of a stored SQL statement. The value of the 
CommandType property can be set to any valid CommandTypeEnum values as shown in Table 
7-1. 
Table 7-1. The CommandTypeEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adCmdText 
Indicates that the value of the CommandText property is a definition 
of a command that the data provider will understand. 
adCmdTable 
Indicates that the value of the CommandText property is the name of 
a table within the data source. ADO will create a SQL statement 
from the table name specified to return all fields within the table. 
adCmdTableDirect Indicates that the value of the CommandText property is the name of 
a table within the data source. This value is very similar to that of 

IT-SC book 
163
adCmdFile except that the table name is used to return all of the 
fields within the table rather than a generated SQL statement. 
adCmdStoredProc Indicates that the value of the CommandText property is the name of 
a stored procedure accessible by the data provider. 
adCmdUnknown 
Indicates that the value of the CommandText property is of an 
unknown type. This is the default value for the CommandType 
property. 
adCmdFile 
Indicates that the value of the CommandText property is the name of 
a file that has been created by a persisted Recordset. 
One of the most common uses of the CommandText and CommandType properties 
involves passing textual definitions of commands to the data source. 
7.1.1 Textual Definitions as Commands 
When working with textual definitions of a command, we usually think of SQL 
statements. Although it is a topic well beyond the scope of this book, many other types of 
textual definitions can be defined within the CommandText property, depending on your 
data provider. Particular command information should be available within your data 
provider's documentation. In this book, we are working with Access and SQL Server 
databases; therefore, we are going to stick with SQL statements as the sole example of 
textual definitions of commands. 
The following piece of code illustrates how a SQL SELECT statement can be assigned to the 
CommandText property and how it can be executed to return a Recordset object to the application: 
com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                     & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
                     & "uid=sa; " _ 
                     & "database=Northwind" 
 
com.CommandText = "SELECT * " _ 
                & "FROM Customers " _ 
                & "WHERE (ContactTitle = 'Sales Representative') " _ 
                & "AND (Country = 'USA'); " 
com.CommandType = adCmdText 
 
Set rst = com.Execute 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print rst.Fields("ContactName") 
    rst.MoveNext 
Loop 
 
rst.Close 

IT-SC book 
164 
In this example, the Execute method of the Command object instructed ADO to query the data 
source with the SQL statement defined within the CommandText property and to return a 
Recordset object. Notice that ADO also knew the CommandText property held a textual 
definition of a command because the CommandType property had been set to adCmdText. 
It is also important to note that the ActiveConnection property, in the last piece of code, 
was used to indicate the SQL Server data source that we are using to execute our query. 
Although the ActiveConnection property is explained in greater detail later in this chapter, 
all Command objects have to have an associated connection to a data source to use the 
Execute method. 
The next piece of code is somewhat similar to the last, except that the SQL statement being 
executed by the Command object is considered an Action query (see Appendix A for more 
information): 
com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                     & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
                     & "uid=sa; " _ 
                     & "database=Northwind" 
 
com.CommandText = "UPDATE customers " _ 
                & "SET Country = 'UK' " _ 
                & "WHERE (CustomerID = 'HUNGC'); " 
 
com.CommandType = adCmdText 
 
Set rst = com.Execute 
 
If (rst.State & adStateOpen) Then 
    Debug.Print "Recordset is open... records returned." 
    rst.Close 
Else 
    Debug.Print "Recordset not open... no records." 
End If 
Since an Action query does not return records, the Recordset object returned from the 
Execute method is closed. Furthermore, if we attempt to use the Close method on a 
closed Recordset object, we get an error. The previous example illustrates how you can 
use the Command object to modify a group of records with a single command. 
7.1.2 Stored Procedures as Commands 
Another type of value that can be passed to the CommandText property is a name of a 
stored definition of a command -- a stored procedure. Stored procedures are used a lot in 
today's database applications and used quite heavily within ADO implementations of 
these applications. 
To execute a stored procedure with a Command object in ADO, pass the name of the stored 
procedure to the CommandText property, and set the CommandType property to 
adCmdStoredProc as shown: 
com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                     & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 

IT-SC book 
165
                     & "uid=sa; " _ 
                     & "database=Northwind" 
 
com.CommandText = "[Ten Most Expensive Products]" 
com.CommandType = adCmdStoredProc 
 
Set rst = com.Execute 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print rst.Fields("TenMostExpensiveProducts") 
    rst.MoveNext 
Loop 
In this code, we are assuming that the stored procedure "Ten Most Expensive Products" 
returns records. In addition, because the name of this stored procedure has spaces within 
it, we have to put this name within brackets. This is a requirement of SQL Server, not 
ADO. ADO simply passes this information to SQL Server. 
7.1.3 Table Names as Commands 
Table names can be used as the command text of a Command object in two different ways. First, 
when the adCmdTable value is used within the CommandType property, ADO constructs a SQL 
statement based on the table name that is passed to it through the ComandText property, as in the 
following code: 
com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                     & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
                     & "uid=sa; " _ 
                     & "database=Northwind" 
 
com.CommandText = "Orders" 
com.CommandType = adCmdTable 
 
Set rst = com.Execute 
 
Debug.Print "CommandText property value: " & com.CommandText 
 
rst.Close 
The output from this code is: 
CommandText property value:  
SELECT * FROM ORDERS 
As you can see, ADO has generated a SQL statement and has placed it directly within the 
CommandText property. 
The second way tables can be accessed with a Command object is with the adCmdTableDirect 
setting for the CommandType property. This setting is not available with all data providers, 
including SQL Server, but it does exist: 
com.ActiveConnection = "DSN=SupportedDSN" 
 
com.CommandText = "ATableName" 
com.CommandType = adCmdTableDirect 

IT-SC book 
166 
 
Set rst = com.Execute 
 
Debug.Print "CommandText property value: " 
Debug.Print UCase$(com.CommandText) 
 
rst.Close 
When this code is executed on a data provider that supports the adCmdTableDirect flag of the 
CommandType property, its output is: 
CommandText property value:  
ATableName 
Notice how ADO does not change the value of the CommandText property value when 
communicating with the data provider. 
7.1.4 Unknown Command Types 
Another valid setting for the CommandType property is adCmdUnknown. What this value 
indicates to ADO is that the application does not know what it is sending to the data provider. It 
could be a SQL statement, a stored procedure, or a table name. It doesn't know. Although ADO 
will accept this, it is not a wise value to use unless absolutely necessary. 
When you do use the adCmdUnknown value, ADO has to try to figure out what it has and perform 
additional communications with SQL Server to determine the type of command it is, an 
unnecessary and time-consuming activity. 
Nevertheless, if for some reason you don't know the type of command that you are asking ADO 
to execute, you can use the adCmdUnknown value as follows: 
com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                     & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
                     & "uid=sa; " _ 
                     & "database=Northwind" 
 
com.CommandText = "[Ten Most Expensive Products]" 
com.CommandType = adCmdUnknown 
 
Set rst = com.Execute 
 
If (rst.State & adStateOpen) Then 
    Debug.Print "Recordset is open... records returned." 
    rst.Close 
Else 
    Debug.Print "Recordset not open... no records." 
End If 
As you can see, the only difference is the change of the CommandType property value to 
adCmdUnknown. 
7.2 Executing Commands 

IT-SC book 
167
You can execute a command with the Command object, the Connection object, or the 
Recordset object. Command objects allow you the greatest flexibility by allowing you to 
specify how the returned Recordset is defined. Connection objects and Recordset objects 
offer very little fine-tuning capabilities, but they are excellent for retrieving simple 
recordsets using the default settings. 
7.2.1 Executing Commands with the Command Object 
A command can be executed with a Command object by using its Execute method. The Execute 
method has three parameters. The first is a number indicating how many records were affected by 
the command once it had been executed. If the command being executed deleted records, this 
number would indicate how many were deleted. If it was a command to update records, this 
number would indicate how many were updated. The second is an array of variant data 
representing one or more parameter values (parameters are discussed in the next section of this 
chapter). The third is an integer value representing a CommandTypeEnum value listed in Table 
7-1 and an optional ExcecuteOptionEnum value. 
The ExecuteOptionEnum value used with the Execute method of the Command object allows you 
to specify how a provider should execute a command. The valid values for the 
ExecuteOptionEnum enumeration can be found in Table 7-2. 
Table 7-2. The ExecuteOptionEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
AdAsyncExecute 
(ASYNCEXECUTE) 
16 
(&H10) Instructs ADO to execute the command 
asynchronously. 
adAsyncFetch (ASYNCFETCH) 32 
(&H20) 
Instructs ADO to fetch the records returned 
from this command asynchronously after the 
initial number of rows (indicated by the 
CacheSize property) are returned. 
adAsyncFetchNonBlocking 
(ASYNCFETCHNONBLOCKING) 
64 
(&H40) 
Instructs ADO never to block the main 
thread while executing, and if the row that is 
requested 
has 
not 
been 
read, 
it 
is 
automatically moved to the end of the file. 
adExecuteNoRecords 
(NORECORDS) 
128 
(&H80) 
Instructs ADO that the CommandText property 
does not return rows, and if it does, to discard 
them. This value is always combined with 
adCmdText or 
adCmdStoredProc of the 
CommandTypeEnum enumeration. 
adExecuteStream 
(no 
1024 
(&H400) Indicates that the returned object of the 
Command object's Execute method will be a 

IT-SC book 
168 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
Stream object. This value is invalid for all 
other uses. 
Although a Command object is independent of other objects, it must be connected to a 
data source before it can execute its command. The Command object uses the 
ActiveConnection property to establish this connection. 
The ActiveConnection can be set to any valid, open Connection object, as shown in the 
following example: 
con.ConnectionString = "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
con.Open 
 
Set com.ActiveConnection = con 
 
com.CommandText = "Authors" 
 
Set rst = com.Execute(, , adCmdTable) 
                       
Debug.Print "First author's name: " & rst.Fields("Author") 
 
rst.Close 
con.Close 
In this example, once the Connection object is open, a reference of the object is given to 
the Command object to use as a connection to the data source (this is merely one way of 
establishing a connection). If the Close method of the Connection object were to be 
called prior to the Execute method of the Command object, an error would occur. 
A Command object's ActiveConnection property can also accept a String value 
representing a connection string. With this value, the Command object can create its own 
Connection object, internally: 
com.ActiveConnection = "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
Set con = com.ActiveConnection 
 
Debug.Print "Command Object's Connection String:" 
 
sTemp = con.ConnectionString & ";" 
 
While (sTemp <> "") 
    nPosition = InStr(1, sTemp, ";", vbTextCompare) 
    Debug.Print , Left$(sTemp, nPosition) 
    sTemp = Right$(sTemp, Len(sTemp) - nPosition) 
Wend 
 
com.CommandText = "Authors" 
 
Set rst = com.Execute(, , adCmdTable) 
                       
Debug.Print "First author's name: " & rst.Fields("Author") 
 

IT-SC book 
169
rst.Close 
con.Close 
Notice that in this code segment, the internally created Connection object is actually 
retrieved from the Command object by reading the ActiveConnection property. 
The following example is the output that describes the ConnectionString property of the newly 
created Connection object, all derived from the original "DSN=BiblioDSN" connection string 
passed to the ActiveConnection of the Command object: 
Command Object's Connection String: 
              Provider=MSDASQL.1; 
              Connect Timeout=15; 
              Extended Properties="DSN=BiblioDSN; 
              DBQ=c:\My Documents\Book\Chapter 5\BIBLIO.MDB; 
              DriverId=25; 
              FIL=MS Access; 
              MaxBufferSize=512; 
              PageTimeout=5; 
              "; 
              Locale Identifier=1033; 
If a Connection object is not specified for a Command object's ActiveConnection 
property, a new Connection object is created each time, even if the connection string used 
is the same. It is wiser to create a single Connection object and pass it to the Command 
object each time you need to execute a command to save resources and connection time.  
7.2.2 Executing Commands with the Connection Object 
The second way of executing a command is through the Connection object. Although it is 
not necessary to explicitly instantiate an instance of a Command object in order to 
execute a command through the Connection object, it does not mean that one is not being 
used. 
The Execute method of the Connection object accepts three parameters. The first is the 
equivalent of the CommandText property of the Command object. The second is a 
variable used to store the number of records affected by the execution. The third and final 
parameter is equivalent to the CommandType property of the Command object, 
specifying the type of command that has been passed in the first parameter: 
con.Open "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
Set rst = con.Execute("Authors", _ 
                       , _ 
                       adCmdTable) 
 
Debug.Print "First author's name: " & rst.Fields("Author") 
 
rst.Close 
When the Execute method is called, it returns a Recordset object just as the Command's 
Execute method does. This is done with a Command object that is created internally by 

IT-SC book 
170 
the Connection object. The Command object created by the Connection object cannot be 
retrieved like the Connection object from the Command object in the last section. 
7.2.3 Executing Commands with the Recordset Object 
The third and final way of executing a command within ADO is with the use of a 
Recordset object. In this way, a Command object is created by specifying at least the 
connection and the command itself. This Command object is then passed to the Open 
method of the Recordset object as the first parameter, representing the source of the 
recordset. The following piece of code represents this method: 
com.ActiveConnection = "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
com.CommandText = "Authors" 
          
rst.Open com, _ 
         , _ 
         adOpenDynamic, _ 
         adLockBatchOptimistic, _ 
         adCmdTable 
 
Debug.Print "First author's name: " & rst.Fields("Author") 
 
rst.Close 
Note that if a Command object is being passed to the Open method of the Recordset 
object, a connection must already be established within the Command object. The 
connection cannot be present in the second parameter of the Open method. This situation 
would result in an error. 
In addition, it is also very important to note that this final method of executing commands 
is the only method that allows the developer to specify how the recordset is returned to 
the application. It is the only way in which the cursor type and locking scheme can be 
specified for the resulting recordset. 
7.3 Parameters 
Parameterized queries are used frequently in today's databases. Parameters allow queries 
to be stored within the data source and to be altered based upon different values at 
runtime. 
7.3.1 Passing Parameters 
Like most things in ADO, there are a couple ways of passing parameter values to the data 
provider. 
The first way, and probably the easiest, is to specify the value of a parameter in 
CommandText property of a Command object, like a function call: 
com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                     & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 

IT-SC book 
171
                     & "uid=sa; " _ 
                     & "database=Northwind" 
 
com.CommandText = "CustOrderHist('ALFKI')" 
com.CommandType = adCmdStoredProc 
 
Set rst = com.Execute 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print rst.Fields("ProductName") 
    rst.MoveNext 
Loop 
 
rst.Close 
In this code, the value 'ALFKI' is passed to the stored procedure CustOrderHist. This method 
can also be used when executing commands through a Connection object, as in the following 
example: 
con.Open "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
       & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
       & "uid=sa; " _ 
       & "database=Northwind" 
 
Set rst = con.Execute("CustOrderHist('ALFKI')", _ 
                      , _ 
                      adCmdStoredProc) 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print rst.Fields("ProductName") 
    rst.MoveNext 
Loop 
 
rst.Close 
Although easy to understand, this method leaves much to be desired. Suppose that you 
wish to pass a parameter value from within a variable, rather than hard-coding it into the 
string as shown in the last two examples. In this case, of course it can be done. However, 
you will have to do string concatenation, and things can get sloppy in the code. Why 
bother? 
Through the Command object only, ADO allows us to specify the values of parameters as 
an array (or a string if there is only one parameter), as in the following example: 
com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                     & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
                     & "uid=sa; " _ 
                     & "database=Northwind" 
 
com.CommandText = "CustOrdersDetail" 
 
Set rst = com.Execute(, "10255", adCmdStoredProc) 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print rst.Fields("ProductName") 
    rst.MoveNext 

IT-SC book 
172 
Loop 
 
rst.Close 
In this code, the value 10255 has been passed as the parameter to the Execute method of the 
Command object. Notice that the third and final parameter, CommandType, must be specified if 
the second parameter is being used. This method is a lot neater than the first. 
The Parameters collection of the Command object allows us to view information about 
parameters in addition to setting them. The Parameters collection has a method called 
Refresh. The Refresh method must be called before you can read the properties of any 
given parameter. In fact, the Refresh method must be called in order to obtain the 
individual parameters. 
In the previous examples, the Command object called the Refresh method on its own to 
obtain information about the parameters for the given stored procedure. 
Once the Refresh method has been called, parameters can be accessed via their index in 
the collection, as shown in the following example: 
com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                     & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
                     & "uid=sa; " _ 
                     & "database=Northwind" 
 
com.CommandText = "CustOrdersDetail" 
com.CommandType = adCmdStoredProc 
 
com.Parameters.Refresh 
com.Parameters(1).Value = "10255" 
 
Set rst = com.Execute 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print rst.Fields("ProductName") 
    rst.MoveNext 
Loop 
 
rst.Close 
Here, the Refresh method is called after the stored procedure name is specified in order to obtain 
information regarding its parameters. The value of the first parameter is set to 10255, and then 
the command is executed. 
In addition to the Value property of the Parameter object, if the particular parameter accepts long 
binary data, the AppendChunk method can be used to set the value of the parameter as explained 
in Section 6.2.3 in Chapter 6. 
The Attributes property can determine whether the particular parameter accepts long binary data 
by using the logical And keyword and the value adParamLong as shown: 
com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                     & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
                     & "uid=sa; " _ 

IT-SC book 
173
                     & "database=Northwind" 
 
com.CommandText = "CustOrdersDetail" 
com.CommandType = adCmdStoredProc 
 
com.Parameters.Refresh 
 
If (com.Parameters(1).Attributes And adParamLong) Then 
    com.Parameters(1).AppendChunk "First piece of data" 
    com.Parameters(1).AppendChunk "Second piece of data" 
    com.Parameters(1).AppendChunk "Third piece of data" 
    com.Parameters(1).AppendChunk "Fourth piece of data" 
Else 
    com.Parameters(1).Value = "10255" 
End If 
 
Set rst = com.Execute 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print rst.Fields("ProductName") 
    rst.MoveNext 
Loop 
 
rst.Close 
If a parameter accepts long binary values, the AppendChunk method, called in succession, 
appends data to the value. The first time the AppendChunk method is called on a parameter, the 
value of that parameter is set to the value passed with the method. Every succeeding call to the 
AppendChunk method adds data to that value. In addition, by passing a Null value to the 
AppendChunk method, the value of the parameter is cleared.  
7.3.2 Parameter Properties 
Once the Parameters collection has all the information about the individual Parameter objects that 
are within it, you can use any of the Parameter properties shown in Table 7-3. 
Table 7-3. The Parameter Object's Properties  
Property 
Description 
Attributes 
Indicates particular properties of a Parameter object, including whether it 
accepts signed values, nulls, or long binary data. 
Direction 
Indicates if the parameter is an input parameter, an output parameter, both 
an input and an output parameter, or a return value from a stored 
procedure. 
Name 
Indicates the name of the parameter. 

IT-SC book 
174 
NumericScale Indicates the number of decimal places that are used if the type of the 
particular Parameter object is numeric. 
Precision 
Indicates the number of bytes that are used to present the largest numeric 
value that the Parameter object can hold. 
Size 
Indicates the maximum number of bytes that the Parameter object can 
hold. 
Type 
Indicates the type of the Parameter object's value by a DataTypeEnum 
value. 
Value 
Indicates the value of the Parameter object. 
Although we can ask ADO to obtain information about the parameters belonging to a 
stored procedure, it is not always such a good idea. In most cases, obtaining information 
about parameters on its own causes ADO to spend a lot of time communicating with the 
data provider when it doesn't have to. The following section explains how to specify 
known parameters. 
7.3.3 Specifying Parameters 
In the cases in which you know the details about a specific parameter, it saves time tell 
ADO before attempting to execute a command.  
The Parameters collection contains all the parameters for a command. Parameters can be 
added to this collection with the use of the CreateParameter method of the collection. The 
CreateParameter method accepts three parameters itself: the name, the datatype, and the 
direction of the parameter to be created. 
The datatype parameter must be a valid DataTypeEnum value (see Table 6-1). The direction 
parameter must be a valid ParameterDirectionEnum value shown in Table 7-4. 
Table 7-4. The ParameterDirectionEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adParamUnknown 
Indicates that the parameter direction is unknown. 
adParamInput 
Indicates that the parameter is an input parameter. This is the 
default value for the Direction property and parameter. 

IT-SC book 
175
adParamOutput 
Indicates that the parameter is an output parameter. 
adParamInputOutput Indicates that the parameter is both an input and an output 
parameter. 
adParamReturnValue Indicates that the parameter is a return value from the stored 
procedure. 
The following example illustrates the use of the CreateParameter method: 
com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                     & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
                     & "uid=sa; " _ 
                     & "database=Northwind" 
 
com.CommandText = "CustOrdersDetail" 
com.CommandType = adCmdStoredProc 
 
Set par = com.CreateParameter("@OrderID", adInteger, adParamInput) 
com.Parameters.Append par 
 
par.Value = "10255" 
Set rst = com.Execute 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print rst.Fields("ProductName") 
    rst.MoveNext 
Loop 
rst.Close 
 
par.Value = "10260" 
Set rst = com.Execute 
 
Do Until (rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print rst.Fields("ProductName") 
    rst.MoveNext 
Loop 
rst.Close 
As you can see, the CreateParameter method returns a Parameter object. A reference to 
the Parameter object is appended, using the Append method, to the Parameters collection. 
Once this is done, the Parameter object's value is changed before each execution of the 
stored procedure. 
The previous code fragment potentially executes faster than code using the Refresh 
method of the Parameters collection to determine the parameter specifications of a stored 
procedure. 
7.4 The Parameters Project 

IT-SC book 
176 
Now that you understand Parameter objects, this section will walk you though a project 
that allows you to view all available properties and attributes of any given stored 
procedure. 
Begin by creating a form that looks like that of the one shown in Figure 7-1. 
Figure 7-1. The Parameters Project in design mode 
 
Now set the values of the controls as listed in Table 7-5. 
Table 7-5. The Parameters Project Example Control Settings  
Control 
Property 
Value 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdGo 
  
Caption 
"&Go" 
  
Default 
-1 'True 
Command Button 
Name 
CmdClose 
  
Caption 
"&Close" 
  
Cancel 
-1 'True 
Text Box 
Name 
TxtConnectionString 

IT-SC book 
177
  
MultiLine 
-1 'True 
  
Text 
A valid connection string 
Text Box 
Name 
TxtCommandString 
  
Text 
A valid stored procedure name 
Check Box 
Name 
chkSigned 
  
Alignment 
1 'Right Justify 
  
Caption 
"Accepts Signed Values:" 
Check Box 
Name 
chkNull 
  
Alignment 
1 'Right Justify 
  
Caption 
"Accepts Null Values:" 
Check Box 
Name 
chkLong 
  
Alignment 
1 'Right Justify 
  
Caption 
"Accepts Long Values:" 
Combo Box 
Name 
CboDirection 
  
Enabled 
0 'False 
List Box 
Name 
lstParameters 
Text Box 
Name 
TxtType 
  
Enabled 
0 'False 

IT-SC book 
178 
Text Box 
Name 
TxtSize 
  
Enabled 
0 'False 
Text Box 
Name 
TxtPrecision 
  
Enabled 
0 'False 
Text Box 
Name 
TxtNumericScale 
  
Enabled 
0 'False 
Label 
Caption 
"Connection String:" 
Label 
Caption 
"Stored Procedure:" 
Label 
Caption 
"Parameters:" 
Label 
Caption 
"Direction:" 
Label 
Caption 
"Numerical Scale:" 
Label 
Caption 
"Precision:" 
Label 
Caption 
"Size:" 
Label 
Caption 
"Type:" 
Now that the controls are in place and their values have been set, begin by entering the 
Declarations section of the Parameters project as follows: 
Option Explicit 
 
Private com As ADODB.Command 
Private par As ADODB.Parameter 
Enter the code for the Close button's Click event, which unloads the global Command 
object instance from memory: 
Private Sub cmdClose_Click(  ) 
    Set com = Nothing 

IT-SC book 
179
    Unload Me 
End Sub 
The form's Load event clears the controls by calling the SetFields method: 
Private Sub Form_Load(  ) 
    Set com = New ADODB.Command 
     
    Call SetFields 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub SetFields(  ) 
     
    chkSigned.Value = 0 
    chkNull.Value = 0 
    chkLong.Value = 0 
     
    cboDirection.Clear 
    cboDirection.AddItem "Unknown direction", adParamUnknown 
    cboDirection.AddItem "Input Parameter", adParamInput 
    cboDirection.AddItem "Output Parameter", adParamOutput 
    cboDirection.AddItem "Input/Output Parameter", adParamInputOutput 
    cboDirection.AddItem "Return Value", adParamReturnValue 
     
    txtNumericScale.Text = "" 
    txtPrecision.Text = "" 
    txtSize.Text = "" 
    txtType.Text = "" 
     
End Sub 
Now enter the following code for the Go button's Click event. This code clears the 
contents of the controls on the form and attempts to refresh the Parameters collection of a 
Command object based upon the connection string and stored procedure name entered in 
the form: 
Private Sub cmdGo_Click(  ) 
On Error GoTo ERR_cmdGo_Click: 
     
    Screen.MousePointer = vbHourglass 
     
    lstParameters.Clear 
    SetFields 
     
    com.ActiveConnection = txtConnectionString.Text 
    com.CommandText = txtCommandText.Text 
    com.CommandType = adCmdStoredProc 
    com.Parameters.Refresh 
     
    lstParameters.Clear 
    For Each par In com.Parameters 
        lstParameters.AddItem par.Name 
    Next 
     
ERR_cmdGo_Click: 
     

IT-SC book 
180 
    Screen.MousePointer = vbDefault 
     
    Select Case (Err.Number) 
        Case 0: ' no error 
        Case Else: 
            MsgBox "Error #" & Err.Number _ 
                 & " " & Err.Description 
    End Select 
End Sub 
The only thing left to enter now is the Click event for the list control containing the 
parameters belonging to the stored procedure. This event basically fills in the controls on 
the form, based on the information gathered from the parameter that was chosen from the 
list: 
Private Sub lstParameters_Click(  ) 
 
    Call SetFields 
         
    Set par = com.Parameters( _ 
                lstParameters.List( _ 
                    lstParameters.ListIndex)) 
     
    If (par.Attributes And adParamSigned) Then chkSigned.Value = 1 
    If (par.Attributes And adParamNullable) Then chkNull.Value = 1 
    If (par.Attributes And adParamLong) Then chkLong.Value = 1 
     
    cboDirection.ListIndex = par.Direction 
     
    txtNumericScale.Text = par.Direction 
    txtPrecision.Text = par.Precision 
    txtSize.Text = par.Size 
     
    Select Case (par.Type) 
        Case adBigInt: 
            txtType.Text = "adBigInt" 
        Case adBinary: 
            txtType.Text = "adBinary" 
        Case adBoolean: 
            txtType.Text = "adBoolean" 
        Case adBSTR: 
            txtType.Text = "adBSTR" 
        Case adChar: 
            txtType.Text = "adChar" 
        Case adCurrency: 
            txtType.Text = "adCurrency" 
        Case adDate: 
            txtType.Text = "adDate" 
        Case adDBDate: 
            txtType.Text = "adDBDate" 
        Case adDBTime: 
            txtType.Text = "adDBTime" 
        Case adDBTimeStamp: 
            txtType.Text = "adDBTimeStamp" 
        Case adDecimal: 
            txtType.Text = "adDecimal" 

IT-SC book 
181
        Case adDouble: 
            txtType.Text = "adDouble" 
        Case adEmpty: 
            txtType.Text = "adEmpty" 
        Case adError: 
            txtType.Text = "adError" 
        Case adGUID: 
            txtType.Text = "adGUID" 
        Case adIDispatch: 
            txtType.Text = "adIDispatch" 
        Case adInteger: 
            txtType.Text = "adInteger" 
        Case adIUnknown: 
            txtType.Text = "adIUnknown" 
        Case adLongVarBinary: 
            txtType.Text = "adLongVarBinary" 
        Case adLongVarChar: 
            txtType.Text = "adLongVarChar" 
        Case adLongVarWChar: 
            txtType.Text = "adLongVarWChar" 
        Case adNumeric: 
            txtType.Text = "adNumeric" 
        Case adSingle: 
            txtType.Text = "adSingle" 
        Case adSmallInt: 
            txtType.Text = "adSmallInt" 
        Case adTinyInt: 
            txtType.Text = "adTinyInt" 
        Case adUnsignedBigInt: 
            txtType.Text = "adUnsignedBigInt" 
        Case adUnsignedInt: 
            txtType.Text = "adUnsignedInt" 
        Case adUnsignedSmallInt: 
            txtType.Text = "adUnsignedSmallInt" 
        Case adUnsignedTinyInt: 
            txtType.Text = "adUnsignedTinyInt" 
        Case adUserDefined: 
            txtType.Text = "adUserDefined" 
        Case adVarBinary: 
            txtType.Text = "adVarBinary" 
        Case adVarChar: 
            txtType.Text = "adVarChar" 
        Case adVariant: 
            txtType.Text = "adVariant" 
        Case adVarWChar: 
            txtType.Text = "adVarWChar" 
        Case adWChar: 
            txtType.Text = "adWChar" 
    End Select 
     
    Set par = Nothing 
     
End Sub 
Once you have entered all of the code, run the application. If the connection string and stored 
procedure values are not already entered, do so now. Click the Go button to refresh the 

IT-SC book 
182 
Parameters collection of the newly created Command object, and then choose a parameter from 
the list to the left to view its specific attributes and property values. Figure 7-2 shows what this 
project might look like in action. 
Figure 7-2. The Parameters project executing 
 
7.5 Asynchronous Execution 
Asynchronous execution allows you to execute commands in the background of the client or 
server, while allowing the application to continue executing other commands. Asynchronous 
execution is vital when dealing with large data sources over a large network. 
In most cases, users will not wait more than a few seconds -- let alone two or three 
minutes -- for a response from your application indicating that a command is finally done. 
For instance, suppose an administrator of a large company determines to increase the 
prices of all items by one dollar. Suppose that this company has 10,000 products. When 
the user presses a button confirming the price change, she shouldn't have to wait for all 
products to be updated before she can continue her work. Instead, once she confirms the 
price change, the application should issue an asynchronous command to the server to 
execute the update. 
7.5.1 Executing a Command Asynchronously 
Before you learn how to execute commands asynchronously, first take a look at a piece of 
code that takes a significant amount of time to execute: 
com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                 & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
                 & "uid=sa; " _ 
                 & "database=Northwind" 
 
com.CommandText = "DELETE [Order Details (Backup)]; " 
 
sSQL = "INSERT INTO [Order Details (Backup)] " _ 

IT-SC book 
183
     & "      (OrderID, ProductID, UnitPrice, Quantity, Discount) " _ 
     & "SELECT OrderID, ProductID, UnitPrice, Quantity, Discount " _ 
     & "FROM [Order Details]; " 
 
com.CommandText = com.CommandText + sSQL 
 
Debug.Print "Time execution began:     " & Now 
 
Set rst = com.Execute(lNumberOfRecords, _ 
                      , _ 
                      adCmdText) 
                   
Debug.Print "  Number of records:      " & lNumberOfRecords 
 
Debug.Print "Time execution completed: " & Now 
This code actually executes two action queries on the data source with one command 
execution. First, all the records of the "Order Details (Backup)" table are deleted. Second, 
all of the records located in the "Order Details" record are copied to the blank table. 
On my machine, this takes about 3 seconds and inserts 2,155 records into the backup 
table. Although 3 seconds is not a tremendous amount of time, imagine if it were to insert 
21550 records. This could take 30 seconds on a single machine. It could take a minute 
over the network. 
To execute a command asynchronously, add the adAsyncExecute constant value to the 
CommandType parameter of the Execute method: 
com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                 & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
                 & "uid=sa; " _ 
                 & "database=Northwind" 
 
com.CommandText = "DELETE [Order Details (Backup)]; " 
 
sSQL = "INSERT INTO [Order Details (Backup)] " _ 
     & "      (OrderID, ProductID, UnitPrice, Quantity, Discount) " _ 
     & "SELECT OrderID, ProductID, UnitPrice, Quantity, Discount " _ 
     & "FROM [Order Details]; " 
 
com.CommandTimeout = 0 
com.CommandText = com.CommandText + sSQL 
 
Set rst = com.Execute(lNumberOfRecords, _ 
                      , _ 
                      adCmdText + adAsyncExecute) 
 
PrintObjectState "Command", com 
 
While (com.State & adStateExecuting) 
    ' empty loop 
Wend 
 
PrintObjectState "Command", com 

IT-SC book 
184 
You will also need the following code for the PrintObjectState method to display the 
current state of the Command object in the last example: 
Private Sub PrintObjectState(sObjectType As String, _ 
                             oObject As Object) 
 
    Debug.Print "The " & sObjectType & " object is "; 
    Select Case (oObject.State) 
        Case adStateClosed: 
            Debug.Print "closed." 
        Case adStateOpen: 
            Debug.Print "open." 
        Case adStateConnecting: 
            Debug.Print "connecting." 
        Case adStateExecuting: 
            Debug.Print "executing." 
        Case adStateFetching: 
            Debug.Print "fetching." 
    End Select 
     
End Sub 
Notice that when this example is executed, the processing of the application still 
continues. Visual Basic does not wait for ADO to return from the Execute method and 
announce its completion; rather, Visual Basic continues to process while the data 
provider does its thing in the background. 
Also, notice that the CommandTimeout property was used in the last example. As we will 
see next, the CommandTimeout property is used to indicate the length, in seconds, to 
wait for an execution to complete. In the previous example, the CommandTimeout 
property was set to zero, which indicates that there is no time limit.  
7.5.2 Canceling a Command 
If a command's execution is taking longer than expected, or too long for your needs, you 
can always cancel its execution with the Cancel method of the Command object. The 
following example illustrates the use of the Cancel method: 
Private Sub ExecuteCancelQuery(  ) 
 
    Dim com As ADODB.Command 
    Dim rst As ADDOB.Recordset 
    Dim sSQL As String 
     
    Set com = New ADODB.Command 
 
    com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                         & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
                         & "uid=sa; " _ 
                         & "database=Northwind" 
     
    com.CommandText = "DELETE [Order Details (Backup)]; " 
     
    sSQL = "INSERT INTO [Order Details (Backup)] " _ 

IT-SC book 
185
         & "      (OrderID, ProductID, UnitPrice, Quantity, Discount) " 
_ 
         & "SELECT OrderID, ProductID, UnitPrice, Quantity, Discount " 
_ 
         & "FROM [Order Details]; " 
     
    com.CommandText = com.CommandText + sSQL 
     
    Set rst = com.Execute(, , adCmdText + adAsyncExecute) 
     
    PrintObjectState "Command", com 
     
    If (com.State = adStateExecuting) Then 
        com.Cancel 
        Debug.Print "  The execution took too long, " 
        Debug.Print "  it has been canceled." 
    End If 
     
    PrintObjectState "Command", com 
 
End Sub 
In this example, ExecuteCancelQuery executes an asynchronous query and immediately 
cancels it to illustrate how to use the Cancel method. Notice, however, that the state of 
the command's execution is checked prior to the Cancel method call. 
We can also use the CommandTimeout property of a Command object to explicitly state 
the length in seconds to wait to complete a command's execution. In the following 
example, the CommandTimeout property is set to one second, assuming that the time to 
execute the following command will take longer than this: 
Private Sub ExecuteTimeoutQuery(  ) 
On Error GoTo ERR_ExecuteTimeoutQuery: 
 
    Dim com As ADODB.Command 
    Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
    Dim sSQL As String 
     
    Set com = New ADODB.Command 
 
    com.ActiveConnection = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                         & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
                         & "uid=sa; " _ 
                         & "database=Northwind" 
     
    com.CommandText = "DELETE [Order Details (Backup)]; " 
     
    sSQL = "INSERT INTO [Order Details (Backup)] " _ 
         & "      (OrderID, ProductID, UnitPrice, Quantity, Discount) " 
_ 
         & "SELECT OrderID, ProductID, UnitPrice, Quantity, Discount " 
_ 
         & "FROM [Order Details]; " 
     
    com.CommandText = com.CommandText + sSQL 
     

IT-SC book 
186 
    com.CommandTimeout = 1 ' one second to execute command 
     
    Set rst = com.Execute(, _ 
                          , _ 
                          adCmdText + adAsyncExecute) 
     
    PrintObjectState "Command", com 
     
    While (com.State & adStateExecuting) 
        ' empty loop 
    Wend 
     
    PrintObjectState "Command", com 
ERR_ExecuteTimeoutQuery: 
    Select Case Err.Number 
        Case 0:                         ' No error 
        Case -2147217871:               ' Timeout error 
            MsgBox "Execution timeout." 
        Case Else:                      ' Unknown error 
            MsgBox "Error #: " & Err.Number _ 
                 & " " & Err.Description 
    End Select 
End Sub 
When executed in the previous example, ExecuteCancelQuery will timeout and raise 
error number -2147217871, which is trapped in the error-handling section of the function. 
If this were a complete application, you would inform the user that the execution did not 
complete.  
7.6 Summary 
This chapter explains the Command object and its use of Parameter objects to help you 
understand how to execute different types of commands and pass parameters to stored 
procedures. After reading this chapter, you should be able to fully understand how 
commands are executed using ADO and the following key points about their execution: 
Although Command objects can be created independently of other ADO objects, they still need to 
connect to a data source. 
Commands can be executed with the Command object, the Recordset object, or the Connection 
object. 
Specifying parameters ahead of time can significantly increase performance when executing 
commands. 
Asynchronous execution of commands allows applications to continue processing while ADO 
and the data provider continue to work in the background of the client machine or on a server. 
The next chapter of this book, Chapter 8, explains how to use the Errors collection of the 
Connection object, which contains all of the Error objects for specific failures of the data provider. 

IT-SC book 
187
Chapter 8. The ADO Event Model 
With Version 2.0 of ActiveX Data Objects came the introduction of the ADO Event 
Model. Coupled with the power of ADO to handle asynchronous operations, this new 
event model gives developers greater control over their applications. 
8.1 Introduction to Events 
There are two different types of events: 
Will event  
Raised when an operation will occur. For instance, the WillConnect event is raised when a 
connection to a data source will occur. All Will events begin with the word Will. 
Complete event  
Raised once the operation is completed (successfully or not). An example of a Complete event is 
the ConnectComplete event that is raised once a connection to a data source has been attempted. 
Some, but not all, Complete events end with the word Complete. 
All Will events have a matching Complete event, but the opposite is not true. Matching 
Will and Complete events (e.g., WillConnect and ConnectComplete) are usually referred 
to as "Will/Connect pairs." Those Complete events that do not have a corresponding Will 
event are usually referred to as "Standalone events." 
Events belong to either the ConnectionEvent family or the RecordsetEvent family, each 
of which represents the events that are raised by operations on the respective object. 
Within the ConnectionEvent family, there are nine events broken into four categories, as shown 
in Table 8-1. 
Table 8-1. The ConnectionEvent Family of Events  
Event Group 
Event 
Description 
Connection Events WillConnect 
Indicates that a connection will occur. 
  
ConnectComplete 
Indicates that a connection has occurred. 
  
Disconnect 
Indicates that a connection has ended. 
Execution Events WillExecute 
Indicates that an execution will occur. 
  
ExecuteComplete 
Indicates that an execution has occurred. 

IT-SC book 
188 
Transaction 
Events 
BeginTransComplete 
Indicates that a transaction has begun. 
  
CommitTransComplete Indicates that a transaction has been 
committed. 
  
RollbackTransComplete Indicates that a transaction has been rolled 
back. 
Informational 
Event 
InfoMessage 
Provides additional information about an 
operation. 
The RecordsetEvent family has eleven events broken into five categories, as shown in Table 8-2. 
Table 8-2. The RecordsetEvent Family of Events  
Event Group 
Event 
Description 
Retrieval Events FetchProgress 
Indicates the progress of an asynchronous 
fetch. 
  
FetchComplete 
Indicates that an asynchronous fetch has 
completed. 
Movement 
Events 
WillMove 
Indicates that the record pointer within the 
recordset will move to a new record. 
  
MoveComplete 
Indicates that the record pointer within the 
recordset has moved to a new record. 
  
EndOfRecordset 
Indicates that the record pointer within the 
recordset has moved past the last record. 
Field 
Change 
Events 
WillChangeField 
Indicates that a field's value will change. 
  
FieldChangeComplete 
Indicates that a field's value has changed. 
Record Change WillChangeRecord 
Indicates that the current record will 

IT-SC book 
189
Events 
change. 
  
RecordChangeComplete 
Indicates that the current record has 
changed. 
Recordset 
Change Events 
WillChangeRecordset 
Indicates that the current recordset will 
change. 
  
RecordsetChangeComplete Indicates that the current recordset has 
changed. 
The events and their categories are described in more detail in the following sections. 
8.2 The ConnectionEvent Family 
The ConnectionEvent family contains a group of events that belong to the Connection 
object. To instantiate a connection object that implements events, declare it as follows: 
Private WithEvents con As ADODB.Connection 
As stated earlier, the events within the ConnectionEvent family can be broken into four 
categories: 
Connection events 
Execution events 
Transaction events 
Informational events 
Each category of events contains events pertaining to one specific task. 
8.2.1 Connection Events 
The Connection events category of the ConnectionEvent family comprises three events: 
The WillConnect event is raised when a connection to a data source is about to be attempted. 
The ConnectComplete event is raised after a connection to a data source has been attempted. 
The Disconnect event is raised after a connection to a data source has been terminated. 
The WillConnect and ConnectComplete events are a Will/Complete event pair. Notice 
there is not a Will event for the Disconnect event, making it a standalone event. 

IT-SC book 
190 
To illustrate when each of these events is fired, enter a call to the PrintStatus function 
(which I will describe in a minute) to the three events: 
Private Sub con_WillConnect(ConnectionString As String, _ 
                            UserID As String, _ 
                            Password As String, _ 
                            Options As Long, _ 
                            adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                            ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 
    PrintStatus "WillConnect", adStatus 
     
End Sub 
 
Private Sub con_ConnectComplete(ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 
    PrintStatus "ConnectComplete", adStatus, pError 
     
End Sub 
 
Private Sub con_Disconnect(adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                           ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 
    PrintStatus "Disconnect", adStatus 
     
End Sub 
This code assumes that there is already a member variable, con, which is declared as a 
Connection object supporting events. To declare this member variable, enter the following code 
in the module's General Declaration section: 
Option Explicit 
 
Private WithEvents con As ADODB.Connection 
Now enter the PrintStatus method that will indicate when an event has been fired. This 
method outputs to the Immediate Window the name and status of the event that was fired, 
as well as any error information that was passed to the method: 
Private Sub PrintStatus(sEventName As String, _ 
                        ByRef adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                        Optional ByVal pError As ADODB.Error) 
 
    Debug.Print 
    Debug.Print sEventName & " event raised." 
     
    Debug.Print "  Status: "; 
    Select Case (adStatus) 
     
        Case adStatusOK: 
            Debug.Print "Okay." 
         
        Case adStatusCantDeny: 
            Debug.Print "Can't deny." 

IT-SC book 
191
         
        Case adStatusErrorsOccurred: 
            Debug.Print "Errors have occurred." 
            Debug.Print "  Error:  " & pError.Description 
            adStatus = adStatusCancel 
             
    End Select 
     
End Sub 
The PrintStatus method accepts three arguments. The first of these arguments is a String 
value that represents the name of the event that has been fired. This value is shown in the 
three preceding event declarations. 
The second parameter is a reference to a variable that contains the event's status at the time it was 
fired. This variable can return one of the valid EventStatusEnum enumeration values shown in 
Table 8-3. 
Table 8-3. The EventStatusEnum Enumeration, Initial Values  
Value 
Description 
adStatusOK 
Indicates that the operation that caused the event to fire has 
succeeded. 
adStatusErrorsOccurred Indicates that the operation that caused the event to fire has 
resulted in one or more errors or that a corresponding Will 
event has canceled the operation. 
adStatusCantDeny 
Indicates that the Will event cannot request that the operation 
that caused the event to fire be canceled. 
The third parameter is optional and works in conjunction with the status parameter. If the status 
parameter returned a value of adStatusErrorOccurred, the third parameter (a pointer to an 
Error object) displays the error's description. 
If you look back at the PrintStatus method calls that were inserted into the Connection events, 
you will notice that only the ConnectComplete event returned an Error object. This is the only 
event that can pass this information to the PrintStatus method, because there are plenty of errors 
that can occur while attempting to connect to a data source. The ConnectComplete event can 
return either adStatusOk or adStatusErrorsOccurred for the status parameter. If the 
adStatusErrorsOccurred value is set for the status flag, the Error object is populated with 
the information regarding the error. 
The WillConnect event does not return an Error object. There are no errors to report. The 
WillConnect event simply says that a connection to the data source will be attempted. Being a 
Will event, WillConnect can return a value of adStatusOk or adStatusCantDeny only for the 
status parameter. 

IT-SC book 
192 
The Disconnect event does not return an Error object. The Disconnect event just indicates when a 
connection to a data source has been terminated. The Disconnect event returns a value of 
adStatusOk only for the status parameter. 
Let's take a look at a very simple example of how these three events are fired: 
con.Open "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
con.Close 
This example establishes a connection to a data source by opening the BiblioDSN data 
source name. When this code is run, the following output is sent to the Immediate 
Window: 
WillConnect event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
ConnectComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
Disconnect event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
Notice the order in which the events are fired. If you were to step through the execution of this 
example, you would be able to see how the con method calls fell into this order: 
con.Open "DSN=BiblioDSN"  
WillConnect  
ConnectComplete  
con.Close  
Disconnect  
The following code attempts to open a data-source name that does not exist. (If by some chance 
you do have a data-source name MissingDSN, you should select better DSNs!): 
con.Open "DSN=MissingDSN" 
 
con.Close 
When this code is executed, the following output results: 
WillConnect event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
ConnectComplete event raised. 
  Status: Errors have occurred. 
  Error:  [Microsoft][ODBC Driver Manager] Data source name not found 
and no 
          default driver specified 
Notice how the error occurred within the ConnectComplete event. This can be a little 
misleading -- when the connection fails, the ConnectComplete event is fired with an error. 
Furthermore, the con.Close method call will return a runtime error because you cannot 
close a Connection object that is not open. 

IT-SC book 
193
In addition to the values shown in Table 8-3, the EventStatusEnum enumeration contains the 
values shown in Table 8-4, which can be used to set the status of an event prior to its completion. 
These values cannot be combined. 
Table 8-4. The EventStatusEnum Enumeration, Additional Values  
Value 
Description 
adStatusUnwantedEvent Indicates that the event is no longer fired. 
adStatusCancel 
Indicates that the code within the event has requested to 
cancel the operation. 
You can set the status parameter of Will events to adStatusOK (tells the Will event to continue 
executing and raising), adStatusCancel (cancel the pending operation on the current object), 
or adStatusUnwantedEvent (suppress further firing of the current event for the current 
Connection instance). You can set the status parameter of Complete events to adStatusOK or 
adStatusUnwantedEvent. 
Now look at a similar piece of code that establishes a connection to a SQL Server database by 
passing the user ID sa: 
con.Open "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
       & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
       & "database=Northwind" _ 
       , "sa" 
        
con.Close 
Assuming that there is no password for the user sa and that the ConnectionString information 
passed to the Open method of the Connection object is correct, executing this code will send the 
following output to the Immediate Window: 
WillConnect event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
ConnectComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
Disconnect event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
Now change the code to pass an invalid user ID: 
con.Open "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
       & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
       & "database=Northwind" _ 
       , "WrongUserID" 
 
con.Close 

IT-SC book 
194 
Again, if you have a valid user named "WrongUserID" (without a password) for the Northwind 
database of your SQL Server on JROFF_LAPTOP, something is fishy. 
The following error will be reported to the Immediate Window upon execution of the 
previous code: 
WillConnect event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
ConnectComplete event raised. 
  Status: Errors have occurred. 
  Error:  [Microsoft][ODBC SQL Server Driver][SQL Server]Login failed 
for user 
          'WrongUserID'. 
A runtime error will be generated for the attempt to call the Close method of con while the 
Connection is not opened. 
To illustrate a point, modify the code again to attempt to open the data source without 
specifying a user ID: 
con.Open "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
       & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
       & "database=Northwind" 
        
con.Close 
Now modify the WillConnect event: 
Private Sub con_WillConnect(ConnectionString As String, _ 
                            UserID As String, _ 
                            Password As String, _ 
                            Options As Long, _ 
                            adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                            ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 
    PrintStatus "WillConnect", adStatus 
     
    If (UserID = "") Then UserID = "sa" 
         
End Sub 
This code checks for a user ID before it allows Connection to complete. If the user ID is 
missing, it fills it in. As you would expect, this code allows the previous attempt to 
connect to the data source to succeed, as we see from the output in the Intermediate 
Window: 
WillConnect event raised.  
  Status: Okay. 
 
ConnectComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
Disconnect event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 

IT-SC book 
195
FetchProgress events are dependent upon the provider, and Microsoft tells us that ADO 
almost never gets an accurate portrayal of the progress of an asynchronous fetch. The 
FetchProgress event is useful to know that your code hasn't hung -- but it is not reliable 
enough for a progress bar.  
8.2.2 Execution Events 
Two events belong to the Execution events category of the ConnectionEvent family: 
The WillExecute event is raised when an execution of a command is going to be attempted. 
The ExecuteComplete event is raised after an execution of a command has been attempted. 
The WillExecute and ExecuteComplete events are a Will/Complete event pair. So that we 
can track the firing of these two events, add the code shown to call the PrintStatus 
method with information from the events: 
Private Sub con_WillExecute(Source As String, _ 
                            CursorType As ADODB.CursorTypeEnum, _ 
                            LockType As ADODB.LockTypeEnum, _ 
                            Options As Long, _ 
                            adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                            ByVal pCommand As ADODB.Command, _ 
                            ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset, _ 
                            ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
     
    PrintStatus "WillExecute", adStatus 
     
End Sub 
 
Private Sub con_ExecuteComplete(ByVal RecordsAffected As Long, _ 
                                ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                ByVal pCommand As ADODB.Command, _ 
                                ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset, _ 
                                ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
     
    PrintStatus "ExecuteComplete", adStatus, pError 
     
End Sub 
Now look at a piece of code that executes a command from the Connection object: 
con.Open "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
Set rst = con.Execute("SELECT * FROM Authors") 
 
con.Close 
When this code is executed, the following output is sent to the Immediate Window: 
WillConnect event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
ConnectComplete event raised. 

IT-SC book 
196 
  Status: Okay. 
 
WillExecute event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
ExecuteComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
Disconnect event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
This output also shows the Connection events fired from the last piece of code. (For the 
remainder of this section, I will stop showing these events and will focus on the 
Execution events.) 
To see how an error is reported while executing a command, alter the code to request a 
table that does not exist: 
Set rst = con.Execute("SELECT * FROM AMissingTable") 
When this code is executed, the error is reported to the Complete event of the pair, the 
ExecuteComplete event: 
WillExecute event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
ExecuteComplete event raised. 
  Status: Errors have occurred. 
  Error:  [Microsoft][ODBC Microsoft Access 97 Driver] The Microsoft 
Jet 
          database engine cannot find the input table or query 
'AMissingTable'. 
          Make sure it exists and that its name is spelled correctly. 
Now, for the sake of illustration, alter the code once again to a valid command text value: 
Set rst = con.Execute("DELETE * FROM Authors " _ 
                    & "WHERE (Author = 'Jason')") 
Alter the WillExecute event as shown: 
Private Sub con_WillExecute(Source As String, _ 
                            CursorType As ADODB.CursorTypeEnum, _ 
                            LockType As ADODB.LockTypeEnum, _ 
                            Options As Long, _ 
                            adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                            ByVal pCommand As ADODB.Command, _ 
                            ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset, _ 
                            ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
     
    PrintStatus "WillExecute", adStatus 
     
    Debug.Print "  The Source of this execution is:" 
    Debug.Print "    " & Source 
     
    Debug.Print "  The ConnectionString used for this execution is:" 

IT-SC book 
197
    Debug.Print "    " & pConnection.ConnectionString 
     
    CursorType = adOpenKeyset 
    LockType = adLockOptimistic 
    Options = adCmdText 
     
End Sub 
This code sends the command text and the ConnectionString used to execute the 
command to the Immediate Window as output. In addition, the properties of the resulting 
recordset can be altered, as shown, by setting the CursorType, LockType, and Options 
variables. An example of output from the previous code is: 
WillExecute event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  The Source of this execution is: 
    DELETE * FROM Authors WHERE (Author = 'Jason') 
  The ConnectionString used for this execution is: 
    Provider=MSDASQL.1;User ID=sa;Connect Timeout=15;Extended 
    Properties="DSN=BiblioDSN;DBQ=c:\My 
Documents\BIBLIO.MDB;DriverId=25; 
    FIL=MS Access;MaxBufferSize=512;PageTimeout=5;UID=admin;"; 
    Locale Identifier=1033 
 
ExecuteComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
Notice how the ConnectionString information is a lot longer than you might have 
expected. This is because ADO sets many of the default characteristics of a connection 
for you. 
Now, execute a non-row-returning command as shown next: 
Set rst = con.Execute("DELETE * FROM Authors " _ 
                    & "WHERE (Author = 'Kaitlyn')") 
Alter the ExecuteComplete event to output the number of records the command affected: 
Private Sub con_ExecuteComplete(ByVal RecordsAffected As Long, _ 
                                ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                ByVal pCommand As ADODB.Command, _ 
                                ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset, _ 
                                ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
     
    PrintStatus "ExecuteComplete", adStatus, pError 
     
    If (RecordsAffected >= 0) Then 
        Debug.Print "  Records Affected: " & RecordsAffected 
    End If         
End Sub 
Notice that the records affected are only printed if the number is greater than or equal to 
zero. This is because the variable, RecordsAffected, is very often set to -1 (usually when 

IT-SC book 
198 
ADO cannot determine the number of records that have been affected). The following 
output results from the previous code: 
WillExecute event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  The Source of this execution is: 
    DELETE * FROM Authors WHERE (Author = 'Kaitlyn') 
  The ConnectionString used for this execution is: 
    Provider=MSDASQL.1;User ID=sa;Connect Timeout=15;Extended 
    Properties="DSN=BiblioDSN;DBQ=c:\My 
Documents\BIBLIO.MDB;DriverId=25; 
    FIL=MS Access;MaxBufferSize=512;PageTimeout=5;UID=admin;"; 
    Locale Identifier=1033 
 
ExecuteComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Records Affected: 4 
You can also use the Execute events when working with a Command object, although the 
events belong to a Connection object. 
As you may recall, each Command object has to have an associated Connection object. If 
this Connection object is external to the Command object rather than internally created 
by the Command object, the Execute events can be fired for a Command object's 
execution, as illustrated in the following code: 
com.CommandText = "SELECT * FROM Authors" 
com.CommandTimeout = 10 
com.CommandType = adCmdText 
com.ActiveConnection = con 
 
Set rst = com.Execute 
Notice that in this piece of code, the con variable is set to the ActiveConnection property of the 
Command object that will be executed. This con variable is where the actual firing of the Execute 
events takes place. 
Now alter the WillExecute event so that we may verify that it is fired for the correct 
Command object: 
Private Sub con_WillExecute(Source As String, _ 
                            CursorType As ADODB.CursorTypeEnum, _ 
                            LockType As ADODB.LockTypeEnum, _ 
                            Options As Long, _ 
                            adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                            ByVal pCommand As ADODB.Command, _ 
                            ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset, _ 
                            ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 
    PrintStatus "WillExecute", adStatus 
     
    Debug.Print "  The CommandText used for this execution is:" 
    Debug.Print "    " & pCommand.CommandText 
 
End Sub 

IT-SC book 
199
This code results in the following (partial) output: 
WillExecute event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  The CommandText used for this execution is: 
    SELECT * FROM Authors 
We can verify that the WillExecute method was fired for the Command object because 
the CommandText is identical.  
8.2.3 Transaction Events 
Three events belong to the Transaction events category of the ConnectionEvent family: 
The BeginTransComplete event is raised when a new transaction has been created. 
The CommitTransComplete event is raised when a transaction has been committed to the data 
source. 
The RollbackTransComplete event is raised when a transaction has been rolled back to restore the 
information within the data source prior to the creation of a new transaction. 
Just as you have for the other events introduced thus far, add the method call to 
PrintStatus for each of the Transaction events: 
Private Sub con_BeginTransComplete(ByVal TransactionLevel As Long, _ 
                                   ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                   adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                   ByVal pConnection As 
ADODB.Connection) 
     
    PrintStatus "BeginTransComplete", adStatus, pError 
     
End Sub 
 
Private Sub con_CommitTransComplete(ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                    adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, 
_ 
                                    ByVal pConnection As 
ADODB.Connection) 
 
    PrintStatus "CommitTransComplete", adStatus, pError 
     
End Sub 
 
Private Sub con_RollbackTransComplete(ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                      adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, 
_ 
                                      ByVal pConnection As 
ADODB.Connection) 
 
    PrintStatus "RollbackTransComplete", adStatusCancel, pError 
     
End Sub 

IT-SC book 
200 
To illustrate how the Transaction events are fired, enter the following code, which 
establishes a connection, begins a transaction, commits the transaction, and closes the 
connection to the data source: 
con.Open "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
 
con.BeginTrans 
' 
' do something here... 
' 
con.CommitTrans 
 
con.Close 
This code results in the following output in the Immediate Window: 
WillConnect event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
ConnectComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
BeginTransComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
CommitTransComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
Disconnect event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
Again, the WillConnect, ConnectComplete, and Disconnect events are shown here to 
illustrate where the Transaction events are fired in comparison. For the remainder of this 
section, the Connection events will not be shown. 
Now look at something slightly different. The following piece of code attempts to 
commit a transaction that has already been rolled back: 
con.BeginTrans 
' 
' do something here... 
' 
con.RollbackTrans 
' 
' do something here... 
' 
con.CommitTrans 
Upon execution of the above piece of code, the following output is sent to the Immediate 
Window: 
BeginTransComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
RollbackTransComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 

IT-SC book 
201
 
CommitTransComplete event raised. 
  Status: Errors have occurred. 
  Error:  No transaction is active. 
By changing the Attributes property of the Connection object, we can allow transactions 
to be created automatically after any call to RollbackTrans or CommitTrans. This change 
eliminates the previous error. 
The following code adds the adXactCommitRetaining and adXactAbortRetaining flags to 
the Attributes property to allow for just this (refer to the "Managing Multiple Transactions" in 
Chapter 4, for more information): 
con.Attributes = adXactCommitRetaining _ 
               + adXactAbortRetaining 
     
con.BeginTrans 
' 
' do something here... 
' 
con.RollbackTrans 
' 
' do something here... 
' 
con.CommitTrans 
When this code is executed, a new transaction is created after the RollbackTrans method 
call, therefore allowing it to be committed with the CommitTrans method call. The 
following output results: 
BeginTransComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
RollbackTransComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
CommitTransComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
As we can see, the transaction code no longer generates an error.  
8.2.4 Informational Events 
The final category in ConnectionEvents is the Informational events category. The only 
event currently in the Informational Events category is the InfoMessage event, which is 
fired whenever a warning has occurred during any other ConnectionEvents operation. 
To track the firing of the InfoMessage event and to display the warning that has been 
raised, modify the InfoMessage event as shown: 
Private Sub con_InfoMessage(ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                            adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                            ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 

IT-SC book 
202 
    PrintStatus "InfoMessage", adStatus, pError 
     
    Debug.Print "  Error: " & pError.Description 
    Debug.Print 
         
End Sub 
Now, enter code that you thought executed previously without any problems: 
con.Open "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
        
Set rst = con.Execute("SELECT * FROM Authors") 
     
con.Close 
When this code is executed, notice the following InfoMessage event: 
WillConnect event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
ConnectComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
InfoMessage event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Error: [Microsoft][ODBC Driver Manager] Driver's SQLSetConnectAttr 
failed 
 
WillExecute event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  The Source of this execution is: 
    SELECT * FROM Authors 
  The ConnectionString used for this execution is: 
    Provider=MSDASQL.1;User ID=sa;Connect Timeout=15;Extended 
    Properties="DSN=BiblioDSN;DBQ=c:\My 
Documents\BIBLIO.MDB;DriverId=25; 
    FIL=MS Access;MaxBufferSize=512;PageTimeout=5;UID=admin;"; 
    Locale Identifier=1033 
 
ExecuteComplete event raised.  
  Status: Okay. 
 
Disconnect event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
The InfoMessage event has posted a warning, not an error. This warning was placed in the pError 
object just as an error is. When the InfoMessage event is raised, it is known that a warning has 
occurred, and therefore the pError object will be populated with its information; however, the 
adStatus flag is set to adStatusOK. Our code in the PrintStatus method prints the information 
from the pError object only if the adStatus flag is set to adStatusErrorsOccurred. This is 
why we printed the warning from within the InfoMessage event itself. 
8.3 The RecordsetEvent Family 

IT-SC book 
203
The RecordsetEvent family contains a group of events that belong to the Recordset object. 
To instantiate a Recordset object that implements events, declare it as follows: 
Private WithEvents rst As ADODB.Recordset 
As stated earlier, the events within the Recordset family can be broken into five 
categories: 
Retrieval events 
Movement events 
Field Change events 
Record Change events 
Recordset Change events 
Each category of events contains events pertaining to one specific task. The first of these 
tasks is retrieving records from a data source. 
8.3.1 Retrieval Events 
Two events belong to the Retrieval events category of the RecordsetEvent family: 
The FetchProgress event is raised to indicate the progress of a lengthy asynchronous fetch 
operation. 
The FetchComplete event is raised when an asynchronous fetch operation is complete. 
So that we can track how ADO raises these two events, add the PrintStatus method call to each, 
as shown in the following code. In addition, we will put an End keyword within the 
FetchComplete event so that the application will terminate once all of the records have been 
fetched: 
Private Sub rst_FetchProgress(ByVal Progress As Long, _ 
                              ByVal MaxProgress As Long, _ 
                              adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                              ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    PrintStatus "FetchProgress", adStatus 
     
End Sub 
 
Private Sub rst_FetchComplete(ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                              adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                              ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    PrintStatus "FetchComplete", adStatus 
     
    ' End the application 
    End 
     

IT-SC book 
204 
End Sub 
Now enter the following code to create a recordset that returns all of the records from the Orders 
table. In this example, we are passing the adAsyncFetch option to the Open method of the 
Recordset object in order to retrieve the records asynchronously: 
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
 
con.CursorLocation = adUseClient 
 
con.Open "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
       & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
       & "database=Northwind; " _ 
       & "uid=sa;" 
 
rst.rst.Open "SELECT * FROM Orders", _ 
         con, _ 
         , _ 
         , _ 
         adAsyncFetch 
          
While True 
    DoEvents 
Wend 
The last piece of code had a forced While...Wend statement that assures us that our application 
is still running. Periodically, while the fetch is taking place, the FetchProgress event should be 
raised; once the operation is complete, the FetchComplete event should be raised. 
Once the last piece of code is executed, the following output is sent to the Immediate 
Window: 
FetchProgress event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
. 
. (about 20 more times) 
. 
 
FetchProgress event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
FetchProgress event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
FetchComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
For clarity, I have removed about twenty statements declaring that the FetchProgress 
event has been raised. The last piece of code executed exactly as we had planned. 
8.3.2 Movement Events 

IT-SC book 
205
Three events belong to the Movement events category of the RecordsetEvent family: 
The WillMove event is raised when an operation is going to execute that will move the record 
pointer to a different location within the recordset. 
The MoveComplete event is raised when an operation that moves the record pointer to a different 
location within the recordset has completed. 
The EndOfRecordset event is raised when an operation has completed that moved the record 
pointer to the EOF marker within the recordset. 
We will first look at the WillMove and MoveComplete events of the Recordset object. For both 
of these events, an adReason parameter is returned, containing a constant value that represents the 
reason why the event was raised. This parameter can contain any valid EventReasonEnum 
enumeration value listed in Table 8-5. 
Table 8-5. The EventReasonEnum Enumeration Values for the adReason Parameter  
Value 
Description 
adRsnMoveFirst 
The event was raised because of a MoveFirst method call. 
adRsnMoveLast 
The event was raised because of a MoveLast method call. 
adRsnMoveNext 
The event was raised because of a MoveNext method call. 
adRsnMovePrevious The event was raised because of a MovePrevious method call. 
adRsnMove 
The event was raised because of a Move method call. 
adRsnRequery 
The event was raised because of a Requery method call. 
Enter the following code for both the WillMove and the WillComplete events so that we 
can track the raising of these events. In addition, place a call to the PrintReason function 
(which I will define next) within the WillMove event: 
Private Sub rst_WillMove(ByVal adReason As ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                         adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                         ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
     
    PrintStatus "WillMove", adStatus 
    PrintReason adReason 
     
End Sub 
 
Private Sub rst_MoveComplete(ByVal adReason As ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                             ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                             adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 

IT-SC book 
206 
                             ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    PrintStatus "MoveComplete", adStatus, pError 
     
End Sub 
The EventReasonEnum contains many more constants than those shown in Table 8-3, but they 
do not apply to the WillMove and MoveComplete events. The following code for the PrintReason 
method includes all of the possible EventReasonEnum values, because it will be used for other 
RecordsetEvent events later in this chapter: 
Private Sub PrintReason(adReason As ADODB.EventReasonEnum) 
 
    Debug.Print "  Reason for event: "; 
    Select Case (adReason) 
        Case adRsnAddNew: 
            Debug.Print "AddNew" 
        Case adRsnClose: 
            Debug.Print "Close" 
        Case adDelete: 
            Debug.Print "Delete" 
        Case adRsnFirstChange: 
            Debug.Print "First Change" 
        Case adRsnMove: 
            Debug.Print "Move" 
        Case adRsnMoveFirst: 
            Debug.Print "MoveFirst" 
        Case adRsnMoveLast: 
            Debug.Print "MoveLast" 
        Case adRsnMoveNext: 
            Debug.Print "MoveNext" 
        Case adRsnMovePrevious: 
            Debug.Print "MovePrevious" 
        Case adRsnOpen: 
            Debug.Print "Open" 
        Case adRsnRequery: 
            Debug.Print "Requery" 
        Case adRsnResynch: 
            Debug.Print "Resynch" 
        Case adRsnUndoAddNew: 
            Debug.Print "Undo AddNew" 
        Case adRsnUndoDelete: 
            Debug.Print "Undo Delete" 
        Case adRsnUndoUpdate: 
            Debug.Print "Undo Update" 
        Case adRsnUpdate: 
            Debug.Print "Update" 
    End Select 
 
End Sub 
The following code and its output illustrate the events that are called when a recordset is 
simply opened and then closed: 
Debug.Print "---------- Before the recordset is opened." 
rst.rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 

IT-SC book 
207
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic, _ 
         adCmdTable 
 
Debug.Print 
Debug.Print "---------- Before the recordset is closed." 
rst.rst.Close 
When this example is run, the following output is sent to the Immediate Window: 
---------- Before the recordset is opened. 
 
WillMove event raised. 
  Status: Can't deny. 
  Reason for event: Move 
 
MoveComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
---------- Before the recordset is closed. 
 
WillMove event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: Move 
 
MoveComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
In analyzing the output from the previous piece of code, when the Recordset is opened, the 
WillMove event is raised for the first time. This event is raised with a status of Can't deny. The 
reason displayed for the event being raised is a Move method. We did not code a Move method in 
our code example; however, when the Recordset is first opened, the record pointer is moved for 
the first record, and you can't do anything about it. This is why its status is 'Can't deny'. The 
MoveComplete event is then raised once the move has been completed. 
When the Recordset is closed, the Move event is raised again, followed by the 
MoveComplete event. 
Now look at a piece of code that does a little more. After the Recordset is opened, the 
MoveNext method is called and followed by the Close method. Enter the following code 
to see how the WillMove and MoveComplete events are called in this situation: 
Debug.Print "---------- Before the recordset is opened." 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
             "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
             adOpenKeyset, _ 
             adLockOptimistic, _ 
             adCmdTable 
Debug.Print 
Debug.Print "---------- MoveNext Call" 
rst.MoveNext 
 
Debug.Print 
Debug.Print "---------- Before the recordset is closed." 
rst.Close 

IT-SC book 
208 
Once this code has been entered and run, the following output is sent to the Immediate 
Window: 
---------- Before the recordset is opened. 
 
---------- MoveNext Call 
 
WillMove event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: MoveNext 
 
MoveComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
---------- Before the recordset is closed. 
The output for the Open and Close method calls have been omitted in the most recent 
example output because it is the same as the output in the previous example. The only 
output that is shown earlier is that for the MoveNext method to illustrate the events that 
are fired for the previous example's MoveNext statement. 
The third event belonging to the Movement events category of the RecordsetEvents 
family is the EndOfRecordset event. This event, as stated earlier in this section, is raised 
once the record pointer has moved one position past the last record in the recordset to the 
EOF marker. Add the PrintStatus method to the EndOfRecordset event, as shown in the 
following example, so that we can track when this event is being raised: 
Private Sub rst_EndOfRecordset(fMoreData As Boolean, _ 
                               adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                               ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    PrintStatus "EndOfRecordset", adStatus 
     
End Sub 
Assuming that a recordset is already open, enter the following methods to move the 
record pointer around within the recordset: 
Debug.Print 
Debug.Print "---------- MoveLast Call" 
rst.MoveLast 
 
Debug.Print 
Debug.Print "---------- First MoveNext Call" 
rst.MoveNext 
 
Debug.Print 
Debug.Print "---------- Second MoveNext Call" 
rst.MoveNext 
Run this code to see which Movement events are being raised for each Recordset method 
call in the previous piece of code. The following is sent as output to the Immediate 
Window from the last piece of code: 
---------- MoveLast Call 

IT-SC book 
209
 
WillMove event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: MoveLast 
 
MoveComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
---------- First MoveNext Call 
 
WillMove event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: MoveNext 
 
EndOfRecordset event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
MoveComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
---------- Second MoveNext Call 
 
WillMove event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: MoveNext 
 
EndOfRecordset event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
MoveComplete event raised. 
  Status: Errors have occurred. 
  Error:  Either BOF or EOF is True, or the current record has been 
deleted; 
          the operation requested by the application requires a current 
record. 
The MoveLast method call continues successfully, as does the first call to MoveNext. 
This call to MoveNext effectively places the record pointer at the end of file marker, 
located directly past the last record in the recordset. 
The second call to the MoveNext method generates an error after it raises the EndOfRecordset 
event. The error is reported through the MoveComplete event, which indicates that neither BOF 
nor EOF is True. 
Now, modify the EndOfRecordset event as shown: 
Private Sub rst_EndOfRecordset(fMoreData As Boolean, _ 
                               adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                               ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    PrintStatus "EndOfRecordset", adStatus 
     
    pRecordset.AddNew 
    pRecordset.Update 
     
    fMoreData = True 

IT-SC book 
210 
     
End Sub 
The fMoreData flag of the EndOfRecordset event allows you to indicate that more data has been 
added to the recordset and that the record pointer no longer points to an invalid record. If you 
want to do this, you must add the new records (with the AddNew method) and then set the 
fMoreData flag to True. When the application exits the EndOfRecordset event, the 
MoveComplete event does not report an error, but completes successfully. 
By changing the EndOfRecordset event as shown before and re-executing the code, the 
following event output is sent to the Immediate Window: 
---------- MoveLast Call 
 
WillMove event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: MoveLast 
 
MoveComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
---------- First MoveNext Call 
 
WillMove event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: MoveNext 
 
EndOfRecordset event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
MoveComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
---------- Second MoveNext Call 
 
WillMove event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: MoveNext 
 
EndOfRecordset event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
MoveComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
Notice how the last MoveNext method call executed without an error.  
8.3.3 Field Change Events 
Two events make up the Field Change events category of the RecordsetEvent family: 
The WillChangeField event is raised when one or more fields are about to change due to an 
operation. 

IT-SC book 
211
The ChangeFieldComplete event is raised when one or more fields were changed due to an 
operation. 
The WillChangeField event, shown next, passes two important parameters. The first of 
these parameters is a Long value indicating the number of fields that will be changed. 
The second parameter, Fields, is a Variant value that contains an array of Field objects 
that are about to be changed. 
The code in the following WillChangeField event not only calls the PrintStatus method to 
indicate that the event has been raised, but it also prints the old value of each field that is 
about to be modified: 
Private Sub rst_WillChangeField(ByVal cFields As Long, _ 
                                ByVal Fields As Variant, _ 
                                adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
     
    Dim lCount As Long 
     
    PrintStatus "WillChangeField", adStatus 
     
    For lCount = 1 To cFields 
        Debug.Print "  Field " & lCount & ": " & Fields(lCount - 1) 
    Next lCount 
 
End Sub 
The FieldChangeComplete event is called after the operation has changed the field (or 
has failed trying): 
Private Sub rst_FieldChangeComplete(ByVal cFields As Long, _ 
                                    ByVal Fields As Variant, _ 
                                    ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                    adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, 
_ 
                                    ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    PrintStatus "FieldChangeComplete", adStatus, pError 
     
End Sub 
Now enter the following code to see how the Field Change events are raised when a 
single Field is modified: 
rst.MoveFirst 
     
rst.Update "Author", "Kimberly" 
When this code is executed, the following output is sent to the Immediate Window: 
WillChangeField event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Field 1: Jason 
 
FieldChangeComplete event raised. 

IT-SC book 
212 
  Status: Okay. 
Notice that the value of Field 1 output during the WillChangeField event is Jason, although the 
code has changed it to the value of Kimberly. This is because during the WillChangeField event, 
the value of the Field has not changed yet; therefore, the original value of the field is outputted. 
8.3.4 Record Change Events 
Two events make up the Record Change events category of the RecordsetEvent family: 
The WillChangeRecord event is raised when the current record is about to change due to an 
operation. 
The ChangeRecordComplete event is raised when the current record has changed due to an 
operation. 
Both of the Record Change events pass the adReason flag that we saw earlier in the Movement 
events. The WillChangeRecord and RecordChangeComplete events can be raised because of any 
of the values of the EventReasonEnum values in Table 8-6. 
Table 8-6. The EventReasonEnum Enumeration for Record Change Events  
Value 
Description 
adRsnAddNew 
The event was raised because of an AddNew method call. 
adRsnDelete 
The event was raised because of a Delete method call. 
adRsnUpdate 
The event was raised because of an Update method call. 
adRsnUndoUpdate The event was raised because of a CancelUpdate method call. 
adRsnUndoAddNew The event was raised because of a CancelBatch method call 
(concerning a previous AddNew method call). 
adRsnUndoDelete The event was raised because of a CancelBatch method call 
(concerning a previous Delete method call). 
adRsnFirstChange The event was raised because it was the first time that this recordset 
has been set. 
Enter 
the 
following 
code 
for 
both 
the 
WillChangeRecord 
and 
the 
RecordChangeComplete events. It will be used to track when and why the events are 
raised. 

IT-SC book 
213
Private Sub rst_WillChangeRecord(ByVal adReason As 
ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                                 ByVal cRecords As Long, _ 
                                 adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                 ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    PrintStatus "WillChangeRecord", adStatus 
    PrintReason adReason 
    Debug.Print "  Records: " & cRecords 
     
End Sub 
 
Private Sub rst_RecordChangeComplete(ByVal adReason As 
ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                                     ByVal cRecords As Long, _ 
                                     ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                     adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, 
_ 
                                     ByVal pRecordset As 
ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    PrintStatus "RecordChangeComplete", adStatus, pError 
    PrintReason adReason 
    Debug.Print "  Records: " & cRecords 
 
End Sub 
Now enter some code that would fire the two previous events. The following piece of 
code uses a single Update method call to modify two fields within the current record: 
Dim vFields(1) As Variant 
Dim vValues(1) As Variant 
 
vFields(0) = "Author" 
vFields(1) = "Year Born" 
     
vValues(0) = "Tamara" 
vValues(1) = "1975" 
     
rst.Update vFields, vValues 
When the previous code is run, the following is sent as output to the Immediate Window: 
WillChangeRecord event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: First Change 
  Records: 1 
 
WillChangeField event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Field 1: Jason 
  Field 2: 1973 
 
FieldChangeComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
RecordChangeComplete event raised. 

IT-SC book 
214 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: First Change 
  Records: 1 
 
WillChangeRecord event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: Update 
  Records: 1 
 
RecordChangeComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: Update 
  Records: 1 
When we break down this output, we see that the WillChangeRecord event is raised before any 
other. Then the WillChangeField and FieldChangeComplete events are fired, indicating that the 
two Fields shown (with values of 
Jason and 
1973) are changed. Then the 
RecordChangeComplete event is raised. This grouping of events has indicated that the values 
have changed, but not necessarily been updated to the data source. 
When the last WillChangeRecord and RecordChangeComplete events are raised, the 
update is made (indicated by the Update output for the reason for the event).  
8.3.5 Recordset Change Events 
Two events make up the final set of events -- the Record Change events category of the 
RecordsetEvent family: 
The WillChangeRecordset event is raised when the current recordset is about to change due to an 
operation. 
The ChangeRecordsetComplete event is raised when the current recordset has changed due to an 
operation. 
Both of these events include a parameter, adReason, which can be set to any of the 
EventReasonEnum values indicated in Table 8-7. 
Table 8-7. The EventReasonEnum Enumeration for Recordset Change Events  
Value 
Description 
adRsnReQuery 
The event was raised because of a Requery method call. 
adRsnReSynch 
The event was raised because of a Resynch method call. 
adRsnOpen 
The event was raised because of an Open method call. 
adRsnClose 
The event was raised because of a Close method call. 

IT-SC book 
215
Now enter the code that is necessary in order to track the raising of the 
WillChangeRecordset and the RecordsetChangeComplete events: 
Private Sub rst_WillChangeRecordset(ByVal adReason As 
ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                                    adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, 
_ 
                                    ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    PrintStatus "WillChangeRecordset", adStatus 
    PrintReason adReason 
     
End Sub 
 
Private Sub rst_RecordsetChangeComplete(ByVal adReason As 
ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                                        ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                        adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                        ByVal pRecordset As 
ADODB.Recordset) 
     
    PrintStatus "RecordsetChangeComplete", adStatus, pError 
    PrintReason adReason 
 
End Sub 
Now enter code that will illustrate how these two events are raised. The following piece 
of code opens and closes a recordset: 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN", _ 
         adOpenDynamic, _ 
         adLockOptimistic, _ 
         adCmdTable 
     
rst.Close 
When this code is run, the following is sent as output to the Immediate Window: 
WillChangeRecordset event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: Move 
 
RecordsetChangeComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: Move 
 
WillMove event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
  Reason for event: Move 
 
MoveComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 
 
RecordsetChangeComplete event raised. 
  Status: Okay. 

IT-SC book 
216 
  Reason for event: Close 
Looking at this output, we see that the record pointer moving from one record to another 
has caused the WillChangeComplete and RecordsetChangeComplete events to be raised. 
Once the recordset is closed, the RecordsetChangeComplete event is raised again. 
8.4 Canceling Operations 
Your application can deny the execution of any operation that triggers a Will event. By changing 
the status parameter passed to any Will event to adStatusCancel, the operation will not 
execute. However, if the adStatus property is set to adStatusCantDeny, you cannot cancel the 
operation. 
For instance, assume that you want to restrict the connection to a data source. By entering 
the following code for the WillConnect event, the connection will never occur: 
Private Sub con_WillConnect(ConnectionString As String, _ 
                            UserID As String, _ 
                            Password As String, _ 
                            Options As Long, _ 
                            adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                            ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 
    ' cancel the connection 
    adStatus = adStatusCancel 
     
End Sub 
Now enter the following code in a method to test the connection: 
On Error GoTo ERR_Connection: 
 
    Set con = New Connection 
     
    con.Open "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
     
    con.Close 
     
ERR_Connection: 
    If (Err.Number = 3712) Then 
        Debug.Print "Connection canceled." 
    End If 
     
    Set con = Nothing 
Output from this code produces the message Connection canceled. Of course, you would not 
logically deny every connection attempt made by an application, but you might deny Connections 
if you know that you already have many connections made to the same data source. 
8.5 Turning Events Off 
In addition to canceling operations by altering the status parameter of an event, you can also turn 
the events off completely for an open instance of an object. By setting any event's status 

IT-SC book 
217
parameter to adStatusUnwantedEvent, you are informing ADO that you no longer want to be 
notified of a particular event. 
To illustrate this ability, alter the WillMove event as shown: 
Private Sub rst_WillMove(ByVal adReason As ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                         adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                         ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
                          
    Debug.Print 
    Debug.Print "  WillMove Event Raised" 
    adStatus = adStatusUnwantedEvent 
    Debug.Print "  Turned WillMove Event Off" 
 
End Sub 
Now enter and execute a piece of code that raises the WillMove event at least once: 
Debug.Print "--------- Before Opening Recordset" 
rst.Open "Authors", _ 
         "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
          
Debug.Print 
Debug.Print "--------- Before MoveFirst" 
rst.MoveFirst 
 
Debug.Print 
Debug.Print "--------- Before MoveNext" 
rst.MoveNext 
 
Debug.Print 
Debug.Print "--------- Before Closing Recordset" 
rst.Close 
When this code is executed, the following output is sent to the Immediate Window: 
--------- Before Opening Recordset 
 
  WillMove Event Raised 
  Turned WillMove Event Off 
 
--------- Before MoveFirst 
 
--------- Before MoveNext 
 
--------- Before Closing Recordset 
Note that once a Recordset object (or a Connection object for that matter) is closed and 
then reopened, the event will be raised again. 
In the case of events that can be raised for more than one reason, you must indicate that 
the event is not wanted for each possible reason as each type occurs. At the very least, 
each event can occur one time for each possible reason. 
8.6 Summary 

IT-SC book 
218 
This chapter was written to help you understand how to trap and potentially alter 
executions prior to their completion, as well as develop applications that are notified once 
an operation is complete. After reading this chapter, you should be able to fully 
understand how the ADO Event Model works and the following key points about it: 
There are two different types of events, Will/Complete events and Standalone events. 
The Connection object supports events that deal with connecting to a data source, executing 
commands, transaction management, and informational events that belong to the 
ConnectionEvent family. 
The Recordset object supports events that deal with the asynchronous fetching of records, 
movement through a recordset, and Field, Record, and Recordset Change events that belong to 
the RecordsetEvent family. 
Within a given event, an operation can be canceled or an event can be turned off so that the 
application will no longer receive them. 
The next chapter of this book, Chapter 9, explains how to use one or more data providers to 
construct a hierarchical view (shaped view) of your data. 

IT-SC book 
219
Chapter 9. Data Shaping 
Introduced with ADO 2.0, data shaping allows creation of hierarchical or nested sets of 
recordsets with a single ADO object. The data shaping specifies the relation between columns 
and recordsets (i.e., parent-child relationships).  
9.1 An Introduction to Data Shaping 
Each of the columns within a shaped recordset can be defined as one of the following:  
Data from a data provider 
A reference to another recordset 
A solution to an operation on a single row of this recordset 
A solution to an operation on an entire column of a recordset 
A completely new defined column 
A recordset whose column contains another recordset is called a hierarchical recordset. 
Hierarchical recordsets can be nested to any depth. The recordset that contains another recordset 
is called the parent, while the contained recordset is called the child. When a parent recordset's 
field (column), which represents another recordset, is read, ADO actually returns an instance of 
another Recordset object as the value of the field.  
The field in the parent recordset that refers to a child recordset is called a chapter. This Field 
object is appended to the parent recordset and given a datatype of adChapter.  
To create shaped recordsets, ADO 2.0 introduced the Shape command syntax, which is explained 
later in this chapter (Section 9.3). Shape commands are used in conjunction with the OLE DB 
provider's native command set, usually SQL. A Shape command is passed to the Source property 
of a Recordset object just like any other SQL statement.  
In Version 2.1, ADO introduced the concept of reshaping. Reshaping allows a newly created 
recordset to have existing shaped recordsets as its children. There are four restrictions to 
reshaping:  
You cannot add columns to an existing recordset. 
You cannot reshape a parameterized query. 
You cannot reshape any of the Recordset objects within an intervening Compute clause.  
You cannot perform aggregate options on the children or the recordset that is being reshaped.  
Each recordset in a hierarchical recordset can have an alias. Any field within any of these 
recordsets can be referenced through a fully qualified name. For instance, if a hierarchical 
recordset has three recordsets -- Customers, Orders, and Products -- a product's cost may be 

IT-SC book 
220 
referenced with the name Customers.Orders.Products.Cost. This name can also be used as an 
argument to one of the aggregate functions mentioned later in this chapter. This concept is 
referred to as grandchild aggregates.  
9.2 The Microsoft Data Shaping Service 
The Microsoft Data Shaping Service is one of two providers necessary to create a shaped 
recordset with a connection to a data source. The other is a data provider such as SQL 
Server. In this case, SQL Server would supply the data to the MS Data Shaping service, 
which would supply it to the application, through ADO.  
To specify the MS Data Shaping Service, in the ConnectionString property, set the Provider 
keyword to MSDataShape. When the Provider property is set to MSDataShape, the connection 
string gains a dynamic property called Data Provider, used to specify the source of the data 
provided to the MS Data Shaping Service.  
The following example shows how the MS Data Shaping Service property is used in 
conjunction with the MS Jet Engine:  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
     
con.ConnectionString = "Provider=MSDataShape; " _ 
                     & "Data Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " _ 
                     & "Data Source=C:\My Documents\Biblio.mdb; " 
     
con.Open 
 
' 
' do something here 
' 
con.Close 
Set con = Nothing 
9.3 Shaping Commands 
Shaping commands allow you to create hierarchical recordsets in two ways. The first way is done 
through the APPEND command. The APPEND command can be used to attach a child recordset to a 
parent based upon a common field value or values. One field value in the parent recordset is 
equivalent to all of the field values in its child recordset. The APPEND command can add not only 
chapter columns (pointing to child recordsets), it can also add calculated, aggregated, and 
fabricated columns.  
The second method of creating hierarchical recordsets in ADO is to use the COMPUTE command. 
This method generates a parent recordset from a child recordset. Parent columns are created by 
aggregation operations over a column of the child, an expression on an entire row of the recordset, 
a grouping column (using the keyword BY), or by creating a new blank column. In addition, one 
of the parent recordset's columns must be a chapter column pointing to the child recordset. The 
parent can also be a calculated, aggregated, or fabricated column.  

IT-SC book 
221
9.3.1 APPEND Command 
The APPEND command is used to append a child recordset to a column within a parent recordset. 
The syntax of the APPEND command is as follows:  
SHAPE {parent-command} [[AS] parent-alias] 
APPEND ({child-command} [AS] child-alias 
RELATE parent-column TO child-column) [[AS] chapter-alias]... 
In this syntax, the parent-command and child-commands can be one of four things:  
A command that is translated by the underlying data provider (usually a SQL Statement)  
A table name preceded by the keyword TABLE 
Another Shape command in (...) 
The name of a recordset that has already been shaped 
The first type of command can be translated by the underlying data provider. In the following 
example, two tables from the Nwind.mdb database supplied with Visual Basic 6.0 will be shaped. 
To better visualize the hierarchical recordset that is a result of this Shape command, we will 
create a form with only one control: the Microsoft Hierarchical FlexGrid control.  
Create a new project, and rename the main form to frmShapeExample. Add the component 
Microsoft Hierarchical FlexGrid Control 6.0 (OLE DB) and the reference to ADO, Microsoft 
ActiveX Data Objects 2.6 Library.  
Next, add an instance of the MSHFlexGrid control to the form, and rename it mshFlexGrid. Now 
enter the following code to resize the control along with the form:  
Private Sub Form_Resize(  ) 
     
    mshFlexGrid.Top = 0 
    mshFlexGrid.Left = 0 
    mshFlexGrid.Width = Me.ScaleWidth 
    mshFlexGrid.Height = Me.ScaleHeight 
     
End Sub 
Now save this project as prjShapeExample. This project will be used throughout this chapter to 
view the hierarchical recordsets that we will create.  
The simplest hierarchical recordset that we can create is one that appends one SQL 
statement to another:  
SHAPE   {SELECT * FROM Orders;}  
APPEND ({SELECT * FROM [Order Details];} 
RELATE   OrderID TO OrderID) 
This statement uses the Orders and Order Details tables from the Nwind.mdb MS Access database 
file distributed with MS Visual Basic 6.0.  
To view this recordset in action, enter the following code for the FirstExample method:  

IT-SC book 
222 
Private Sub FirstExample(  ) 
 
    Dim con As  ADODB.Connection 
    Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
    Dim sSource As String 
 
    Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
    Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
         
    con.ConnectionString = "Provider=MSDataShape; " _ 
                         & "Data Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " _ 
                         & "Data Source=D:\My Documents\Nwind.mdb; " 
 
    con.Open 
                  
    sSource = "SHAPE   {SELECT * FROM Orders;} " _ 
            & "APPEND ({SELECT * FROM [Order Details];} " _ 
            & "RELATE   OrderID TO OrderID) " 
              
    rst.Open sSource, _ 
             con, _ 
             adOpenForwardOnly, _ 
             adLockReadOnly 
              
    Set mshFlexGrid.Recordset = rec 
     
    rst.Close 
    Set rst = Nothing 
     
    con.Close 
    Set con = Nothing 
     
End Sub 
Now, enter a call to the FirstExample method within the Form_Load event, and run this example. 
If 
this 
example 
doesn't 
work 
immediately, 
ensure 
that 
the 
path 
set 
in 
the 
con.ConnectionString property points to your copy of the Nwind.mdb database file.  
If this example does work properly for you, you should see a form similar to that shown in 
Figure 9-1.  
Figure 9-1. The first Shape example in action 

IT-SC book 
223
 
Another valid value for either the parent-command or the child-command would be a table name 
preceded with the TABLE keyword. By replacing the following lines of code in the FirstExample 
method shown earlier, the application is performing the same function:  
sSource = "SHAPE   TABLE Orders; " _ 
        & "APPEND (TABLE [Order Details] " _ 
        & "RELATE   OrderID TO OrderID) " 
In addition, either the parent-command or the child-command can be another valid Shape 
command as in the following example:  
sSource = "SHAPE TABLE Customers " _ 
        & "APPEND (( " _ 
        & "   SHAPE TABLE Orders " _ 
        & "   APPEND (TABLE [Order Details]; " _ 
        & "   RELATE OrderID TO OrderID)) " _ 
        & "RELATE CustomerID TO CustomerID) " 
This example creates a three-level hierarchical recordset starting with the Customers 
table, then the Orders table, and finally the Order Details table.  
You can enter the previous code lines into the project that you have set up and run it. You 
will notice that you have a lot of column headers now -- three tables worth. To ease the 
readability for the example, you can selectively choose the columns that you would like 
to see, as with the following lines of code:  
sSource = "SHAPE {SELECT CustomerID, ContactName " _ 
        & "       FROM Customers;} " _ 
        & "APPEND (( " _ 
        & "   SHAPE {SELECT OrderID,CustomerID " _ 
        & "          FROM Orders;} " _ 
        & "   APPEND (TABLE [Order Details] " _ 
        & "   RELATE OrderID TO OrderID)) " _ 
        & "RELATE CustomerID TO CustomerID) " 
If you were to run this code within the project that you have created, you would see a window 
similar to that shown in Figure 9-2.  

IT-SC book 
224 
Figure 9-2. A three-level hierarchical recordset example 
 
When a Recordset object is opened on an ordinary Shape command, both the parent and 
the child recordsets are opened immediately. You might expect to achieve better 
performance by using a Shaped recordset.  
The main advantage to a shaped recordset is the amount of information that is returned to the 
application. Every Shaped recordset could be replaced with a JOINed SQL statement. With a 
Shaped recordset, parent records are not duplicated; with a JOINed SQL statement, a parent 
recordset could contain much more data than necessary. For instance, take a look at Figure 9-2, 
at CustomerID ANATR. With a Shaped recordset, only one record is returned from the parent 
recordset for this customer. If this recordset was created with JOINed SQL statements, there 
would be four records (one for each of the orders) that are duplicated for the parent. In addition, if 
a third recordset was appended, as in the example shown in Figure 9-2, there would be a 
duplicated record for each of the order detail records.  
The shape commands can also use the PARAMETER keywords. Don't mistake the Shape 
PARAMETER keyword with the Parameters collection object or the PARAMETER object of ADO; it 
has nothing to do with them. The Shape PARAMETER keyword is interpreted by the Microsoft 
Data Shaping Engine. Try placing the following lines of code into the example project that you 
have created:  
sSource = "SHAPE   TABLE Orders " _ 
        & "APPEND ({SELECT * " _ 
        & "         FROM [Order Details] " _ 
        & "         WHERE (OrderID = ?);} " _ 
        & "RELATE   OrderID TO PARAMETER 0) " 
The question mark (?) in the SQL statement SELECT * FROM [Order Details] WHERE 
(OrderID = ?); acts like an ordinary parameter. The PARAMETER keyword, with the index zero, 
is supplied by the Data Shaping Engine to the child recordset before ADO returns it. The result is 
that the child recordset is not read until it is needed. This is different than the shaped recordsets 
that we have seen so far, in that the entire child recordset is read immediately.  

IT-SC book 
225
By using the PARAMETER keyword, ADO isn't expecting an actual value for the parameter from 
the application. In the preceding example, the data shaping engine knows to relate the OrderID 
value of the Orders Detail table with the OrderID of the current Orders table.  
The are two advantages to using the PARAMETER keyword. First, it offers faster initial execution 
since the child rowset is not populated at execute time. Second, only the child data you actually 
need is fetched from the server. If your application needs to use all of the children from a Shaped 
recordset, you will most likely be better off without using the PARAMETER keyword because it 
will require many small trips to the server versus fewer larger trips.  
9.3.2 COMPUTE Command 
The COMPUTE command is used to create a parent recordset based upon a given child recordset. 
The syntax of the COMPUTE command is as follows:  
SHAPE {child-command} [AS] child-alias 
COMPUTE child-alias [, additional-fields-list] 
[BY group-field-list] 
In this syntax, the child-command can be one of four things: 
A command that is translated by the underlying data provider (usually a SQL statement)  
A table name preceded by the keyword TABLE 
Another Shape command 
The name of a recordset that has already been shaped 
If a COMPUTE Shape command does not use the optional BY keyword, then only one record will 
be returned in the recordset. The columns for this record would include chapter column pointing 
to the entire child recordset.  
By using the project skeleton that was introduced earlier in this chapter, replace the sSource 
variable assignment with the following code:  
sSource = "SHAPE {SELECT * FROM Orders;} " _ 
        & "        AS Orders " _ 
        & "COMPUTE Orders, " _ 
        & "        SUM(Orders.Freight) AS TotalFreight" 
In this code, the following Shape command is being assigned to the sSource variable:  
SHAPE {SELECT * FROM Orders;} AS Orders 
COMPUTE Orders, SUM(Orders.Frieght) AS TotalFreight 
The child-command in this example is a SQL statement that returns all of the columns of the 
Orders table to the MS Data Shaping Service. The MS Data Shaping Service is going to create a 
parent recordset for this child-command because the COMPUTE command is being used. Within 
this parent recordset, there are two fields. The first is a chapter field pointing to the child-
recordset, Orders. The second field is a summation of all the Freight field values within the child 
recordset. This command will return only one record with the total freight cost as the TotalFreight 
field value.  

IT-SC book 
226 
In order to return more than one record within the created parent-recordset, you must use the BY 
keyword. The BY keyword groups by a column value within the child recordset producing one 
record in the parent recordset for each unique value within the child recordset.  
As an example, replace the sSource variable assignment in our sample application with the 
following code:  
sSource = "SHAPE {SELECT OrderID, ShipCountry " _ 
        & "       FROM Orders;} " _ 
        & "          AS Orders " _ 
        & "COMPUTE Orders, " _ 
        & "        COUNT(Orders.OrderID) AS [Number Of Orders], " _ 
        & "BY ShipCountry" 
This code produces the following Shape statement: 
SHAPE {SELECT OrderID, ShipCountry FROM Orders;" 
        AS Orders 
COMPUTE Orders, COUNT(Orders.OrderID) AS [Number Of Orders] 
BY ShipCountry 
This example uses a child-command that only returns two columns, the OrderID and the 
ShipCountry. The COMPUTE command causes a parent recordset to be created with three fields. 
The first field is a chapter field pointing to the child-recordset that was created by the SQL 
statement. The second field displays a count of the number of orders within the chapter of that 
record. Finally, the third field comes from the BY clause of the Shape command, the ShipCountry 
field. This BY clause causes the parent recordset to have a distinct record for each unique 
ShipCountry within the child-command specified. For each of these parent recordset records, the 
chapter field returns a subset of the overall child command. Each child recordset contains only 
recordsets whose ShipCountry field values match that of the current parent recordset's 
ShipCountry field value. Figure 9-3 illustrates how this parent-child hierarchical recordset looks 
once it is created.  
Let us go one step further and create another nested level within our hierarchical 
recordset. In the next example, the parent recordset is grouped by countries, and its child 
recordset contains all of the regions within each country. Furthermore, each recordset 
broken down by regions acts as a parent recordset whose child recordset contains all of 
the individual orders within each region.  
To create such a nested Shape command, replace the sSource assignment in our example 
framework with the following two assignments:  
sSource = "SHAPE {SELECT OrderID, ShipCountry, ShipRegion " _ 
        & "       FROM Orders;} " _ 
        & "          AS Orders " _ 
        & "COMPUTE Orders, " _ 
        & "        COUNT(Orders.OrderID) AS [Number Of Orders], " _ 
        & "        ANY(Orders.ShipCountry) as Country " _ 
        & "BY ShipRegion " 
             
sSource = "SHAPE (" & sSource & ") " _ 
        & "      AS OrderRegion " _ 
        & "COMPUTE OrderRegion, " _ 
        & "        SUM(OrderRegion.[Number Of Orders]) " _ 

IT-SC book 
227
        & "           AS [Number Of Country Orders] " _ 
        & "BY Country"   
Figure 9-3. A simple COMPUTE Shape command  
 
As you can see, the sSource variable is first set to a Shape command that will group the orders 
by region. The second sSource variable is assigned to another Shape command that takes the 
first shape command and groups it by country.  
The following output is generated by the code: 
SHAPE ( 
   SHAPE {SELECT OrderID, ShipCountry, ShipRegion 
          FROM Orders;} 
            AS Orders 
   COMPUTE Orders, 
           COUNT(Orders.OrderID) AS [Number Of Orders], 
           ANY(Orders.ShipCountry) AS Country 
   BY ShipRegion 
) 
  AS OrderRegion 
COMPUTE OrderRegion, 
        SUM(OrderRegion.[Number Of Orders]) 
          AS [Number Of Country Orders] 
BY Country 
Notice that within the nested Shape statement the inner nest, or the first Shape statement, 
returns four fields: the Orders chapter, the Count field, the ShipCountry value for the 
given row, and the ShipRegion for its child recordset. It is important to have this Shape 
statement include the ShipCountry value to the outer Shape command so that it can group 
by it.  

IT-SC book 
228 
When the application is run with this statement, you should see a dialog box very similar to that 
shown in Figure 9-4.  
Figure 9-4. A nested COMPUTE Shape command  
 
Notice that we have introduced another aggregate function, ANY. The purpose of the ANY 
aggregate function is to return a value for a column that is the same for all of the child recordset's 
rows. For instance, notice that in Figure 9-4, the ShipCountry value is the same for all records of 
a chapter by looking at the last three columns shown in the dialog box. In this example, USA is the 
value for all of the child records.  
9.3.3 Shape Functions 
In total, the Shape command syntax supports seven aggregate functions as shown in Table 9-1.  
Table 9-1. The Shape Aggregate Functions  
Function 
Syntax 
Description 
ANY (chapter-
alias.field-
name)  
Returns the value of the column that matches all the values of the child's 
column of the same name. The ANY function has a well-defined result 
only when all of the rows in the child recordset have the identical value for 
the specified column. If the rows in the child recordset don't all have the 
same value for the specified column, one of the values will be picked as 
the value of the ANY aggregate. Which value is picked is not defined, so 
ANY in this case has unpredictable results.  

IT-SC book 
229
AVG (chapter-
alias.field-
name)  
Returns an average value within the child recordset. 
COUNT 
(chapter-
alias.field-
name)  
Returns a count of all child's records. The field name is optional for the 
COUNT function. If it is omitted, the value of COUNT is the number of 
rows in the child recordset. If a field name is provided, then the value of 
COUNT is the number of rows in the child recordset for which the 
specified column is non-Null.  
MAX (chapter-
alias.field-
name)  
Returns the maximum value within the child recordset. 
MIN (chapter-
alias.field-
name)  
Returns the minimum value within the child recordset. 
STDEV 
(chapter-
alias.field-
name)  
Returns the standard deviation based upon the values within the child 
recordset.  
SUM (chapter-
alias.field-
name)  
Returns the sum of all the values within the child recordset. 
In addition, the Shape command syntax also supports all VBA function or expressions through 
the use of the CALC function. The CALC function can be used only upon the row of the recordset 
that contains the CALC function itself, as in the following example:  
sSource = "SHAPE   {SELECT OrderID, OrderDate FROM Orders;} " _ 
        & "APPEND ({SELECT OrderID, ProductID FROM [Order Details];} " 
_ 
        & "RELATE   OrderID TO OrderID), " _ 
        & "         CALC(Format(OrderDate, 'mmm-dd-yyyy'))" 
In this example, the VBA function Format$ was used to return the OrderDate field with the 
format mmm-dd-yyyy.  
9.4 Example: Accessing Shaped Recordsets 
The example in this chapter allows you to navigate manually through a three-level 
hierarchical recordset with the use of non-bound controls. Although the MS Hierarchical 

IT-SC book 
230 
Flex Grid is very useful in some situations, as we see throughout this chapter, this control 
frequently offers us no help at all in our real-world applications.  
Figure 9-5 shows what the Access example looks like during runtime.  
Figure 9-5. The Access Shape recordset example in action 
 
This example allows the user to select a contact name, or customer, from a list box on the 
left. Programmatically, this action accesses a chapter field within the recordset that passes 
a child recordset to the individual orders shown in the second list box. When you select 
an order from this list box, another chapter field is read to return the second child 
recordset, the Order Details table. The Total Order Price shown in the bottom-right 
corner of the form is calculated using an aggregation method on the Order Details child 
recordset.  
To begin this example, create a new project and call it prjAccessExample. Use the Project 
References . . . menu item to add a reference to Microsoft ActiveX Data Objects 2.1 Library, or 
the most recent version that you have. In addition, you should use the Project 
Components . . . 
menu item to add the Microsoft Windows Common Controls 6.0 to your project for the use of the 
List View control.  
Once you are done with these steps, add four labels, two list boxes, a List View, and a text box as 
shown in Figure 9-6. The lstOrderDetails control shown is the List View control.  
Figure 9-6. The Access Shape recordset example at design time 
 
After adding the controls to the form, go to the Property Pages of the List View control 
by right-clicking on the control and selecting Properties from the pop-up menu. Change 
the View property on the first tab to 3-lvwReport, and then add five columns to the 

IT-SC book 
231
Column Headers tab. Name the columns ProductID, Quantity, UnitPrice, Discount, and 
Total Price. Set all but the ProductID column headers alignment to 1-lvwColumnRight 
because they will be displaying numeric values.  
Once you are done with all of this, you can continue to set the properties of the controls as 
specified by Table 9-2.  
Table 9-2. The Access Shape Recordset Example Form Control Settings  
Control 
Property 
Value 
Form 
Name 
frmAccessExample 
  
Caption 
Access Example 
Label 
Caption 
Contact Name: 
List Box 
Name 
lstCustomers 
Label 
Caption 
Order Number: 
List Box 
Name 
lstOrders 
Label 
Caption 
Order Details: 
List View 
Name 
lstOrderDetails 
Label 
Caption 
Total Order Price: 
Text Box 
Name 
txtTotalOrderPrice 
  
Enabled 
False 
  
BackColor 
Button Face 
Now begin entering the code. Enter the following Private declarations for the connection 
and the three recordsets:  
Private con As ADODB.Connection 
 
Private rstCustomers As ADODB.Recordset 
Private rstOrders As ADODB.Recordset 

IT-SC book 
232 
Private rstOrderDetails As ADODB.Recordset 
Now add the code to kick off the Form_Load event:  
Public Sub Form_Load(  ) 
 
    Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
    Set rstCustomers = New ADODB.Recordset 
    Set rstOrders = New ADODB.Recordset 
    Set rstOrderDetails = New ADODB.Recordset 
     
    SpaceOrderDetailColumns 
    CreateRecordset 
    PopulateCustomersList 
     
End Sub 
The code for the Form_Unload event simply closes any open recordsets, as well as the connection. 
It also sets all of these objects to Nothing. Notice that for only two Recordset objects, 
rstOrderDetails and rstOrders, the state of the object is checked to make sure it is open 
before it is closed. This is done because these recordsets are opened as you click on the list boxes; 
if you do not click on them and close the application, they will never be opened. In such a case, 
attempting to close them would result in an error; therefore, the State property of each is 
compared to the constant enumeration value, adStateOpen, to attempt to close them only if they 
are already open. The rstCustomers Recordset and the con Connection aren't checked because we 
are assuming that they both are open at the application startup:  
Private Sub Form_Unload(Cancel As Integer) 
 
    If (rstOrderDetails.State = adStateOpen) Then rstOrderDetails.Close 
    Set rstOrderDetails = Nothing 
     
    If (rstOrders.State = adStateOpen) Then rstOrders.Close 
    Set rstOrders = Nothing 
     
    rstCustomers.Close 
    Set rst = Nothing 
     
    con.Close 
    Set con = Nothing 
     
End Sub 
Now enter the following code for SpaceOrderDetailColumns method. This automatically 
resizes the column headers of the List View control so that all are shown on the screen at 
once. This is done only for aesthetics:  
Private Sub SpaceOrderDetailColumns(  ) 
 
    Dim lColumnCount As Long 
    Dim lColumnWidth As Long 
     
    With lstOrderDetails 
         
        lColumnWidth = (.Width - 100) / .ColumnHeaders.Count 
     

IT-SC book 
233
        For lColumnCount = 1 To .ColumnHeaders.Count 
            .ColumnHeaders(lColumnCount).Width = lColumnWidth 
        Next lColumnCount 
     
    End With 
     
End Sub 
The following method, ClearContents, has been added to clear the contents of everything 
but the lstCustomers List Box control. This example will use this method in a couple of 
places.  
Private Sub ClearContents(  ) 
 
    lstOrders.Clear 
    lstOrderDetails.ListItems.Clear 
    txtTotalOrderPrice.Text = "" 
     
End Sub 
The second method to be called from the Form_Load event is the CreateRecordset method shown 
next. This method establishes a connection to the data source -- in this case, the Nwind.mdb 
database supplied with MS Visual Basic 6.0. After the connection is established, a shaped 
recordset is created. You may need to change the path of the Nwind.mdb database file in order to 
get this example to work correctly on your machine.  
Private Sub CreateRecordset(  ) 
 
    Dim sSource As String 
     
    con.ConnectionString = "Provider=MSDataShape; " _ 
                         & "Data Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " _ 
                         & "Data Source=D:\My Documents\Nwind.mdb; " 
 
    con.Open 
     
    sSource = "SHAPE TABLE Customers " _ 
            & "APPEND (( " _ 
            & "   SHAPE TABLE Orders " _ 
            & "   APPEND ({SELECT OrderID, ProductID, Quantity, " _ 
            & "                   UnitPrice, Discount, " _ 
            & "                 ((UnitPrice * Quantity * (1 - Discount) 
" _ 
            & "                                           / 100) * 100) 
" _ 
            & "                     AS TotalUnitPrice " _ 
            & "            FROM [Order Details];} " _ 
            & "   RELATE OrderID TO OrderID) AS cptOrderDetails, " _ 
            & "           SUM(cptOrderDetails.TotalUnitPrice) " _ 
            & "              AS TotalOrderPrice) " _ 
            & "RELATE CustomerID TO CustomerID) AS cptOrders" 
 
    rstCustomers.Open sSource, _ 
                      con, _ 
                      adOpenForwardOnly, _ 
                      adLockReadOnly 

IT-SC book 
234 
              
End Sub 
I tried very hard to get the shaped recordset that is set to the sSource String variable to be as 
readable as I could, but just in case you still cannot read it, here it is without the mess:  
SHAPE TABLE Customers 
APPEND (( 
   SHAPE TABLE Orders 
   APPEND ({SELECT OrderID, ProductID, Quantity, UnitPrice, Discount, 
           ((UnitPrice * Quantity * (1 - Discount) / 100) * 100) 
                                                            AS 
TotalUnitPrice 
            FROM [Order Details];}  
   RELATE OrderID TO OrderID) AS cptOrderDetails,  
          SUM(cptOrderDetails.TotalUnitPrice) AS TotalOrderPrice)  
RELATE CustomerID TO CustomerID) AS cptOrders 
Let's take a look at this Shape command. There are three recordsets being shaped in all. The 
parent recordset is made up of all the columns of the Customers table (TABLE Customers;), 
and its child recordset is the Orders table (TABLE Orders;). The two of these tables are related 
by the CustomerID field shown on the last line of the Shape command, and the chapter field that 
refers to the child recordset is referred to as cptOrders.  
The third recordset, created from the Order Details table with a complex SELECT 
statement, is a child recordset of the Orders table, which is now a parent recordset. The 
two tables are related by the OrderID field and the child recordset is accessed through the 
chapter field, TotalOrderPrice.  
In addition, the SELECT statement, which is done on the Order Details table to create the third-
level recordset, has an additional field, the TotalUnitPrice field. This field is calculated for each 
row of the Order Details table based upon the Quantity, UnitPrice, and Discount field values. This 
TotalUnitPrice field is used within an aggregate function, SUM, which in turn is used to append 
another field to each order record in the Orders table.  
In short, this Shape command relates customers to their orders and the orders to the order 
details. For each order detail, a total unit price is calculated, and for each order, all the 
total unit prices are summed in order to generate a total order price.  
Now we can continue to the third and last method that is called by the Form_Load event, 
the PopulatCustomersList method:  
Private Sub PopulateCustomersList(  ) 
 
    With rstCustomers 
     
        If (Not (.BOF And .EOF)) Then .MoveFirst 
         
        Do Until (.EOF) 
            lstCustomers.AddItem .Fields("ContactName").Value 
            .MoveNext 
        Loop 
     
    End With 

IT-SC book 
235
     
    ClearContents 
     
End Sub 
This method simply fills the lstCustomers list box with the ContactName property values 
of the rstCustomers Recordset object. It then calls ClearContents to remove anything else 
that is shown on the form.  
When a user clicks on the lstCustomers list box, the lstCustomers_Click event, shown 
next, is fired to populate the lstOrders list box for the customer selected:  
Private Sub lstCustomers_Click(  ) 
     
    Dim sCustomer As String 
     
    ClearContents 
     
    sCustomer = lstCustomers.List(lstCustomers.ListIndex) 
         
    With rstCustomers 
     
        If (Not (.BOF And .EOF)) Then .MoveFirst 
        .Find "ContactName='" & sCustomer & "'" 
         
        Set rstOrders = .Fields("cptOrders").Value 
     
    End With 
     
    PopulateOrdersList 
         
End Sub 
First, the customer name is extracted from the list box and then used to find the correct 
record within the lstCustomers recordset. Once it is found, the rstOrders Recordset object 
is opened with the cptOrders chapter field of that record. This chapter field returns a child 
recordset of the rstCustomers recordset for the current customer. Once the recordset has 
been extracted, the PopulateOrdersList method is called, as follows:  
Private Sub PopulateOrdersList(  ) 
     
    With rstOrders 
     
        If (Not (.BOF And .EOF)) Then .MoveFirst 
     
        Do Until (.EOF) 
            lstOrders.AddItem .Fields("OrderID").Value 
            .MoveNext 
        Loop 
 
    End With 
     
End Sub 

IT-SC book 
236 
When the lstOrders list box is clicked, the lstOrders_Click event is fired. Fill in the code 
for this event as it appears here:  
Private Sub lstOrders_Click(  ) 
 
    Dim sOrderID As String 
     
    sOrderID = lstOrders.List(lstOrders.ListIndex) 
         
    With rstOrders 
         
        If (Not (.BOF And .EOF)) Then .MoveFirst 
        .Find "OrderID='" & sOrderID & "'" 
         
        Set rstOrderDetails = .Fields("cptOrderDetails").Value 
     
        txtTotalOrderPrice.Text = 
FormatCurrency(.Fields("TotalOrderPrice")) 
     
    End With 
     
    PopulateOrderDetailInformation 
                
End Sub 
The code for the lstOrders_Click event is very similar to that of the lstCustomers_Click 
event. It finds the order that has been selected from the list, and it locates it in the 
rstOrders child recordset. Once the record has been located, the rstOrderDetails 
Recordset object is set to the chapter field cptOrderDetails. This chapter field returns 
another child recordset, this time for the parent rstOrders. The returned child recordset 
contains the detail records for the current order selected from the rstOrders recordset.  
In addition, the aggregate field, TotalOrderPrice, is used to populate the 
txtTotalOrderPrice text box on the form indicating the total price of the order.  
Finally, the PopulateOrderDetailInformation method is called to show the detail records 
contained within this new child recordset. The following code is used for this method:  
Private Sub PopulateOrderDetailInformation(  ) 
 
    Dim lListItem As Long 
    Dim lFieldCount As Long 
     
    lstOrderDetails.ListItems.Clear 
     
    rstOrderDetailsDo Until (rstOrderDetails.EOF) 
         
        With lstOrderDetails 
         
            .ListItems.Add , , 
rstOrderDetails.Fields("ProductID").Value 
             
            lListItem = .ListItems.Count 
             
            With .ListItems(lListItem).ListSubItems 

IT-SC book 
237
             
                .Add , , rstOrderDetails.Fields("Quantity").Value 
                .Add , , FormatCurrency( _ 
                           rstOrderDetails.Fields("UnitPrice").Value) 
                .Add , , rstOrderDetails.Fields("Discount").Value 
                .Add , , FormatCurrency( _ 
                           
rstOrderDetails.Fields("TotalUnitPrice").Value) 
 
            End With 
 
        End With 
         
        rstOrderDetails.MoveNext 
     
    Loop 
     
End Sub 
For each record within the rstOrderDetails recordset, another list item is added to the List 
View control.  
9.5 Summary 
This chapter introduced and explained the concepts of Data Shaping and Hierarchical 
Recordset with the use of the Microsoft Data Shaping Service provided with ADO 2.0 
and 2.1, how to create Shaped statements, and how to use them in your applications. 
After reading this chapter, you should be able to connect to the MS Data Shaping Service 
and fully understand the Shape command syntax and the following key points about it:  
There are two types of Shape commands: APPEND and COMPUTE. 
The APPEND Shape command allows you to append a child recordset to a parent recordset.  
The COMPUTE Shape command allows you to create a parent recordset to a child recordset 
based upon computations specified in the Shape statement.  
Shape commands can be nested to any level that you need. 

IT-SC book 
238 
Chapter 10. Records and Streams 
The Record object represents either a single record of a Recordset object or of a resource 
on a web server (such as a file or a directory). The Stream object represents a buffer of 
either binary or text data.  
Together the Record and Stream objects can be used to navigate hierarchical data sources, 
such as a directory structure. Each file and directory within this hierarchical data source 
is considered a resource and therefore can be opened as a Record object. The Record 
object allows you to copy, move, and delete files and directories of a data source. Within 
such a resource, there is a stream (or buffer) of information that can be read, thus the 
Stream object. The Stream object allows you to manipulate the contents of a stream by 
editing the text or binary data directly. One of the most interesting features about these 
two new objects is the ability to connect to their data source with the use of URLs as a 
connection string. Both the Record and Stream objects were introduced with ActiveX 
Data Objects 2.5.  
10.1 The Record Object 
The Record object is used to navigate hierarchical data sources, such as a file directory. 
Think of a file directory as a tree with nodes. The Record object can represent any node 
within that tree -- either a leaf node (a file), or a nonleaf node (a directory).  
As a leaf node, the Record object contains information about a file or document. The properties of 
the file or document are accessed through the Record object's Fields collection. The contents of 
the file or document is accessed through the default stream for the Record Object (covered later in 
this chapter under Section 10.2.1.2.  
As a nonleaf node, the Record object contains information about a directory, which may contain 
other files and directories. As such, the Record object will provide information about the 
directory through its Fields collection. The files and directories belonging to the directory 
represented by this Record object can be returned within a Recordset object, containing individual 
Record objects for each resource. I will discuss this later in this chapter (see Section 10.1.2.  
10.1.1 Opening a Record Object 
To begin working with a Record object, you first have to open it, of course. Following is 
the prototype for the Record.Open method:  
record.Open [Source], _ 
            [ActiveConnection], _ 
            [Mode], _ 
            [CreateOptions], _ 
            [Options], _ 
            [UserName], _ 
            [Password]_ 

IT-SC book 
239
The Record object can be opened by passing one of five different items to the Source 
argument:  
A Command object 
A SQL statement 
A table name 
An open Recordset object 
A URL representing the resource to open served by a web site 
This chapter focuses on opening a Record object with a URL, but I will first briefly 
discuss the other four ways of opening a Record object, all of which return a single row 
when used with the Record object.  
10.1.1.1 Opening a Record object with a Command object 
To open a Record object with a Command object, you must create a common Connection 
object that uses a data provider that supports executing commands through the Record 
object. The OLE DB provider for SQL Server does just that.  
After the Connection object is opened, it must be passed to both the Command object and the 
Record object. Assign your CommandText property of the Command object with the correct SQL 
statement, and then pass the Command object to the Record object's open method. Finally, the 
fifth parameter to the Open method, the Options parameter, must be set to the 
ADODB.RecordOpenOptionsEnum value adOpenExecuteCommand:  
con.Open "Provider=SQLOLEDB; " _ 
       & "Data Source=JROFF-NTLT; " _ 
       & "Initial Catalog=Northwind; " _ 
       & "UID=sa" 
 
com.ActiveConnection = con 
com.CommandText = "SELECT * " _ 
                & "FROM Shippers " _ 
                & "WHERE CompanyName='United Package'" 
 
rec.Open com, _ 
         con, , , _ 
         adOpenExecuteCommand 
Make sure that you have done the following: 
Declared the con, com, and rec object variables as ADODB Connection, Command, and Record 
objects, respectively.  
Set each of the three object variables to a new instance of its respective ADODB object type.  
Have a SQL Server running on JROFF-NTLT (or change it to your own). 

IT-SC book 
240 
Have an OLE DB provider for SQL Server driver installed. 
Have a database named Northwind (one comes with SQL Server).  
Have the username and password of the SQL Server set to "sa" and "", respectively.  
Before running the previous code, add the following code so that you can see whether the 
Record object was opened by looking at the Record.State property:  
If (rec.State & adStateOpen) Then 
    MsgBox "Record successfully opened." 
Else 
    MsgBox "Record was not opened." 
End If 
Finally, add the following function to your project so that you can see the output of the 
Fields collection of the Record object:  
Private Function DisplayFields(Flds As ADODB.Fields) 
 
    Dim fld As ADODB.Field 
     
    For Each fld In Flds 
        Debug.Print Left$(fld.Name & Space(25), 25) & ": " & fld.Value 
    Next fld 
     
End Function 
Now add a call to the DisplayFields function that you have just entered, and add the code 
to close all of the objects that you were using:  
DisplayFields rec.Fields 
 
rec.Close 
com.Close 
con.Close 
After running all of the previous code, you should see the following output in your 
Immediate window within Visual Basic:  
ShipperID                : 2 
CompanyName              : United Package 
Phone                    : (503) 555-3199 
If you got this far, you have successfully opened your first Record object -- and used a 
Command object while you were at it. If you are experiencing errors with this first 
example, go back and make sure that your prerequisites listed in the beginning are correct 
(do you have the right server name? did you declare and instantiate your variables 
correctly? and so on).  
10.1.1.2 Opening a Record object with a SQL statement 
Now that you are getting the hang of opening Record objects, the next one should be a 
snap. To open a Record object with a SQL statement, do the exact same thing you did 

IT-SC book 
241
when opening a Record object with a Command object, except that you leave out the 
Command object. Instead of setting the SQL statement to the Command.CommandText 
property, you can pass it directly to the Record.Open method's Source argument as shown 
here:  
con.Open "Provider=SQLOLEDB; " _ 
       & "Data Source=JROFF-NTLT; " _ 
       & "Initial Catalog=Northwind; " _ 
       & "UID=sa" 
 
rec.Open "SELECT * " _ 
       & "FROM Customers " _ 
       & "WHERE CustomerID='CHOPS'", _ 
         con, , , _ 
         adOpenExecuteCommand 
 
DisplayFields rec.Fields 
 
rec.Close 
con.Close 
Running this code fragment gives you the fields you would expect from the Customer's 
table:  
CustomerID               : CHOPS 
CompanyName              : Chop-suey Chinese 
ContactName              : Yang Wang 
ContactTitle             : Owner 
Address                  : Hauptstr. 29 
City                     : Bern 
Region                   :  
PostalCode               : 3012 
Country                  : Switzerland 
Phone                    : 0452-076545 
Fax                      : 
10.1.1.3 Opening a Record object with a table name 
Opening a Record object with a table name is just as easy -- simply pass the table name 
instead of the SQL statement, and you are done:  
con.Open "Provider=SQLOLEDB; " _ 
       & "Data Source=JROFF-NTLT; " _ 
       & "Initial Catalog=Northwind; " _ 
       & "UID=sa" 
 
rec.Open "Orders", _ 
         con, , , _ 
         adOpenExecuteCommand 
 
DisplayFields rec.Fields 
 
rec.Close 
con.Close 

IT-SC book 
242 
The output of this code fragment yields the following: 
OrderID                  : 10248 
CustomerID               : VINET 
EmployeeID               : 5 
OrderDate                : 7/4/1996 
RequiredDate             : 8/1/1996 
ShippedDate              : 7/16/1996 
ShipVia                  : 3 
Freight                  : 32.38 
ShipName                 : Vins et alcools Chevalier 
ShipAddress              : 59 rue de l'Abbaye 
ShipCity                 : Reims 
ShipRegion               :  
ShipPostalCode           : 51100 
ShipCountry              : France 
10.1.1.4 Opening a Record object with an open Recordset object 
Now let's try to open a Record object with an already open Recordset object. Remember 
that a Record object can represent a single row within a Recordset object.  
To use the Recordset object as a Source to the Record.Open method, the Recordset must 
be opened on a file using the OLE DB Internet Publishing Provider. To do so, you must 
specify a valid URL address of the file you want to open.  
I have IIS 5.1 running on my machine, and my server's root directory is C:\Inetpub\WWWroot; 
however, to access this directory, it is specified in IIS as the JROFF-NTLT server. With this 
information, the correct URL pointing to this directory is http://JROFF-NTLT/. Precede this with 
the URL keyword as in the following code fragment, and you should be on your way:  
rst.Open "index.htm", _ 
         "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/", , , _ 
         adCmdTableDirect 
 
rec.Open rst 
 
DisplayFields rec.Fields 
 
rec.Close 
rst.Close 
Notice that the Recordset object takes the URL statement within the ActiveConnection argument 
to the Open method, while it accepts the name of the individual file index.htm as the source. Also 
notice that the option adCmdTableDirect is used.  
Once the Recordset object is opened, it can be passed to the Record object's Open method. 
Calling the DisplayFields function displays the following output to the Immediate 
window:  
RESOURCE_PARSENAME       : index.htm 
RESOURCE_PARENTNAME      : http://jroff-ntlt 
RESOURCE_ABSOLUTEPARSENAM: http://jroff-ntlt/index.htm 
RESOURCE_ISHIDDEN        : False 

IT-SC book 
243
RESOURCE_ISREADONLY      :  
RESOURCE_CONTENTTYPE     :  
RESOURCE_CONTENTCLASS    : text/html 
RESOURCE_CONTENTLANGUAGE :  
RESOURCE_CREATIONTIME    : 3/19/2000 5:08:35 PM 
RESOURCE_LASTACCESSTIME  :  
RESOURCE_LASTWRITETIME   : 3/19/2000 5:08:36 PM 
RESOURCE_STREAMSIZE      : 13715 
RESOURCE_ISCOLLECTION    : False 
RESOURCE_ISSTRUCTUREDDOCU:  
DEFAULT_DOCUMENT         :  
RESOURCE_DISPLAYNAME     : index.htm 
RESOURCE_ISROOT          :  
RESOURCE_ISMARKEDFOROFFLI: False 
DAV:getcontentlength     : 13715 
DAV:creationdate         : 3/19/2000 5:08:35 PM 
DAV:displayname          : index.htm 
DAV:getetag              : "0240c3c591bf1:aec6" 
DAV:getlastmodified      : 3/19/2000 5:08:36 PM 
DAV:ishidden             : False 
DAV:iscollection         : False 
DAV:getcontenttype       : text/html 
All of the previous fields are specific to the OLE DB provider for Internet Publishing. 
Each will be explained in "Internet Publishing Provider Fields" later in this chapter, but 
you should be able to guess what a lot of these fields indicate already.  
10.1.1.5 Opening a Record object with a URL 
Now let's apply the same information regarding a URL ActiveConnection to the Record object. 
The following code fragment opens up the root directory of the JROFF-NTLT server:  
rec.Open , "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/" 
 
DisplayFields rec.Fields 
 
rec.Close 
The output from calling the DisplayFields function should look familiar to you now:  
RESOURCE_PARSENAME       :  
RESOURCE_PARENTNAME      : http://jroff-ntlt 
RESOURCE_ABSOLUTEPARSENAM: http://jroff-ntlt 
RESOURCE_ISHIDDEN        : False 
RESOURCE_ISREADONLY      :  
RESOURCE_CONTENTTYPE     :  
RESOURCE_CONTENTCLASS    : application/octet-stream 
RESOURCE_CONTENTLANGUAGE :  
RESOURCE_CREATIONTIME    : 1/15/2000 12:46:22 AM 
RESOURCE_LASTACCESSTIME  :  
RESOURCE_LASTWRITETIME   : 1/15/2000 12:46:24 AM 
RESOURCE_STREAMSIZE      : 0 
RESOURCE_ISCOLLECTION    : True 
RESOURCE_ISSTRUCTUREDDOCU:  
DEFAULT_DOCUMENT         :  
RESOURCE_DISPLAYNAME     : / 

IT-SC book 
244 
RESOURCE_ISROOT          :  
RESOURCE_ISMARKEDFOROFFLI: False 
DAV:getcontentlength     : 0 
DAV:creationdate         : 1/15/2000 12:46:22 AM 
DAV:displayname          : / 
DAV:getetag              : "0709af2f15ebf1:aec6" 
DAV:getlastmodified      : 1/15/2000 12:46:24 AM 
DAV:ishidden             : False 
DAV:iscollection         : True 
DAV:getcontenttype       : application/octet-stream 
The last example opened up what ADO refers to as a collection, or a directory. This is indicated 
by the RESOURCE_ISCOLLECTION field's value of True.  
Open up a file, which is considered a noncollection resource. You can do this by specifying the 
resource in the Source argument of the Record.Open method. Additionally, I have added a path to 
locate the resource. (I don't expect you to have a Documents directory containing a file named 
ADO.01.DOC -- unless you are writing a competing ADO book and don't need my help!) In any 
case, change the Source argument in the remaining examples to directories and files that you have 
on your server. The important point about the next example is that it is pointing to a file -- it 
doesn't necessarily have to be a Word document:  
rec.Open "Documents/ADO.01.DOC", _ 
         "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/" 
 
DisplayFields rec.Fields 
 
rec.Close 
Running this code will cause the following output in your Immediate Window:  
RESOURCE_PARSENAME       : ADO.01.DOC 
RESOURCE_PARENTNAME      : http://jroff-ntlt/Documents 
RESOURCE_ABSOLUTEPARSENAM: http://jroff-ntlt/Documents/ADO.01.DOC 
RESOURCE_ISHIDDEN        : False 
RESOURCE_ISREADONLY      :  
RESOURCE_CONTENTTYPE     :  
RESOURCE_CONTENTCLASS    : application/msword 
RESOURCE_CONTENTLANGUAGE :  
RESOURCE_CREATIONTIME    : 4/15/2000 9:10:55 PM 
RESOURCE_LASTACCESSTIME  :  
RESOURCE_LASTWRITETIME   : 4/5/1999 3:02:56 PM 
RESOURCE_STREAMSIZE      : 123392 
RESOURCE_ISCOLLECTION    : False 
RESOURCE_ISSTRUCTUREDDOCU:  
DEFAULT_DOCUMENT         :  
RESOURCE_DISPLAYNAME     : ADO.01.DOC 
RESOURCE_ISROOT          :  
RESOURCE_ISMARKEDFOROFFLI: False 
DAV:getcontentlength     : 123392 
DAV:creationdate         : 4/15/2000 9:10:55 PM 
DAV:displayname          : ADO.01.DOC 
DAV:getetag              : "090e462757fbe1:aec6" 
DAV:getlastmodified      : 4/5/1999 3:02:56 PM 
DAV:ishidden             : False 
DAV:iscollection         : False 

IT-SC book 
245
DAV:getcontenttype       : application/msword 
Notice a couple of newly populated properties. First, RESOURCE_STREAMSIZE is now populated 
with the file size of your resource. This indicates that we can open a Stream object to access the 
data within the file specified. We will do this later in this chapter, in Section 10.2.1.2.  
We can create files and directories with the Record.Open method by passing the right values to 
the CreateOptions argument. The following example creates a new file, the appropriately named 
NewFile within the Documents directory of the JROFF-NTLT server. As a matter of fact, if the 
file already exists on the server, in the same location, this code will overwrite it:  
rec.Open "Documents/NewFile", _ 
         "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT", , _ 
         adCreateOverwrite 
' 
' 
' 
rec.Close 
Similarly, we can create a collection (a directory), by adding the adCreateCollection 
enumeration value to the CreateOptions argument:  
rec.Open "Documents/NewDirectory", _ 
         "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/", , _ 
         adCreateOverwrite + adCreateCollection 
' 
' 
' 
rec.Close 
You can also specify the ActiveConnection and the Source property values separately, by 
using the corresponding Record object property values, as in the following example:  
rec.ActiveConnection = "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/" 
rec.Source = "Documents/ADO.01.DOC" 
rec.Open 
 
Debug.Print "ParentUrl: " & rec.ParentURL 
 
rec.Close 
In addition, the Record object has a nifty property called ParentURL, which, when read 
(unsurprisingly), outputs the parent URL for the opened resource. Running the previous 
results in the following output:  
ParentURL: http://jroff-ntlt/Documents 
Another important property of the Record object is the Mode property. The Mode 
property indicates the read/write permissions the Record object should use to open the 
resource. The following two examples produce the same effect. One uses the Record 
properties, and the other uses the Record.Open method arguments:  
rec.Mode = adModeReadWrite 
rec.ActiveConnection = "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/Documents/" 
rec.Source = "ADO.01.DOC" 
rec.Open 

IT-SC book 
246 
' 
' 
' 
rec.Close 
 
rec.Open "ADO.01.DOC", _ 
         "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/Documents/", _ 
         adModeReadWrite 
' 
' 
' 
rec.Close 
The RecordType property of the Record object returns a RecordTypeEnum enumeration value 
indicating the record type of the opened resource. The following source code indicates that the 
ADO.01.DOC file is a Simple Record -- or a text file:  
sSource = "http://JROFF-NTLT/Documents/ADO.01.DOC" 
 
rec.Open sSource 
 
Select Case (rec.RecordType) 
    Case ADODB.RecordTypeEnum.adCollectionRecord 
        sRecordType = "Collection" 
    Case ADODB.RecordTypeEnum.adSimpleRecord 
        sRecordType = "Simple Record" 
    Case ADODB.RecordTypeEnum.adStructDoc 
        sRecordType = "Structured Document" 
End Select 
 
MsgBox "The source: " & sSource & " has a record type of " & 
sRecordType 
 
rec.Close 
10.1.2 Navigating Hierarchies 
Now that we've seen the basic steps for opening a Record object, let's do something with 
it. When a Record object is opened on a collection resource (such as a directory), the 
GetChildren method of the Record object can be used to return a Recordset containing 
the subdirectories and files belonging to that directory.  
The following two functions use the GetChildren method to build a display of the directory 
structure for the JROFF-NTLT server:  
Public Sub NavigatingHierarchies(  ) 
 
    Set rec = New ADODB.Record 
     
    rec.Open "http://JROFF-NTLT" 
     
    DisplaySubLevels rec, 0 
     
    rec.Close 
     

IT-SC book 
247
    Set rec = Nothing 
     
End Sub 
 
Private Sub DisplaySubLevels(RecordIn As ADODB.Record, _ 
                             Level As Long) 
 
    Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
    Dim rec As ADODB.Record 
     
    If (Level = 0) Then Debug.Print RecordIn.ParentURL 
     
    If (RecordIn.RecordType = adCollectionRecord) Then 
         
        ' 
        ' Display resource name 
        ' 
        Debug.Print Space(Level * 2); 
        Debug.Print RecordIn.Fields("RESOURCE_PARSENAME").Value 
       
        ' 
        ' loop through collection 
        ' 
        Set rst = RecordIn.GetChildren 
         
        If (Not (rst.BOF And rst.EOF)) Then rst.MoveFirst 
         
        Set rec = New ADODB.Record 
         
        While (Not rst.EOF) 
            rec.Open rst 
            DisplaySubLevels rec, Level + 1 
            rec.Close 
            rst.MoveNext 
        Wend 
         
        Set rec = Nothing 
        rst.Close 
         
    End If 
     
End Sub 
This example outputs only the directories; however, it can be modified to also output the 
files within each directory. Running the previous code on my server resulted in the 
following output:  
http://jroff-ntlt 
 
  scripts 
  webpub 
  msadc 
    Samples11 
      AddressBook 
    Samples 
      Tutorial 

IT-SC book 
248 
      Selector 
        Middle_Tier 
          VBBusObj 
        Client 
          VB 
            VBtoADF 
              Setup 
            VBtoVB 
              Setup 
          IE 
      AddressBook 
    doc11 
  iishelp 
    iis 
      misc 
      winhelp 
      htm 
        tutorial 
          template 
        core 
' 
' 
' continued... 
10.1.3 File and Directory Manipulation with the Record Object 
The Record object has three methods designed to manipulate files and directories on a 
server: the CopyRecord, DeleteRecord, and MoveRecord methods.  
10.1.3.1 Copying 
The 
CopyRecord 
method 
accepts 
a 
source, 
a 
destination, 
and 
an 
ADODB.CopyRecordOptionsEnum enumeration value, which indicates how the copy should 
proceed. The following code copies the index.htm file to the Copyofindex.htm file, overwriting 
the destination file if it already exists:  
rec.Open "http://JROFF-NTLT/" 
 
rec.CopyRecord "http://JROFF-NTLT/index.htm", _ 
               "Copy of index.htm", , , _ 
               adCopyOverWrite 
 
rec.Close 
The following code does the same thing; this time, a relative URL path is passed for the 
Source argument, instead of an absolute URL path:  
rec.Open "http://JROFF-NTLT/" 
 
rec.CopyRecord "index.htm", _ 
               "Copy of index.htm", , , _ 
               adCopyOverWrite 
 
rec.Close 

IT-SC book 
249
The CopyRecord method can also be used to copy directories, as in the following 
example:  
rec.Open "http://JROFF-NTLT/" 
 
rec.CopyRecord "Documents", _ 
               "Copy of Documents", , , _ 
               adCopyOverWrite 
 
rec.Close 
The previous code fragment will copy the Documents folder and any other recursive folders and 
files beneath it. To avoid this, and to simply copy the directory name to another location, add the 
adCopyOverwrite enumeration value to the CopyOptions argument of the Record.CopyRecord 
method.  
rec.CopyRecord "Backup of Documents", _ 
               "Documents Folder", , , _ 
               adCopyNonRecursive + adCopyOverWrite 
 
rec.Close 
Another option when copying files with the Record.CopyRecord method is to allow for 
emulation, which means that while the files and directories are being copied, other 
applications will see the files as if they were already there, through simulation:  
rec.CopyRecord "Backup of Documents", _ 
               "Documents Folder", , , _ 
               adCopyOverWrite + adCopyAllowEmulation 
 
rec.Close 
10.1.3.2 Deleting 
To delete a file on a server, call the Record.Delete method with the name of that file:  
rec.Open "http://JROFF-NTLT/" 
 
rec.DeleteRecord "Copy of Index.htm" 
 
rec.Close 
10.1.3.3 Moving 
To move a file from one place to another (but still within the scope of the server), use the 
Record.MoveRecord method:  
rec.Open "http://JROFF-NTLT/" 
 
rec.MoveRecord "index.htm", _ 
               "index.htm Renamed", , , _ 
               adMoveOverWrite 
 
rec.Close 

IT-SC book 
250 
This example overwrites the destination file if it already exists because the MoveRecord method 
was called with the adMoveOverWrite value.  
When you move files from one location to another on a web server, think about hyperlinks 
between these files. By default, the MoveRecord method updates links, if your provider can 
handle it. If for some reason you don't want to update the hyperlinks based on the new location of 
the resource, you can add the adMoveDontUpdateLinks enumeration value to the 
MoveOptions parameter:  
rec.Open "http://JROFF-NTLT/" 
 
rec.MoveRecord "Documents", _ 
               "Documents Renamed", , , _ 
               adMoveOverWrite + adMoveDontUpdateLinks 
 
rec.Close 
Finally, the MoveRecord method also allows for emulation, just as the CopyRecord 
method does, as shown in the next code fragment:  
rec.Open "http://JROFF-NTLT/" 
 
rec.MoveRecord "Backup of Documents", _ 
               "Documents Folder", , , _ 
               adMoveAllowEmulation + adMoveOverWrite 
 
rec.Close 
10.1.4 Record Object Properties 
Although the Record object has a Properties collection, it doesn't seem to contain 
anything. As a matter of fact, Microsoft's documentation doesn't even show that 
properties exist for the Record object.  
10.1.5 Record Object Fields 
Each Record object has a Fields collection. The Fields collection of the Record object is just like 
the Fields collection of the Recordset object, which is covered in detail in Chapter 6.  
What is unique about the Record object's Fields collection is the type of Fields that are 
present when using the OLE DB provider for Internet Publishing, as described in the 
following sections.  
10.1.5.1 Internet Publishing provider fields 
As in previous examples throughout this chapter, the OLE DB provider for Internet Publishing 
has a set of standard field values that provide information about the resource that is open. Table 
10-1 describes each of these fields.  
Table 10-1. Standard Record Object Fields  

IT-SC book 
251
Field 
Description 
RESOURCE_PARSENAME 
If the Record object represents a simple 
record 
(noncollection-type 
resource), 
represents the name of this resource.  
RESOURCE_PARENTNAME 
Indicates the parent URL of the given 
non-collection resource or the entire URL 
if the Record object represents a 
collection resource.  
RESOURCE_ABSOLUTEPARSENAME 
Combination 
of 
RESOURCE_PARSENAME 
and 
RESOURCE_PARENTNAME: 
returns 
an absolute URL to the resource 
represented by the Record object.  
RESOURCE_ISHIDDEN 
Indicates if the resource is hidden. 
RESOURCE_ISREADONLY 
Indicates if the resource is read-only. 
RESOURCE_CONTENTTYPE 
Indicates the type of the resource, such as 
text/html.  
RESOURCE_CONTENTCLASS 
Indicates the type of resource, such as 
text/html, 
application/octet-stream, 
application/msword.  
RESOURCE_CONTENTLANGUAGE 
Indicates the language of the resource.  
RESOURCE_CREATIONTIME 
Indicates the time the resource was 
created. 
RESOURCE_LASTACCESSTIME 
Indicates the time the resource was last 
accessed. 
RESOURCE_LASTWRITETIME 
Indicates the time the resource was last 
written to. 

IT-SC book 
252 
RESOURCE_STREAMSIZE 
Indicates the size of the default stream of 
the Record object, if the Record object 
represents a noncollection-type resource. 
RESOURCE_ISCOLLECTION 
Indicates if the Record object represents a 
collection-type resource. 
RESOURCE_ISSTRUCTUREDDOCUMENT Indicates if the Record object represents a 
structured document-type resource.  
DEFAULT_DOCUMENT 
Indicates that the resource contains a 
URL to a simple document (folder or 
structured document) that is the default. 
This is used when the default stream is 
requested and blank for a simple file.  
RESOURCE_DISPLAYNAME 
Indicates the name that is displayed for 
the current resource. 
RESOURCE_ISROOT 
Indicates if the current resource is a root.
RESOURCE_ISMARKEDFOROFFLINE 
Indicates if the current resource is 
marked for offline browsing. 
DAV:getcontentlength 
Same as RESOURCE_STREAMSIZE. 
DAV:creationdate 
Same 
as 
RESOURCE_CREATIONTIME. 
DAV:displayname 
Same as RESOURCE_DISPLAYNAME.
DAV:getetag 
The entity tag associated with a cached 
entity. 
DAV:getlastmodified 
Same 
as 
RESOURCE_LASTWRITETIME. 
DAV:ishidden 
Same as RESOURCE_ISHIDDEN. 

IT-SC book 
253
DAV:iscollection 
Same as RESOURCE_ISCOLLECTION.
DAV:getcontenttype 
Same 
as 
RESOURCE_CONTENTCLASS. 
10.1.5.2 Standard Record object fields 
There are two special Field objects accessed via the FieldEnum enumeration. The first of 
these special Field objects is the RecordURL field, accessed via the adRecordURL 
enumeration value, as shown in the following code fragment:  
rec.Open "http://JROFF-NTLT/index.htm" 
     
MsgBox "Record opened on " & _ 
        rec.Fields.Item(ADODB.FieldEnum.adRecordURL).Value 
 
rec.Close 
This code returns the Source parameter that was passed to the Record.Open method call.  
The second of the two special Field objects is the default stream that belongs to Record 
objects representing noncollection-type resources. This field is accessed via the 
adDefaultStream enumeration value and returns a Stream object:  
rec.Open "Documents/ADO.01.DOC", "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/" 
 
Set stm = rec.Fields.Item(ADODB.FieldEnum.adDefaultStream).Value 
 
If (stm.State & adStateOpen) Then 
    MsgBox "Stream successfully opened." 
Else 
    MsgBox "Stream was not opened." 
End If 
 
rec.Close 
stm.Close 
The Stream object returned from the default stream field of the Record object represents 
the data within the resource opened. Let us now take a closer look at the Stream object.  
10.2 The Stream Object 
The Stream object is used to view and manipulate text or binary data. A stream object can 
exist as a type of resource (such as a noncollection file) or as a buffer in memory.  
10.2.1 Opening a Stream Object 
The prototype for the Stream object is:  
stream.Open [Source], _ 

IT-SC book 
254 
            [Mode], _ 
            [OpenOptions], _ 
            [UserName], _ 
            [Password] 
The Stream object can be retrieved in four ways: 
By setting it to the default Stream property of the Record object, as seen in the last section of this 
chapter.  
By passing an open Record object to the Source argument of the Stream.Open method.  
By passing an absolute URL to the Source argument of the Stream.Open method.  
By opening the Stream in memory; that is, by calling the Stream.Open method without a Source 
argument.  
This chapter focuses on opening a Record object with a URL, but I will first describe the 
other four ways of opening a Record object.  
10.2.1.1 Obtaining a Stream with the Default Stream from a Record object 
The following example recaps what we saw earlier regarding the Record object returning 
the default string for a noncollection-type resource through the use of the Default Stream 
field:  
rec.Open "Documents/ADO.01.DOC", "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/" 
 
Set stm = rec.Fields.Item(ADODB.FieldEnum.adDefaultStream).Value 
 
MsgBox "Stream is " & stm.Size & " bytes." 
 
rec.Close 
stm.Close 
In this example, we see that we can get the size of the Stream in bytes through the 
Stream.Size property.  
10.2.1.2 Opening a Stream with an open Record object 
Similarly, we can pass the opened Record object to the Source argument of the 
Stream.Open method to accomplish the same task as the previous example:  
rec.Open "Documents/ADO.01.DOC", "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/" 
 
stm.Open rec, , _ 
         adOpenStreamFromRecord 
 
If (stm.State & adStateOpen) Then MsgBox "Stream open." 
 
stm.Close 
rec.Close 

IT-SC book 
255
Here, the Stream is checked to see whether it is open, by means of the State property.  
10.2.1.3 Opening a Stream with an absolute URL 
A Stream object can accept an absolute URL to a noncollection-type resource within the 
Source argument of the Stream.Open method as shown:  
Set stm = New ADODB.Stream 
 
stm.Open "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/Documents/ADO.01.DOC" 
 
Select Case (stm.Type) 
    Case (ADODB.StreamTypeEnum.adTypeBinary): 
        sMessage = "binary" 
    Case (ADODB.StreamTypeEnum.adTypeText): 
        sMessage = "text" 
End Select 
 
MsgBox "The stream is " & sMessage 
 
stm.Close 
This example determines whether the newly opened Stream is a binary or a text resource 
by checking the Stream.Type property.  
10.2.1.4 Opening a Stream in memory 
One of the most interesting ways in which we can use the Stream object is without connecting to 
a web server at all. In this case, the Stream can be used to contain either text or binary data locally. 
As we will see in Section 10.2.2.3, we can use these types of Stream objects to persist the data 
to a file locally and later retrieve this information in the same state. In this way, the Stream object 
doubles as a nifty buffer utility:  
stm.Type = adTypeBinary 
stm.Open 
 
If (stm.State & adStateOpen) Then MsgBox "Stream open." 
     
' 
' 
' 
stm.Close 
10.2.2 Reading and Writing with Streams 
Once we have opened a Stream, we can either read from it or write to it. We can do so 
with either text or binary information, depending upon how the Stream was created.  
10.2.2.1 Textual data 
Let's first take a look at writing to a newly created text file. In the following example, we 
create a new text file using the Record object. Next, we open a Stream object, but not 

IT-SC book 
256 
before we set the Stream.Type property to text and the Stream.CharSet property to ASCII. 
Once the Stream is opened, we can use the WriteText method to send data to the stream:  
rec.Open "TextFile.txt", _ 
         "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/", _ 
         adModeReadWrite, _ 
         adCreateNonCollection + adCreateOverwrite 
 
stm.Type = adTypeText 
stm.Charset = "ASCII" 
 
stm.Open rec, _ 
         adModeReadWrite, _ 
         adOpenStreamFromRecord 
 
stm.WriteText "This is the first line of text.", adWriteLine 
stm.WriteText "This is the second line of text.", adWriteLine 
stm.WriteText "This is the third line of text.", adWriteLine 
stm.WriteText "ABC", adWriteChar 
stm.WriteText "DEF", adWriteChar 
stm.WriteText "GHI", adWriteLine 
stm.WriteText "This is the fifth line of text.", adWriteLine 
stm.WriteText "This is the sixth and last line of text.", adWriteLine 
 
stm.Flush 
 
stm.Close 
rec.Close 
As you can see, this example used two different parameters in the WriteText method calls. The 
first parameter used, adWriteLine, indicates that a line separator should be appended to the end 
of the data being written. The second parameter, adWriteChar, indicates that the next call to 
WriteText should append to the location that this call last left off. This technique is similar to 
adding a semicolon at the end of a Debug.Print statement.  
To verify the contents of the newly created text file, enter the following code to print its 
contents:  
stm.Open "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/TextFile.txt", _ 
         adModeReadWrite 
          
Debug.Print stm.ReadText(ADODB.StreamReadEnum.adReadAll) 
 
stm.Close 
You should see the following output in the Immediate window: 
This is the first line of text. 
This is the second line of text. 
This is the third line of text. 
ABCDEFGHI 
This is the fifth line of text. 
This is the sixth and last line of text. 
Notice that in the first example, the Stream.Flush method is called prior to the 
Stream.Close method. This isn't completely necessary. The Flush method forces data 

IT-SC book 
257
entered with the WriteText method (and the Write method -- described in the next section) 
to the data source. By calling the Close method, the Flush method is implicitly called. 
This example was redundant in order to show you the Stream.Flush method.  
The previous example read the entire file by passing the adReadAll parameter to the 
Stream.ReadText method. We can also read a file line-by-line with the adReadLine method:  
stm.Open "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/TextFile.txt", _ 
         adModeReadWrite 
          
While (Not stm.EOS) 
    Debug.Print stm.ReadText(ADODB.StreamReadEnum.adReadLine) 
Wend 
 
stm.Close 
In this code fragment, the Stream.EOS property is used to indicate whether the end of the 
Stream has been reached. The first time the ReadText method is called, the Stream is read 
from the beginning of the file until a line separator or the end of the Stream is reached. If 
the end of the Stream is not reached and the second call to Stream.ReadText is made, the 
Stream's pointer picks up where is last left off, at the beginning of the next line.  
Finally, we can read a section of characters with the ReadText method by specifying a 
number of characters to retrieve. In the following example, one character is obtained at a 
time:  
Dim sChar As String 
 
stm.Open "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/TextFile.txt", _ 
         adModeReadWrite 
          
While (Not stm.EOS) 
    sChar = stm.ReadText(1) 
    If (Asc(sChar) <> 10) Then Debug.Print sChar; 
Wend 
 
stm.Close 
This example contains a little bit more code than the others. The reason for this is simple: 
by reading one character at a time, we get two characters at the end of a line (carriage 
return and linefeed). Both of these characters, outputed with Debug.Print, cause a 
carriage return, resulting in blank lines in between each line. To avoid this, the code 
suppresses characters with an ASCII code of 10 (line feeds), but keeps the carriage 
returns.  
Another interesting method of the Stream object that has to do with reading text data is 
the SkipLine method. It does exactly what it seems to do -- skips lines:  
stm.Open "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/TextFile.txt", _ 
         adModeReadWrite 
          
Debug.Print stm.ReadText(ADODB.StreamReadEnum.adReadLine) 
 

IT-SC book 
258 
stm.SkipLine 
 
Debug.Print stm.ReadText(ADODB.StreamReadEnum.adReadLine) 
 
stm.SkipLine 
stm.SkipLine 
 
Debug.Print stm.ReadText(ADODB.StreamReadEnum.adReadLine) 
 
stm.Close 
Running this code on the same text file returns the following output to the Immediate 
window:  
This is the first line of text. 
This is the third line of text. 
This is the sixth and last line of text. 
The Stream.Position property can be read to indicate where the stream pointer is located 
within a Stream, or it can be set to force the stream pointer to a particular location. Using 
the Position property in conjunction with the SetEOS method (which truncates files, 
giving them a new EOS marker), we can change the size of a file as in the next example:  
stm.Open "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/TextFile.txt" 
 
stm.Position = Abs(stm.Size / 2) 
stm.SetEOS 
stm.Position = 0 
 
Debug.Print stm.ReadText(ADODB.StreamReadEnum.adReadAll) 
 
stm.Close 
This example cuts the file in half by obtaining the size of the stream, and dividing it by 
two -- and thereby moving the stream pointer to the halfway mark and calling the SetEOS 
method. After this, the stream pointer is moved back to the beginning of the Stream so 
that the Stream can be sent as output to the Immediate window as shown:  
This is the first line of text. 
This is the second line of text. 
This is the third line of 
10.2.2.2 Binary data 
Reading and writing binary data is almost identical to reading and writing text data, 
except that instead of a String value, the Write and Read methods accept and return an 
array of Byte values. Since there is no sense of line separators with binary data, the Write 
method doesn't have the second parameter that the WriteText method has to indicate if a 
line separator should be added:  
Dim byBuffer(5) As Byte 
 
rec.Open "BinaryData.dat", _ 
         "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/", _ 
         adModeReadWrite, _ 

IT-SC book 
259
         adCreateNonCollection + adCreateOverwrite 
          
stm.Type = adTypeBinary 
 
stm.Open rec, _ 
         adModeReadWrite, _ 
         adOpenStreamFromRecord 
 
byBuffer(0) = 100 
byBuffer(1) = 110 
byBuffer(2) = 120 
byBuffer(3) = 130 
byBuffer(4) = 140 
 
stm.Write byBuffer 
 
stm.Flush 
 
stm.Close 
rec.Close 
To read and output the data, use the following code fragment: 
Dim byBufferIn(  ) As Byte 
Dim lCount As Long 
 
stm.Open "URL=http://JROFF-NTLT/BinaryData.dat" 
 
byBufferIn = stm.Read(ADODB.StreamReadEnum.adReadAll) 
 
For lCount = 0 To UBound(byBuffer) 
    Debug.Print "Byte #" & lCount + 1 & ": " & byBuffer(lCount) 
Next lCount 
 
stm.Close 
This code results in the following output: 
Byte #1: 100 
Byte #2: 110 
Byte #3: 120 
Byte #4: 130 
Byte #5: 140 
Byte #6: 0 
Notice the last Byte value, 0. This is the end-of-file marker.  
10.2.2.3 Stream persistence 
When we create a Stream in memory without specifying a Source argument, we can 
persist the information within the Stream object by using the SaveToFile, LoadToFile, 
and CopyTo methods.  

IT-SC book 
260 
The first of these methods, SaveToFile, persists the Stream to a file of your choice (which 
does not have to be within a web server's scope because we are not using the OLE DB 
provider for Internet Publishing):  
stm.Type = adTypeText 
stm.Open 
 
stm.WriteText "This is the first line of text.", adWriteLine 
stm.WriteText "ABC", adWriteChar 
stm.WriteText "DEF", adWriteChar 
stm.WriteText "GHI", adWriteLine 
stm.WriteText "This is the third line of text.", adWriteLine 
 
stm.SaveToFile "Stream Output.txt", _ 
    adSaveCreateOverWrite 
     
stm.Close 
To reread the data into a Stream object, we can use the LoadFromFile method -- but not 
until the Stream is already opened as shown:  
stm.Open 
 
stm.LoadFromFile "Stream Output.txt" 
 
Debug.Print stm.ReadText(ADODB.StreamReadEnum.adReadAll) 
 
stm.Close 
This code fragment sends the following output to the Immediate window: 
This is the first line of text. 
ABCDEFGHI 
This is the third line of text. 
The CopyTo method copies the contents or a portion of one Stream to another. In the 
following example, the CopyTo method is used to copy the first 10 bytes to another open 
Stream object:  
Dim stmCopy As ADODB.Stream 
 
Set stmCopy = New ADODB.Stream 
 
stm.Open 
stm.LoadFromFile "Stream Output.txt" 
 
stmCopy.Open 
 
stm.CopyTo stmCopy, 10 
stm.Close 
 
stmCopy.Position = 0 
 
Debug.Print stmCopy.ReadText(ADODB.StreamReadEnum.adReadAll) 
10.3 Summary 

IT-SC book 
261
This chapter introduced the Record and Stream objects, explaining how they can be used 
to access hierarchical data sources such as directory and file structures. The Record and 
Stream objects are primarily designed to work in conjunction with the OLE DB provider 
for Internet Publishing; however, each has their own methods and properties, which add 
functionality way beyond the scope of Internet Publishing. After reading this chapter, you 
should be able to open both Record and Stream objects and understand the following key 
points about each:  
There are five ways in which a Record object can be opened. 
The Record object can be used to navigate hierarchical data sources. 
The Record object can be used to manipulate directories and files within a web server.  
The OLE DB provider for Internet Publishing provides a standard set of Fields for the Record 
object, which contain additional information about the Record object's represented resource.  
The Stream object can be obtained four different ways. 
The Stream object can be used to read and write text and binary data. 
The Stream object can be used to persist and retrieve information to local files.  

IT-SC book 
262 
Chapter 11. Remote Data Services 
With ADO, you typically create two-tier applications in which your application is the 
first tier and the data source is the second. In this scenario, your application can access 
data directly.  
In some cases, you may wish to create a three-tier application in which a separate middle-
tier is added to handle communication with the data source on behalf of the application. 
In web applications, this functionality of the optional middle tier requires IIS (Internet 
Information Server) or some other web server to mediate communication between the 
browser-based client and the data source. Remote Data Service (RDS) allows you to 
provide this functionality in a middle tier.  
This chapter provides a brief overview of RDS. 
11.1 RDS Object Model 
Remote Data Service is a set of three objects used to provide client-side access to 
functionality running on the middle tier, especially over the Internet or an intranet.  
By using a third middle tier, your application written in VBScript need not access the 
data source directly. Instead, by using RDS, the client application can instruct IIS to 
connect to the database itself, optimally processing the data on the server instead of tying 
up client resources.  
The following three objects are provided with RDS: 
DataSpace object  
Allows the client access to business objects, such as the DataFactory object, located on the 
middle tier of an application through the generation of proxies.  
DataFactory object  
Provides a client-side application with access to the data. This object can be replaced with a 
custom object that implements its methods differently than the default.  
DataControl object  
Binds one or more HTML controls to a Recordset object so that they are automatically populated 
with the data retrieved from the Recordset object.  
When the client application requests a query from the data source indirectly through RDS, 
IIS establishes a proxy connection to the data source through either the DataSpace object 
or the DataControl object, depending upon which one you use in your code.  
With the DataControl object, this proxy is used internally and allows the DataControl 
object access to the data source without the use of the DataSpace or the DataFactory 

IT-SC book 
263
objects. On the client side, the DataFactory object can be bound to one or more visual 
controls on the HTML page, just as VB controls can be bound to an instance of the ADO 
Data Control.  
If your application is not using the DataControl object, the proxy that is returned to the 
client application can be used with the DataFactory object that allows your application to 
remotely control the manipulation of a Recordset that was created on the middle tier. This 
Recordset can be sent to the client for manipulation, and just the changes can be sent 
back to the middle tier to be persisted by passing back this same instance of the Recordset 
object.  
11.1.1 The DataSpace Object 
The DataSpace object establishes a proxy with a business object located in the middle tier of an 
application. A proxy allows the client application to communicate with objects created in the 
middle tier. Remote Data Service supports HTTP, HTTPS, and DCOM protocols through the use 
of proxies. In addition, if the middle tier is accessible to the client without the use of the Internet 
or a network (usually on the same machine), then a proxy is not necessary; instead, the DataSpace 
simply returns an instance of the business object requested. The use of proxies is illustrated in 
Figure 11-1.  
Figure 11-1. The use of proxies with the DataSpace object 
 
When a new request is made from the DataSpace object, a new instance of the specified 
business object is instantiated on the middle tier, a proxy is created (for HTTP, HTTPS, 
and DCOM protocols) and returned to the client. This proxy is used by the client to 
access the functionality of the business object just as it was instantiated locally.  
Once a request is completed with the business object, and since the Internet is stateless, 
RDS automatically removes the instance of the business object. If another request is 
made from the same DataSpace object, a new business object is automatically created on 
the middle tier. Although this activity is transparent to the client, it is the reason the client 
cannot use properties of the business object to carry over application data from request to 
request.  
11.1.1.1 DataSpace object members 
The following method and property are the only members of the DataSpace object:  

IT-SC book 
264 
CreateObject method (String)  
Instantiates an instance of a business object for use in the front-end code by accepting a String 
value as the programmatic ID of the business object to create and a String value as the computer 
name or URL to the web server where the instance of the business object is created. In doing this, 
a proxy is created if the protocol specified is HTTP (standard Internet protocol), HTTPS (secure 
Internet protocol), or DCOM (for a network without HTTP). The proxy handles the packaging of 
data from the server and unpacks it on the client. In addition, the CreateObject method can use an 
in-process protocol that is used when the business object is on the same machine and a network is 
unnecessary. In this case, a proxy is bypassed, and a pointer to the instantiated business object is 
returned.  
InternetTimeout property  
Specifies, in milliseconds, the time to wait before a connection to the server will timeout. The 
InternetTimeout property applies only to HTTP and HTTPS protocols.  
11.1.1.2 Instantiating an object with the DataSpace object 
To instantiate a business object from the client using the HTTP protocol, you might use 
code similar to the following:  
Dim dsp As RDS.DataSpace 
Dim dfy As Object 
 
Set dsp = New RDS.DataSpace 
 
dsp.InternetTimeout = 10 
Set dfy = dsp.CreateObject("RDSServer.DataFactory", _ 
                           "http://production/") 
                 
' 
' place your code here 
' 
 
Set dfy = Nothing 
Set dsp = Nothing 
In this code, the CreateObject method of the DataSpace object indicates that the business 
object to create is the DataFactory object and that it should be created on the production 
server using an HTTP protocol to obtain the proxy.  
Before you use the DataSpace object in Visual Basic, you need to add a reference (from 
the Project 
References . . . menu) to the Microsoft Remote Data Services 2.6 library.  
11.1.2 The DataFactory Object 
The DataFactory object provides access to the underlying data source from the client. It is 
created as an Automation object on the server side that processes requests from the client.  

IT-SC book 
265
The DataFactory and the DataControl objects share some members. If you call these 
members from within your client-side application, the DataControl object's members are 
called by default.  
The DataFactory object can be replaced with a custom business object that will 
implement some or all of the methods provided by the default DataFactory object and 
that is customized for the data source. From this custom business object, the default 
DataFactory's methods can be called if the custom business object doesn't implement 
them itself.  
11.1.2.1 DataFactory object members 
The following four methods are the only members of the DataFactory object:  
ConvertToString method  
Accepts a Recordset object and converts it into a MIME string that can be sent via HTTP to the 
client. Microsoft suggests that you use this process only for recordsets with 400 or fewer records 
with each record containing no more than 1024 bytes.  
CreateRecordset method  
Creates an empty Recordset object that can be used by a server-side business object. This method 
accepts an array of columns to be used in the creation of the Recordset object. Each column is an 
array of attributes containing the name, type, size, and nullability of the column. On the server 
side, this Recordset object can be populated with data from a file, data from a data source, or 
hard-coded data from the application.  
Query method  
Accepts a connection string and a valid SQL statement (for the specified data source) and returns 
a Recordset object.  
SubmitChanges method  
Sends changes to a Recordset object back to the server so that they can be persisted. This method 
accepts a connection string and a Recordset object.  
11.1.2.2 Creating an empty recordset on the client side 
The following example illustrates how an empty Recordset object can be created from the 
client-side application:  
Dim dfy As RDSServer.DataFactory 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
Dim vFieldInfo1(3) As Variant 
Dim vFieldInfo2(3) As Variant 
Dim vFieldInfo3(3) As Variant 
Dim vFields(2) As Variant 
Dim vValues(2) As Variant 
Dim vFieldNames(2) As Variant 
 
Set dfy = New RDSServer.DataFactory 

IT-SC book 
266 
 
' 
' define the recordset 
' 
vFieldInfo1(0) = "Name" 
vFieldInfo1(1) = CInt(ADODB.DataTypeEnum.adVarChar) 
vFieldInfo1(2) = CInt(30) 
vFieldInfo1(3) = False 
 
vFields(0) = vFieldInfo1 
 
vFieldInfo2(0) = "Age" 
vFieldInfo2(1) = CInt(ADODB.DataTypeEnum.adInteger) 
vFieldInfo2(2) = CInt(-1) 
vFieldInfo2(3) = True 
 
vFields(1) = vFieldInfo2 
 
vFieldInfo3(0) = "Married" 
vFieldInfo3(1) = CInt(ADODB.DataTypeEnum.adBoolean) 
vFieldInfo3(2) = CInt(-1) 
vFieldInfo3(3) = True 
 
vFields(2) = vFieldInfo3 
 
Set rst = dfy.CreateRecordSet(vFields) 
 
' 
' populate the recordset 
' 
vFieldNames(0) = vFieldInfo1(0) 
vFieldNames(1) = vFieldInfo2(0) 
vFieldNames(2) = vFieldInfo3(0) 
 
vValues(0) = "Jason" 
vValues(1) = CInt(27) 
vValues(2) = True 
rst.AddNew vFieldNames, vValues 
 
vValues(0) = "Kimberly " 
vValues(1) = 25 
vValues(2) = True 
rst.AddNew vFieldNames, vValues 
 
vValues(0) = "Zachary " 
vValues(1) = 0 
vValues(2) = False 
rst.AddNew vFieldNames, vValues 
         
' 
' do something with the Recordset 
' 
     
Set rst = Nothing 
Set dfy = Nothing 

IT-SC book 
267
11.1.2.3 Roundtrip querying and updating 
The DataFactory object allows a query to the server and an update from the client in a 
single roundtrip communication, as shown in the following example:  
Dim dsp As RDS.DataSpace 
Dim dfy As Object 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
Dim sCon As String 
 
Set dsp = New RDS.DataSpace 
 
dsp.InternetTimeout = 10 
 
' 
' create the data factory from the data space 
' 
Set dfy = dsp.CreateObject("RDSServer.DataFactory", "") 
                  
' 
' retrieve the data from the server 
' 
sCon = "driver={SQL Server};" _ 
     & "server=jroff-laptop;" _ 
     & "database=NORTHWIND" 
                   
Set rst = dfy.Query(sCon, _ 
                    "SELECT * FROM Orders") 
 
' 
' update the data 
' 
rst.Find "OrderID=10268", _ 
         0, _ 
         adSearchForward, _ 
         0 
          
rst!Freight = rst!Freight + 1.27 
 
' 
' send the data back to the server 
' 
dfy.SubmitChanges sCon, rst 
 
Set dfy = Nothing 
Set dsp = Nothing 
11.1.3 The DataControl Object 
The RDS DataControl object allo ws your project easy access to data without your 
explicitly creating and working with the DataSpace object and a DataFactory object. In 
addition, the DataControl object links one or more controls on an HTML page to a query.  

IT-SC book 
268 
The DataControl object is for web applications only and has no purpose in a Visual Basic 
desktop application. If you have multiple queries, you need multiple DataControl objects. 
There is no restriction on the number of DataControl objects that you can use in a single 
HTML page.  
All of the properties of the DataControl object are optional, since custom business objects 
can be developed to replace any of the functionality. With the DataControl object, you 
can query a data source with a SQL statement; move around within the created recordset; 
and update, sort, and filter records.  
11.1.3.1 DataControl object members 
The following list of methods, properties, and events constitute the members of the 
DataControl object:  
Cancel method  
Cancels the execution of an asynchronous method call that is still running. After calling this 
method, the Recordset object is empty.  
CancelUpdate method  
Cancels any pending changes to the current record or the new record. After calling this method, 
the bound control is refreshed from the original data.  
Connect property  
Connects to a data source against which queries and updates will be executed. The Connect 
property can be set during design time (by using HTML tags) or runtime.  
CreateRecordset method  
Creates an empty Recordset object that can be used by a server-side business object. On the 
server side, this Recordset object can be populated with data from a file, data from a data source, 
or hard-coded data from the application.  
ExcecuteOptions property  
Indicates whether the next refresh of the Recordset will be asynchronous (adcExecAsync, the 
default value) or synchronous (adcExecSync).  
FetchOptions property  
Indicates the type of asynchronous fetching that should occur. The default value for this property 
is adcFetchAsync, which returns control immediately to the application while the records are 
being fetched. This is the setting recommended by Microsoft for web applications. For a 
compiled client application, the Microsoft-recommended setting is adcFetchBackground, 
which returns control to the application as soon as the first batch of records has been fetched. The 
remaining setting, adcFetchUpFront, fetches all of the records before control is returned. You 
should choose this last setting if you need the entire recordset to continue your code.  
FilterColumn property  

IT-SC book 
269
Used with the FilterValue and FilterCriterion properties, indicates the column on which to 
evaluate the filter criteria for the Recordset. The Reset method must be called to update the data 
in the Recordset.  
FilterCriterion property  
Is set to a String value of <, <=, >, >=, =, or <> to indicate the filter-criteria operator used in the 
filter specified by the FilterValue and FilterColumn properties. The Reset method must be called 
to update the data in the Recordset.  
FilterValue property  
Is set to a String value that indicates the data value to filter on. The FilterValue property is used in 
conjunction with the FilterColumn and the FilterCriterion properties. The Reset method must be 
called to update the data in the Recordset.  
Handler property  
Indicates the name of a server-side custom program (or handler) that is used to extend the 
functionality of the DataFactory object. Included in this string can be parameters for the handler, 
separated by commas (for example, "handler_name, parameter1, parameter2").  
InternetTimeout property  
Specifies, in milliseconds, the time to wait before a request to the server will timeout. The 
InternetTimeout property applies only to HTTP and HTTPS protocols.  
MoveFirst method  
Moves to the first record in the Recordset.  
MoveLast method  
Moves to the last record in the Recordset.  
MoveNext method  
Moves to the next record in the Recordset.  
MovePrevious method  
Moves to the previous record in the Recordset.  
onError event  
Called whenever an error occurs with an operation.  
onReadyStateChange event  
Fired when a change occurs in the DataControl's ReadyState property value.  
ReadyState property  
Indicates the current state of the DataControl object as it receives data. If no records have been 
fetched yet and the query is still executing, the ReadyState property is set to 
adcReadyStateLoaded. If the initial set of records is loaded in the DataControl object and the 
remaining records are still loading, the Recordset object can be used, and the ReadyState property 

IT-SC book 
270 
is set to adReadyStateInteractive. If all the records have been returned to the DataControl 
object or an error has occurred in the execution of the last command, the ReadyState property will 
be set to adcReadyStateComplete. To determine whether an error has occurred, in addition to 
checking the ReadyState property, check the State property for the adStateClosed enumeration 
value.  
Recordset property  
Read-only. Returns the Recordset object that was returned from a custom business object. To set 
the Recordset object, use the SourceRecordset object.  
Refresh method  
Refreshes the data in the Recordset object by querying the data source again. Any controls on the 
page that are tied to the DataControl object are refreshed automatically.  
Reset method  
Re-executes the sort and filter query for a Recordset object for a client-side cursor. This method 
accepts a Boolean value to indicate if the re-execution of the query should include the current 
filter (True) or if it should re-execute on the original data (False) and clear out the current filter.  
SourceRecordset property  
Write-only. Sets the Recordset object that was returned from a custom business object. To read 
the Recordset object, use the Recordset object.  
Server property  
Indicates on which server the DataControl's request is processed. This property can be set at 
design time or runtime.  
SortColumn property  
Indicates which column is to be used when sorting the Recordset.  
SortDirection property  
Indicates the direction of the sort for the Recordset. A value of True indicates that the sort order 
is ascending; False indicates descending.  
SQL property  
Indicates the SQL statement that is used to populate the Recordset object.  
SubmitChanges method  
Sends only the changed records from a Recordset object to the server to be updated. Either all or 
none of the records are updated.  
URL property  
Indicates a String that contains either a relative or an absolute URL. This URL usually points to 
an ASP page that returns a Recordset object. If the URL property is indicated, the SubmitChanges 
method will return records to the URL.  
11.1.3.2 Binding a control to the DataControl object 

IT-SC book 
271
The DataControl object binds a query easily to one or more visual controls on an HTML 
page, as demonstrated in the next example. To run this example, you must first create an 
ASP page. Within this page, create a table with the following HTML code:  
<TABLE DATASRC=#OrderTable> 
<TBODY> 
  <TR> 
    <TD><SPAN DATAFLD="OrderID"></SPAN></TD> 
    <TD><SPAN DATAFLD="ShipName"></SPAN></TD> 
    <TD><SPAN DATAFLD="Freight"></SPAN></TD> 
  </TR> 
</TBODY> 
</TABLE> 
In this code, three columns are names based upon three columns in the recordset that we 
will be creating.  
The next thing you need to do is to create a DataControl object. To do this, you must create an 
object with the class ID of BD96C556-65A3-11D0-983A-00C04FC29E33, as in the following 
code:  
<OBJECT classid="clsid:BD96C556-65A3-11D0-983A-00C04FC29E33" 
   ID=OrderTable HEIGHT=1 WIDTH=1> 
</OBJECT> 
Within the VBScript section of your ASP page, enter the following code to set the server, 
SQL statement, and connection string:  
OrderTable.Server = "http://JROFF-LAPTOP/" 
 
OrderTable.SQL = "SELECT * FROM Orders;" 
 
OrderTable.Connect = "DRIVER={SQL SERVER}; " _ 
                   & "SERVER=JROFF-LAPTOP; " _ 
                   & "DATABASE=Northwind; " 
                    
 
OrderTable.Refresh 
When this page is viewed, the table is populated with all the records from the Orders 
table.  
11.1.3.3 Filtering and sorting the recordset 
With the DataControl object, you can filter and sort the recordset, as shown:  
' 
' set the filter 
' 
OrderTable.FilterColumn = "Freight" 
OrderTable.FilterCriterion = ">=" 
OrderTable.FilterValue = "20.00" 
 
' 
' set the sort order 

IT-SC book 
272 
' 
OrderTable.SortColumn = "Freight" 
OrderTable.SortDirection = False 
 
' 
' populate 
' 
OrderTable.Refresh 
11.2 An Example in RDS 
Example 11-1 displays the entire Orders table of the Northwind database in a table within an 
ASP page. To run this example, create an ASP page and replace the entire contents of the page 
with the following code. Make sure that this ASP page is within a virtual directory of your web 
server, such as RDSExample. To execute this page, go to Internet Explorer and type in the full 
URL to the ASP -- for example, http://servername/RDSExample/example.asp.  
Example 11-1. Displaying a Table with RDS  
<%@ Language=VBScript %> 
<html> 
<head> 
    <title>RDS Code Example</title> 
</head> 
 
<body> 
 
<h1>RDS Code Example</h1> 
 
<H2>Orders Table</H2> 
<P> 
 
<INPUT TYPE=button NAME="View" VALUE="View"> 
 
<SCRIPT Language="VBScript"> 
<!-- 
 
Sub View_OnClick 
 
 
' 
 
' connect to the server and query 
 
' 
 
OrderTable.Server = "http://JROFF-LAPTOP/" 
 
 
OrderTable.SQL = "SELECT * FROM Orders;" 
 
 
OrderTable.Connect = "DRIVER={SQL SERVER}; " _ 
 
                   & "SERVER=JROFF-LAPTOP; " _ 
 
                   & "DATABASE=Northwind; " 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
' 
 
' set the filter 
 
' 
 
OrderTable.FilterColumn = "Freight" 

IT-SC book 
273
 
OrderTable.FilterCriterion = ">=" 
 
OrderTable.FilterValue = "20.00" 
 
 
' 
 
' set the sort order 
 
' 
 
OrderTable.SortColumn = "Freight" 
 
OrderTable.SortDirection = False 
 
 
' 
 
' populate 
 
' 
 
OrderTable.Refresh 
 
End Sub 
 
--> 
</SCRIPT> 
&nbsp;</P> 
 
<TABLE DATASRC=#OrderTable  
 
   align=left  
 
   border=1  
 
   style="LEFT: 11px; TOP: 115px"> 
<TBODY> 
  <TR> 
    <TD><SPAN DATAFLD="OrderID"></SPAN></TD> 
    <TD><SPAN DATAFLD="ShipName"></SPAN></TD> 
    <TD><SPAN DATAFLD="Freight"></SPAN></TD> 
  </TR> 
</TBODY> 
</TABLE> 
 
<P> 
<OBJECT classid=clsid:BD96C556-65A3-11D0-983A-00C04FC29E33  
 
 
height=1  
 
 
id=OrderTable  
 
 
width=1> 
 
 
 
 
<PARAM NAME="ExecuteOptions" VALUE="2"> 
 
<PARAM NAME="FetchOptions" VALUE="3"> 
 
<PARAM NAME="InternetTimeout" VALUE="100"> 
 
</OBJECT></P> 
 
<P>&nbsp;</P> 
<P>&nbsp;</P> 
<P>&nbsp;</P> 
 
</body> 
</html> 
11.3 More Information About RDS 
This chapter by no means covers RDS in full. RDS has more capabilities that are not mentioned 
here. For instance, RDS allows you to create custom business objects to use in place or in 

IT-SC book 
274 
addition to the standard objects supplied by RDS. RDS also has many features that allow 
customization of security rights. For more information see Professional ADO 2.5 RDS 
Programming with ASP 3.0 by John Papa (Wrox Press, Inc., 2000).  
11.4 Summary 
This chapter introduced to you the component of ADO called Remote Data Services or 
RDS. You have learned that RDS allows client-side applications to access and 
manipulate data sources through a third middle tier such as IIS. After reading this chapter, 
you should be able to fully understand RDS and the following key points:  
There are three objects that make up RDS: the DataSpace object, the DataFactory object, and the 
DataControl object.  
The DataSpace object manages the connection through the middle tier to the data source by 
providing a proxy to the client application.  
The DataFactory object allows the manipulation and the access to the underlying data source by 
using the proxy returned from the DataSpace object.  
The DataControl object is used as a simple way to access a data source through a middle tier 
without using the DataSpace and the DataFactory objects. This object also allows your client 
HTML page to be bound to the results of the query that has been executed by the DataControl.  

IT-SC book 
275
Chapter 12. The Microsoft .NET 
Framework and ADO.NET 
At the Professional Developer's Conference 2000, Microsoft announced a new development 
platform called the .NET Framework. One of the components of the new .NET Framework is 
ADO.NET, Microsoft's successor to ADO. In this chapter, I will provide a brief introduction to 
the .NET Framework and ADO.NET's place within it. For more information on .NET, see 
http://msdn.microsoft.com, as well as C# Essentials (O'Reilly, 2001) and the upcoming .NET 
Framework Essentials (O'Reilly, 2001).  
12.1 The Microsoft .NET Framework 
The Microsoft .NET Framework consists of three new components of interest to the ADO 
developer:  
The Common Language Runtime (CLR) and its base class library (BCL) 
C#, a new unified programming language 
ASP.NET, a new framework for web application development 
Each of these three components plays a key role in the .NET Framework. 
12.1.1 The Common Language Runtime 
The Common Language Runtime has two roles, one for the execution environment and 
one for the development environment.  
For the execution environment, the CLR is the provider of .NET's functionality. This 
functionality includes, but is not limited to: compilation of Intermediate Language (IL) to 
native code, handling of security, memory allocation, and thread and process 
management.  
For the development environment, the CLR supports any language compiler that 
generates the IL code that it understands and the metadata it uses to make runtime 
decisions. In its first release, .NET will support VB.NET (the new C# language), 
managed C++, and JScript.NET. The CLR also allows the developer to write less code 
because so much is handled by the runtime, such as garbage collection and serialization 
of objects to and from XML.  
12.1.2 C#: Unified Programming Language 
In the current Microsoft development framework, C++, Visual Basic, and Java all have 
different APIs that achieve the same functionality. With the .NET Framework, Microsoft 
is attempting to combine the APIs into one class framework.  

IT-SC book 
276 
This gives developers more power than they have ever had by allowing them to mix and 
match languages very easily. In fact, it will allow cross-language inheritance, debugging, 
and error handling.  
This common class framework (or set of APIs) that every language can use as its own 
will make the language used for developing an application virtually meaningless, 
allowing you to create applications in JScript that are just as powerful as applications 
written in C++.  
12.1.3 ASP.NET 
ASP.NET is the Microsoft .NET Framework for developing web applications. ASP.NET, 
like its predecessor, allows developers to combine HTML and programming languages to 
create web pages on the server that function as middle-tier business objects. ASP.NET 
also simplifies the task of interacting with browser clients a range of devices including 
PDAs and cell phones, as well as PCs.  
ASP.NET controls are objects that run on the server but broadcast simple HTML controls 
to the client, such as a text box or a button. These ASP.NET controls have object models 
so that they can be programmed using normal development techniques on the server and 
any of the .NET-compliant languages.  
In addition, ASP.NET provides application context through its own object model to the 
web developer, such as session state.  
12.1.4 From COM to .NET: The Creation of ADO.NET 
One of the main purposes of the Microsoft .NET Framework is to make development of 
COM objects and applications easier. This is done through an abstraction level that 
automates the creation, management, interaction, and registration of COM objects so that 
the developer can do other things.  
Because of this abstraction, Microsoft was able to create ADO.NET, a simpler successor 
to ADO that is geared towards web applications. Because web applications are stateless, 
ADO.NET focuses on disconnected data, while traditional ADO focuses on connected 
data.  
ADO will continue to play an important role in traditional desktop and client-server 
applications where the data-services code is tightly coupled with the data source itself. 
Microsoft provides access to ADO and other COM/ActiveX object libraries through the 
use of the .NET/COM interoperability services, which allow direct access to a COM 
object from within the .NET Framework, without using the abstraction layer that is 
normally applied to COM objects. By using these services, your application can access 
traditional ADO as it always has.  
12.2 ADO.NET 

IT-SC book 
277
ADO.NET is comprised of two main components, DataSets and managed providers. DataSets can 
store an entire database in memory, while managed providers provide the ability to establish a 
connection between the data source and a DataSet. In addition, managed providers provide a 
means of populating, manipulating, and accessing the data within the DataSet.  
12.2.1 DataSets 
A DataSet is a memory-resident version of a database containing tables, rows, 
relationships, constraints, and keys. In ADO.NET, all work is done with a DataSet. The 
DataSet has three main collection classes and numerous child classes belonging to each:  
TablesCollection object  
A collection of one or more DataTable objects that represent individual tables from the data 
source. In these DataTable objects, both columns and rows are stored as separate objects. Each 
DataTable object represents one table within memory. The DataSet is able to persist the contents 
of the TablesCollection and reload it using XML. The TablesCollection automatically keeps track 
of any changes made to the data stored in the individual DataTables.  
RelationsCollection object  
A collection of one or more relations between rows from different tables. Relations can be 
navigated from one table to another.  
Extended Properties object  
A collection of user-customized properties such as a password or the time data was last updated.  
12.2.2 Managed Providers 
A managed provider establishes a connection between a data source, such as SQL Server 
and DataSet. There are three main components to managed providers:  
DataSetCommand object  
Connections, commands, and parameters that access and populate the DataSet with the data.  
DataReader object  
Provides fast, simple, forward-only access to data. 
Low-level objects  
Connect to the database to issue data-specific commands. 
There are two managed providers provided with .NET: the SQL managed provider, 
which creates a connection between the DataSet and SQL Server, and the ADO managed 
provider, which bridges the DataSet object to any data source that has an OLE DB driver.  
12.3 ADO.NET Features 

IT-SC book 
278 
As the name implies, ADO.NET is an extension built upon the existing, traditional ADO 
object model. While ADO.NET will be very familiar to an ADO developer, several new 
features have been added to facilitate use with disconnected data sources:  
ADO.NET focuses on disconnected data. 
ADO.NET allows strongly typed language. 
ADO.NET works with hierarchical and relational data through XML. 
Each of these differences have their own benefits, as explained in the following sections.  
12.3.1 Disconnected Data 
ADO.NET allows you to create disconnected n-tier applications. This feature is probably the 
biggest draw of ADO.NET. Traditional ADO was designed to work with tightly coupled 
application tiers, where state is maintained. In the web development paradigm, state is 
nonexistent.  
With ADO.NET, the DataSet object is populated with the entire data that is needed in 
your application, and then the connection is closed, even if you are going to work with 
this data for a long time. When the data needs to be persisted to the data source, another 
connection is created, and then the data is persisted.  
In ADO, you must state explicitly that you want to work with a disconnected Recordset, 
which can be done only with RDS objects: with ADO.NET, this choice is the default.  
12.3.2 Strongly Typed Language 
ADO.NET provides for a strongly typed language, which allows you to access collection 
classes and data that are normally parameterized with the actual name. For instance, to 
display the first name of the current author in a table, you could type:  
Msgbox Authors.Firstname 
With ADO, you must specify the parametered value, such as: 
Msgbox rst("FirstName").Value 
In addition, ADO.NET syntax allows you to use the actual datatype of the member, rather 
than just a Variant -- this is the definition of a strongly typed language. This feature 
allows the development IDE to use IntelliSense and display the actual table and column 
names as you are developing, thus enabling faster and smoother development.  
12.3.3 XML Integration 
Both .NET and ADO.NET allow you to work easily with hierarchical data (compared to 
the relational data that ADO works so well with). The ability to work with hierarchical 

IT-SC book 
279
data is important, as the computing population is moving closer and closer to XML, a 
hierarchical data-storage method.  
ADO.NET provides the ability to access relational data through the use of a DataSet. The 
DataSet also allows data to be saved and restored in its native format, including XML, 
making the DataSet an ideal candidate for tier communication in a client/server 
application.  
.NET provides the ability to access hierarchical data, with XML, through the use of the 
XmlDocument. A third component, XmlDataDocument, allows the developer to bridge 
the two types of data access. This object allows the developer to load either relational or 
hierarchical data and manipulate it using DOM (Document Object Model). The 
XmlDataDocument handles the synchronization between the DataSet and the DOM.  
12.4 Summary 
This chapter briefly introduced the Microsoft .NET Framework and its ADO.NET 
component. I also listed the key components and features of the ADO.NET component:  
The Microsoft .NET Framework is a development and runtime environment that promises ease of 
development and stronger Internet applications, based upon its ability to abstract COM details.  
ADO.NET is the .NET Framework's replacement for ADO. ADO.NET maintains in memory a 
copy of data in use, allowing disconnected access to a data source -- ideal for today's web 
applications.  
Some of the features of ADO.NET include the ability to work disconnected data, promotion of a 
strongly typed language, and XML integration.  

IT-SC book 
280 
Part II: Reference Section  
Chapter 13. ADO API Reference 
This reference chapter lists all of the methods, properties, and events that belong to 
ActiveX Data Objects. 
13.1 Finding the Reference Page 
This reference section is arranged in alphabetical order, and all properties, methods, and 
events are alphabetized by their fully qualified name, which includes the name of the 
object which they are part of. For instance, if you want to read about the Open method of 
the Recordset object, look up "Recordset.Open", not "Open." 
Table 13-1 contains a directory that will help if you do not know the object to which your 
method, property, or event belongs, or if the reference page is not where you expected. The table 
of contents lists, in the left column, the properties, methods, and events within ADO. The right 
column gives you the full name of the object and the member -- here's where you'll find the 
correct reference page. Note that some members are used by more than one object. For example, 
the State property belongs to the Command, Connection, Record, Recordset, and Stream objects. 
Table 13-1. Reference Contents  
For 
See 
AbsolutePage 
Recordset.AbsolutePage 
AbsolutePosition 
Recordset.AbsolutePosition 
ActiveCommand 
Recordset.ActiveCommand 
ActiveConnection 
Command.ActiveConnection, 
Record.ActiveConnection, 
Recordset.ActiveConnection 
ActualSize 
Field.ActualSize 
AddNew 
Recordset.AddNew 
Append 
Fields.Append, Parameters.Append 
AppendChunk 
Field.AppendChunk, Parameter.AppendChunk 

IT-SC book 
281
Attributes 
Connection.Attributes, 
Field.Attributes, 
Parameter.Attributes, Property.Attributes 
BeginTrans 
Connection.BeginTrans 
BeginTransComplete 
Connection.BeginTransComplete 
BOF 
Recordset.BOF 
Bookmark 
Recordset.Bookmark 
CacheSize 
Recordset.CacheSize 
Cancel 
Command.Cancel, 
Connection.Cancel, 
Record.Cancel, 
Recordset.Cancel, Stream.Cancel 
CancelBatch 
Recordset.CancelBatch 
CancelUpdate 
Fields.CancelUpdate, Recordset.CancelUpdate 
CharSet 
Stream.CharSet 
Clear 
Errors.Clear 
Clone 
Recordset.Clone 
Close 
Connection.Close, 
Record.Close, 
Recordset.Close, 
Stream.Close 
CommandStream 
Command.CommandStream 
CommandText 
Command.CommandText 
CommandTimeout 
Command.CommandTimeout, 
Connection.CommandTimeout 

IT-SC book 
282 
CommandType 
Command.CommandType 
CommitTrans 
Connection.CommitTrans 
CommitTransComplete 
Connection.CommitTransComplete 
CompareBookmarks 
Recordset.CompareBookmarks 
ConnectionString 
Connection.ConnectionString 
ConnectionTimeout 
Connection.ConnectionTimeout 
CopyRecord 
Record.CopyRecord 
CopyTo 
Stream.CopyTo 
Count 
Fields.Count, Parameters.Count, Properties.Count 
CreateParameter 
Command.CreateParameter 
CursorLocation 
Connection.CursorLocation, Recordset.CursorLocation 
CursorType 
Recordset.CursorType 
DataFormat 
Field.DataFormat 
DataMember 
Recordset.DataMember 
DataSource 
Recordset.DataSource 
DefaultDatabase 
Connection.DefaultDatabase 
DefinedSize 
Field.DefinedSize 
Delete 
Fields.Delete, Parameters.Delete, Recordset.Delete 

IT-SC book 
283
DeleteRecord 
Record.DeleteRecord 
Description 
Error.Description 
Dialet 
Command.Dialet 
Direction 
Parameter.Direction 
Disconnect 
Connection.Disconnect 
EditMode 
Recordset.EditMode 
EndOfRecordset 
Recordset.EndOfRecordset 
EOF 
Recordset.EOF, Stream.EOS 
Errors 
Connection.Errors 
Execute 
Command.Execute, Connection.Execute 
ExecuteComplete 
Connection.ExecuteComplete 
FetchComplete 
Recordset.FetchComplete 
FetchProgress 
Recordset.FetchProgress 
FieldChangeComplete 
Recordset.FieldChangeComplete 
Fields 
Fields, Record.Fields, Recordset.Fields 
Find 
Recordset.Find 
Flush 
Stream.Flush 
GetChildren 
Record.GetChildren 

IT-SC book 
284 
GetChunk 
Field.GetChunk 
GetRows 
Recordset.GetRows 
GetString 
Recordset.GetString 
HelpContext 
Error.HelpContext 
HelpFile 
Error.HelpFile 
Index 
Recordset.Index 
InfoMessage 
Connection.InfoMessage 
IsolationLevel 
Connection.IsolationLevel 
Item 
Errors.Item. Fields.Item, Parameters.Item, Properties.Item 
LineSeparator 
Stream.LineSeparator 
LoadFromFile 
Stream.LoadFromFile 
LockType 
Recordset.LockType 
MarshallOptions 
Recordset.MarshallOptions 
MaxRecords 
Recordset.MaxRecords 
Mode 
Connection.Mode, 
Record.Mode, 
Stream.Mode, 
Recordset.Move 
MoveComplete 
Recordset.MoveComplete 
MoveFirst 
Recordset.MoveFirst 
MoveLast 
Recordset.MoveLast 

IT-SC book 
285
MoveNext 
Recordset.MoveNext 
MovePrevious 
Recordset.MovePrevious 
MoveRecord 
Record.MoveRecord 
Name 
Command.Name, 
Field.Name, 
Parameter.Name, 
Property.Name 
NamedParameters 
Command.NamedParameters 
NativeError 
Error.NativeError 
NextRecordset 
Recordset.NextRecordset 
Number 
Error.Number 
NumericScale 
Field.NumericScale, Parameter.NumericScale 
Open 
Connection.Open, 
Record.Open, 
Recordset.Open, 
Stream.Open 
OpenSchema 
Connection.OpenSchema 
OriginalValue 
Field.OriginalValue 
PageCount 
Recordset.PageCount 
PageSize 
Recordset.PageSize 
Parameters 
Command.Parameters, Parameters Collection 
ParentURL 
Record.ParentURL 
Position 
Stream.Position 

IT-SC book 
286 
Precision 
Field.Precision, Parameter.Precision 
Prepared 
Command.Prepared 
Properties 
Connection.Properties, 
Field.Properties, 
Parameter.Properties, 
Properties, 
Record.Properties, 
Recordset.Properties 
Provider 
Connection.Provider 
Read 
Stream.Read 
ReadText 
Stream.ReadText 
RecordChangeComplete 
Recordset.RecordChangeComplete 
RecordCount 
Recordset.RecordCount 
RecordsetChangeComplete Recordset.RecordsetChangeComplete 
RecordType 
Record.RecordType 
Refresh 
Errors.Refresh, 
Fields.Refresh, 
Parameters.Refresh, 
Properties.Refresh 
Requery 
Recordset.Requery 
Resync 
Fields.Resync, Recordset.Resync 
RollbackTrans 
Connection.RollbackTrans 
Save 
Recordset.Save 
SaveToFile 
Stream.SaveToFile 
Seek 
Recordset.Seek 

IT-SC book 
287
SetEOS 
Stream.SetEOS 
Size 
Parameter.Size, Stream.Size 
SkipLine 
Stream.SkipLine 
Sort 
Recordset.Sort 
Source 
Error.Source, Record.Source, Recordset.Source 
SQLState 
Error.SQLState 
State 
Command.State, 
Connection.State, 
Record.State, 
Recordset.State, Stream.State 
Status 
Field.Status, Recordset.Status 
StayInSync 
Recordset.StayInSync 
Supports 
Recordset.Supports 
Type 
Field.Type, Parameter.Type, Property.Type, Stream.Type 
UnderlyingValue 
Field.UnderlyingValue 
Update 
Fields.Update, Recordset.Update 
UpdateBatch 
Recordset.UpdateBatch 
Value 
Field.Value, Parameter.Value, Property.Value 
Version 
Connection.Version 
WillChangeField 
Recordset.WillChangeField 
WillChangeRecord 
Recordset.WillChangeRecord 

IT-SC book 
288 
WillChangeRecordset 
Recordset.WillChangeRecordset 
WillConnect 
Connection.WillConnect 
WillExecute 
Connection.WillExecute 
WillMove 
Recordset.WillMove 
Write 
Stream.Write 
WriteText 
Stream.WriteText 
13.2 Using the Reference Pages 
Each object and collection within ADO has its own section. The first reference page is 
titled "Sample Object"; it explains the structure of each reference page representing an 
ADO object or collection. 
Each member (method, property, or event) of an ADO object and collection has its own 
section. The second reference page is titled "Sample Object.Property"; it explains the 
structure of each reference page representing an ADO property. 
The third reference page is titled "Sample Object.Method"; it explains the structure of 
each reference page representing an ADO method or event. 
Sample Object  
(Versions) 
 
 
 
Title, Versions, and Description 
Each entry begins with a title, the versions of ADO in which the object or collection is 
found, and a description. Entries are listed in alphabetical order with a quick summary of 
the item; this feature helps ensure that you've found the correct entry. 
Collections 
Some ADO objects contain references to ADO collections. For instance, the Recordset 
object has a reference to the Fields collection. In this section, the referenced Collections 
for the currently referenced ADO object are listed in alphabetical order with a brief 
description. 

IT-SC book 
289
Methods 
Lists the methods, if any, for the currently referenced ADO object or collection in 
alphabetical order with a brief description. 
Properties 
Lists the properties, if any, for the currently referenced ADO object or collection in 
alphabetical order with a brief description. 
Events 
Lists the events, if any, for the currently referenced ADO object in alphabetical order 
with a brief description. 
Description 
Provides the pertinent information for the given ADO object or collection with an 
overview of what the object or collection can do and an idea of the capabilities of each 
member method, property, and event. 
Examples 
One or more examples on using the ADO object or collection. 
Sample Object.Property  
(Versions) 
 
 
 
Title, Versions, and Description 
Each property reference entry includes a title, the versions of ADO the property can be 
found in, and a description. Entries in the reference are listed in alphabetical order and 
contain the fully qualified name of the property. For instance, the State property of the 
Recordset object is titled "Recordset.State Property." 
Datatype 
Lists the datatype for the given property. 
Description 
Provides a detailed description of the property. 
See Also 

IT-SC book 
290 
Lists the objects, collections, methods, properties, and events that are related to the 
current property. 
Sample Object.Method  
(Versions) 
 
 
 
Title, Versions, and Description 
Each method and event reference entry includes a title, the versions of ADO the property 
can be found in, and a description. Entries in the reference are listed in alphabetical order 
and contain the fully qualified name of the method. For instance, the Open method of the 
Recordset object is titled "Recordset.Open Method." 
Arguments 
Lists the arguments, if any, for the current method or event, with a datatype and a 
description. 
Returns 
Lists the possible datatypes that can be returned for the method. Events do not have 
Returns sections. 
Description 
Provides a detailed description of the method. 
See Also 
Lists the objects, collections, methods, properties, and events that are related to the 
current method or event. 
Command Object  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Dim object As ADODB.Command 
 
The Command object executes a SQL statement, query, or stored procedure against a 
specified data source. A Command object can alter the structure of the data source, 
execute large batch operations, or select records to be returned within a Recordset object. 
Collections 
Parameters  

IT-SC book 
291
The Parameters collection returns a collection of parameters for the given Command object. 
Properties  
The Properties property returns a Properties Collection class that contains characteristics specific 
to the Command object for the currently used provider. 
Methods 
Cancel  
The Cancel method cancels the pending asynchronous command that is executing. 
CreateParameter  
The CreateParameter creates and returns a new parameter with the information that is supplied. 
Execute  
The Execute method executes a SQL statement, query, or stored procedure specified in the 
Command.CommandText property value. 
Properties 
ActiveConnection  
The ActiveConnection property specifies the Connection object for the current Command object. 
CommandStream  
The CommandStream property sets or returns the data provider-specific stream that is used as the 
Command's input just as the CommandText property identifies the command to use as the input. 
CommandText  
The CommandText property sets or returns a valid SQL statement, table name, stored procedure 
name, relative URL, or any other command text that the data provider may recognize. 
CommandTimeout  
The CommandTimeout property indicates how long ADO waits, in seconds, before it generates 
an error when executing an asynchronous command. 
CommandType  
The CommandType property indicates the current type of Command object. 
Dialect  
The Dialect property is used with the CommandText and the CommandStream properties to 
indicate the data provider-specific syntax of the Command's source. 
Name  
The Name property specifies the name for the current Command object. 

IT-SC book 
292 
NamedParameters  
The NamedParameters property indicates whether the data provider should use parameter names 
to match the Command object's parameters or if it should match them in the order that they 
appear. 
Prepared  
The Prepared property indicates whether a prepared statement should be created by the current 
Command object before it is executed. 
State  
The Status property determines the status of the current record when using batch updates or bulk 
operations. 
Description 
A Command object must have a value for its ActiveConnection property that either 
associates it with an existing, open ActiveConnection object or uses a connection string 
to create a new, independent Connection object within the Command object. 
Once a Command object is associated to an open Connection object, the Command object 
can be executed from the Connection object, by name. A Connection object can also 
execute a command, without a Command object at all, by using the Execute method. In 
this case, ADO is actually creating and using a Command object internally within the 
Connection object, but it does not expose it to your application. 
When you execute a command without a Command object, you cannot persist (save the 
data to the datasource) and re-execute the command text or use parameters with your 
command. 
If two or more Command objects are associated to the same Connection object and one of 
them is a stored procedure with output parameters, an error will occur. To avoid this, use 
separate Connection objects for each Command object, or make sure that all other 
Command objects are disconnected from their Connection objects before executing 
others. 
Examples 
In this section, we will be looking at three examples that will show us how to: 
Execute SQL statements. 
Execute a Command object from an associated Connection object. 
Use parameters in queries. 
To use the Command examples for this section, you must define the following connection string 
Const value for the examples to work properly: 

IT-SC book 
293
Private Const DATASOURCE_BIBLIO = "Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " 
_ 
                            & "Data Source=C:\Program Files\" _ 
                            & "Microsoft Visual 
Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb;" 
Example 13-1 illustrates how a Command object can be used to execute a simple SQL 
statement. Notice how the connection string Const value is assigned to the ActiveConnection 
property. This value will be used by ADO to create the Command object and its own Connection 
object. 
Example 13-1. Executing a SQL Statement with a Command Object  
Dim com As ADODB.Command 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
' 
' instantiate a new instance of the Command Object 
' 
Set com = New ADODB.Command 
 
' 
' pass the previously defined connection string to the object 
' 
' this will create a new internal Connection object 
' 
com.ActiveConnection = DATASOURCE_BIBLIO 
 
' 
' specify the command text and tell the object to evaluate it 
' as a SQL statement 
' 
com.CommandText = "SELECT * FROM Authors;" 
com.CommandType = adCmdText 
 
' 
' instruct ADO to prepare the statement and timeout after 30 seconds 
' 
com.Prepared = True 
com.CommandTimeout = 30 
 
' 
' execute the command and return the results to the Recordset object 
' 
Set rst = com.Execute 
 
' 
' the Recordset object now contains the results from the Command's 
query 
' 
MsgBox "The first author in the recordset is: " & 
rst.Fields.Item("Author").Value 
 
' 
' like always, clean up 
' 

IT-SC book 
294 
rst.Close 
 
Set rst = Nothing 
Set com = Nothing 
A Command object can also be associated with a Connection object and be invoked directly as 
you will see in Example 13-2. Note that by using this method, the method created by the 
associated Command object -- in this example, MyCommand -- is not available in the Intellisense 
feature offered by VB. This is because the Command object is being bounded late to the 
Connection object. 
Example 13-2. Executing a Command Object from a Connection Object  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Dim com As ADODB.Command 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
' 
' open an external Connection object 
' 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
con.Open DATASOURCE_BIBLIO 
 
' 
' instantiate a new instance of the Command Object and give it a name 
' 
Set com = New ADODB.Command 
com.Name = "MyCommand" 
 
' 
' associate the Command object with the already opened Connection 
object 
' 
Set com.ActiveConnection = con 
 
' 
' specify the command text and tell the object to evaluate it 
' as a SQL statement 
' 
com.CommandText = "SELECT * FROM Authors WHERE Author=AuthorName;" 
com.CommandType = adCmdText 
 
' 
' execute the command and return the results to the Recordset object 
' 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
con.MyCommand "Ingham, Kenneth", rst 
 
' 
' the Recordset object now contains the results from the Command's 
query 
' 
MsgBox "The first author in the recordset is: " & rst.Fields("Author") 
 
Debug.Print rst.Fields.Item("Author").Value 

IT-SC book 
295
 
' 
' like always, clean up 
' 
rst.Close 
con.Close 
 
Set rst = Nothing 
Set com = Nothing 
Set con = Nothing 
Example 13-3 illustrates how parameters are used with the object. Each Command object has its 
own collection class, Parameters. By using the CreateParameter method, we can create an 
instance of a Parameter class and append it to the Command's Parameters collection. 
Example 13-3. Using Parameters with the Command Object  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Dim com As ADODB.Command 
Dim par As ADODB.Parameter 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
' 
' open an external Connection object 
' 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
con.Open DATASOURCE_BIBLIO 
 
' 
' instantiate a new instance of the Command Object and give it a name 
' 
Set com = New ADODB.Command 
com.Name = "MyCommand" 
 
' 
' associate the Command object with the already opened Connection 
object 
' 
Set com.ActiveConnection = con 
 
' 
' specify the command text and tell the object to evaluate it 
' as a SQL statement 
' 
com.CommandText = "SELECT * FROM Authors WHERE Author=AuthorName;" 
com.CommandType = adCmdText 
 
' 
' create the parameter and add it to the Parameters collection 
' 
Set par = com.CreateParameter("AuthorName", _ 
                              adChar, _ 
                              adParamInput, _ 
                              20, _ 
                              "Ingham, Kenneth") 
 

IT-SC book 
296 
com.Parameters.Append par 
 
' 
' execute the command and return the results to the Recordset object 
' 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
con.MyCommand , rst 
 
' 
' the Recordset object now contains the results from the Command's 
query 
' 
MsgBox "The first author in the recordset is: " & rst.Fields("Author") 
 
Debug.Print rst.Fields.Item("Author").Value 
 
' 
' like always, clean up 
' 
rst.Close 
con.Close 
 
Set rst = Nothing 
Set com = Nothing 
Set par = Nothing 
Set con = Nothing 
Command.ActiveConnection 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
Command.ActiveConnection = ConnectionString 
Set Command.ActiveConnection = ConnectionObject 
 
The ActiveConnection property specifies the Connection object for the current Command 
object. 
Datatype 
String or Variant (containing the current Connection object) 
Description 
The ActiveConnection property can be set to either a String, representing a connection 
string, or a Variant, representing an open Connection object. 
The ActiveConnection property can be set to either a String or a reference to a Connection object. 
If a String value is used, then it should be a valid connection string that could be passed to the 
ConnectionString property of a Connection object. You must set the ActiveConnection property 
before you attempt to execute a Command object. Before it is set, the value of the 
ActiveConnection property is a Null object reference, by default. 

IT-SC book 
297
If you set the ActiveConnection property to a closed Connection object, ADO will generate an 
error. If you set it to Nothing, ADO will disassociate the Command object from the Connection 
object and release any resources that are associated with the data source. If the ActiveConnection 
property is set to either Nothing or a different Connection object, those Parameter objects that 
were supplied by the data provider, residing in the Command's Parameters collection class, will 
be lost. However, those Parameter objects that were manually added to the Parameters collection 
class will not. 
If you close the Connection object associated with a Command object, the Command object's 
ActiveConnection will automatically be set to Nothing. 
See Also 
Connection.ConnectionString Property 
Command.Cancel Method (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Command.Cancel 
 
The Cancel method cancels the pending asynchronous command that is executing. 
Description 
The Cancel method cancels an asynchronous executing command that was initiated with the 
Execute method using the adAsyncExecute option. 
If the Cancel method is called on a command that was not executed with the adAsyncExecute 
option set, an error will occur. 
See Also 
Command.Execute Method 
Command.CommandStream Property  (Version 2.6) 
 
Command.CommandStream = Stream 
 
The CommandStream property sets or returns the data provider-specific stream that is 
used as the Command's input just as the CommandText property identifies the command 
to use as the input. 
Datatype 
Variant 

IT-SC book 
298 
Description 
The CommandStream property is used to specify the stream used as a Command's input. If this 
property is set, then the CommandText property is set to an empty String (""). Similarly, if the 
CommandText property is set, the CommandStream property is set to Nothing. 
If a Command object whose source is a stream is used to create a Recordset object, 
reading the Recordset object's Source property would return an empty String (""), 
because it returns the value of the Command object's CommandText property. 
You must use either the adCmdText or adCmdUnknown enumeration values for the 
CommandType property if the CommandStream property is set. 
The format of the stream being set to the CommandStream property is data provider-
specific, as is the behavior of both the Command.Parameters.Refresh and 
Command.Prepare methods. 
See Also 
Command.CommandText 
Property, 
Comand.CommandDialect 
Property, 
CommandTypeEnum Enumeration, Recordset.Source 
Command.CommandText 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
Command.CommandText = CommandText 
 
The CommandText property sets or returns a valid SQL statement, table name, stored 
procedure name, relative URL, or any other command text that the data provider may 
recognize. 
Datatype 
String 
Description 
The CommandText property contains a String value that by default contains a zero-length 
string (""). This string can be set to a SQL statement, table name, stored procedure call, 
relative URL, or any other command text that the data provider may recognize. 
The CommandType property is used to indicate to ADO what type of information resides within 
the CommandText property. If the CommandType property is set to adCmdText, it indicates to 
the provider that the CommandText property value contains a text command that the provider will 
understand. This will usually be a SQL statement, but not necessarily. 

IT-SC book 
299
If you set the CommandText property, ADO prepares the specified query on the Execute or Open 
methods whenever the Prepared property of the Command object is set to True, and it is bound 
to an open connection. 
The value of CommandText may be changed by ADO, depending on the value of the 
CommandType property. Retrieve the value of the CommandText property at any time if 
you question its value. 
If the CommandStream property is set to a value, then the CommandText property is 
automatically set to an empty string (""). 
See Also 
Command.CommandStream, Command.CommandType Property, Command.Dialect 
Property, Command.Prepared Property 
Command.CommandTimeout 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
Command.CommlandTimeout = Seconds 
 
The CommandTimeout property indicates how long ADO waits, in seconds, before it 
generates an error when executing an asynchronous command. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
The CommandTimeout property is read- and write-enabled. With the CommandTimeout 
property, you can specify how long ADO will wait for a command to execute. The setting 
for the CommandTimeout property is represented in seconds, and the default value is 30. 
By setting this property to zero, you are allowing ADO to wait indefinitely for a specified 
command to execute. If a command does timeout, an error is generated. 
The CommandTimeout property of the Command object is unrelated to the 
CommandTimeout property of the Connection object. 
Note 
Not all providers support the CommandTimeout property. Check your data provider's 
documentation to see if it supports this property. When developing an application with 
ADO, it might be a good idea to go as far as checking the capabilities of your planned 
data provider to see whether it matches your needs before you write most of your code -- 
and it becomes too late. 

IT-SC book 
300 
See Also 
Command.Execute Method, Connection.CommandTimeout Property 
Command.CommandType 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
Command.CommandType = CommandTypeEnum 
 
The CommandType property indicates the current type of Command object. 
Datatype 
CommandTypeEnum 
Description 
The CommandType property indicates the type of Command object you are using. The value of 
this property can be set to one of the CommandTypeEnum enumeration values. If the source of 
the Command object is a stream (set via the Command.CommandStream property), the 
CommandType property must be set to either adCmdText or adCmdUnknown. 
In addition, the ExecuteOptionEnum value of adExecuteNoRecords can be combined with the 
adCmdText or adCmdStoredProc constants to improve performance. This value cannot be used 
with the Open method of the Recordset object. 
If you know the type of Command object that you are using, set this property manually to 
prevent unwanted delays in performance when ADO tries to figure it out for itself. If the 
property is set incorrectly, an error is generated upon a call to the Execute method. 
See Also 
Command.CommandStream, Command.CommandText Property, CommandTypeEnum 
Enumeration 
Command.CreateParameter 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set parameter = command.CreateParameter(Name, 
Type, Direction, Size, Value) 
 
The CreateParameter method creates and returns a new parameter with the information 
supplied. 
Arguments 

IT-SC book 
301
Name (String)  
Optional. Contains the desired name of the new parameter. This argument is mapped to the 
Parameter.Name property. 
Type (DataTypeEnum)  
Optional. Indicates the desired datatype of the new parameter. This argument is mapped to the 
Parameter.Type property. The default value is adEmpty. 
Direction (ParameterDirectionEnum)  
Optional. Indicates the desired direction of the new parameter. This argument is mapped to the 
Parameter.Direction property. The default value is adParamImput. 
Size (Long)  
Optional. Specifies the maximum length of the newly created parameter in either characters or 
bytes if the Type parameter is set to a variable-length datatype. This argument is mapped to the 
Parameter.Size property. 
Value (Variant)  
Optional. Is used to initialize the value of the newly created Parameter object. This argument is 
mapped to the Parameter.Value property. 
Returns 
Parameter object 
Description 
With the CreateParameter method of the Command object, you can create a new 
Parameter object with the information that you specify, including name, type, direction, 
size, and value. When you create a new Parameter object with this method, the parameter 
is not automatically added to the Parameters collection of the chosen Command object. 
The Append method of the Command.Parameters property must be used to do this. 
When assigning variable-length datatypes, you must set the Size property at either 
creation or some other time before appending it to the Parameters collection to avoid an 
error. 
If the Type property is set to either adNumeric or adDecimal, the Parameter.NumericScale and 
Parameter.Precision properties must be set to fully specify the parameter's datatype. For instance, 
a NumericScale of 3 would indicate that there are three digits after the decimal point and a 
Precision of 5 would mean that there are five digits, total, representing the number. 
See Also 
DataTypeEnum 
Enumeration, 
ParameterDirectionEnum 
Enumeration, 
Parameter.Direction Property, Parameter.Name Property, Parameter.NumericScale 

IT-SC book 
302 
Property, Parameter.Precision Property, Parameter.Size Property, Parameter.Type 
Property, Parameter.Value Property 
Command.Dialect Property  
(Version 2.6) 
 
Command.Dialect = GUID 
 
The Dialect property is used with the CommandText and the CommandStream properties 
to indicate the data provider-specific syntax of the Command's source. 
Datatype 
String 
Description 
The default value for the Dialect property is {C8B521FB-5CF3-11CE-ADE5-00AA0044773D}, 
which indicates to ADO that the provider will attempt to figure out how to interpret the 
Command's source specified in either the CommandStream or the CommandText property. 
Note 
You must check your data provider's documentation to see what the valid values of the 
Dialect property must be specified as, depending upon the value in the CommandStream 
or CommandText properties. 
See Also 
Command.CommandStream Property, Command.CommandText Property 
Command.Execute 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Set recordset = command.Execute(RecordsAffected, 
Parameters, Options) 
Set stream = command.Execute(RecordsAffected, 
Parameters, Options) 
command.Execute RecordsAffected, Parameters, 
Options 
 
The Execute method executes a SQL statement, query, or stored procedure specified in 
the Command.CommandText property value. 
Arguments 

IT-SC book 
303
RecordsAffected (Long)  
Optional. Populated, by the data provider, with the number of records that were affected by the 
action SQL statement, query, or stored procedure (result-returning commands do not populate this 
parameter). 
Parameters (Variant Array)  
Optional. Contains the values to be passed to the SQL statement, query, or stored procedure for 
the parameters in which it holds. 
Options (Long)  
Optional. A combination of one or more CommandTypeEnum and ExecuteOptionEnum values 
indicating how the data provider should treat the command. The default value is -1 (no options 
set). The CommandTypeEnum values can also be set with the Command.CommandType property. 
Returns 
Recordset object  
Stream object  
Nothing  
Description 
The Execute method executes a stored procedure, SQL statement, or query against a data 
source. The command that is executed is dependent upon the value of the 
Command.CommandText property. The way in which ADO evaluates this 
CommandText is dependent upon the Options parameter to the Execute method. 
If the CommandText value causes the Execute method to return records from the data 
source, these records are returned in the form of a Recordset object from the Execute 
method. A returned Recordset object from the Command.Execute method is always a 
read-only, forward-only cursor. 
When the Execute method's Options parameter includes the adAsyncExecute, adAsyncFetch, 
or adAsyncFetchNonBlocking values, operations continue in the background of the 
application flow. While these operations are continuing, the Command.Cancel method can be 
called to cancel all pending asynchronous operations. 
See Also 
Command.Cancel Method, Command.CommadText Property, Command.CommandType 
Property, 
CommandTypeEnum 
Enumeration, 
ExecuteOptionEnum 
Enumeration, 
ExecuteOptionEnum Enumeration 
Command.Name Property (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 

IT-SC book 
304 
command.Name = Name 
 
The Name property specifies the name for the current Command object. 
Datatype 
String 
Description 
The Name property is both read- and write-enabled for the Command object. The Name 
property is used to assign a name to the associated Command object or retrieve a 
Command object from the Commands collection. 
Names do not have to be unique within collections. 
Command.NamedParameters 
Property  
(Version 
2.6) 
 
command.NamedParameters = Boolean 
 
The NamedParameters property indicates whether the data provider should use parameter 
names to match the Command object's parameters or if it should match them in the order 
that they appear. 
Datatype 
Boolean 
Description 
If the NamedParameters property is set to True, the name properties of each Parameter object in 
the current Command objects, Parameters collection, will be passed to the data provider so that 
they can be used to map the parameters to the values in either the CommandText or the 
CommandStream Property. 
If this property is set to False, then the parameters are not matched by name, but rather by the 
order in which they appear. 
See Also 
Command.CommandText Property, Command.CommandStream Property, Parameters 
Collection 

IT-SC book 
305
Command.Parameters 
Collection  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set parameters = command.Parameters 
 
The Parameters collection returns a collection of parameters for the given Command 
object. 
Datatype 
Parameters (Collection object) 
Applies To 
Command object 
Description 
The Parameters property of the Command object is read-only. It returns a reference to the 
Parameters collection object, which can contain zero or many Parameter objects that 
represent parameters for the given command. 
Command.Prepared 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
command.Prepared = Boolean 
 
The Prepared property indicates whether a prepared statement should be created by the 
current Command object before it is executed. 
Datatype 
Boolean 
Description 
If the value of the Prepared property is set to True, then before the first execution of a query 
defined by the CommandText property of the Command object, the query is compiled and saved. 
From then on the Execute statement will refer to the compiled version of the query to perform. 
This may slow the initial call to Execute, but all calls that follow will benefit from this. 
If the value of the Prepared property is set to False, then the query is never compiled; instead the 
query is done directly from the Command object. 

IT-SC book 
306 
Note 
Not all providers support the Prepared property. Some providers raise an error as soon as the 
Prepared property is set to True, while others do not raise an error and simply replace the 
Prepared property's value with False. 
Command.Properties 
Collection  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Set properties = command.Properties 
 
The Properties property returns a Properties Collection class that contains characteristics 
specific to the Command object for the currently used provider. 
Datatype 
Properties (Collection object) 
Applies To 
Command object 
Description 
The Properties collection class contains a Property class instance for each property 
specific to the Command object for the data provider. 
The Properties collection of the Command object is not populated until the 
ActiveConnection property of the Command object has been set to an open Connection 
object or a valid connection string value. 
See Also 
Command.ActiveConnection Property 
Command.State Property 
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
state = command.State 
 
The Status property is used to determine the status of the current record when using batch 
updates or bulk operations. 
Datatype 

IT-SC book 
307
RecordStatusEnum 
Description 
The Type property is used to check the changes that are pending for records that have 
changed during a batch update. In addition, you can check the status of records that have 
failed during bulk operations such as what might happen with a call to the Delete, Resync, 
UpdateBatch, or CancelBatch methods or when a Filter property is set to an array of 
bookmarks. 
The Type property returns a sum of one or more of the RecordStatusEnum enumerations, listed in 
Appendix E. 
See Also 
Recordset.CancelBatch, 
Recordset.Delete 
Method, 
Recordset.Filter 
Property, 
Recordset.Resync Method, Recordset.UpdateBatch, RecordStatusEnum Enumeration, 
ObjectStateEnum Enumeration 
Connection Object  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Dim connection As ADODB.Connection 
 
A Connection object represents a unique connection to a data source. Connection objects 
are independent of all other ADO objects. 
Collections 
Errors  
The Errors collection is a collection of individual errors and warnings that have occurred for the 
last operation on the current Connection object. 
Properties  
The Properties collection contains characteristics specific to the Connection object for the 
currently used provider. 
Methods 
BeginTrans  
Manages transaction processing for the current Connection object by starting a transaction. 
Cancel  
Cancels the pending asynchronous connection or execution. 
Close  

IT-SC book 
308 
Closes either a Connection or Recordset object, including any dependent objects that they may 
have. 
CommitTrans  
Manages transaction processing for the current Connection object by committing a transaction. 
Execute  
Executes a specified SQL statement, query, stored procedure, URL, or provider-specific 
command against the data source. 
Open  
For the Connection object, opens a connection to a particular data source. For the Recordset 
object, opens a cursor. 
OpenSchema  
Returns a Recordset object containing information about the data source's schema. 
RollbackTrans  
Manages transaction processing for the current Connection object by rolling back a transaction. 
Properties 
Attributes  
Sets or returns specific characteristics about the Connection object. 
CommandTimeout  
Indicates how long ADO waits before it generates an error when executing a particular command. 
ConnectionString  
Defines the connection used to access a data source. 
ConnectionTimeout  
Indicates how long in seconds ADO will wait while attempting a connection to a data source. 
CursorLocation  
Indicates the location of the cursor service. 
DefaultDatabase  
Indicates the database that is chosen as the default for the current connection. 
IsolationLevel  
Sets the level of isolation used when utilizing transaction management. 
Mode  
Identifies the available permissions for modifying data within the specified connection. 

IT-SC book 
309
Provider  
Indicates the name of the data provider for the current Connection object. 
State  
Indicates the current status of a Command, Connection, Record, Recordset, or Stream object. 
Version  
Indicates the current version of ActiveX Data Objects that is being used. 
Events 
BeginTransComplete  
Raised after the BeginTrans method has completed its operation. 
CommitTransComplete  
Raised after the CommitTrans method completes its operation. 
ConnectComplete  
Raised once a connection has been made. 
Disconnect  
Raised once a connection has ended. 
ExecuteComplete  
Called when the execution of a command has completed. 
InfoMessage  
Called when a warning is produced during a ConnectionEvent operation. 
RollbackTransComplete  
Raised after the RollbackTrans method has completed its operation. 
WillConnect  
Raised before a connection is made. 
WillExecute  
Raised before an execution of a command has begun. 
Description 
A Connection object can execute commands on its own or with the use of an associated 
Command object. In addition, Connection objects are used to manage transaction locking, 
view ADO errors, and inspect the schema of a data source. 

IT-SC book 
310 
The Connection is one of the two ADO objects that support events at this time. By 
responding to the Connection events, your application can be notified when transactions 
are being used, when connections are made and lost, and when commands are executed. 
Examples 
In this section, we will be looking at four examples that will show us how to: 
Establish an asynchronous connection to a data source. 
Manage transactions with the Connection object. 
Issue SQL statements without the use of a Command object. 
Inspect the schema of a data source. 
Before we take a look at these examples that use the Connection object, let's first add 
some code to show us when our Connection events are fired. With this code, we can see 
how events are reported as we look at the upcoming examples in this section. 
For all examples, add a new Class to your current project and declare the Connection object 
WithEvents as shown: 
Private WithEvents con As ADODB.Connection 
Now, you should be able to see the con variable in the first combo box in the code pane. 
Selecting this object, you will be given a choice of nine events that can be fired for your 
Connection object. For each event, we are going to add code to output the parameters passed to 
that event to the Immediate Window. 
Add the following code for the nine events to the new Class: 
Private Sub con_BeginTransComplete(ByVal TransactionLevel As Long, _ 
                                ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 
    Debug.Print "Event: BeginTransComplete" 
    Debug.Print "  TransLevel: " & TransactionLevel 
    Debug.Print "  Status:     " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Connection: " & pConnection.ConnectionString 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub con_CommitTransComplete(ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                 adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                 ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
     
    Debug.Print "Event: CommitTransComplete" 
    Debug.Print "  Status:     " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Connection: " & pConnection.ConnectionString 
    Debug.Print 

IT-SC book 
311
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub con_ConnectComplete(ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                             adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                             ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 
    Debug.Print "Event: ConnectComplete" 
    Debug.Print "  Status:     " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Connection: " & pConnection.ConnectionString 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub con_Disconnect(adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                           ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 
    Debug.Print "Event: Disconnect" 
    Debug.Print "  Status:     " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Connection: " & pConnection.ConnectionString 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub con_ExecuteComplete(ByVal RecordsAffected As Long, _ 
                             ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                             adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                             ByVal pCommand As ADODB.Command, _ 
                             ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset, _ 
                             ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 
    Debug.Print "Event: ExecuteComplete" 
    Debug.Print "  RecordsAff: " & RecordsAffected 
    Debug.Print "  Status:     " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Command:    " & pCommand.CommandText 
    Debug.Print "  Recordset:  " & pRecordset.Source 
    Debug.Print "  Connection: " & pConnection.ConnectionString 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub con_InfoMessage(ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                            adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                            ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
                             
    Debug.Print "Event: InfoMessage" 
    Debug.Print "  Error:      " & pError.Description 
    Debug.Print "  Status:     " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Connection: " & pConnection.ConnectionString 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub con_RollbackTransComplete(ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                 adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                 ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
     

IT-SC book 
312 
    Debug.Print "Event: RollbackTransComplete" 
    Debug.Print "  Status:     " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Connection: " & pConnection.ConnectionString 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub con_WillConnect(ConnectionString As String, _ 
                            UserID As String, _ 
                            Password As String, _ 
                            Options As Long, _ 
                            adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                            ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 
    Debug.Print "Event: WillConnect" 
    Debug.Print "  UserID:     " & UserID 
    Debug.Print "  Password:   " & Password 
    Debug.Print "  Options:    " & Options 
    Debug.Print "  Status:     " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Connection: " & pConnection.ConnectionString 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub con_WillExecute(Source As String, _ 
                            CursorType As ADODB.CursorTypeEnum, _ 
                            LockType As ADODB.LockTypeEnum, _ 
                            Options As Long, _ 
                            adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                            ByVal pCommand As ADODB.Command, _ 
                            ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset, _ 
                            ByVal pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 
    Debug.Print "Event: WillExecute" 
    Debug.Print "  CursorType: " & CursorType 
    Debug.Print "  LockType:   " & LockType 
    Debug.Print "  Options:    " & Options 
    Debug.Print "  Status:     " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    If (Not (pCommand Is Nothing)) Then 
        Debug.Print "  Command:    " & pCommand.CommandText 
    End If 
    If (Not (pRecordset Is Nothing)) Then 
        Debug.Print "  Recordset:  " & pRecordset.Source 
    End If 
    Debug.Print "  Connection: " & pConnection.ConnectionString 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
The only other code that you will need for the following examples is the code for the 
GetStatusString function, which accepts an EventStatusEnum value and returns a String 
describing the enumeration value: 
Private Function GetStatusString(adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum) _ 
                                                            As String 
 

IT-SC book 
313
    Select Case (adStatus) 
         
        Case ADODB.EventStatusEnum.adStatusCancel: 
            GetStatusString = "Cancel" 
         
        Case ADODB.EventStatusEnum.adStatusCantDeny: 
            GetStatusString = "Can't Deny" 
         
        Case ADODB.EventStatusEnum.adStatusErrorsOccurred 
            GetStatusString = "Errors Occurred" 
         
        Case ADODB.EventStatusEnum.adStatusOK: 
            GetStatusString = "Status Okay" 
         
        Case ADODB.EventStatusEnum.adStatusUnwantedEvent: 
            GetStatusString = "Unwanted Event" 
     
    End Select 
     
End Function 
Example 13-4 illustrates how we can establish a connection to a data source, asynchronously, 
by adding the adAsyncExecute enumeration value to the Open method of the Connection object. 
Example 13-4. Establishing an Asynchronous Connection  
' instantiate a new Connection object 
' 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
' 
' open the Biblio database with Jet as read/write enabled 
' 
 
con.Mode = adModeReadWrite 
 
con.Provider = "Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0" 
 
con.Open "C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb", _ 
         , _ 
         , _ 
         ADODB.ExecuteOptionEnum.adAsyncExecute 
 
While (con.State <> ADODB.ObjectStateEnum.adStateOpen) 
    ' 
    ' do something while the connection is being opened 
    ' 
Wend 
 
' 
' do something with the connection object 
' 
 
' 
' close and clean up 
' 

IT-SC book 
314 
con.Close 
 
Set con = Nothing 
Notice that all the examples for the Connection object do not declare their own con variable -- 
rather, they simply instantiate the module-level variable that has already been declared so that we 
can trap the events for that object. Example 13-4 sends the following output to the Immediate 
Window: 
Event: WillConnect 
  UserID:      
  Password:    
  Options:    16 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb 
 
Event: ConnectComplete 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet...... ir=False;Jet OLEDB:SFP=False 
 
Event: Disconnect 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb 
I'm sure that you will notice that the connection string for the ConnectComplete event has been 
shorted to save trees. 
Example 13-5 shows how transactions are used and managed with the Connection object. 
Example 13-5. Managing Transactions with the Connection Object  
Dim sCon As String 
 
' 
' instantiate and open a new Connection object 
' 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
sCon = "Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " _ 
     & "Data Source=C:\Program Files\Microsoft " _ 
     & "Visual Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb; " 
 
con.Open sCon 
 
' 
' begin the first level of the transaction 
' 
con.BeginTrans 
 
    ' 
    ' begin the second level of the transaction 
    ' 
    con.BeginTrans 
         
        ' 
        ' begin the third level of the transaction 

IT-SC book 
315
        ' 
        con.BeginTrans 
         
        ' 
        ' commit the third level of the transaction 
        ' 
        con.CommitTrans 
         
    ' 
    ' rollback the second level of the transaction 
    ' 
    con.RollbackTrans 
 
' 
' commit the third level of the transaction 
' 
con.CommitTrans 
 
' 
' close and clean up 
' 
con.Close 
 
Set con = Nothing 
This example uses three levels of transactions, as we can see from the Immediate 
Window's tell-tale account: 
Event: WillConnect 
  UserID:      
  Password:    
  Options:    -1 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; Data Source=C:\Program 
Files\ 
Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb;  
 
Event: ConnectComplete 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet...... ir=False;Jet OLEDB:SFP=False 
 
Event: BeginTransComplete 
  TransLevel: 1 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet...... ir=False;Jet OLEDB:SFP=False 
 
Event: BeginTransComplete 
  TransLevel: 2 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet...... ir=False;Jet OLEDB:SFP=False 
 
Event: BeginTransComplete 
  TransLevel: 3 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet...... ir=False;Jet OLEDB:SFP=False 
 
Event: CommitTransComplete 

IT-SC book 
316 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet...... ir=False;Jet OLEDB:SFP=False 
 
Event: RollbackTransComplete 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet...... ir=False;Jet OLEDB:SFP=False 
 
Event: CommitTransComplete 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet...... ir=False;Jet OLEDB:SFP=False 
 
Event: Disconnect 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; Data Source=C:\Program 
Files\ 
Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb; 
Although the connection strings for the transaction events have been shortened, you might notice 
that the connection events WillConnect and Disconnect used the original connection string 
that was used with the Connection object. The other events used a modified String that contained 
much more detail about the connection once it was made. 
Example 13-6 shows how the Connection object can be used to issue SQL statements without 
the use of a Command object. 
Example 13-6. Issuing SQL Statements Without the Use of a Command 
Object  
Dim sCon As String 
 
Dim com As ADODB.Command 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
' 
' instantiate and open a new Connection object 
' 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
sCon = "Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " _ 
     & "Data Source=C:\Program Files\Microsoft " _ 
     & "Visual Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb; " 
 
con.Open sCon 
 
' 
' execute a SQL statement without a Command object 
' 
con.CommandTimeout = 3 
Set rst = con.Execute("SELECT * FROM Authors;") 
 
' 
' the Recordset object now contains the results from the Command 
' 
MsgBox "The first author in the recordset is: " & rst("Author") 
 

IT-SC book 
317
' 
' close and clean up 
' 
rst.Close 
con.Close 
 
Set rst = Nothing 
Set con = Nothing 
Events fired by our Connection object cause the following message to be printed: 
Event: WillConnect 
  UserID:      
  Password:    
  Options:    -1 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; Data Source=C:\Program 
Files\ 
Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb;  
 
Event: ConnectComplete 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet...... ir=False;Jet OLEDB:SFP=False 
 
Event: WillExecute 
  CursorType: -1 
  LockType:   -1 
  Options:    -1 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet...... ir=False;Jet OLEDB:SFP=False 
 
Event: ExecuteComplete 
  RecordsAff: 0 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Command:    SELECT * FROM Authors; 
  Recordset:  SELECT * FROM Authors; 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet...... ir=False;Jet OLEDB:SFP=False 
 
Event: Disconnect 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; Data Source=C:\Program 
Files\ 
Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb; 
Example 13-7, our final example for the Connection object, illustrates how we can inspect the 
schema of a data source with the Connection object and display its tables. Notice that the 
Connection object is being used to check the version of ADO in use. 
Example 13-7. Inspecting a Data Source's Schema  
Dim sCon As String 
Dim sTables As String 
 
Dim com As ADODB.Command 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
Dim fld As ADODB.Field 

IT-SC book 
318 
 
' 
' instantiate and open a new Connection object 
' 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
sCon = "Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " _ 
     & "Data Source=C:\Program Files\Microsoft " _ 
     & "Visual Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb; " 
 
con.Open sCon 
 
' 
' display the ADO version 
' 
MsgBox "ADO Version " & CStr(con.Version) 
 
' 
' open the schema for the database tables which is returned as a 
'   Recordset 
' 
Set rst = con.OpenSchema(adSchemaTables) 
 
' 
' record the field names and values 
' 
If (Not (rst.BOF And rst.EOF)) Then rst.MoveFirst 
 
For Each fld In rst.Fields 
    sTables = sTables & Left$(fld.Name & Space(20), 20) & vbTab 
Next fld 
 
sTables = sTables & vbCr 
 
While (Not rst.EOF) 
 
    For Each fld In rst.Fields 
        sTables = sTables & Left$((fld.Value & "") & Space(20), 20) 
        sTables = sTables & vbTab 
    Next fld 
     
    sTables = sTables & vbCr 
     
    rst.MoveNext 
 
Wend 
 
' 
' display the table information 
' 
Debug.Print sTables 
 
' 
' close and clean up 
' 
rst.Close 
con.Close 

IT-SC book 
319
 
Set rst = Nothing 
Set con = Nothing 
Now, we have output from both the events and the schema data. Because the amount of 
schema data returned in this example is tremendous, we kept only a couple of columns 
for readability: 
Event: WillConnect 
  UserID:      
  Password:    
  Options:    -1 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; Data Source=C:\Program 
Files\ 
Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb;  
 
Event: ConnectComplete 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet...... ir=False;Jet OLEDB:SFP=False 
 
TABLE_NAME              TABLE_TYPE            
All Titles              VIEW          
Authors                 TABLE           
MSysACEs                SYSTEM TABLE        
MSysIMEXColumns         ACCESS TABLE    
MSysIMEXSpecs           ACCESS TABLE       
MSysModules             ACCESS TABLE   
MSysModules2            ACCESS TABLE   
MSysObjects             SYSTEM TABLE           
MSysQueries             SYSTEM TABLE             
MSysRelationships       SYSTEM TABLE           
Publishers              TABLE        
Title Author            TABLE          
Titles                  TABLE        
 
Event: Disconnect 
  Status:     Status Okay 
  Connection: Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; Data Source=C:\Program 
Files\ 
Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb;  
Connection.Attributes 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Connection.Attributes = XactArgumentsEnum [+ 
XactArgumentsEnum...] 
 
The Attributes property is used to set or return specific characteristics about the 
Connection object. 
Datatype 

IT-SC book 
320 
XactArgumentsEnum (Long) 
Description 
The Attributes property is read- and write-enabled. The value of the Attributes property can be set 
to any sum of the XactArgumentsEnum enumeration values, listed in Appendix E. 
The default value of the Attributes property is zero. 
Note 
Not all providers support the functionality of the Attributes property. 
See Also 
Connection.BeginTrans 
Method, 
Connection.CommitTrans 
Method, 
Connection.RollBackTrans Method, XactAttributeEnum Enumeration 
Connection.BeginTrans 
Method 
Connection.CommitTrans 
Method 
Connection.RollbackTrans 
Method  
CBT Method(Versions 
2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
CCT Method(Versions 
2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
CRT Method(Versions 
2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
connection.BeginTrans 
level = connection.BeginTrans(  ) 
connection.CommitTrans 
connection.RollbackTrans 
 
The BeginTrans, CommitTrans, and RollbackTrans methods are used to manage 
transaction processing for the current Connection object. 
The BeginTrans method begins a transaction, as you might expect. 
The CommitTrans method ends the current transaction, while first saving any changes 
and then possibly starting another transaction altogether. 
The RollbackTrans method ends the current transaction, but rolls back any changes made 
during the current transaction. In addition, the RollbackTrans method can start another 
transaction, just as the CommitTrans method can. 
Description 

IT-SC book 
321
The BeginTrans, CommitTrans, and RollbackTrans methods of the Connection object 
perform transaction management within a particular connection. The most common 
example of a need for transaction management is a banking system. When you transfer 
money from one account to another, it is important that the two steps involved (a 
withdraw followed by a deposit) occur as a single transaction. By using these three 
transaction-management methods, we can ensure that both or none (but not either alone) 
of the bank steps are performed. If there is a problem with the deposit after the withdraw 
has completed, we can in effect roll back time with the RollbackTrans method. 
The BeginTrans method begins a new transaction within the current Connection object. 
By using the BeginTrans method, you can create nested transactions much like you can 
create nested If . . . Then statements in your code. A return value can be received from 
the BeginTrans method in the form of a Long, if the data provider supports nested 
transactions. This return value indicates the level of the nested transaction that was 
created, one being the first. 
The CommitTrans method commits any changes since the beginning of the last 
transaction. While the RollbackTrans method performs the opposite, it cancels any 
changes made to the last transaction. In both cases, the last transaction is ended. In 
addition, the last transaction created must end before either the CommitTrans or 
RollbackTrans methods can end an earlier transaction. 
If the Arguments property of the Connection object is set to adXactCommitRetaining, a new 
transaction is automatically created after a CommitTrans method call. If this property is set to 
adXactAbortRetaining, a new transaction is created automatically after a RollbackTrans 
method call. 
See Also 
Connection.Arguments Property 
Connection.BeginTransComplete 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 
2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Private Sub BeginTransComplete(ByVal 
TransactionLevel As Long, _ 
                               ByVal pError As 
ADODB.Error, _ 
                               adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                               ByVal pConnection 
As ADODB.Connection) 
 
The BeginTransComplete event is raised after the BeginTrans method has completed its 
operation. 

IT-SC book 
322 
Arguments 
TransactionLevel  
A Long value indicating the nesting level of the new transaction. 
pError  
An Error object containing details about an error that occurred if the adStatus parameter is set 
to adStatusErrorsOccurred. 
adStatus  
An EventStatusEnum value indicating the status of the current operation. If the adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusOK, the operation was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set 
to adStatusErrorsOccurred, the operation failed, and the pError object contains the details 
regarding the error. By setting the adStatus parameter to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this 
event will not be called again. 
pConnection  
The Connection object that fired this event. 
See Also 
Connection.BeginTrans 
Method, 
Connection.CommitTransComplete 
Event, 
Connection.RollbackTransComplete Event, EventStatusEnum Enumeration 
Connection.Cancel 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
connection.Cancel 
 
The Cancel method cancels the pending asynchronous connection or execution. 
Description 
If the Execute or Open methods of a Connection object where called with the adAsyncConnect, 
adAsyncExecute, or adAsyncFetch options, the Cancel method will cancel the pending 
asynchronous operation. 
If the Cancel method is called for an operation that was not executed with the adAsyncExecute 
option set, an error will occur. 
See Also 
Connection.Execute Method, Connection.Open Method 

IT-SC book 
323
Connection.Close Method 
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
connection.Close 
 
The Close method is used to close either a Connection or Recordset object, including any 
dependent objects that they may have. 
Description 
The Close method terminates a connection with a data source. After a Connection object 
is closed, properties can be adjusted, and the object can be opened again. Calling methods 
that require a connection while the Connection object is closed generates an error. 
Closing a Connection object that one or more Recordset objects were created from causes 
those Recordset objects to close as well. All pending changes are lost. If there is a 
pending transaction, an error occurs. 
Closing a Connection object does not remove it from memory, it only frees the resources that it is 
using. To remove the Connection object from memory in Visual Basic, set it to Nothing. 
Connection.CommandTimeout 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 
2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
connection.CommandTimeout = timeout 
 
The CommandTimeout property indicates how long ADO waits before it generates an 
error when executing a particular command. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
The CommandTimeout property is read- and write-enabled. By using the CommandTimeout 
property, you can specify how long ADO will wait for a command to execute. The setting for the 
CommandTimeout property is represented in seconds, and the default value is 30. By setting this 
property to zero, you are allowing ADO to wait indefinitely for a specified command to execute. 
If a command does time out, an error will be generated. 
The CommandTimeout property of the Command object is unrelated to the 
CommandTimeout property of the Connection object. 
The Connection object's CommandTimeout is read- and write-enabled even when the 
Connection object is open. 

IT-SC book 
324 
Note 
Not all providers support the CommandTimeout property. 
Connection.CommitTrans 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
See the Connection.BeginTrans Method. 
Connection.CommitTransComplete 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 
2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Private Sub CommitTransComplete(ByVal pError As 
ADODB.Error, _ 
                                adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                ByVal pConnection 
As ADODB.Connection) 
 
The CommitTransComplete event is raised after the CommitTrans method completes its 
operation. 
Arguments 
pError  
An Error object containing details about an error that occurred if the adStatus parameter is set 
to adStatusErrorsOccurred. 
adStatus  
An EventStatusEnum value indicating the status of the current operation. If the adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusOK, the operation was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set 
to adStatusErrorsOccurred, the operation failed, and the pError object contains the details 
regarding the error. By setting the adStatus parameter to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this 
event will not be called again. 
pConnection  
The Connection object that fired this event. 
See Also 
Connection.BeginTransComplete 
Event, 
Connection.CommitTrans 
Method, 
Connection.RollbackTransComplete Event, EventStatusEnum Enumeration 

IT-SC book 
325
Connection.ConnectComplete 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
Private Sub ConnectComplete(ByVal pError As 
ADODB.Error, _ 
                            adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                            ByVal pConnection As 
ADODB.Connection) 
 
The ConnectComplete event is raised once a connection has been made. 
Arguments 
pError  
An Error object containing details about an error that occurred if the adStatus parameter is set 
to adStatusErrorsOccurred. 
adStatus  
An EventStatusEnum value indicating the status of the current operation. If the adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusOK, the operation was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set 
to adStatusErrorsOccurred, the operation failed, and the pError object contains the details 
regarding the error. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this event 
will not be called again. 
pConnection  
The Connection object that fired this event. 
See Also 
Connection.Disconnect Event, Connection.WillConnect Event, ConnectOptionEnum 
Enumeration, EventStatusEnum Enumeration 
Connection.ConnectionString 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 
2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
connection.ConnectionString = connectionstring 
 
The ConnectionString property defines the connection used to access a data source. 
Datatype 
String 

IT-SC book 
326 
Description 
The ConnectionString property indicates the data source to be used by your connection. You may 
pass either a DSN (data source name) or a detailed connection string, which is a list of arguments. 
The arguments must be in the form of argument=value, with multiple arguments separated by a 
semicolon. If ADO finds an equal sign in the ConnectionString property, it assumes that you are 
passing a detailed connection string. 
Arguments 
The three supported arguments are listed next. If you pass additional arguments, they are 
passed directly to the data provider and are not checked by ADO: 
Provider  
Specifies the name of the data provider to use for the particular connection. 
Filename  
Specifies the name of a data provider-specific file containing connection information. This 
argument cannot be used with the Provider argument. 
URL  
Identifies the absolute URL of a file or directory. 
The contents of the ConnectionString property can be altered by ADO at any time after 
opening the Connection object, so read the property if you are unsure of its contents. 
If the ConnectionString argument was used in the Open method of the Connection object, 
the value is placed within the ConnectionString property of the Connection object. 
While the Connection object is open, the ConnectionString is read-only, but when it is 
closed, it is both read- and write-enabled. 
See Also 
Connection.Open Method 
Connection.ConnectionTimeout 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 
2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
connection.ConnectionTimeout = timeout 
 
The ConnectionTimeout property indicates how long in seconds ADO will wait while 
attempting a connection to a data source. 
Datatype 

IT-SC book 
327
Long 
Description 
By using the ConnectionTimeout property, you can specify how long ADO will wait for 
a connection to a data source. The setting for the ConnectionTimeout property is 
represented in seconds. By setting this property to zero, you are allowing ADO to wait 
indefinitely for a specified connection. If the connection does time out, an error is 
generated. 
The ConnectionTimeout property is read- and write-enabled while the Connection object 
is closed, but read-only once it is opened. 
Note 
Not all providers support the ConnectionTimeout property. 
See Also 
Connection.Open Method 
Connection.CursorLocation 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
connection.CursorLocation = CursorLocationEnum 
 
The CursorLocation property indicates the location of the cursor service. 
Datatype 
CursorLocationEnum (Long) 
Description 
The value of the CursorLocation property can be set to one of the valid CursorLocationEnum 
values, listed in Appendix E. 
The value of the CursorLocation property is both read- and write-enabled. However, 
changing the value of this property affects only Connections that are opened after the 
value has changed. 
See Also 
Connection.Open Method 

IT-SC book 
328 
Connection.DefaultDatabase 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
connection.DefaultDatabase = database 
 
The DefaultDatabase property indicates the database that is chosen as the default for the 
current connection. 
Datatype 
String 
Description 
The DefaultDatabase property allows the application to specify which database is the 
default for a Connection object. 
Unqualified syntax automatically refers to the database specified by the DefaultDatabase 
property. Qualifying the object names with the desired database name must be done to 
access all other databases. 
Note 
Not all providers support the DefaultDatabase property. If they do not, they may raise an 
error or return an empty String value. 
Connection.Disconnect 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Private Sub Disconnect(adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                       ByVal pConnection As 
ADODB.Connection) 
 
The Disconnect event is raised once a connection has ended. 
Arguments 
adStatus  
An EventStatusEnum value indicating the status of the current operation. The adStatus 
parameter is always set to adStatusOK when the event is fired. Setting the adStatus parameter 
to adStatusUnwantedEvent before leaving the event code means that this event will not be 
called again. 

IT-SC book 
329
pConnection  
The Connection object that fired this event. 
See Also 
Connection.ConnectComplete Event, EventStatusEnum Enumeration 
Connection.Errors 
Collection  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Set errors = connection.Errors 
 
The Errors collection is a collection of individual errors and warnings that have occurred 
for the last operation on the current Connection object. 
Datatype 
Errors (Collection Object) 
Description 
The Errors property of the Connection object is read-only. It returns a reference to the 
Errors collection object that can contain zero or many Error objects that indicate ADO or 
provider-specific errors. 
Connection.Execute 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
connection.Execute CommandText, RecordsAffected, 
Options 
Set recordset = connection.Execute(CommandText, 
RecordsAffected, Options) 
 
The Execute method is used to execute a specified SQL statement, query, stored 
procedure, URL, or provider-specific command against the data source. 
Arguments 
CommandText (String)  
Optional. Contains the SQL statement, query, stored procedure, URL, or provider-specific 
command to be executed. The parameter is similar to the Command.CommandText property. 
RecordsAffected (Long)  

IT-SC book 
330 
Optional. Contains the number of records that the executed command affected. 
Options (Long)  
Optional. 
Represents 
a 
combination 
of 
one 
or 
more 
CommandTypeEnum 
and 
ExecuteOptionEnum values indicating how the data provider should treat the command. The 
default value is -1 (no options set). 
The CommandTypeEnum and ExecuteOptionEnum enumeration values are listed in Appendix E. 
Returns 
RecordsetObject 
Description 
The Execute method executes the command specified by the CommandText parameter, 
which in turn is evaluated based upon the Options parameter. When the execution of the 
command is complete, the Connection.ExecuteComplete event is raised. 
If the execution of the command returns records, a new Recordset object is returned from 
the Execute method. If the execution of the command does not return records, an empty 
Recordset object is returned from the Execute method. Regardless, the Recordset 
returned is always read-only with a forward-only cursor. 
When the Execute method's Options parameter includes one of the adAsyncExecute, 
adAsyncFetch, or adAsyncFetchNonBlocking values, operations continue in the 
background of the application flow. While these operations are continuing, the 
Connection.Cancel method can be called to cancel all pending asynchronous operations. 
Note 
Although the documentation for ADO 2.6 (beta 2) has specified that the CommandText 
arguments and property can be set to a relative URL, I have found that whatever you set 
this value to, it is irrelevant. If you wish to obtain the contents of a directory, you must 
specify the directory in the ConnectionString property. No matter what you specify as the 
CommandText arguments of the Execute method or the CommandText property of the 
Connection object, it is ignored. However, if you use an empty String ("") as a value, you 
will receive the error "Errors Occurred." 
The following example illustrates how the CommandText property value is irrelevant 
when calling the Execute method: 
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Dim rec As ADODB.Recordset 
 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
con.Open "URL=http://jroff_laptop/" 
 

IT-SC book 
331
Set rec = con.Execute("nothing really matters") 
     
' 
' rec contains contents of jroff_laptop 
' 
 
rec.Close 
con.Close 
 
Set rec = Nothing 
Set con = Nothing 
See Also 
Connection.Cancel 
Method, 
Command.CommandText 
Property, 
Connection.ExecuteComplete 
Event, 
CommandTypeEnum 
Enumeration, 
ExecuteOptionEnum Enumeration 
Connection.ExecuteComplete 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
Private Sub con_ExecuteComplete(ByVal 
RecordsAffected As Long, _ 
                                ByVal pError As 
ADODB.Error, _ 
                                adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                ByVal pCommand As 
ADODB.Command, _ 
                                ByVal pRecordset 
As ADODB.Recordset, _ 
                                ByVal pConnection 
As ADODB.Connection) 
 
The ExecuteComplete event is called when the execution of a command has completed. 
Arguments 
RecordsAffected (Long)  
Indicates how many records are affected by the executed command. 
pError (Error)  
Contains details about an error that occurred if the adStatus parameter is set to 
adStatusErrorsOccurred. 
adStatus (EventStatusEnum)  

IT-SC book 
332 
Indicates the status of the current operation. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusOK, 
the operation was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusErrorsOccurred, 
the operation failed, and the pError object contains the details regarding the error. If the 
adStatus parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this event will not be called again. 
pCommand  
Represents the Command object that was executed (if there was one). 
pRecordset  
Represents the Recordset object that results from the commands execution. This Recordset object 
can be empty. 
pConnection  
Represents the Connection object that fired this event. 
See Also 
Connection.Execute Method, Command.Execute Method, Recordset.NextRecordset 
Method, Recordset.Open Method, EventStatusEnum Enumeration 
Connection.InfoMessage 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Private Sub InfoMessage(ByVal pError As 
ADODB.Error, _ 
                        adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                        ByVal pConnection As 
ADODB.Connection) 
 
The InfoMessage event is called when a warning is produced during a ConnectionEvent 
operation. 
Arguments 
pError  
An Error object containing details about an error that occurred if the adStatus parameter is set 
to adStatusErrorsOccurred. 
adStatus  
An EventStatusEnum value indicating the status of the current operation. If the adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusOK, the operation was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set 
to adStatusErrorsOccurred, the operation failed, and the pError object contains the details 
regarding the error. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this event 
will not be called again. 

IT-SC book 
333
pRecordset  
The Recordset object that fired this event. 
See Also 
EventStatusEnum Enumeration 
Connection.IsolationLevel 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
connection.IsolationLevel = IsolationLevelEnum 
 
The IsolationLevel property is used to set the level of isolation used when utilizing 
transaction management. 
Datatype 
IsolationLevelEnum (Long) 
Description 
The IsolationLevel property is both read- and write-enabled. If the value of this property 
is changed, the effects will not take place until you call the BeginTrans method. If the 
level of isolation requested couldn't be granted by the data provider, then the next level 
may be set automatically. 
The IsolationLevel property can be set to one of the IsolationLevelEnum enumerations listed in 
Appendix E. 
See Also 
Connection.BeginTrans Method, IsolationLevelEnum Enumeration 
Connection.Mode 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
connection.Mode = ConnectModeEnum 
 
The Mode property identifies the available permissions for modifying data within the 
specified connection. 
Datatype 

IT-SC book 
334 
ConnectModeEnum (Long) 
Description 
The Mode property is read- and write-enabled while the Connection object is closed, but 
read-only once it is opened. 
The Mode property can be set to one of the ConnectModeEnum enumerations listed in Appendix 
E. 
Connection.Open Method  (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
connection.Open ConnectionString, UserID, 
Password, Options 
 
The Open method for the Connection object opens a connection to a particular data 
source. The Open method for the Recordset object opens a cursor. 
Arguments 
ConnectionString (String)  
Optional. Contains the information needed for ADO to connect to the data provider. This property 
is mapped to the Connection.ConnectionString property. 
UserID (String)  
Optional. Contains a username that is used to establish the desired connection. 
Password (String)  
Optional. Contains a password that is used to establish the desired connection. 
Options (Long)  
Optional. Represents a ConnectOptionEnum enumeration value. Currently, the only defined value 
for the ConnectOptionEnum enumeration is adAsyncConnect (16) which instructs ADO to 
connect to the data source asynchronously. The default value is -1 (no options set). 
Description 
The Open method establishes a connection with a data provider. Once a connection is 
established, you can issue commands against the data provider and obtain information 
from the data source. 
The connection to a data provider can be established asynchronously by passing the 
adConnectAsync value to the Options parameter of the Open method. Once the operation has 
started, the application can call the Connection.Cancel method to cancel the pending 
asynchronous connection if the application has determined that the connection is taking too long. 

IT-SC book 
335
The connection to the data provider is defined by the value of the ConnectionString parameter. In 
addition, the UserName and Password parameters authenticates the user within the data provider. 
It is possible to set the UserName and Password values in both the ConnectionString and as 
parameters to the Open method. In such a case, the parameters will override those specified in the 
ConnectionString property. 
The ConnectionString parameter overwrites any value previously set to the 
Connection.ConnectionString property. In most cases, the ConnectionString property 
contains more detailed information about the connection then you would pass through the 
ConnectionString parameter of the Open method. You can read the ConnectionString 
property to see this added detail. 
The ConnectionString parameter, like the ConnectionString property, is constructed of a services 
of argument=value statements separated by semicolons. The arguments that are used within the 
ConnectionString parameter (and property) are completely dependent upon the data provider to 
which you are connecting. 
The Connection.Close method is used to close an opened Connection object once the application 
is done with it. A Connection object that is closed can be altered and reopened again. To remove 
the Connection object from memory in Visual Basic, set it to Nothing. 
See Also 
Connection.Cancel Method, Connection.Close Method, Connection.ConnectionString 
Property, ConnectModeEnum Enumeration, ConnectOptionEnum Enumeration 
Connection.OpenSchema  (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set recordset = connection.OpenSchema(Schema, 
Criteria, SchemaID) 
 
The OpenSchema method returns a Recordset object containing information about the 
data source's schema. 
Arguments 
Schema (SchemaEnum)  
Indicates the type of schema the OpenSchema method will provide in the returned Recordset 
object. 
SchemaEnum contains the enumeration values listed in Table F-1. 
Criteria (Variant Array)  
Optional. Indicates which constraint columns to use for the Schema requested. A list of each 
available constraint column for each schema type is listed in Table G-1. 
SchemaID (Long)  

IT-SC book 
336 
Optional. Represents a GUID of a provider-specific schema query. If the Schema parameter is set 
to adSchemaProviderSpecific (-1), then this parameter is mandatory; otherwise, it is not 
used. 
Description 
The OpenSchema method is used to obtain information about a data source's structure -- 
its schema. 
By setting the Schema parameter to a SchemaEnum value, ADO can determine which 
information the application is requesting. In addition, the Criteria parameter can be set to 
narrow the search. For instance, by passing the adSchemaTables enumeration value, the 
OpenSchema method will only return the table names. 
Some providers may support their own schema query types. To use this feature, set the Schema 
parameter to adSchemaProviderSpecific, and set the SchemaID parameter to the GUID of 
the 
provider-specific 
schema 
query. 
If 
the 
Schema 
parameter 
is 
set 
to 
the 
adSchemaProviderSpecific value and the SchemaID parameter is not specified, an error 
will occur. 
Not all providers will support all of the schema queries defined in Table G-1. As a matter 
of fact, only the adSchemaTables, adSchemaColumns, and adSchemaProviderTypes 
schema queries are supported by all providers. But this still does not guarantee that any of 
the constraint columns are supported. 
See Also 
SchemaEnum Enumeration 
Connection.Properties 
Collection  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set properties = connection.Properties 
 
The Properties collection contains characteristics specific to the Connection object for the 
currently used provider. 
Datatype 
Properties (Collection Object) 
Description 
The Properties collection class contains a Property class instance for each property 
specific to the Connection object for the data provider. 

IT-SC book 
337
The Properties collection of the Connection object contains only the following properties 
until the Connection is opened: 
Password 
Persist Security Info 
User ID 
Data Source 
Window Handle 
Location 
Mode 
Prompt 
Connect Timeout 
Extended Properties 
Locale Identifier 
Initial Catalog 
OLE DB Services 
General Timeout 
Connection.Provider 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
connection.Provider = provider 
 
The Provider property indicates the name of the data provider for the current Connection 
object. 
Datatype 
String 
Description 
The Provider property sets the provider for the current Connection object. It can also be 
specified in the ConnectionString property of the Connection object or the 
ConnectionString argument to the Open method of the Connection object. It is 

IT-SC book 
338 
recommended that the provider be specified in only one of these places, however, 
because the results can be unpredictable. 
The Provider property of the Connection object is read- and write-enabled when the 
associated Connection object is closed, but read-only once it is open. 
The Provider property is not used until the Connection object is opened or the Properties 
collection of the Connection object is used. 
If no provider is specified, ADO will default to MSDASQL, the Microsoft ODBC Provider for OLE 
DB. 
See Also 
Connection.ConnectionString Property, Connection.Open Method 
Connection.RollbackTrans 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
See the Connection.BeginTrans Method. 
Connection.RollbackTransComplete 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 
2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Private Sub con_RollbackTransComplete(ByVal pError 
As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                      adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                      ByVal 
pConnection As ADODB.Connection) 
 
The RollbackTransComplete event is raised after the RollbackTrans method has completed its 
operation. 
Arguments 
pError  
An Error object containing details about an error that occurred if the adStatus parameter is set 
to adStatusErrorsOccurred. 
adStatus  

IT-SC book 
339
An EventStatusEnum value indicating the status of the current operation. If the adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusOK, the operation was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set 
to adStatusErrorsOccurred, the operation failed, and the pError object contains the details 
regarding the error. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this event 
will not be called again. 
pConnection  
The Connection object that fired this event. 
See Also 
Connection.BeginTransComplete 
Event, 
Connection.CommitTransComplete 
Event, 
Connection.RollbackTrans Method, EventStatusEnum Enumeration 
Connection.State 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
state = connection.State 
 
The State property indicates the current status of a Command, Connection, Record, Recordset, or 
Stream object. 
Datatype 
ObjectStateEnum (Long) 
Description 
The State property returns a combination of the ObjectStateEnum values, listed in Appendix E, 
which indicate the current state of an object. 
See Also 
ObjectStateEnum Enumeration 
Connection.Version 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
version = connection.Version 
 
The Version property indicates the current version of ADO in use. 
Datatype 
String 

IT-SC book 
340 
Description 
The Version property returns the version information for the version of ADO that you are using in 
your application, in the form of a String. 
Connection.WillConnect 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Private Sub WillConnect(ConnectionString As 
String, _ 
                        UserID As String, _ 
                        Password As String, _ 
                        Options As Long, _ 
                        adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                        ByVal pConnection As 
ADODB.Connection) 
 
The WillConnect event is raised before a connection is made. 
Arguments 
ConnectionString (String)  
Contains the connection information for the awaiting connection operation. 
UserID (String)  
Contains the username for the awaiting connection operation. 
Password (String)  
Contains the password for the awaiting connection operation. 
Options (Long)  
Indicates how the ConnectionString parameter should be evaluated. For this parameter, the only 
valid value is adAsyncOpen. 
adStatus (EventStatusEnum)  
Indicates the status of the current operation. The adStatus parameter is set to adStatusOK if 
the operation causing this event was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set to 
adStatusCantDeny, the event cannot request that the operation be canceled. If the adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this event will not be called again. If the 
adStatus parameter is set to adStatusCancel, a cancelation request will be made for this 
operation. 
pConnection  

IT-SC book 
341
Represents the Connection object that fired this event. 
Note 
The ConnectionString, UserID, and Password parameters can be changed by the 
application within this event before the operation finishes execution. 
See Also 
Connection.ConnectComplete Event, EventStatusEnum Enumeration 
Connection.WillExecute 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Private Sub WillExecute(Source As String, _ 
                        CursorType As 
ADODB.CursorTypeEnum, _ 
                        LockType As 
ADODB.LockTypeEnum, _ 
                        Options As Long, _ 
                        adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                        ByVal pCommand As 
ADODB.Command, _ 
                        ByVal pRecordset As 
ADODB.Recordset, _ 
                        ByVal pConnection As 
ADODB.Connection) 
 
The WillExecute event is raised before an execution of a command has begun. 
Arguments 
Source (String)  
Contains the source of the command that is to be executed. This value is usually a SQL statement 
or a stored procedure name. 
CursorType (CursorTypeEnum)  
Indicates the type of Recordset object that will be opened. This value can be changed within the 
event to change the type of cursor that gets used when the Recordset.Open method is called. This 
parameter is ignored for any other method that causes this event. 
LockType (LockTypeEnum)  
Indicates the locking scheme that will be used when the Recordset object is opened. This value 
can be changed within the event to change the locking scheme that gets used when the 

IT-SC book 
342 
Recordset.Open method is called. This parameter is ignored for any other method that causes this 
event. 
Options (Long)  
Indicates any other options used to execute the command or open the recordset. 
adStatus (EventStatusEnum)  
Indicates the status of the current operation. The adStatus parameter is set to adStatusOK if 
the operation causing this event was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set to 
adStatusCantDeny, the event cannot request that the operation be canceled. If the adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this event will not be called again. By setting the 
adStatus parameter to adStatusCancel, a cancelation request will be made for this operation. 
pCommand  
Represents the Command object to which this event applies. Set to Nothing if this event was 
raised because of a Connection.Execute method or a Recordset.Open method. 
pRecordset  
Represents the Recordset object to which this event applies. Set to Nothing if this event was 
raised because of a Connection.Execute method or a Command.Execute method. 
pConnection  
Represents the Connection object that fired this event. 
See Also 
Connection.Execute 
Method, 
Command.Execute 
Method, 
Recordset.Open 
Method, 
EventStatusEnum Enumeration, LockTypeEnum Enumeration 
Error Object  
 
 
Dim error As ADODB.Error 
 
The Error object contains information regarding a particular error or warning that was raised by a 
data provider during an ADO operation. 
Applies To 
Errors  
Contains one or more Error objects that hold information about errors or warnings raised by ADO 
during an operation. 
Properties 
Description  

IT-SC book 
343
Describes the error or warning either ADO or the data provider has generated. 
HelpContext  
Indicates the topic within a help file for a particular error within an Error object. 
HelpFile  
Indicates the name of a help file that contains a topic for a particular error within an Error object. 
NativeError  
Returns the error code supplied by the data provider for the current Error object. 
Number  
Uniquely identifies the error specified by the current Error object. 
Source  
Returns the name of an object or application that generated an error within ADO. 
SQLState  
Returns the SQL state of the current Error object. 
Description 
It is important to remember that these errors are not ADO errors, but rather data-provider errors. 
ADO errors are reported by the development languages default error-handling mechanism (in 
Visual Basic, this is the On Error statement and the Err object). 
When a data provider reports an error for a single ADO operation, ADO clears the contents of the 
Errors collection and populates the collection with an Error object for each error or warning. Data 
providers can generate warnings, but they do not halt the execution of an operation. 
Because the Errors collection is cleared by ADO only when a new error or warning is generated, 
it is a good idea to call the Errors.Clear method (to remove all Error objects from the collection) 
before calling an ADO member that can cause an error or warning, such as 
Recordset.CancelBatch, 
Recordset.Filter, 
Recordset.Resync, 
Recordset.UpdateBatch, 
or 
Connection.Open. 
Examples 
Example 13-8 generates an ADO error (reported by VB) and a data-provider error (reported 
through the Errors collection). 
Example 13-8. Error Reporting  
Public Sub ErrorExample(  ) 
On Error GoTo ErrorHandler 
 
    Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
    Dim ero As ADODB.Error 

IT-SC book 
344 
     
    Dim sMes As String 
     
    Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
    con.Open "DSN=MissingDSN" 
     
    ' 
    ' process flow will never get here 
    ' 
     
Exit Sub 
 
ErrorHandler: 
 
    sMes = "Error Number:" & vbTab & Err.Number & vbCr _ 
         & "Source:" & vbTab & vbTab & Err.Source & vbCr _ 
         & "Last DLL Error:" & vbTab & Err.LastDllError & vbCr _ 
         & "Description:" & vbCr & vbCr & Err.Description 
          
    MsgBox sMes, _ 
           vbCritical + vbMsgBoxHelpButton, _ 
           "VB/ADO Error", _ 
           Err.HelpFile, _ 
           Err.HelpContext 
          
    For Each ero In con.Errors 
        sMes = "Error Number:" & vbTab & ero.Number & vbCr _ 
             & "Source:" & vbTab & vbTab & ero.Source & vbCr _ 
             & "SQL State:" & vbTab & ero.SQLState & vbCr _ 
             & "Native Error:" & vbTab & ero.NativeError & vbCr _ 
             & "Description:" & vbCr & vbCr & ero.Description & vbCr 
          
        MsgBox sMes, _ 
               vbCritical + vbMsgBoxHelpButton, _ 
               "Data Provider Error", _ 
               ero.HelpFile, _ 
               ero.HelpContext 
 
    Next ero 
     
    Set con = Nothing 
 
End Sub 
Error.Description 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
description  = error.Description 
 
The Description property describes the error or warning either ADO or the data provider has 
generated. 
Datatype 

IT-SC book 
345
String 
Description 
The Description property of the Error object is read-only. It offers error or warning information in 
a String form so that you can notify the user of your application that an error or warning has 
occurred. 
The value of the Description property can come from either ADO or the provider. 
Error.HelpContext Property 
Error.HelpFile Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
helpcontext = error.HelpContext 
helpfile = error.HelpFile 
 
The HelpContext and HelpFile properties indicate the topic and the name, respectively, of a 
particular error within an Error object. 
Datatype 
Long (HelpContext Property)  
String (HelpFile Property)  
Description 
The HelpFile property contains a fully qualified path to a Windows Help file. 
The HelpContext property automatically displays a Help topic from the Windows Help file that is 
indicated through the HelpFile property. 
If no Help topic is relevant to the generated error, the HelpContext property returns zero, and the 
HelpFile property returns an empty string (""). 
Error.NativeError 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
nativeerror = error.NativeError 
 
The NativeError property returns the error code supplied by the data provider for the current 
Error Object. 
Datatype 
Long 

IT-SC book 
346 
Description 
Use this property to retrieve error codes that pass from the data source to the data provider and 
then to ADO. 
Error.Number Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
number = error.Number 
 
The Number property is used to uniquely identify the error specified by the current Error object. 
Datatype 
Long or ErrorValueEnum (Long) 
Description 
The value of the Number property is a unique number that describes an error that has occurred. 
The value can be one of the ErrorValueEnum enumeration values shown in Table E-18. 
See Also 
ErrorValueEnum Enumeration 
Error.Source Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
source = error.Source 
 
The Source property returns the name of an object or application that generated an error within 
ADO. 
Datatype 
The Error object returns a String. 
Description 
For the Errors object, the Source property indicates the name of the object or application that 
originally generated an error within ADO. 
ADO errors will have a source value beginning with the value ADODB. followed by the name of 
the object that generated the error. 
Error.SQLState Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 

IT-SC book 
347
sqlstate = error.SQLState 
 
The SQLState property returns the SQL state of the current Error object. 
Datatype 
String (five characters) 
Description 
Use this property to retrieve the five-character error code that the data provider returns to ADO 
when an error occurs processing a SQL statement. These error codes should be ANSI SQL 
standard, but they may not be, depending on the particular data provider. 
Errors Collection  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set errors = connection.Errors 
 
See the Error Object for more information and examples pertaining to the Errors collection. 
Objects 
Error  
Contains information regarding a particular error or warning that was raised by ADO during an 
operation. 
Methods 
Clear  
The Clear method erases all errors stored in the Errors collection. 
Refresh  
The Refresh method of the Errors collection is an undocumented method of ADO that has been 
around since Version 2.0. 
Properties 
Count  
Indicates how many Error objects belong to the associated Errors collection. 
Item  
Accesses a particular Error object belonging to the Errors collection. 

IT-SC book 
348 
Errors.Clear Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
errors.Clear 
 
The Clear method erases all errors stored in the Errors collection. 
Description 
The Clear method clears the current collection of ADO errors. When a new runtime error is 
generated, the Errors collection is automatically cleared and then populated with the error 
information. 
Use the Clear method when you are going to make calls to a Recordset object that might return 
multiple warnings. These calls include Delete, Resync, UpdateBatch, and CancelBatch. Once you 
have made any of these calls, after clearing the Errors collection, you can determine whether any 
warnings were generated by the call in question. 
See Also 
Recordset.CancelBatch 
Method, 
Recordset.Delete 
Method, 
Recordset.Resync 
Method, 
Recordset.UpdateBatch Method 
Errors.Count Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
count = errors.Count 
 
The Count property indicates how many Error objects belong to the associated Errors collection. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
If the value of the Count property is zero, there are no Error objects within the associated Errors 
collection. However, Error objects that do belong to the associated Errors collection are indexed 
from 0 to one less than the value of the Count property. 
Errors.Item Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set error = errors.Item(Index) 
Set error = errors (Index) 
 
The Item property accesses a particular Error object belonging to the Errors collection. 

IT-SC book 
349
Datatype 
Error object 
Description 
The Index placeholder represents a Variant datatype that represents the ordinal position of an 
Error object within the Errors collection. If the Errors collection does not contain the item 
requested, an error is generated. 
Note 
Some languages do not support the Item property in its first syntax. For these languages, use the 
second syntax, without the Item method name. 
Errors.Refresh Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
errors.Refresh 
 
The Refresh method of the Errors collection is an undocumented method of ADO that has been 
around since Version 2.0. 
Description 
The Errors.Refresh method appears to requery for errors within ADO. 
Field Object  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Dim field As ADODB.Field 
 
The Field object represents an individual column within a Recordset or a Record object's Fields 
collection. A Field contains metadata properties that define its datatype, size, and precision. 
Applies To 
Fields  
Contains a group of Field objects that represent the fields of the current record in an open 
Recordset object. 
Collections 
Properties  
Contains characteristics specific to the Field object for the currently used provider. 

IT-SC book 
350 
Methods 
AppendChunk  
Appends data to a large data or binary field. 
GetChunk  
Returns the specified number of bytes or characters from the specified field. 
Properties 
ActualSize  
Returns the actual length of a field's value. 
Attributes  
Sets or returns specific characteristics about the Field object. 
DataFormat  
The DataFormat property for the Field object is not documented at all in the ADO help files -- 
however, the DataFormat property is used in other Microsoft objects outside of ADO. 
DefinedSize  
Represents the size, in bytes, of the capacity of a Field object's datatype. 
Name  
Specifies the name for the current Field object. 
NumericScale  
Indicates the scale of numeric values in the current Field object. 
OriginalValue  
Returns the value that belonged to a field before any changes were made to it. 
Precision  
Represents the degree of precision of a numeric value within the current Field object. 
Status  
Indicates the status of the current Field object. 
Type  
Indicates the datatype of the Field's Value property. 
UnderlyingValue  
Returns the current value of the Field object's Value property. 
Value  

IT-SC book 
351
Indicates the value assigned to the current Field object. 
Description 
A Field object can be used to inspect the value of data within the current row in a Recordset or 
the row represented by the Record object. 
For a Record object, the Fields collection contains two special fields. The first is the URL of the 
resource that is represented by the Record object, and the second is the default stream for the 
Record object. 
The Fields collection can be used to add or remove fields with the Append and Delete method 
and can be finalized with the Update method. Attempting to access fields that do not exist causes 
ADO to append the field to the collection to await a call to Update. 
Examples 
In this section, we will be looking at three examples that will show us how to: 
Examine a Field object's attributes. 
Use long datatypes, such as Memo, with the Field object. 
Add Field objects to a Recordset object without a data source. 
Before we begin looking at the Field examples for this section, we define the following 
connection string Const value so that the examples will work properly: 
Private Const DATASOURCE_BIBLIO = "Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " 
_ 
                            & "Data Source=C:\Program Files\" _ 
                            & "Microsoft Visual 
Studio\VB98\Biblio.mdb;" 
Now that we have this constant defined, we can begin to look at some examples. Example 13-9 
displays the information for each of the Field objects in a Fields collection of a Recordset object. 
Example 13-9. Examining a Field Object's Attributes  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
Dim fld As ADODB.Field 
 
Dim sMes As String 
 
' 
' open an external Connection object 
' 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
con.Open DATASOURCE_BIBLIO 
 
' 
' obtain a recordset with data 

IT-SC book 
352 
' 
Set rst = con.Execute("SELECT * FROM Authors;") 
 
' 
' display the names of the fields within the Recordset object 
' 
sMes = "" 
For Each fld In rst.Fields 
    sMes = sMes & fld.Name & vbCr 
Next fld 
 
MsgBox "Field names:" & vbCr & vbCr & sMes 
 
' 
' display the values of the fields for the first record 
' 
sMes = "" 
For Each fld In rst.Fields 
    sMes = sMes & fld.Name & ": " & vbTab & fld.Value & vbCr 
Next fld 
 
MsgBox "The values for the first record's fields are: " _ 
       & vbCr & vbCr & sMes 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
rst.Close 
con.Close 
 
Set rst = Nothing 
Set con = Nothing 
Example 13-10 illustrates how you can use the Field object's AppendChunk and GetChunk 
methods to read and write to columns that have a long datatype, such as Memo. 
Example 13-10. Using Long Datatypes with the Field Object  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
Dim fld As ADODB.Field 
 
Dim sMes As String 
Dim sChunk As String 
 
' 
' open an external Connection object 
' 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
con.Open DATASOURCE_BIBLIO 
 
' 
' obtain a recordset with data 
' 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
rst.Open "Publishers", con, adOpenDynamic, adLockPessimistic 

IT-SC book 
353
 
' 
' use the AppendChunk method to add to a Long type field 
' 
rst.MoveFirst 
rst.Fields.Item("Comments").AppendChunk "This is the first piece." 
rst.Fields.Item("Comments").AppendChunk "This is the second piece." 
rst.Fields.Item("Comments").AppendChunk "This is the third piece." 
rst.Fields.Item("Comments").AppendChunk "This is the fourth piece." 
rst.Fields.Item("Comments").AppendChunk "This is the fifth piece." 
rst.Update 
 
rst.MoveFirst 
 
' 
' now read the Long type field, one chunk at a time 
' 
sMes = rst.Fields.Item("Comments").GetChunk(10) 
MsgBox "The first chunk is: '" & sMes & "'" 
 
sMes = rst.Fields.Item("Comments").GetChunk(10) 
MsgBox "The second chunk is: '" & sMes & "'" 
 
sMes = rst.Fields.Item("Comments").GetChunk(10) 
MsgBox "The third chunk is: '" & sMes & "'" 
 
sChunk = rst.Fields.Item("Comments").GetChunk(10) 
While (sChunk <> "") 
    sMes = sMes & sChunk 
    sChunk = rst.Fields.Item("Comments").GetChunk(10) & "" 
Wend 
sMes = sMes & sChunk 
 
MsgBox "The remaining data is: '" & sMes & "'" 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
rst.Close 
con.Close 
 
Set rst = Nothing 
Set con = Nothing 
Example 13-11 shows how Field objects can be added to a Recordset object that has been 
instantiated without a connection to a physical data source. After the Fields are appended, the 
Recordset object is populated with three rows and then saved to an XML file. 
Example 13-11. Adding Field Objects to a Recordset Object  
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
Dim fld As ADODB.Field 
 
' 
' create a new Recordset object 
' 

IT-SC book 
354 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
 
MsgBox "There are " & CStr(rst.Fields.Count) & " fields." 
 
' 
' add four fields to it dynamically 
' 
rst.Fields.Append "FirstField", adChar, 20 
rst.Fields.Append "SecondField", adBoolean 
rst.Fields.Append "ThirdField", adInteger 
rst.Fields.Append "FourthField", adBinary, 10 
MsgBox "There are " & CStr(rst.Fields.Count) & " fields." 
 
' 
' remove one of the fields 
' 
rst.Fields.Delete 3 
MsgBox "There are " & CStr(rst.Fields.Count) & " fields." 
 
rst.Open 
 
' 
' add three records 
' 
rst.AddNew 
rst.Fields("FirstField").Value = "Jason T. Roff" 
rst!SecondField = True 
rst.Fields(2) = 27 
rst.Update 
 
rst.AddNew 
rst.Fields("FirstField").Value = "Kimberly A. Roff" 
rst!SecondField = True 
rst.Fields(2) = 25 
rst.Update 
 
rst.AddNew 
rst.Fields("FirstField").Value = "??? Roff" 
rst!SecondField = True 
rst.Fields(2) = 0 
rst.Update 
 
' 
' save the data to an XML file 
' 
rst.Save "Data.xml", adPersistXML 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
rst.Close 
 
Set rst = Nothing 
In the previous example, numerous ways of accessing a Field object from the Recordset object 
are shown. Example 13-11 produces the following XML file: 

IT-SC book 
355
<xml xmlns:s='uuid:BDC6E3F0-6DA3-11d1-A2A3-00AA00C14882' 
    xmlns:dt='uuid:C2F41010-65B3-11d1-A29F-00AA00C14882' 
    xmlns:rs='urn:schemas-microsoft-com:rowset' 
    xmlns:z='#RowsetSchema'> 
<s:Schema id='RowsetSchema'> 
    <s:ElementType name='row' content='eltOnly' rs:updatable='true'> 
        <s:AttributeType name='FirstField' rs:number='1' 
rs:write='true'> 
            <s:datatype dt:type='string' rs:dbtype='str' 
dt:maxLength='20' rs: 
precision='0' rs:fixedlength='true' rs:maybenull='false'/> 
        </s:AttributeType> 
        <s:AttributeType name='SecondField' rs:number='2' 
rs:write='true'> 
            <s:datatype dt:type='boolean' dt:maxLength='2' 
rs:precision='0' rs: 
fixedlength='true' rs:maybenull='false'/> 
        </s:AttributeType> 
        <s:AttributeType name='ThirdField' rs:number='3' 
rs:write='true'> 
            <s:datatype dt:type='int' dt:maxLength='4' rs:precision='0' 
rs: 
fixedlength='true' rs:maybenull='false'/> 
        </s:AttributeType> 
        <s:extends type='rs:rowbase'/> 
    </s:ElementType> 
</s:Schema> 
<rs:data> 
    <rs:insert> 
        <z:row FirstField='Jason T. Roff       ' SecondField='True'  
ThirdField='27'/> 
        <z:row FirstField='Kimberly A. Roff    ' SecondField='True'  
ThirdField='25'/> 
        <z:row FirstField='??? Roff            ' SecondField='True'  
ThirdField='0'/> 
    </rs:insert> 
</rs:data> 
</xml> 
Field.ActualSize Property 
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
actualsize = field.ActualSize 
 
The ActualSize property returns the actual length of a field's value. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
The ActualSize property returns a number indicating how many bytes are stored in the specified 
field, as opposed to the maximum number of bytes allowed (indicated through the DefinedSize 

IT-SC book 
356 
property). If the length of the Field object's value cannot be determined by ADO, adUnknown is 
returned. 
See Also 
Field.DefinedSize Property 
Field.AppendChunk  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
field.AppendChunk Data 
 
The AppendChunk method is used to append data to a large data or binary field. 
Arguments 
Data (Variant)  
Contains the large amount of data that you wish to append to the current Field object. 
Description 
The AppendChunk method appends large amounts of either text or binary data to an existing 
Field object. This can come in very useful when the current system contains limited system 
memory with regard to the amount needed for the operation to be performed. With the 
AppendChunk method, you can add the data to your Field object in increments as you see fit. 
You can use the AppendChunk method with a Field object only if the adFldLong bit of the 
Arguments property of that Field object is set to True. 
By calling the AppendChunk method for the first time, you overwrite any data that may already 
be in that field. With each additional call to the AppendChunk method, the data is appended to 
the end of the pre-existing data. ADO assumes that you are finished appending to a particular 
field in a recordset if you then read or write data in another field in the same recordset. What this 
means is that if you call the AppendChunk method again on the original field, the data is once 
again cleared, as if it were the first call to the method. Reading or writing data in another 
Recordset object will not cause this action to occur, unless it is a clone of the original Recordset 
object. 
See Also 
Field.Attributes Property, FieldAttributeEnum Enumeration 
Field.Attributes Property  (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
field.Attributes = attributes 
 

IT-SC book 
357
The Attributes property sets or returns specific characteristics about the Field object. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
The Attributes property is read-only; it can be a sum of the values from the FieldAttributesEnum 
enumeration listed in Appendix E indicating the characteristics of the Field object, such as 
whether it is updatable or represents a row identifier. 
See Also 
FieldAttributesEnum Enumeration 
Field.DataFormat 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) The 
DataFormat property links the 
current Field object to a data-
bound control. 
 
 
 
Datatype 
StdDataFormat 
Description 
The DataFormat property is both read- and write-enabled. It accepts and returns a StdDataFormat 
object that is used to attach a bound object. 
 
The DataFormat property for the Field object is not documented at all in 
the ADO help files -- however, the DataFormat property is used in other 
Microsoft objects outside of ADO. 
 
Field.DefinedSize 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
definedsize = field.DefinedSize 
 
The DefinedSize property represents the size, in bytes, of the capacity of a Field object's datatype. 
Datatype 

IT-SC book 
358 
Long 
Description 
The DefinedSize property is used to determine the data capacity of a Field object's Value property, 
in bytes. This property differs from the ActualSize property, which indicates how many bytes of 
the defined datatype size are actually being used. 
See Also 
Field.ActualSize Property 
Field.GetChunk Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set value = field.GetChunk(NumBytes) 
 
The GetChunk method returns the specified number of bytes or characters from the specified field. 
Arguments 
NumBytes  
The NumBytes parameter is a Long value representing the number of bytes or characters that you 
want to receive. 
Returns 
Variant 
Description 
The GetChunk method gets pieces of information from a Field object that belongs to a Fields 
collection of an open Recordset object. If the Arguments property of the Field object is set to 
adFldLong, you can use the GetChunk method on that field. 
The first call to GetChunk retrieves the number of bytes specified in the method call, from the 
beginning of the field. All subsequent calls to GetChunk will return data starting from where the 
last call to GetChunk left off. If the amount of bytes or characters in the Field object is fewer than 
the amount that you requested, only the remainder is returned without padding for the difference. 
When you read or write to another field within the same Recordset object (one that is not a clone 
of that recordset), ADO assumes that you are done retrieving chunks from that particular Field 
object. The next call to GetChunk will perform as if it were the first, retrieving the first number of 
bytes or characters that you request. 
See Also 

IT-SC book 
359
Field.Arguments Property 
Field.Name Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set value = field.GetChunk(NumBytes) 
 
The Name property specifies the name for the current Field object. 
Datatype 
String 
Description 
The Name property retrieves a Field object from the Fields collection. Names do not have to be 
unique within collections. 
Field.NumericScale 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
field.NumericScale = numericscale 
 
The NumericScale property indicates the scale of numeric values in the current Field object. 
Datatype 
Byte 
Description 
The read-only NumericScale property identifies how many bytes are used to the right of the 
decimal point for a Field object containing a numeric value. 
Field.OriginalValue 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
originalvalue = field.OriginalValue 
 
The OriginalValue property returns the value that belonged to a field before any changes were 
made to it. 
Datatype 
Variant 

IT-SC book 
360 
Description 
In Immediate mode, the OriginalValue property returns the value of a field in the current record 
before any changes were made to it. In other words, the OriginalValue property is the value of the 
field when the last Update method was called. This is the value that is replaced in the Field object 
when the CancelUpdate method is called. 
In Batch Update mode, the OriginalValue property returns the value of a field in the current 
record before any changes were made to it. In other words, the OriginalValue property is the 
value of the field when the last UpdateBatch method was called. This is the value that is replaced 
in the Field object when the CancelBatch method is called. 
See Also 
Recordset.CancelBatch Method, Recordset.CancelUpdate Method, Recordset.Update Method, 
Recordset.UpdateBatch Method 
Field.Precision Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
precision = field.Precision 
 
The Precision property represents the degree of precision of a numeric value within the current 
Field object. 
Datatype 
Byte 
Description 
The Precision property is read-only for the Field object. This property returns a Byte value that 
indicates the total number of digits used to represent a value for a numeric Field object. 
Field.Properties 
Collection  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Set properties = field.Properties 
 
The Properties collection contains characteristics specific to the Field object for the currently 
used provider. 
Datatype 
Properties (Collection object) 
Description 

IT-SC book 
361
The Properties collection class contains a Property class instance for each property specific to the 
Field object for the data provider. 
Field.Status Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
status = field.Type 
 
The Status property indicates the status of the current Field object. 
Datatype 
FieldStatusEnum 
Description 
The default value for the Status property is adFieldOK. 
After a call to the Record or Recordset's Update method if an error has occurred the Status 
property of each Field object is set to a value from the FieldStatusEnum enumeration, describing 
the problem. 
If you are adding and deleting Field objects to and from the Fields collection, the Status property 
can tell you whether they have been successfully added or deleted. 
The Status property can hold more than one FieldStatusEnum enumeration value at a time. 
See Also 
FieldStatusEnum Enumeration, Record.Update Method, Recordset.Update Method 
Field.Type Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
datatype = field.Type 
 
The Type property indicates the datatype of the Field's Value property. 
Datatype 
DataTypeEnum 
Description 
The Type property is read-only unless it is for a new Field object that has been appended to the 
Fields collection of a Record object, of which it is only read/write after the Value property of the 
Field object has already been specified and the data provider has added the Field object to the 
data source (by using the Update method of the Fields collection). 

IT-SC book 
362 
See Also 
DataTypeEnum Enumeration, Field.Value Property, Fields.Update Method 
Field.UnderlyingValue 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
underlyingvalue = field.UnderlyingValue 
 
The UnderlyingValue property returns the current value of the Field object's Value property. 
Datatype 
Variant 
Description 
The UnderlyingValue property returns the value -- from the current record -- of the associated 
Field object. This value may differ from the OriginalValue property as it shows the value of a 
field for the current transaction. 
This is the same value that the Resync method uses to replace the value of the Value property. 
See Also 
Field.OriginalValue, Field.Value Property, Recordset.Resync Method 
Field.Value Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
field.Value = value 
 
The Value property indicates the value assigned to the current Field object. 
Datatype 
Variant 
Description 
The Value property is used to read and set the value of the associated Field object. The Value 
property supports long binary data through ADO. 
Fields Collection  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 

IT-SC book 
363
Set fields = record.Fields 
Set fields = recordset.Fields 
 
See the Field object for more information and examples pertaining to the Fields collection. 
Applies To 
Recordset  
Offers a particular view of a group of records from the associated connection. 
Objects 
Field  
Contains information about a single field in the current record of an open Recordset object. 
Methods 
Append  
Adds a new Field object to the collection. 
CancelUpdate  
Cancels any pending changes to the individual Field objects of the Record object's Fields 
collection. 
Delete  
Removes a Field object from the current Fields collection. 
Refresh  
Does not perform any visible function according to the Microsoft documentation. 
Resync  
Updates the current collection based upon the underlying database. 
Update  
Persists any changes made to the current Fields collection of a Record object. 
Properties 
Count  
Indicates how many Field objects belong to the associated Fields collection. 
Item  

IT-SC book 
364 
Accesses a particular Field object belonging to the Fields collection. 
Fields.Append Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
fields.Append Name, Type, DefinedSize, Attrib, 
FieldValue 
 
The Append method adds a new Field object to the collection. 
Arguments 
Name (String)  
Represents the name of the field to append to the Fields collection. This name must not already 
exist within the collection. 
Type (DataTypeEnum)  
Specifies the datatype of the Field's Value property. The default value for this parameter is 
adEmpty. 
DefinedSize (String)  
Optional. Dictates the length of the value stored within the Field object. The value of this 
parameter is derived from the Type property. 
Attrib (FieldAttributeEnum)  
Optional. Specifies additional information regarding the new Field object. The default value for 
this parameter is adFldDefault. 
FieldValue (Variant)  
Optional. Gives the new Field object a value. The default for this parameter is Null. This 
parameter is valid only when adding a Field object to a Record object's Fields collection, not a 
Recordset object's. 
Description 
The following datatypes are not supported by ADO and cannot be used when adding new Field 
objects to the collection class: adIDispatch, adIUnknown, and adVariant. 
The following datatypes cannot be added to the Field's collection and will generate an error: 
adArray, adChapter, adEmpty, adPropVariant, and adUserDefined. 
When using the Append method with a Fields collection of a Recordset object, you cannot use the 
FieldValue parameter. Instead, you must add the Field objects while the Recordset object is 
closed and then assign them values after it is opened. 

IT-SC book 
365
When appending Field objects to the Fields collection of a Record object, you must first set the 
Field.Value property and call the Update method before accessing any other Field properties such 
as Type. 
See Also 
DataTypeEnum Enumeration, FieldAttributeEnum Enumeration 
Fields.CancelUpdate Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.Fields.CancelUpdate 
 
The CancelUpdate method cancels any pending changes to the individual Field objects of the 
Record object's Fields collection. 
Description 
After calling the CancelUpdate method, all of the Field Objects will have a status of adFieldOK. 
See Also 
Record Object 
Fields.Count Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
count = fields.Count 
 
The Count property indicates how many Field objects belong to the associated Fields collection. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
If the value of the Count property is zero, there are no Field objects within the associated Fields 
collection. However, Field objects that do belong to the associated Fields collection are indexed 
from 0 to one less than the value of the Count property. 
Fields.Delete Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Fields.Delete Field 
 
The Delete method removes a Field object from the current Fields collection. 

IT-SC book 
366 
Arguments 
Field  
Either the name of a valid Field object within the current Field's collection or the ordinal position 
of a Field object within the collection to be removed. 
Description 
You can call the Field.Delete method only on a closed Recordset object. 
Fields.Item Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set field = fields.Item(Index) 
Set field = fields(Index) 
 
The Item property accesses a particular Field object belonging to the Fields collection. 
Datatype 
Object 
Description 
The Index placeholder represents a Variant datatype that represents the ordinal position of a Field 
object within the Fields collection. If the Fields collection does not contain the item requested, an 
error is generated. 
Note 
Some languages do not support the Item property in its first syntax. For these languages, use the 
second syntax, without the Item method name. 
Fields.Refresh Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Fields.Refresh 
 
The Refresh method does not perform any visible function according to the Microsoft 
documentation. 
Description 
In order to update the Fields collection with changes from the underlying database, use the 
Resync method or the MoveFirst method if the Recordset object doesn't support bookmarks. 
See Also 

IT-SC book 
367
Recordset.MoveFirst Method, Recordset.Resync Method 
Fields.Resync Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.Fields.Resync ResyncValues 
 
The Resync method updates the current collection based upon the underlying database. 
Arguments 
ResyncValues (ResyncEnum)  
Optional. Specifies whether the underlying values within the Fields collection are overwritten. 
The default value for this parameter is adResyncAllValues. 
Description 
The Resync method resynchronizes the Field objects of a Record object's Fields collection with 
those within the underlying database. 
The default value for the only parameter to this method, adResyncAllValues synchronizes all 
of the values within the UnderlyingValue, Value, and OriginalValue properties. 
If a Field object within the collection has a Status property equal to either 
adFieldPendingUnknown or adFieldPendingInsert, then the Resync method is ignored 
for those Field objects. 
See Also 
Field.OriginalValue 
Property, 
Field.Status 
Property, 
Field.UnderlyingValue 
Property, 
Field.Value Property, ResyncEnum Enumeration 
Fields.Update Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.Fields.Update 
 
Description 
The Update method persists any pending changes to the current Fields collection of a Record 
object. 
Dim parameter As ADODB.Parameter 
Parameter Object  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 

IT-SC book 
368 
The Parameter object contains information for one variable within a SQL statement or stored 
procedures. Combined, Parameter objects belong to the Parameters collection of Command 
objects. 
Applies To 
Parameters  
This collection contains a group of Parameter objects that describe parameters belonging to the 
associated Command object. 
Collections 
Properties  
Returns a Properties collection class that contains characteristics specific to the Parameter object 
for the currently used provider. 
Methods 
AppendChunk  
Append data to a large data or binary field within the current Parameter object. 
Properties 
Attributes  
Sets or returns specific characteristics about the Parameter object. 
Direction  
Specifies whether the current parameter is an input parameter, an output parameter, both an input 
and an output parameter, or a return value from a stored procedure. 
Name  
Specifies the name for the current Parameter object. 
NumericScale  
Indicates the scale of numeric values in the current Parameter object. 
Precision  
Represents the degree of precision of a numeric value within the current Parameter object. 
Size  
Returns the maximum size of a Parameter object's value. 
Type  

IT-SC book 
369
Identifies the current object's datatype. 
Value  
Indicates the value assigned to the current Parameter object. 
Description 
Parameters allow SQL statements or stored procedures to be created that can be "altered" at 
runtime by plugging in values for specific variables. A Parameter object contains metadata about 
the variable (datatype, attributes, direction, numeric scale, and size). Parameters can be input, 
output, or both input and output variables. 
When using a Command object with a parameterized query, you can either call the Refresh 
method of the Parameters collection before specifying values for each parameter, or you can call 
the CreateParameter method of the Command object for each parameter that belongs to the query. 
By calling the CreateParameter method for each parameter, you can potentially save tremendous 
amounts of time that would otherwise be used by ADO when the Refresh method is called, 
communicating with the data source to find the parameters and their metadata information for a 
parameterized query. 
Examples 
In this section, we will be looking at two examples that will show how to: 
Execute a parameterized query without first identifying the parameters. 
Execute a parameterized query with explicitly specified parameters. 
Before we begin looking at the Parameter examples for this section, please make sure that you 
have the following connection string Const value defined so that the examples will work 
properly: 
Private Const DATASOURCE_NWIND = "Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " _ 
                            & "Data Source=C:\Program Files\" _ 
                            & "Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98\NWind.mdb;" 
Now that we have this constant defined, we can begin to look at some examples. Example 13-
12 will show you how to execute a parameterized query without specifying the parameters 
beforehand. 
Example 13-12. Executing a Parameterized Query Without First Identifying 
the Parameters  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Dim com As ADODB.Command 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
Dim vParameters(  ) As Variant 
 
' 

IT-SC book 
370 
' open the connection 
' 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
con.Open DATASOURCE_NWIND 
 
' 
' create a new Command object and assign the stored procedure 
' 
Set com = New ADODB.Command 
Set com.ActiveConnection = con 
 
com.CommandText = "[Employee Sales by Country]" 
com.CommandType = adCmdStoredProc 
 
' 
' there are two parameters for this stored procedure, start and end 
date 
' 
ReDim vParameters(1) 
 
vParameters(0) = "1/1/1995" 
vParameters(1) = "12/31/1996" 
 
' 
' execute the command with the parameters 
' 
Set rst = com.Execute(, vParameters) 
 
' 
' the Recordset object now contains the results from the Command's 
query 
' 
MsgBox "The first order to ship in the time frame specified was: " _ 
       & CStr(rst.Fields("OrderID").Value) 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
rst.Close 
con.Close 
 
Set com = Nothing 
Set rst = Nothing 
Set con = Nothing 
Example 13-13 executes the same parameterized query as Example 13-12, but it does so by 
first explicitly specifying the parameters with the CreateParameter example. 
Example 13-13. Executing a Query with Explicitly Specified Parameters  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Dim com As ADODB.Command 
Dim par As ADODB.Parameter 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
     
Dim vParameters(  ) As Variant 

IT-SC book 
371
 
' 
' open the connection 
' 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
con.Open DATASOURCE_NWIND 
 
' 
' create a new Command object and assign the stored procedure 
' 
Set com = New ADODB.Command 
Set com.ActiveConnection = con 
 
com.CommandText = "[Employee Sales by Country]" 
com.CommandType = adCmdStoredProc 
 
' 
' now manually create the two parameters and append them to the 
'  collection 
' 
 
Set par = com.CreateParameter("Start Date", _ 
                              adDate, _ 
                              adParamInput, _ 
                              , _ 
                              "1/1/1995") 
com.Parameters.Append par 
 
Set par = com.CreateParameter("End Date", _ 
                              adDate, _ 
                              adParamInput, _ 
                              , _ 
                              "12/31/1995") 
com.Parameters.Append par 
 
' 
' execute the command 
' 
Set rst = com.Execute 
 
' 
' the Recordset object now contains the results from the Command's 
query 
' 
MsgBox "The first order to ship in the time frame specified was: " _ 
       & CStr(rst.Fields("OrderID").Value) 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
rst.Close 
con.Close 
 
Set com = Nothing 
Set par = Nothing 
Set rst = Nothing 
Set con = Nothing 

IT-SC book 
372 
Parameter.AppendChunk 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
parameter.AppendChunk Data 
 
The AppendChunk method appends data to a large data or binary field within the current 
Parameter object. 
Arguments 
Data  
The only parameter, Data, is a Variant datatype that contains the large amount of data that you 
wish to append to the current Parameter object. 
Description 
The AppendChunk method appends large amounts of either text or binary data to an existing 
Parameter object. This can be very useful when the current system contains limited system 
memory in respect to the amount needed for the operation to be performed. With the 
AppendChunk method, you can add the data to your Field object in increments as you see fit. 
The adFldLong bit of the Arguments property belonging to the Parameter object must be set in 
order for the AppendChunk method of the Parameter object to be called. 
By calling the AppendChunk method multiple times on a Parameter object, you append the data 
to the pre-existing data in the object. The only way to clear the data in a Parameter object is set it 
to a zero-length string. By passing a Null value to the AppendChunk method of a Parameter 
object, you generate an error. 
See Also 
Parameter.Arguments Property 
Parameter.Attributes 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
parameter.Attributes = ParameterAttributesEnum 
 
The Attributes property is used to set or return specific characteristics about the Parameter object. 
Datatype 
ParameterAttributesEnum (Long) 

IT-SC book 
373
Description 
The Arguments property is read- and write-enabled. The value of the Arguments property can be 
set to any sum of the values from the ParameterArgumentsEnum enumeration listed in Appendix 
E. The default value for the Arguments property is adParamSigned. 
See Also 
ParameterAttributesEnum Enumeration 
Parameter.Direction 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
parameter.Direction = ParameterDirectionEnum 
 
The Direction property specifies whether the current parameter is an input parameter, an output 
parameter, both an input and an output parameter, or a return value from a stored procedure. 
Datatype 
ParameterDirectionEnum (Long) 
Description 
The Direction property is both read- and write-enabled. It is to your advantage to add parameters 
manually to a Parameters collection so that ADO does not have to make additional calls to the 
data provider to locate this information itself. In some cases, you must specify the Direction 
property manually because the particular data provider may not be able to determine this 
information itself. 
The Direction property may be set to one of the ParameterDirectionEnum enumerations listed in 
Appendix E. 
Note 
Not all providers can determine the value of the Direction property; therefore, for such providers 
the application must manually set the value of the Direction property for parameters before they 
are used. 
See Also 
ParameterDirectionEnum Enumeration 
Parameter.Name 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 

IT-SC book 
374 
parameter.Name = Name 
 
The Name property specifies the name for the current Parameter object. 
Datatype 
String 
Description 
The Name property is both read- and write-enabled for the Parameter object. You can set the 
Name property only if the Parameter object is not already appended to a Parameters collection. 
The Name property assigns a name to the associated Parameter object or retrieves a Parameter 
object from the Parameters collection. 
Names do not have to be unique within the Parameters collection object. 
Parameter.NumericScale 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
numberscale = parameter.NumericScale 
 
The NumericScale property indicates the scale of numeric values in the current Parameter object. 
Datatype 
Byte 
Description 
The NumericScale property is both read- and write-enabled for the Parameter object. It is used to 
identify how many bytes are used to the right of the decimal point for a numeric Parameter object. 
Parameter.Precision 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
precision = parameter.Precision 
 
The Precision property represents the degree of precision of a numeric value within the current 
Parameter object. 
Datatype 

IT-SC book 
375
Byte 
Description 
The Precision property is both read- and write-enabled for the Parameter object. This property 
returns a Byte value that indicates the total number of digits used to represent a value for a 
numeric Parameter object. 
Parameter.Properties 
Collection  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Set properties = parameter.Properties 
 
The Properties collection returns a Properties collection class that contains characteristics specific 
to the Parameter object for the currently used provider. 
Datatype 
Properties (Collection object) 
Description 
The Properties collection class contains a Property class instance for each property specific to the 
Parameter object for the data provider. 
Parameter.Size Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
parameter.Size = size 
 
The Size property returns the maximum size of a Parameter object's value. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
The Size property returns the maximum size of a parameter's value, in bytes. This property is 
both read- and write-enabled. 
If a Parameter object is of variable length datatype, the Size property must be set before it is 
appended to the Parameters collection, or an error will be generated. 
If you attempt to change the datatype of a Parameter object to a variable-length datatype, be sure 
to set the Size property first so that an error will not be generated. 

IT-SC book 
376 
You should also set the Size property of the Parameter object before calling the Execute method 
of the Command object, since if you don't and a variable-length datatype exists, ADO may try to 
allocate memory based on the maximum amount needed, causing an error. 
Parameter.Type Property (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
parameter.Type = DataTypeEnum 
 
The Type property identifies the current object's datatype. 
Datatype 
DataTypeEnum (Long) 
Description 
The Type property is both read- and write-enabled for the Parameter object. This property returns 
a Byte value that indicates the total number of digits used to represent a value for a numeric 
Parameter object. 
See Also 
DataTypeEnum Enumeration 
Parameter.Value 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
parameter.Value = value 
 
The Value property indicates the value assigned to the current Parameter object. 
Datatype 
Variant 
Description 
The Value property reads and sets the value of the associated Parameter object. The Value 
property supports long binary data through ADO. 
ADO reads Parameter objects' Value property only once. If you execute a command containing a 
parameter with an empty Value property -- and it creates a recordset -- be sure to close the 
recordset before you read the Value property. 
Parameters Collection  
 

IT-SC book 
377
 
Set parameters  = command.Parameters 
Set fields  = recordset.Fields 
 
See the Parameter Object for more information and examples pertaining to the Parameters 
collection. 
Objects 
Parameter  
Contains information about a particular parameter belonging to a SQL statement, query, or stored 
procedure. 
Methods 
Append  
Appends a new Parameter object to the current Parameters collection class. 
Delete  
Removes a Parameter object from the Parameters collection class. 
Refresh  
Updates the collection with the parameters of the current stored procedure or parameterized query 
associated with the Command object to which the Parameters collection belongs. 
Properties 
Count  
Indicates how many Parameter objects belong to the associated Parameters collection. 
Item  
Accesses a particular Parameter object belonging to the Parameters collection. 
Parameters.Append 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
parameters.Append Object 
 
The Append method appends a new Parameter object to the current Parameters collection class. 
Arguments 
Object  

IT-SC book 
378 
The only parameter of the Append method is a Parameter object. The Type property of the 
Parameter object must be set before the Append method is actually called. In addition, if the 
datatype of your Parameter is of variable length, you must also set the Size property of the 
Parameter object to a value greater than zero. 
Description 
The Append method of the Parameters collection informs ADO of the type of parameters that are 
included in stored procedures or parameterized queries. You would do this for a couple of reasons: 
one is that it decreases the time that a stored procedure or parameterized query takes to perform 
its duty by minimizing the calls to the data provider for this information. Another reason for 
declaring the parameters in advance -- by adding them to the Parameters collection -- is that not 
all data providers actually make this information known to ADO. For this reason, unless you 
populate the Parameters collection yourself, you stand a strong chance of not being able to use 
these stored procedures or queries at all. 
It is my advice (as well as Microsoft's) to always declare the parameters of a stored procedure or 
parameterized query in advance whenever possible, because you may not always be able to rely 
on the information being available to ADO (and it can't hurt having the extra speed advantage). 
See Also 
Command.CreateParameter Method, Parameter.Size Property, Parameter.Type Property 
Parameters.Count 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
count = parameters.Count 
 
The Count property indicates how many Parameter objects belong to the associated Parameters 
collection. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
If the value of the Count property is zero, there are no Parameter objects within the associated 
Parameters collection. However, Parameter objects that do belong to the associated Parameters 
collection are indexed from 0 to one less than the value of the Count property. 
Parameters.Delete 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
parameters.Delete Index 
 

IT-SC book 
379
The Delete method removes a Parameter object from the Parameters collection class. 
Arguments 
Index  
The Index parameter can be either the name of the Parameter object to be removed or its ordinal 
position. 
Description 
The Delete method of the Parameters collection class removes a Parameter object from the 
collection. By passing either the name of a valid Parameter object within the collection or its 
ordinal position, the Delete method removes the specified Parameter object from the associated 
Parameters collection class. 
See Also 
Parameter.Name Property 
Parameters.Item 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Set error = errors.Item(Index) 
Set error = errors (Index) 
 
The Item property accesses a particular Parameter object belonging to the Parameters collection. 
Datatype 
Object 
Description 
The Index placeholder is a Variant datatype that represents the ordinal position of a Parameter 
object within the Parameters collection. If the Parameters collection does not contain the item 
requested, an error is generated. 
Note 
Some languages do not support the Item property in its first syntax. For these languages, use the 
second syntax, without the Item method name. 
Parameters.Refresh 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 

IT-SC book 
380 
parameters.Refresh 
 
The Refresh method of the Parameters collection class updates the collection with the parameters 
of the current stored procedure or parameterized query associated with the Command object to 
which the Parameters collection belongs. 
Description 
The Refresh method updates the Parameters collection class with the parameters of the associated 
Command object's stored procedure or parameterized query. 
If you attempt to access the Parameters collection class before calling the Refresh method, it is 
automatically called by ADO. 
Properties Collection  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set properties = connection.Properties 
Set properties = command.Properties 
Set properties = recordset.Properties 
Set properties = field.Properties 
 
See the Property Object for more information and examples pertaining to the Properties collection. 
Objects 
Property  
Contains information about a particular feature supported by the associated data provider. 
Methods 
Refresh  
Updates the Properties collection with properties that are specific to the data provider. 
Properties 
Count  
Indicates how many Property objects belong to the associated Properties collection. 
Item  
Accesses a particular Property object belonging to the Properties collection. 
Properties.Count 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 

IT-SC book 
381
 
count = properties.Count 
 
The Count property indicates how many Property objects belong to the associated Properties 
collection. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
If the value of the Count property is zero, there are no Property objects within the associated 
Properties collection. However, Property objects that do belong to the associated Properties 
collection are indexed from 0 to one less than the value of the Count property. 
Properties.Item Property 
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set property = properties.Item(Index) 
Set property = properties(Index) 
 
The Item property accesses a particular Property object belonging to the Properties collection. 
Datatype 
Property object 
Description 
The Index placeholder is a Variant datatype that represents the ordinal position of a Property 
object within the Properties collection. If the Properties collection does not contain the item 
requested, an error is generated. 
Note 
Some languages do not support the Item property in its first syntax. For these languages, use the 
second syntax, without the Item method name. 
Properties.Refresh Method  
(Versions 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
properties.Refresh 
 
The Refresh method updates the Properties collection with properties that are specific to the data 
provider. 

IT-SC book 
382 
Property Object  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Dim property As ADODB.Property 
 
The Property object contains information about dynamic properties implemented by the 
associated data provider. 
Applies To 
Properties  
This collection contains a group of Property objects that hold information about the functionality 
of a data provider. 
Properties 
Attributes  
Sets or returns specific characteristics about the Property object. 
Name  
Specifies the name for the current Property object. 
Type  
Indicates the datatype of the Property object's value. 
Value  
Indicates the value of the current Property object. 
Description 
Individual Property objects are part of Properties collections for the Connection, Command, 
Recordset, and Field objects. 
An instance of a Property object represents a single Dynamic property for the given data provider. 
The values of these properties, when changed, can alter the behavior of a data provider to a lower 
level than with the built-in properties of the given ADO object. 
Examples 
In this section, we will be looking at two examples that show how to do the following: 
Display the dynamic properties of the Connection object. 
Modify the value of a dynamic property. 

IT-SC book 
383
Before we begin looking at the Property examples for this section, define the following 
connection string Const value so that the examples will work properly: 
Private Const DATASOURCE_NWIND = "Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " _ 
                            & "Data Source=C:\Program Files\" _ 
                            & "Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98\NWind.mdb;" 
Now that we have this constant defined, we can begin to look at some examples. Example 13-
14 displays all of the dynamic properties for the Connection object when it connects to the 
Northwind database with Jet 4.0. 
Example 13-14. Displaying the Dynamic Properties of the Connection Object  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
Dim prp As ADODB.Property 
 
' 
' open the NWind database with Jet 
' 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
con.Open DATASOURCE_NWIND 
 
' 
' display each dynamic property of the Connection object 
' 
For Each prp In con.Properties 
    Debug.Print Left$(prp.Name & ":" & Space(45), 45) & " " & prp.Value 
Next prp 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
con.Close 
 
Set con = Nothing 
As we can see from the output of this example, there are plenty of properties to play with: 
Current Catalog:                               
Active Sessions:                              128 
Asynchable Commit:                            False 
Catalog Location:                             1 
Catalog Term:                                 Database 
Column Definition:                            1 
NULL Concatenation Behavior:                  2 
Data Source Name:                             
C:\Program......\NWind.mdb 
Read-Only Data Source:                        False 
DBMS Name:                                    MS Jet 
DBMS Version:                                 04.00.0000 
GROUP BY Support:                             4 
Heterogeneous Table Support:                  2 
Identifier Case Sensitivity:                  8 
Maximum Index Size:                           255 
Maximum Row Size:                             4049 
Maximum Row Size Includes BLOB:               False 

IT-SC book 
384 
Maximum Tables in SELECT:                     0 
Multiple Storage Objects:                     False 
Multi-Table Update:                           True 
NULL Collation Order:                         4 
OLE Object Support:                           1 
ORDER BY Columns in Select List:              False 
Prepare Abort Behavior:                       1 
Prepare Commit Behavior:                      2 
Procedure Term:                               STORED QUERY 
Provider Name:                                MSJETOLEDB40.DLL 
OLE DB Version:                               02.10 
Provider Version:                             04.00.2927 
Schema Term:                                  Schema 
Schema Usage:                                 0 
SQL Support:                                  512 
Structured Storage:                           9 
Subquery Support:                             63 
Isolation Levels:                             4096 
Isolation Retention:                          9 
Table Term:                                   Table 
User Name:                                    Admin 
Pass By Ref Accessors:                        False 
Transaction DDL:                              16 
Asynchable Abort:                             False 
Data Source Object Threading Model:           1 
Output Parameter Availability:                1 
Persistent ID Type:                           4 
Multiple Parameter Sets:                      True 
Rowset Conversions on Command:                True 
Multiple Results:                             0 
Provider Friendly Name:                       Microsoft......der for 
Jet 
Alter Column Support:                         36 
Open Rowset Support:                          2 
Cache Authentication:                         True 
Encrypt Password:                             False 
Mask Password:                                False 
Password:                                      
User ID:                                      Admin 
Data Source:                                  
C:\Program......\NWind.mdb 
Window Handle:                                0 
Mode:                                         16 
Prompt:                                       4 
Extended Properties:                           
Locale Identifier:                            1033 
Jet OLEDB:System database:                     
Jet OLEDB:Registry Path:                       
Jet OLEDB:Database Password:                   
Jet OLEDB:Engine Type:                        4 
Jet OLEDB:Database Locking Mode:              0 
Jet OLEDB:Global Partial Bulk Ops:            2 
Jet OLEDB:Global Bulk Transactions:           1 
Jet OLEDB:New Database Password:               
Jet OLEDB:Create System Database:             False 
Jet OLEDB:Encrypt Database:                   False 
Jet OLEDB:Don't Copy Locale on Compact:       False 

IT-SC book 
385
Jet OLEDB:Compact Without Replica Repair:     False 
Jet OLEDB:SFP:                                False 
Jet OLEDB:Compact Reclaimed Space Amount:     0 
Autocommit Isolation Levels:                  4096 
Jet OLEDB:ODBC Command Time Out:              0 
Jet OLEDB:Max Locks Per File:                 0 
Jet OLEDB:Implicit Commit Sync:               False 
Jet OLEDB:Flush Transaction Timeout:          0 
Jet OLEDB:Lock Delay:                         0 
Jet OLEDB:Max Buffer Size:                    0 
Jet OLEDB:User Commit Sync:                   True 
Jet OLEDB:Lock Retry:                         0 
Jet OLEDB:Exclusive Async Delay:              0 
Jet OLEDB:Shared Async Delay:                 0 
Jet OLEDB:Page Timeout:                       0 
Jet OLEDB:Recycle Long-Valued Pages:          False 
Jet OLEDB:Reset ISAM Stats:                   True 
Jet OLEDB:Connection Control:                 2 
Jet OLEDB:ODBC Parsing:                       False 
Jet OLEDB:Page Locks to Table Lock:           0 
Jet OLEDB:Sandbox Mode:                       False 
Jet OLEDB:Transaction Commit Mode:            0 
Example 13-15 shows how one of the previous properties can be modified to change the 
behavior of the data provider, particularly the Prompt dynamic property which allows you to 
instruct ADO to prompt the user for connection information. 
Example 13-15. Modifying a Dynamic Property Object  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
 
' 
' create a new instance of the Connection object 
' 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
     
' 
' ask to always show the prompt 
' 
con.Properties.Item("Prompt") = ADODB.ConnectPromptEnum.adPromptAlways 
 
' 
' attempt to open the Connection without any information 
' 
con.Open 
 
' 
' do something here 
' 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
con.Close 
 
Set con = Nothing 

IT-SC book 
386 
Property.Attributes 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
property.Attributes = PropertyArgumentsEnum 
 
The Attributes property sets or returns specific characteristics about the Property object. 
Datatype 
PropertyArgumentsEnum (Long) 
Description 
The Attributes property is read-only. The value of the Arguments property can be set to any sum 
of the values from the PropertyArgumentsEnum enumerations listed in Appendix E. 
See Also 
PropertyAttributesEnum Enumeration 
Property.Name Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
property.Name = name 
 
The Name property specifies the name for the current Property object. 
Datatype 
String 
Description 
The Name property is read-only for the Property object. The Name property retrieves a Property 
object from the Properties collection. Names do not have to be unique within a Properties 
collection class. 
Property.Type Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
type = property.Type 
 
The Type property indicates the datatype of the Property object's value. 
Datatype 

IT-SC book 
387
DataTypeEnum 
Description 
The Type property is read-only for Property objects. 
See Also 
DataTypeEnum Enumeration 
Property.Value Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
value = property.Value 
 
The Value property indicates the value of the current Property object. 
Datatype 
Variant 
Description 
Sets or returns the value of the current Property object. 
Record Object  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Dim record As ADODB.Record 
 
The Record object represents either a single row within a Recordset object or a resource in a 
semistructured data source, such as a file directory. 
Collections 
Fields  
Contains individual field objects for the current Record object. 
Properties  
Contains characteristics specific to the Record object for the currently used provider. 
Methods 
Cancel  
Cancels an asynchronous operation for the Record object. 

IT-SC book 
388 
Close  
Closes an opened Record object. 
CopyRecord  
Represents a member method of the Recordset object that cancels the currently pending batch 
update. 
DeleteRecord  
Deletes the resource represented by the current Record object, or another if specified. 
GetChildren  
Returns the children of a collection Record object in the form of a Recordset object. 
MoveRecord  
Moves a resource to another location. 
Open  
Opens an individual record in a recordset or a resource within a data source. 
Properties 
ActiveConnection  
Indicates to which Connection object the current Record object belongs. 
Mode  
Indicates the permissions for modifying data within a Record object. 
ParentURL  
Indicates the parent record of the current Record object by means of an absolute URL. 
RecordType  
Indicates the type of the current record. 
Source  
Indicates from which object the Record object is created. 
State  
Indicates the current state of the Record object. 
Description 
A Record object contains a collection of Fields, just as a Recordset object does. When a Record 
object is opened with a Recordset object, the Record object contains all of the fields of the 

IT-SC book 
389
Recordset object plus two extra (one for the default stream and one for the URL representing the 
resource identified by the Record object). 
If a Record object is created from a Recordset object, the Source property can be used to return to 
the original Recordset object. 
When a Record object is representing a structured data source such as a filesystem, the Record 
object can be used to represent a leaf node (file) or nonleaf node (directory). In each case, the 
fields within the Fields collection may mean different things. As a nonleaf node (directory), the 
Field objects usually represent attributes of the resource. As a leaf node (file), the Field objects 
contain not only attributes of the resource, but also a default Stream object that contains the 
binary data for the resource. Although this is usually the case, a nonleaf node may also contain 
binary data. 
A Record object can be opened by a URL that uniquely represents a resource. In such a case, a 
Connection object is implicitly created within the Record object, unless one is explicitly stated 
with the ActiveConnection property. In the latter case, the Connection object would dictate the 
context of the files and directories accessible from the Record object. 
The Record object can be used to copy, move, and delete resources within the context of its 
associated Connection object. These resources can be, but don't necessarily have to be, the 
resource that is being represented by the current Record object. 
 
MSDAIPP is needed to browse filesystem data sources; it is the Microsoft 
OLE DB Provider for Internet Publishing. 
 
Examples 
In this section, we will be looking at three examples that show how to do the following: 
Open a Record object from a Recordset object. 
Work with files using the Record object. 
Return the children of a resource with the Record object. 
Example 13-16 shows how a Record object can be opened from an already opened Recordset 
object. This example opens a Recordset object using a URL from the root directory of your 
localhost. Please note that for this example to work, you must be running a Internet 
Information Server or an equivalent Web Server. 
Example 13-16. Opening a Record Object from a Recordset Object  
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
Dim rec As ADODB.Record 
Dim fld As ADODB.Field 
 
' 
' open a Recordset object for the root of the local host 

IT-SC book 
390 
' 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
rst.Open "URL=http://localhost" 
 
' 
' open the Record object with the current record of the Recordset 
' 
Set rec = New ADODB.Record 
rec.Open rst 
 
' 
' display the fields for the single record of the Recordset object 
' 
For Each fld In rec.Fields 
    Debug.Print Left$(fld.Name & ":" & Space(35), 35) & " " & fld.Value 
Next fld 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
rec.Close 
rst.Close 
 
Set rec = Nothing 
Set rst = Nothing 
After running this example, notice that the following information is outputed to the Immediate 
Window. The Record object had been opened for the first resource in the root directory of the 
localhost, the Gallery directory (collection): 
RESOURCE_PARSENAME:                 Gallery 
RESOURCE_PARENTNAME:                http://localhost 
RESOURCE_ABSOLUTEPARSENAME:         http://localhost/Gallery 
RESOURCE_ISHIDDEN: 
RESOURCE_ISREADONLY: 
RESOURCE_CONTENTTYPE: 
RESOURCE_CONTENTCLASS: 
RESOURCE_CONTENTLANGUAGE: 
RESOURCE_CREATIONTIME: 
RESOURCE_LASTACCESSTIME: 
RESOURCE_LASTWRITETIME: 
RESOURCE_STREAMSIZE: 
RESOURCE_ISCOLLECTION:              True 
RESOURCE_ISSTRUCTUREDDOCUMENT: 
DEFAULT_DOCUMENT: 
RESOURCE_DISPLAYNAME:               Gallery 
RESOURCE_ISROOT:                    True 
RESOURCE_ISMARKEDFOROFFLINE:        False 
Example 13-17 shows how files can be created, copied, moved, and deleted within the context 
of the connection -- in this case, the root directory of the localhost machine. 
Example 13-17. Working with Files Using the Record Object  
Dim rec As ADODB.Record 
 

IT-SC book 
391
' 
' create a new resource on the local host 
' 
Set rec = New ADODB.Record 
 
rec.Open "newfile", _ 
         "URL=http://localhost/", _ 
         adModeReadWrite, _ 
         adCreateOverwrite 
 
' 
' copy the new resource to another file 
' 
rec.CopyRecord , _ 
               "http://localhost/anotherfile", _ 
               , _ 
               , _ 
               adCopyOverWrite 
 
' 
' move the file to a new file name 
' 
rec.MoveRecord "http://localhost/anotherfile", _ 
               "http://localhost/movedfile", _ 
               , _ 
               , _ 
               adMoveOverWrite 
 
' 
' delete the moved file 
' 
rec.DeleteRecord "http://localhost/movedfile" 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
rec.Close 
 
Set rec = Nothing 
Example 13-18 shows how the Record object can return children for a given resource. In this 
example, the Record object is opened for the root directory (a collection resource) of the 
localhost machine. Calling the GetChildren method returns a Recordset object containing 
multiple records, each representing a single resource that is considered a child of the root 
directory resource. 
Example 13-18. Returning the Children of a Resource Using the Record 
Object  
Dim rec As ADODB.Record 
Dim rst As ADODB.Recordset 
Dim fld As ADODB.Field 
 
Set rec = New ADODB.Record 
 

IT-SC book 
392 
rec.Open "Gallery", "URL=http://localhost" 
 
Set rst = rec.GetChildren 
 
If (Not (rst.BOF And rst.EOF)) Then rst.MoveFirst 
While (Not rst.EOF) 
    Debug.Print rst.Fields.Item("RESOURCE_ABSOLUTEPARSENAME").Value 
    rst.MoveNext 
Wend 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
rst.Close 
rec.Close 
 
Set rst = Nothing 
Set rec = Nothing 
Running the previous example outputs the following data to the Immediate Window: 
http://localhost/Gallery/survey 
http://localhost/Gallery/guestbk 
http://localhost/Gallery/usernote 
http://localhost/Gallery/timeline 
http://localhost/Gallery/themes 
http://localhost/Gallery/shopcart 
http://localhost/Gallery/randomad 
http://localhost/Gallery/quote 
http://localhost/Gallery/query 
http://localhost/Gallery/prefer 
http://localhost/Gallery/mmedia 
http://localhost/Gallery/ie4 
http://localhost/Gallery/grid 
http://localhost/Gallery/dentry 
http://localhost/Gallery/counter 
http://localhost/Gallery/controls 
http://localhost/Gallery/applet 
http://localhost/Gallery/images 
http://localhost/Gallery/_private 
http://localhost/Gallery/VIEWSRC.ASP 
http://localhost/Gallery/USERNTB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/USERNTA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/TIMELNB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/TIMELNA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/THEMEB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/THEMEA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/SURVEYB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/SURVEYA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/SHOPCRTB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/SHOPCRTA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/SAMPTOC.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/SAMPLE.ASP 
http://localhost/Gallery/SAMPINTR.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/SAMPHDR.ASP 
http://localhost/Gallery/RANDADB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/RANDADA.HTM 

IT-SC book 
393
http://localhost/Gallery/QUOTEB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/QUOTEA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/QUERYB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/QUERYA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/PREFB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/PREFA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/MMEDIAB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/MMEDIAA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/LEGEND.ASP 
http://localhost/Gallery/IE4B.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/IE4A.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/GUESTBKB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/GUESTBKA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/GRIDB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/GRIDA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/Global.asa 
http://localhost/Gallery/DENTRYB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/DENTRYA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/DEFAULT.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/COUNTERB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/COUNTERA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/CONTROLB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/CONTROLA.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/CODE.ASP 
http://localhost/Gallery/APPLETB.HTM 
http://localhost/Gallery/APPLETA.HTM 
Record.ActiveConnection 
Property  
(Versions 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Record.ActiveConnection = ConnectionString 
Set Record.ActiveConnection = ConnectionObject 
 
The ActiveConnection property indicates to which Connection object the current Record object 
belongs. 
Datatype 
String or Variant (containing the current Connection object) 
Description 
The ActiveConnection property of the Record object is both read- and write-enabled while the 
Record object is closed and read-only once it is opened. This property can be set to either a 
connection string or a Connection object and returns a Connection object when it is read. 
If the Record object was opened from an existing Record object or a Recordset object, then the 
Record object gains its Connection object from this object. If the Record object is opened by 
using a URL, a Connection object is automatically created for the Record object and is accessible 
from the ActiveConnection property. 

IT-SC book 
394 
See Also 
Record.Open Method 
Record.Cancel Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.Cancel 
 
The Cancel method cancels an asynchronous operation for the Record object. 
Description 
The Cancel method can be called to cancel an asynchronous operation of the Record object 
invoked by the CopyRecord, DeleteRecord, MoveRecord, and Open methods. 
See Also 
Record.CopyRecord Method, Record.DeleteRecord Method, Record.MoveRecord Method, 
Record.Open Method 
Record.Close Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.Close 
 
The Close method closes an opened Record object. 
Description 
The Close method can be called only on an open Record object. After calling the Close method, 
the Open method can be called again to reopen the Record object. Calling the Close method 
releases any resources allocated to the Record object. 
Record.CopyRecord Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.CopyRecord (Source, _ 
                   Destination, _ 
                   UserName, _ 
                   Password, _ 
                   Options, _ 
                   Async) As String 
 
The CancelBatch is a member method of the Recordset object that cancels the currently pending 
batch update. 

IT-SC book 
395
Arguments 
Source (String)  
Optional. Indicates the URL of a resource to be copied. If this argument is omitted, then the 
resource represented by the current Record object is copied. 
Destination (String)  
Optional. Represents a URL value that indicates where the resource will be copied to. 
UserName (String)  
Optional. Indicates, if necessary, the username that will be used to access the resource indicated 
by the Destination argument. 
Password (String)  
Optional. Indicates, if necessary, the password to verify the UserName argument. 
Options (CopyRecordOptionsEnum)  
Optional. Indicates the behavior of the copy operation. The default value for this argument is 
adCopyUnspecified. 
Async (Boolean)  
Optional. Indicates whether this operation should be executed asynchronously. 
Returns 
String 
Description 
By default, the CopyRecord method will not overwrite a resource that already exists. To force the 
replacement of the destination resource, use the adCopyOverWrite option. 
By default, the CopyRecord method will copy all subdirectories and files beneath the source 
resource unless the adCopyNonRecursive option is specified. 
If the source and the destination resources are identical, an error will occur. If the destination 
resource is a child of the source resource, the operation will never complete. 
The return value, although provider-specific, is usually the name of the destination resource. 
See Also 
CopyRecordOptionsEnum Enumeration 
Record.DeleteRecord Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 

IT-SC book 
396 
 
record.DeleteRecord Source, Async 
 
The DeleteRecord method deletes the resource represented by the current Record object, or 
another if specified. 
Arguments 
Source (String)  
Optional. Specifies which resource to delete. If this argument is omitted, the resource represented 
by the current Record object will be deleted. 
Async (Boolean)  
Optional. Indicates whether this operation should be executed asynchronously. 
Description 
The DeleteRecord method deletes all children resources of the current resource as well. 
The Record object should be closed immediately after calling the DeleteRecord method because 
its behavior would be unpredictable. At the very least, an error will occur when trying to work 
with a Record object that represents a deleted resource. 
If the Record object was created from a Recordset object, you should either close and reopen the 
Recordset object or call Resync or Requery for the resource to be removed from it. 
See Also 
Recordset.Open Method, Recordset.Requery Method, Recordset.Resync Method 
Record.Fields Collection  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.Fields 
 
The Fields collection contains individual Field objects for the current Record object. 
Datatype 
Fields (Collection object) 
Description 
The Fields collection contains multiple Field objects for the current Record object. There are two 
special Field objects, adDefaultStream and adRecordURL,that can be accessed by specifying 

IT-SC book 
397
the FieldEnum enumeration. One returns the default string for the current Record object, and the 
other returns the URL. 
Field objects can be added to the collection either by calling the Field.Append method or by 
referencing a Field by name that is not already part of the collection. Calling the Field.Update 
method will add the field to the collection, if possible, within the data source. Until this moment, 
the Field.Status property will return adFieldPendingInsert. 
See Also 
Field.Append Method, Field.Update Method, FieldEnum Enumeration 
Record.GetChildren Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set recordset = record.GetChildrean 
 
The GetChildren method returns the children of a collection Record object in the form of a 
Recordset object. 
Returns 
Recordset object 
Description 
The GetChildren method returns a Recordset object containing children of the current Record 
object. Each record within the returned Recordset object represents a single resource that is a 
child of the resource represented by the associated Record object. 
Record.Mode Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.Mode = ConnectModeEnum 
 
The Mode property indicates the permissions for modifying data within a Record object. 
Datatype 
ConnectModeEnum 
Description 
The default value for the Mode property of a Record object is adModeRead. The Mode property 
is read- and write-enabled while the Record object is closed, but read-only once it is opened. 
See Also 

IT-SC book 
398 
ConnectModeEnum Enumeration 
Record.MoveRecord Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.MoveRecord  (Source, _ 
                    Destination, _ 
                    UserName, _ 
                    Password, _ 
                    Options, _ 
                    Async) As String 
 
The MoveRecord method moves a resource to another location. 
Arguments 
Source (String)  
Optional. Indicates the URL of a resource to be moved. If this argument is omitted, then the 
resource represented by the current Record object is moved. 
Destination (String)  
Optional. Represents a URL value that indicates where the resource will be moved. 
UserName (String)  
Optional. Indicates, if necessary, the username that will be used to access the resource indicated 
by the Destination argument. 
Password (String)  
Optional. Indicates, if necessary, the password to verify the UserName argument. 
Options (CopyRecordOptionsEnum)  
Optional. Indicates the behavior of the move operation. The default value for this argument is 
adMoveUnspecified. 
Async (Boolean)  
Optional. Indicates whether this operation should be executed asynchronously. 
Returns 
String 
Description 

IT-SC book 
399
By default, the MoveRecord method does not overwrite a resource that already exists. To force 
the replacement of the destination resource, use the adCopyOverWrite option. All hypertext 
links in the file are automatically updated unless otherwise specified in the Options argument. 
If the source and the destination resources are identical, an error will occur. 
If the Record object was created from a Recordset object, you should close and reopen the 
Recordset object or call Resync or Requery for the resource to be removed from the recordset. 
Not all properties of the Record object will be automatically repopulated -- to do this, close and 
reopen the Record object. 
The return value, although provider-specific, is usually the name of the destination resource. 
See Also 
MoveRecordOptionsEnum 
Enumeration, 
Record.Close 
Method, 
Record.Open 
Method, 
Recordset.Open Method, Recordset.Requery Method, Recordset.Resync Method 
Record.Open Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.Open  (Source, _ 
              ActiveConnection, _ 
              Mode, _ 
              CreateOptions, _ 
              Options, _ 
              UserName, _ 
              Password) 
 
The Open method opens an individual record in a recordset or a resource within a data source. 
Arguments 
Source (Variant)  
Optional. Indicates the source of the resource to open. This can be a URL, a Command object 
returning a single row, an open Recordset object, or a String containing a SQL statement or a 
table name. 
ActiveConnection (Variant)  
Optional. Indicates the connection to the data source by either a connection string or an open 
Connection object. 
Mode (ConnectModeEnum)  
Optional. Indicates the access permissions to open the Record object with. The default value is 
adModeUnknown. 
CreateOptions (CreateModeEnum)  

IT-SC book 
400 
Optional. This argument is used only when the Source argument represents a URL. This 
argument can be used to indicate whether to open an existing resource or to create a new one. The 
default value for this argument is adFailIfNotExist. 
Options (RecordOpenOptionsEnum)  
Optional. Can contain multiple RecordOpenOptionsEnum enumeration values that indicate 
special options for opening the Record object. The default value for this method is 
adOpenRecordUnspecified. 
UserName (String)  
Optional. Indicates, if necessary, the username that will be used to access the resource indicated 
by the source argument. 
Password (String)  
Optional. Indicates, if necessary, the password to verify the UserName argument. 
Description 
If the Record object represents a resource that cannot be represented by a URL, then the 
ParentURL property and the adRecordURL default field both return Null. 
See Also 
ConnectModeEnum 
Enumeration, 
RecordCreateOptionsEnum 
Enumeration, 
RecordOpenOptionsEnum Enumeration 
Record.ParentURL Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.ParentURL = ParentURL 
 
The ParentURL is used to indicate the parent record of the current Record object by means of an 
absolute URL. 
Datatype 
String 
Description 
The ParentURL property indicates the parent resource of the current resource represented by the 
Record object. This property is read-only. 
The ParentURL can be Null if there is no parent for the current resource represented by the 
Record object or if the resource cannot be expressed in terms of a URL. 
Record.Properties Collection  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 

IT-SC book 
401
 
record.Properties 
 
The Properties collection contains characteristics specific to the Record object for the currently 
used provider. 
Datatype 
Properties (Collection object) 
Description 
The Properties collection class contains a Property class instance for each property specific to the 
Record object for the data provider. 
Record.RecordType Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.RecordType = RecordTypeEnum 
 
The RecordType property indicates the type of the current record. 
Datatype 
RecordTypeEnum 
Description 
The RecordType property is read-only; it indicates the type of the current Record object. 
See Also 
RecordTypeEnum Enumeration 
Record.Source Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set record.Source = object 
 
The Source property indicates from which object the Record object is created. 
Datatype 
Variant 
Description 

IT-SC book 
402 
The Source property is read-only when the Record object is open, but read- and write-enabled 
while it is closed. 
The Source property can be set to a Recordset or Command object. If the Source property is set to 
a Recordset object, the Record object will be opened based upon the current record of the 
Recordset object. If the Source property is set to a Command object, the Command object must 
return a single row. 
If the ActiveConnection property is also set, then the Source property must be set to an object that 
is within the connection's scope. 
The Source property returns the Source argument of the Record.Open method. 
See Also 
Record.ActiveConnection Property, Record.Open Method 
Record.State Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
state = record.State 
 
The State property indicates the current state of the Record object. 
Datatype 
Long (ObjectStateEnum) 
Description 
The read-only State property returns a Long value that can be evaluated as an ObjectStateEnum 
enumeration value. The default value for the Record object is closed (adStateClosed). 
For the Record object, the State property can return multiple values when the object is executing 
an operation asynchronously (i.e., adStateOpen and adStateExecuting). 
See Also 
ObjectStateEnum Enumeration 
Recordset Object  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Dim recordset As ADODB.Recordset 
 
The Recordset object represents a complete group of rows within a table or a group of records 
that have been returned from an executed command. 

IT-SC book 
403
Collections 
Fields  
Contains multiple Field objects for the current Recordset object, one for each column in the 
Recordset object. 
Properties  
Contains characteristics specific to the Recordset object for the currently used provider. 
Methods 
AddNew  
Creates a new record within the current Recordset object and sets it to the specified value. 
Cancel  
Cancels an asynchronous operation for the Recordset object. 
CancelBatch  
Cancels the currently pending batch update for the current Recordset object. 
CancelUpdate  
Cancels any changes to the current batch update made since the last AddNew or Update method 
calls. 
Clone  
Returns a clone of the current recordset. 
Close  
Closes a recordset and releases any resources used by it. 
CompareBookmarks  
Determines the position of two bookmarks in a recordset in relationship to one another. 
Delete  
Deletes specified records within the recordset. 
Find  
Moves the record pointer to a row within the current recordset that matches the single-column 
search criteria specified. 
GetRows  
Returns multiple records from an open Recordset object in the form of an array. 
GetString  

IT-SC book 
404 
Returns the entire Recordset object as a String value. 
Move  
Moves the position of the record pointer within the desired Recordset object. 
MoveFirst  
Moves the record pointer to the first record in a recordset. 
MoveLast  
Moves the record pointer to the last record in a recordset. 
MoveNext  
Moves the record pointer to the next record in a recordset. 
MovePrevious  
Moves the record pointer to the previous record in a recordset. 
NextRecordset  
Returns the next recordset by advancing through a series of commands. 
Open  
Opens a cursor within a Recordset object. 
Requery  
Re-executes the command that created the recordset in the first place, in order to cause a refresh 
of the recordset. 
Resync  
Refreshes the data in the recordset from the underlying data source. 
Save  
Saves the current Recordset object to a file or to a Stream object. 
Seek  
Quickly changes the record pointer to the record in the Recordset object that matches the index 
provided. 
Supports  
Determines whether the current data provider supports specified functionality. 
Update  
Saves the changes made to fields within the current record when one or more fields have been 
changed or a call to AddNew was made. 
UpdateBatch  

IT-SC book 
405
Writes all pending batch updates to disk when called. 
Properties 
AbsolutePage  
Returns or sets a value that indicates the current page in the recordset. 
AbsolutePosition  
Returns or sets a value that indicates the current record position within the recordset. 
ActiveCommand  
Returns the Command object that was used to populate a Recordset object. 
ActiveConnection  
Specifies the Connection object for the current Recordset object. 
BOF  
Indicates that the record pointer is located before the first record in the recordset. 
Bookmark  
Returns a unique identifier for the current record within a recordset. By setting the Bookmark 
property to a previously read value, the record pointer can be repositioned to the original record. 
CacheSize  
Indicates the number or records that are cached by ADO locally in system memory. 
CursorLocation  
Indicates the location of the cursor service. 
CursorType  
Indicates the type of cursor being used for the current recordset. 
DataMember  
Indicates the object, within the data source specified by the DataSource property, with which the 
Recordset object should be created. 
DataSource  
Indicates the source with which the Recordset object should be created. 
EditMode  
Indicates the current editing status for a given record. 
EOF  
Indicates that the record pointer is located directly after the last record in the recordset. 

IT-SC book 
406 
Filter  
Filters a selection of records within the current Recordset object. 
Index  
Sets the current index for a given recordset. 
LockType  
Indicates the type of locks that are set on records when they are being edited. 
MarshalOptions  
Indicates which records are to be marshaled back to the server. 
MaxRecords  
Indicates the maximum number of records to be returned to a recordset from a query. 
PageCount  
Returns the number of logical pages that are in the current Recordset object. 
PageSize  
Indicates how many records belong to a logical page. 
RecordCount  
Returns the number of records in the current Recordset object. 
Sort  
Sorts a recordset on one or more field names. 
Source  
Returns the source for the data in a Recordset object. 
State  
Indicates the current state of the Recordset object. 
Status  
Indicates the status of the current record in relation to bulk operations. 
StayInSync  
Indicates whether the references to chapter recordsets change when the record pointer moves to a 
different parent row for hierarchical recordsets. 
Events 
EndOfRecordset  
Called when an attempt to move the record pointer past the end of the recordset has occurred. 

IT-SC book 
407
FetchComplete  
Called when a long asynchronous operation (fetch) has completed and all of the records have 
been returned. 
FetchProgress  
Called during a long asynchronous operation (fetch) to report the progress of the fetch. 
FieldChangeComplete  
Called after an operation changes one or more Field object values. 
MoveComplete  
Called after an operation changes the position of the record pointer within the Recordset object. 
RecordChangeComplete  
Called after an operation changes one or more records in the Recordset object. 
RecordsetChangeComplete  
Called after an operation changes the Recordset object. 
WillChangeField  
Called before an operation changes one or more Field object values. 
WillChangeRecord  
Called before an operation changes one or more records in the Recordset object. 
WillChangeRecordset  
Called before an operation changes the Recordset object. 
WillMove  
Called before an operation changes the position of the record pointer within the Recordset object. 
Description 
The Recordset object needs a connection to a data source through the ActiveConnection property 
or the ActiveConnection argument of the Open method. Either can be set to an open Connection 
object or a valid connection string. If used with a connection string, the Recordset object 
implicitly creates its own Connection object behind the scenes. When using multiple Recordset 
objects for the same data source, create a Connection object, and use it with the 
ActiveConnection property or argument. By passing a connection string to each Recordset object, 
multiple connections to the data source are maintained, even if the connection string is identical. 
Before opening a Recordset object, you can set the type of cursor that is used to view the data. 
There are four types of cursors available: Dynamic, Keyset, Static, and Forward Only. (See 
Chapter 5, for more information on these cursor types.) The Forward Only cursor is the default. 

IT-SC book 
408 
The Dynamic cursor allows the application to see all changes including additions, deletions, and 
modifications to records. You can move in any direction within a Dynamic cursor, even if the 
data provider being used doesn't support bookmarks. 
The Keyset cursor is very similar to the Dynamic cursor, except that it doesn't allow you to see 
newly added rows or to access rows that have been deleted by other users. Changes to existing 
rows can still be seen by the application. Because the Keyset cursor supports bookmarks, you can 
move in any direction. 
The Static cursor takes a snapshot of the data within a data source and therefore doesn't allow the 
application to see additions, changes, or deletions by other users. The Static cursor also supports 
bookmarks and allows full movement within it. The Static cursor is the only cursor that can be 
chosen when using a client-side Recordset object (the CursorLocation property is equal to 
adUseClient). 
The Forward Only cursor is the default cursor and does not allow backwards movement through a 
Recordset object. It also does not support viewing changes by other users. This cursor is very 
popular because of its speed when a single pass through the Recordset object is needed. 
You can navigate through a Recordset object with the MoveFirst, MoveNext, MovePrevious, 
MoveLast, and Move methods in conjunction with the BOF and EOF properties, which indicate 
the beginning and the end of the recordset, respectively. If the current Recordset object is empty, 
then both the BOF and EOF properties will be set to True. 
The Filter property can be set to specify which records are visible within the Recordset object. 
You can search for a particular record by using the Find and Seek methods. 
A Recordset object can be used to modify data by means of updating. There are two types of 
updating supported by the Recordset object, Immediate and Batch. 
Immediate updating is done by calling the Update method. Batch updating is done with the 
UpdateBatch method. Batch updating can be used to persist multiple record changes at one time 
to the data source. 
Examples 
In this section, we will be looking at three examples that show how to do the following: 
Open and navigate a Recordset object. 
Add new records to a Recordset object. 
Find and filter data in a Recordset object. 
Before we take a look at any examples of the Recordset object, let's first add some code to our 
application to show us when our Recordset events are fired. With this code, we can see how 
events are reported as we look at the upcoming examples in this section. 
Add a new Class to your current project, declare the Recordset object With Events as shown, and 
add the necessary ConnectionString Const for the examples: 

IT-SC book 
409
Private WithEvents rst As ADODB.Recordset 
 
Private Const DATASOURCE_NWIND = "Provider=Microsoft.Jet.OLEDB.4.0; " _ 
                            & "Data Source=C:\Program Files\" _ 
                            & "Microsoft Visual Studio\VB98\NWind.mdb;" 
Now you should be able to see the rst variable in the first combo list box over your code. After 
selecting this object, you will be given a choice of eleven events that can be fired for your 
Recordset object. For each event, we are going to add code to output the parameters passed to that 
event to the Immediate Window. 
Add the code from Example 13-19 for the 11 events[1] to the new Class. 
[1] Available for download from the book's web site, http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/ado. 
Example 13-19. The 11 Events to the New Class  
Private Sub rst_EndOfRecordset(fMoreData As Boolean, _ 
                               adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                               ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
     
    Debug.Print "Event: EndOfRecordset" 
    Debug.Print "  More Data: " & fMoreData 
    Debug.Print "  Status:    " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Recordset: " & pRecordset.Source 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub rst_FetchComplete(ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                              adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                              ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
     
    Debug.Print "Event: FetchComplete" 
    Debug.Print "  Error:     " & pError.Description 
    Debug.Print "  Status:    " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Recordset: " & pRecordset.Source 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub rst_FetchProgress(ByVal Progress As Long, _ 
                              ByVal MaxProgress As Long, _ 
                              adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                              ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
     
    Debug.Print "Event: FetchProgress" 
    Debug.Print "  Progress:  " & Progress 
    Debug.Print "  Maximum:   " & MaxProgress 
    Debug.Print "  Status:    " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Recordset: " & pRecordset.Source 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 

IT-SC book 
410 
Private Sub rst_FieldChangeComplete(ByVal cFields As Long, _ 
                                    ByVal Fields As Variant, _ 
                                    ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                                    adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, 
_ 
                                    ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    Debug.Print "Event: FieldChangeComplete" 
    Debug.Print "  Changed:   " & cFields 
    If (Not (pError Is Nothing)) Then 
        Debug.Print "  Error:     " & pError.Description 
    End If 
    Debug.Print "  Status:    " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Recordset: " & pRecordset.Source 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub rst_MoveComplete(ByVal adReason As ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                             ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                             adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                             ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    Debug.Print "Event: MoveComplete" 
    Debug.Print "  Reason:    " & GetReasonString(adReason) 
    If (Not (pError Is Nothing)) Then 
        Debug.Print "  Error:     " & pError.Description 
    End If 
    Debug.Print "  Status:    " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Recordset: " & pRecordset.Source 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub rst_RecordChangeComplete( _ 
                             ByVal adReason As ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                             ByVal cRecords As Long, _ 
                             ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                             adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                             ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    Debug.Print "Event: RecordChangeComplete" 
    Debug.Print "  Reason:    " & GetReasonString(adReason) 
    Debug.Print "  Changed:   " & cRecords 
    If (Not (pError Is Nothing)) Then 
        Debug.Print "  Error:     " & pError.Description 
    End If 
    Debug.Print "  Status:    " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Recordset: " & pRecordset.Source 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub rst_RecordsetChangeComplete( _ 
                              ByVal adReason As ADODB.EventReasonEnum, 
_ 
                              ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 

IT-SC book 
411
                              adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                              ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    Debug.Print "Event: RecordsetChangeComplete" 
    Debug.Print "  Reason:    " & GetReasonString(adReason) 
    If (Not (pError Is Nothing)) Then 
        Debug.Print "  Error:     " & pError.Description 
    End If 
    Debug.Print "  Status:    " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Recordset: " & pRecordset.Source 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub rst_WillChangeField(ByVal cFields As Long, _ 
                                ByVal Fields As Variant, _ 
                                adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    Debug.Print "Event: WillChangeField" 
    Debug.Print "  Changed:   " & cFields 
    Debug.Print "  Status:    " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Recordset: " & pRecordset.Source 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub rst_WillChangeRecord( _ 
                          ByVal adReason As ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                          ByVal cRecords As Long, _ 
                          adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                          ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
     
    Debug.Print "Event: WillChangeRecord" 
    Debug.Print "  Reason:    " & GetReasonString(adReason) 
    Debug.Print "  Changed:   " & cRecords 
    Debug.Print "  Status:    " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Recordset: " & pRecordset.Source 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub rst_WillChangeRecordset( _ 
                            ByVal adReason As ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                            adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                            ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
     
    Debug.Print "Event: WillChangeRecordset" 
    Debug.Print "  Reason:    " & GetReasonString(adReason) 
    Debug.Print "  Status:    " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Recordset: " & pRecordset.Source 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub rst_WillMove(ByVal adReason As ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                         adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 

IT-SC book 
412 
                         ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
    Debug.Print "Event: WillMove" 
    Debug.Print "  Reason:    " & GetReasonString(adReason) 
    Debug.Print "  Status:    " & GetStatusString(adStatus) 
    Debug.Print "  Recordset: " & pRecordset.Source 
    Debug.Print 
 
End Sub 
The only other code that you need for the following examples is the code for the GetStatusString 
and GetReasonString functions, which accept an enumeration value and returns a String 
describing the value: 
Private Function GetStatusString(adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum) As 
String 
 
    Select Case (adStatus) 
         
        Case ADODB.EventStatusEnum.adStatusCancel: 
            GetStatusString = "Cancel" 
         
        Case ADODB.EventStatusEnum.adStatusCantDeny: 
            GetStatusString = "Can't Deny" 
         
        Case ADODB.EventStatusEnum.adStatusErrorsOccurred 
            GetStatusString = "Errors Occurred" 
         
        Case ADODB.EventStatusEnum.adStatusOK: 
            GetStatusString = "Status Okay" 
         
        Case ADODB.EventStatusEnum.adStatusUnwantedEvent: 
            GetStatusString = "Unwanted Event" 
     
    End Select 
     
End Function 
 
Private Function GetReasonString(adReason As ADODB.EventReasonEnum) As 
String 
 
    Select Case (adReason) 
         
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnAddNew 
            GetReasonString = "Add New" 
 
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnClose 
            GetReasonString = "Close" 
 
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnDelete 
            GetReasonString = "Delete" 
 
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnFirstChange 
            GetReasonString = "First Change" 
 
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnMove 
            GetReasonString = "Move" 

IT-SC book 
413
 
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnMoveFirst 
            GetReasonString = "Move First" 
 
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnMoveLast 
            GetReasonString = "Move Last" 
         
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnMoveNext 
            GetReasonString = "Move Next" 
         
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnMovePrevious 
            GetReasonString = "Move Previous" 
         
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnRequery 
            GetReasonString = "Requery" 
 
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnResynch 
            GetReasonString = "Resynch" 
 
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnUndoAddNew 
            GetReasonString = "Undo Add New" 
 
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnUndoDelete 
            GetReasonString = "Undo Delete" 
 
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnUndoUpdate 
            GetReasonString = "Undo Update" 
     
        Case ADODB.EventReasonEnum.adRsnUpdate 
            GetReasonString = "Update" 
     
    End Select 
     
End Function 
Example 13-20 illustrates how to open a Recordset object with an existing Connection object 
and how to navigate the newly opened object with the Move methods and bookmarks. 
Example 13-20. Opening and Navigating a Recordset Object  
Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
 
Dim vBookmark1 As Variant 
Dim vBookmark2 As Variant 
 
' 
' instantiate and open a new Connection object 
' 
Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
con.Open DATASOURCE_NWIND 
 
' 
' instantiate and open a new Recordset object with: 
' 
'   currently opened connection 
'   Suppliers table 

IT-SC book 
414 
'   Server side cursor 
'   Dynamic cursor 
'   Read-only locking 
' 
 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
 
rst.ActiveConnection = con 
rst.Source = "Suppliers" 
rst.CursorLocation = adUseServer 
rst.CursorType = adOpenKeyset 
rst.LockType = adLockReadOnly 
rst.Open , , , , adCmdTable 
 
' 
' move to the first record in the recordset 
' 
If (Not (rst.BOF And rst.EOF)) Then rst.MoveFirst 
 
' 
' begin to move around 
' 
rst.MoveLast 
rst.MovePrevious 
 
' 
' save the first bookmark 
' 
vBookmark1 = rst.Bookmark 
MsgBox "Bookmark 1 is at position " & CStr(rst.AbsolutePosition) 
 
' 
' move around a little 
' 
rst.MoveFirst 
rst.MoveNext 
 
' 
' save the second bookmark 
' 
vBookmark2 = rst.Bookmark 
MsgBox "Bookmark 2 is at position " & CStr(rst.AbsolutePosition) 
 
' 
' compare the two bookmarks 
' 
If (rst.CompareBookmarks(vBookmark1, _ 
                         vBookmark2) = adCompareLessThan) Then 
    MsgBox "Bookmark 1 comes before Bookmark 2." 
Else 
    MsgBox "Bookmark 2 comes before Bookmark 1." 
End If 
 
' 
' set the record pointer to a prevously saved bookmark 
' 
rst.Bookmark = vBookmark1 

IT-SC book 
415
MsgBox "Now located at position " & CStr(rst.AbsolutePosition) 
MsgBox "Now located at page " & CStr(rst.AbsolutePage) 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
rst.Close 
con.Close 
 
Set rst = Nothing 
Set con = Nothing 
Remember not to declare the rst variable in a member function. It is already declared at a 
module level, allowing the events that are triggered for it to be displayed in the Immediate 
Window, as shown for the output from the previous example: 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Can't Deny 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move First 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move First 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move Last 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move Last 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 

IT-SC book 
416 
  Reason:    Move Previous 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move Previous 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move First 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move First 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move Next 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move Next 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: RecordsetChangeComplete 
  Reason:    Close 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
Example 13-21 shows how records can be added to a Recordset object in immediate update 
mode, the default. 
Example 13-21. Adding Records to a Recordset Object  
' 
' instantiate and open a Recordset on the Suppliers table 
' 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
 
rst.Open "Suppliers", _ 
         DATASOURCE_NWIND, _ 

IT-SC book 
417
         adOpenKeyset, _ 
         adLockOptimistic, _ 
         adCmdTable 
 
' 
' add a new record to the Suppliers table 
' 
rst.AddNew 
rst.Fields("CompanyName").Value = "Roff's Supplies" 
rst.Fields("ContactName").Value = "Roff, Jason T." 
rst.Update 
 
' 
' add another record to the Suppliers table 
' 
rst.AddNew 
rst.Fields("CompanyName").Value = "Kimberly's Supplies" 
rst.Fields("ContactName").Value = "Roff, Kimberly A." 
rst.Update 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
rst.Close 
 
Set rst = Nothing 
When running Example 13-21, the following output is displayed in the Immediate Window: 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Can't Deny 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillChangeRecord 
  Reason:    Add New 
  Changed:   1 

IT-SC book 
418 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: RecordChangeComplete 
  Reason:    Add New 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillChangeField 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: FieldChangeComplete 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillChangeField 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: FieldChangeComplete 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillChangeRecord 
  Reason:    Update 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: RecordChangeComplete 
  Reason:    Update 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillChangeRecord 
  Reason:    Add New 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 

IT-SC book 
419
Event: RecordChangeComplete 
  Reason:    Add New 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillChangeField 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: FieldChangeComplete 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillChangeField 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: FieldChangeComplete 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: WillChangeRecord 
  Reason:    Update 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: RecordChangeComplete 
  Reason:    Update 
  Changed:   1 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
 
Event: RecordsetChangeComplete 
  Reason:    Close 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: select * from Suppliers 
Example 13-22, our final example for the Recordset object, illustrates how data can be found 
and filtered very easily. 
Example 13-22. Filtering and Finding Data  
Dim sInfo As String 
 
' 

IT-SC book 
420 
' instantiate and open a Recordset on the Suppliers table 
'   using Batch locking 
' 
Set rst = New ADODB.Recordset 
 
rst.Open "Suppliers", _ 
         DATASOURCE_NWIND, _ 
         adOpenKeyset 
 
If (Not (rst.BOF And rst.EOF)) Then rst.MoveFirst 
 
' 
' find the first record with the contact, Jason T. Roff 
' 
rst.Find "ContactName = 'Roff, Jason T.'", _ 
         0, _ 
         adSearchForward 
 
MsgBox "Jason's company: " & rst.Fields("CompanyName") 
 
' 
' display some information about the current Recordset objet 
' 
sInfo = sInfo & "Page size:   " & vbTab & rst.PageSize & vbCr 
sInfo = sInfo & "Page count:  " & vbTab & rst.PageCount & vbCr 
sInfo = sInfo & "Cache size:  " & vbTab & rst.CacheSize & vbCr 
sInfo = sInfo & "Recordcount: " & vbTab & rst.RecordCount 
MsgBox sInfo 
 
' 
' filter records for just the Managers 
' 
rst.Filter = "ContactTitle Like '*Manager*'" 
MsgBox "There are " & CStr(rst.RecordCount) & " managers as contacts." 
         
' 
' clean up 
' 
rst.Close 
 
Set rst = Nothing 
The Immediate Window is populated with the following event-debug information: 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Can't Deny 
  Recordset: Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 

IT-SC book 
421
  Recordset: Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move First 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move First 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Move Last 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Move Last 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: Suppliers 
 
Event: WillMove 
  Reason:    Requery 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: Suppliers 
 
Event: MoveComplete 
  Reason:    Requery 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: Suppliers 
 
Event: RecordsetChangeComplete 
  Reason:    Close 
  Status:    Status Okay 
  Recordset: Suppliers 
Recordset.AbsolutePage 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
absolutepage = recordset.AbsolutePage 
 
The AbsolutePage property returns or sets a value that indicates the current page in the recordset. 
Datatype 
Long 

IT-SC book 
422 
Description 
By setting the AbsolutePage property, you are instructing ADO to move the record pointer to the 
first record within the page that you specified. The AbsolutePage property can be set from 1 to 
the number returned by the PageCount property, which is the total number of logical pages. The 
size of each page is determined by the PageSize property. 
By reading the AbsolutePage property, you can determine in which logical page the record 
pointer is located. The AbsolutePage property can return a Long value indicating the current page 
or a PositionEnum value. 
If when reading the AbsolutePage property, the record pointer is pointing to the BOF marker, 
then the value adPosBOF (-2) is returned. If the record pointer is at the EOF marker, then the 
adPosEOF (-3) value is returned. If the recordset is empty, if the record pointer's position is 
unknown or if the data provider does not support the AbsolutePage property, then the value 
adPosUnknown (-1) is returned. 
The AbsolutePage property is 1-based, meaning that a value of 1 indicates the first page in the 
recordset. 
Note 
Not all providers support the AbsolutePage property. 
See Also 
CursorOptionEnum Enumeration, PositionEnum Enumeration, Recordset.Count Property, 
Recordset.Filter Property, Recordset.PageSize Property, Recordset.Supports Method 
Recordset.AbsolutePosition 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
absoluteposition = recordset.AbsolutePosition 
 
The AbsolutePosition property returns or sets a value that indicates the current record position 
within the recordset. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
By setting the AbsolutePosition property, you are instructing ADO to move to the record with the 
ordinal position that you specified. The AbsolutePosition property can be set from 1 to the 
number returned by the RecordCount property, which is the total number of records in the 
recordset. 

IT-SC book 
423
When you set the AbsolutePosition property, ADO reloads the cache with a new set of records, 
the first one of which is the record that you specify. The number of records that are loaded in the 
cache is determined by the CacheSize property. 
By reading the AbsolutePosition property, you can determine at which ordinal position the record 
pointer is located by the Long or the PositionEnum value. 
If, when reading the AbsolutePosition property, the record pointer is pointing to the BOF marker, 
then the value adPosBOF (-2) is returned. If the record pointer is at the EOF marker, then the 
adPosEOF (-3) value is returned. If the recordset is empty, if the record pointer's position is 
unknown, or if the data provider does not support the AbsolutePosition property, then the value 
adPosUnknown (-1) is returned. 
It is important to note that the AbsolutePosition can change in the event that a previous record is 
deleted or even if the recordset is required. I recommend using bookmarks to keep track of 
records by position. 
The AbsolutePosition property is 1-based, meaning that the value 1 indicates the first record in 
the recordset. 
Note 
Not all providers support the AbsolutePosition property. 
See Also 
CursorOptionEnum Enumeration, PositionEnum Enumeration, Recordset.CacheSize Property, 
Recordset.RecordCount Property, Recordset.Supports Method 
Recordset.ActiveCommand 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
activecommand = recordset.ActiveCommand 
 
The ActiveCommand property returns the Command object that was used to populate a Recordset 
object. 
Datatype 
Variant (containing a Command object) 
Description 
The read-only ActiveCommand property is used to return the Command object that was used to 
populate a Recordset object. 
If a Command object was not used to populate a Recordset object, a reference to a Null object is 
returned. 

IT-SC book 
424 
Recordset.ActiveConnection 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set recordset.ActiveConnection = connection 
recordset.ActiveConnection = connenctionstring 
 
The ActiveConnection property specifies the Connection object for the current Recordset object. 
Datatype 
String or a Variant (containing the current Connection object) 
Description 
The ActiveConnection property can be read to return either a String or a reference to a 
Connection object. The ActiveConnection property cannot be read if the Recordset object is open 
or if the Recordset object was created with a Command object (its Source property set to a 
Command object). At any other time, the ActiveConnection property can be set to either a String 
or a reference to a Connection object. If a String value is used, then it should be a valid 
connection string that could be passed to the ConnectionString property of a Connection object. 
You must set the ActiveConnection property before you attempt to open a Recordset object. 
Before it is set, the default value for the ActiveConnection property is a Null object reference. 
If you specify the ActiveConnection as a parameter to the Open method of the Recordset object, 
the ActiveConnection property will access the same value. If you opened a Recordset object with 
a Command object as the Source property value, the Recordset object's ActiveConnection 
property will access the Command object's ActiveConnection property value. 
See Also 
Conection.ConnectionString Property, Recordset.Open Method, Recordset.Source Property 
Recordset.AddNew 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
recordset.AddNew Fields, Values 
 
The AddNew method creates a new record within the current Recordset object that is set to the 
value that you specify. 
Arguments 
Fields  

IT-SC book 
425
As the optional first parameter to the AddNew method, supply either a Variant or a Variant array. 
This object represents the name of the field or an array of fields, respectively, for which you wish 
to initialize values. If this parameter is a Variant array, then the next parameter, Values, must 
also be a Variant array of the same dimension. 
Values  
The optional second parameter works in correspondence with the first parameter, Fields. This 
parameter is also either a Variant or a Variant array that specifies the values of the fields that you 
included in your first parameter. It is important to remember that if this parameter contains a 
Variant array, then the Fields parameter must also be an array of the same dimension. In addition, 
each ordinal position of both arrays must match the proper fields to the correct values. 
Description 
The AddNew method is a member method of the Recordset object. Its purpose is to add a new 
record to the recordset specified by the Recordset object. With the AddNew method, you may 
choose to include either a single field name and initialization value or a list of fields, in the form 
of a Variant array, along with a corresponding Variant array of values, which match these fields. 
After calling the AddNew method, you can call either the Update method or the AddNew method 
again to add the current record to the Recordset object. If you call the AddNew method before 
calling the Update method, then ADO automatically calls the Update method and proceeds with 
the AddNew method call. Simply adding the record to the Recordset object does not guarantee 
that your new record is in your data source. This case depends on the updating mode of your 
Recordset object. 
If the Recordset object is set for immediate update mode and you do not include parameters with 
the AddNew call, then your changes are made immediately after the following Update or 
AddNew method call. If you call AddNew with parameters, the values are cached locally until the 
next Update is called. During the period between the AddNew and Update method calls, the 
EditMode property is set to adEditAdd and is not reset to adEditNone until the update is 
completed, either by calling the Update method or AddNew once again. 
If the Recordset object is set for batch update mode, your changes are made only when the 
UpdateBatch method of the Recordset object is called. In this mode, the changes are cached 
locally if the AddNew method does not include parameters. This also sets the EditMode property 
to adEditAdd. The changes are sent to the provider -- but still not posted to the data source -- 
when the Update method is called, in turn setting the EditMode property to adEditNone. On the 
other hand, if you call the AddNew method with parameters, the changes are immediately sent to 
the provider to be posted with the next UpdateBatch method call. 
If your Recordset object supports bookmarks, your new record will be added to the end of your 
recordset and can be accessed at any time. If your Recordset object does not support bookmarks, 
there is a good chance that you may not be able to access the record once you move away from it, 
so never rely on it being there. Instead, use the Requery method of the Recordset object to enable 
your application to find the field. 
See Also 

IT-SC book 
426 
EditModeEnum Enumeration, Recordset.EditMode Property, Recordset.Requery Method, 
Recordset.Update Method, Recordset.UpdateBatch Method 
Recordset.BOF Property 
Recordset.EOF Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
Boolean = recordset.BOF 
Boolean = recordset.EOF 
 
The BOF property indicates that the record pointer is located before the first record in the 
recordset. The EOF property indicates that the record pointer is located directly after the last 
record in the recordset. 
Datatype 
Boolean 
Description 
The BOF and EOF properties are both read-only. 
If both the BOF and EOF properties are True, then the current recordset is empty. Using any 
Move method (Move, MovePrevious, MoveFirst, MoveNext, or MovePrevious) generates an 
error. 
If both the BOF and EOF properties are False, then the record pointer can be pointing to any 
record within the recordset. If this is the case, you can use any of the Move methods without 
generating an error. 
If the BOF property is True and the EOF property is False, then the record pointer is pointing to 
the position directly before the first record within the recordset. When this happens, you cannot 
use the MovePrevious method or the Move method with a negative number without generating an 
error. 
If the EOF property is True and the BOF property is False, then the record pointer is pointing to 
the position directly after the last record within the recordset. When this happens, you cannot use 
the MoveFirst method or the Move method with a positive number without generating an error. 
If you delete the last record in the recordset, the BOF and EOF properties will remain set to 
False until you move the record pointer. 
If either a call to MoveFirst or a call to MoveLast results in not being able to find a record, both 
the EOF and BOF properties will be set to True. 
If MovePrevious or Move -- with a value of less than zero -- cannot find a record, the BOF 
property is set to True. 

IT-SC book 
427
If MoveNext or Move -- with a value of greater than zero -- cannot find a record, the EOF 
property is set to True. 
See Also 
Recordset.Move 
Method, 
Recordset.MoveFirst 
Method, 
Recordset.MoveLast 
Method, 
Recordset.MoveNext Method, Recordset.MovePrevious Method, Recordset.Open Method 
Recordset.Bookmark 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
bookmark = recordset.Bookmark 
 
The Bookmark property returns a unique identifier for the current record within a recordset. By 
setting the Bookmark property to a previously read value, the record pointer can be repositioned 
to the original record. 
Datatype 
Variant 
Description 
The Bookmark property is available only through recordsets that support bookmarks. Bookmarks 
are used to record the position of the current record and later to set the current record back to the 
specified bookmark. 
Bookmarks can be used interchangeably within Recordset objects that are clones of each other, 
but not with other Recordset objects, even if they were created from the same source. 
The return value of the Bookmark property is not readable and shouldn't be used in comparisons 
because two bookmarks of the same record may not be the same. 
Note 
Not all recordsets support the Bookmark property. 
See Also 
CursorOptionEnum Enumeration, Recordset.Supports Method 
Recordset.CacheSize 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
recordset.CacheSize = cachesize 
 

IT-SC book 
428 
The CacheSize property indicates the number or records that are cached by ADO locally in 
system memory. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
The CacheSize property sets or reads the number of records that are kept in local memory at one 
time by ADO. The value of CacheSize must be at least 1, otherwise an error will occur. The 
default value of the CacheSize property is 1. 
When a recordset is first opened, the number of records specified by the CacheSize property is 
gathered. After the record pointer moves beyond this number, another set of records is returned, 
the first being the next record in the recordset. If fewer records are available, the CacheSize 
requests only those records that are gathered. 
The CacheSize property can be changed throughout the life of a recordset; however, the number 
of records retrieved into the cache does not change until the record pointer is moved outside the 
current cache. 
The values within the cache do not reflect changes made by other users. To accomplish this, use 
the Resync method. 
See Also 
Recordset.Resync Method 
Recordset.Cancel Method (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.Cancel 
 
The Cancel method cancels an asynchronous operation for the Recordset object. 
Description 
The Cancel method can be called to cancel an asynchronous operation of the Recordset object 
invoked by the Open method. 
See Also 
Recordset.Open Method 
Recordset.CancelBatch 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 

IT-SC book 
429
recordset.CancelBatch AffectRecords 
 
The CancelBatch method cancels the currently pending batch update for the current Recordset 
object. 
Arguments 
AffectRecords (AffectEnum)  
Optional. Enumerator with the value of 
adAffectCurrent, 
adAffectGroup, or 
adAffectAll. 
If the value of AffectRecords is adAffectCurrent, the CancelBatch method call affects 
only the pending updates for the current record of the recordset. 
If the value of AffectRecords is adAffectGroup, the CancelBatch method call affects only 
the pending records that are dictated through the Filter property of the current Recordset object. 
This property must be already set for the CancelBatch method to be called with the 
adAffectGroup parameter. 
If the value of AffectRecords is adAffectAll, all records pending updates within the current 
Recordset object (including those hidden by the Filter property) are affected by the CancelBatch 
method. 
Description 
With the CancelBatch method, you can cancel any or all pending updates in the current Recordset 
object from batch update mode; however, in immediate update mode, calling this method will 
generate an error. 
The CancelUpdate method is called when the CancelBatch method is called, thus removing any 
updates or new records that were added within the batch. For this reason, the current record 
position may be invalid, and it is suggested that you move to a reliable record position, either by a 
valid bookmark or by using a method such as MoveFirst. 
If a runtime error occurs during the call to the CancelBatch method, then there are conflicts with 
all of the records that were requested from the current recordset. In addition, if only one or a few 
records are in conflict, then the Errors collection is populated, but a runtime error does not occur. 
Note 
Not all providers support the CancelBatch property. 
See Also 
CursorOptionEnum Enumeration, Recordset.CancelUpdate Method, Recordset.Filter Property, 
AffectEnum Enumeration, Recordset.Supports Method 

IT-SC book 
430 
Recordset.CancelUpdate 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.CancelUpdate 
 
The CancelUpdate method cancels any changes to the current batch update made since the last 
AddNew or Update method calls. 
Description 
The CancelUpdate method of the Recordset object cancels any changes that were made to a 
record since a call to the Update method of that Recordset. In addition, the CancelUpdate method 
cancels the creation of a new record by the AddNew method. 
The CancelUpdate method must be called before the Update method for the current record. The 
only other way to cancel the changes to a record is by using transaction management through the 
BeginTrans and RollbackTrans methods of the Recordset object. 
See Also 
Recordset.AddNew Method, Recordset.Update Method 
Recordset.Clone Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set cloned_recordset = original_recordset.Clone 
 
The Clone method of the Recordset object returns a clone of the current Recordset. 
Returns 
Recordset object 
Description 
The Clone method of the Recordset object creates an exact multiple copy of the original 
Recordset object. Use this method when you want to access more than one record at a time within 
the same recordset. This is more efficient than creating another new Recordset object for the same 
recordset. 
When a clone is created, the clone's record position will be set to the first record in the recordset. 
Only recordsets that support bookmarks can be cloned. Bookmarks from one recordset are valid 
for clones of that recordset, and vice versa. Closing a clone does not close the original recordset, 
and vice versa. 

IT-SC book 
431
See Also 
LockTypeEnum Enumeration 
Recordset.Close Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.Close 
 
The Close method closes a Recordset object. 
Description 
The Close method closes either a Connection or a Recordset object. When you invoke this 
method on either object, all dependant objects of your connection or recordset are also closed. 
You would use the Close method to free system resources although the resource still remains in 
memory. After closing a Connection or Recordset object, you can still open it again. To 
completely remove the object from memory, set it to Nothing. 
When calling the Close method of the Connection object, all associated Recordset objects will be 
closed, but the associated Command object will persist, thus setting the ActiveConnection 
property to Nothing and clearning the Parameters collection of the Command object. You can 
still use the Open method to connect to a data source. 
If you close a Connection object that has any associated open Recordset objects, any pending 
changes of the Recordset objects will be rolled back. By calling the Close method of the 
Connection object while a transaction is in progress, you generate an error. If a Connection object 
falls out of scope while a transaction is in progress, the transaction is automatically rolled back. 
When you use the Close method on the Recordset object, that object releases any exclusive access 
you may have to the data and releases any associated data. You can still use the Open method of 
that Recordset object later, after the Close method. 
If your data source is in immediate update mode and the Close method is called while editing, an 
error occurs. To avoid this error, call either the Update method or the CancelUpdate method. If 
you are in batch update mode, the data since the last UpdateBatch will be lost. 
If you have cloned a Recordset object whose Close method you called, the cloned Recordset 
object will not be closed, and vice versa. 
See Also 
Recordset.ActiveConnection Property, Recordset.CancelUpdate Method, Recordset.Open Method, 
Recordset.Update Method 
Recordset.CompareBookmarks 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 
2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 

IT-SC book 
432 
result = recordset.CopmareBookmarks (Bookmark1, 
Bookmark2) 
 
The CompareBookmarks method determines the position of two bookmarks in a recordset 
relative to one another. 
Arguments 
Bookmark1 (Variant)  
A bookmark of the first row to be compared. 
Bookmark2 (Variant)  
A bookmark of the second row to be compared. 
Returns 
CompareEnum 
Description 
The CompareBookmark method returns a value that indicates which of the two passed bookmarks 
come first in ordinal position. Bookmarks are unique to rows within the same Recordset and 
clones of a Recordset object. Comparing bookmarks from two different Recordsets (not created 
by cloning another) will not return reliable results. 
Obtain the current row's bookmark by reading the Bookmark property. 
See Also 
CompareEnum Enumeration, Recordset.Bookmark Property, Recordset.Clone Method 
Recordset.CursorLocation 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.CursorLocation = cursorlocation 
 
The CursorLocation property indicates the location of the cursor service. 
Datatype 
CursorLocationEnum (Long) 
Description 

IT-SC book 
433
The value of the CursorLocation property can be set to one of the valid CursorLocationEnum 
values listed in Appendix E. 
The value of the CursorLocation property is read- and write-enabled for closed Recordset objects 
and read-only for open Recordset objects. 
A recordset returned from an Execute method inherits the value for the CursorLocation from the 
original object. Recordset objects automatically inherit this value from the Connection object that 
established it. 
See Also 
Command.Object Method, Connection.Execute Method, CursorLocationEnum Enumeration, 
Recordset.Open Method 
Recordset.CursorType 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
recordset.CursorLocation = cursorlocation 
 
The CursorType property indicates the type of cursor to be used for the current recordset. 
Datatype 
CursorTypeEnum (Long) 
Description 
The CursorType property indicates the type of cursor that should be used when the Recordset 
object is opened. The value of this property is read- and write-enabled when the Recordset object 
is closed and read-only when it is opened. The value of the CursorType property can be one of 
the CursorType enumerations listed in Appendix E. 
If the current data provider does not support the selected cursor type, the value of the CursorType 
property changes when the Recordset object is opened. This value can be read by the application 
if need be. In this case, once the Recordset object is closed, the original selected value will be 
returned to the CursorType property. 
You can use the Supports method of the Recordset object to see what functionality is supported 
by the chosen cursor type. (See Chapter 5 for more information on cursor types.) 
The Dynamic cursor supports the adMovePrevious functionality as described by the Supports 
method. The Forward Only cursor does not support any of the functionality that the Supports 
method indicates. The Keyset cursor and the Static cursor support adBookmark, adHoldRecords, 
adMovePrevious, and adResync functionality as described by the Supports method. 
The Forward Only cursor type does not support bookmarks, because you do not have the 
functionality to move back to a bookmarked record. The Keyset and Static cursor records support 

IT-SC book 
434 
bookmarks through ADO, and the Dynamic cursor supports bookmarks through the data provider 
(if it supports them). 
Note 
If the CursorLocation property has been set to adUseClient, only the adOpenStatic 
CursorType value can be used. 
See Also 
Connection.CursorLocation Property, CursorTypeEnum Enumeration, Recordset.CursorLocation 
Property, Recordset.Open Method, Recordset.Supports Method 
Recordset.DataMember 
Property 
Recordset.DataSource 
Property  
RDM Property(Versions 
2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) RDS 
Property(Versions 2.0, 
2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.DataMember = datamember 
recordset.DataSource = datasource 
 
The DataMember property indicates the object, within the data source specified by the Data 
Source property, that the Recordset object should be created with. 
Datatype 
String (DataMember property)  
DataSource (DataSource property)  
Description 
The DataMember and DataSource properties are always used together. 
The DataSource property indicates the data source in which the object specified by DataMember 
resides. 
The DataMember property indicates which object within the data source should be used to create 
the Recordset object. 
The Recordset must be closed when the DataMember property is being set. In addition, an error 
will be raised if the DataSource property is set before the DataMember property. 
Recordset.Delete Method 
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.Delete AffectRecords 
 

IT-SC book 
435
The Delete method deletes specified records within the recordset. 
Arguments 
AffectRecords (Affect Enum)  
Optional. Indicates either the value of adAffectCurrent or adAffectGroup. 
If the value of AffectRecords is adAffectCurrent, the CancelBatch method call affects 
only the pending updates for the current record of the recordset. 
If the value of AffectRecords is adAffectGroup, the CancelBatch method call affects only the 
pending records that are dictated through the Filter property of the current Recordset object. This 
property must be already set for the CancelBatch method to be called with the adAffectGroup 
parameter. 
Description 
The Delete method removes a record or a group of records when used with the Recordset object. 
The Delete method removes a specified Parameter object from the Parameters collection when 
used with it. 
When using the Delete method with the Recordset object, records that are to be deleted are 
actually marked for deletion. If the particular recordset does not allow deletion, an error occurs. 
In immediate update mode, the deletion occurs immediately. However, in batch update mode, the 
records are marked deleted and are cached until the UpdateBatch method is called. You can view 
the deleted records by using the Filter property. 
After you delete a record, the current record position is still on that record. Once you move from 
that record position, the records are no longer accessible, and attempting to read a deleted record 
results in an error. If you are using transaction management with BeginTrans, you can cancel the 
deletion of records with the RollbackTrans method. In addition, in batch update mode, you can 
cancel deletion by using the CancelBatch method. 
If you attempt to delete a record that has already been deleted by another user, a runtime error 
does not occur; instead, the Errors collection is populated with warnings. A runtime error occurs 
only if all of the requested records to be deleted have a conflict for some reason. You can use the 
Filter property with the adFilterAffectedRecords value and the Status property to locate 
any records with conflicts. 
The Delete method is valid only for the Parameters collection of the Command object. Specify 
the name of the parameter to be deleted from the collection in the form of a String. 
Note 
Not all providers support the Delete method. 
See Also 

IT-SC book 
436 
AffectEnum Enumeration, Connection.RollbackTrans Method, CursorOptionEnum Enumeration, 
Recordset.CancelBatch 
Method, 
Recordset.Filter 
Property, 
Recordset.Status 
Property, 
Recordset.Supports Method 
Recordset.EditMode 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
recordset.EditMode = editmode 
 
The EditMode property indicates the current editing status for a given record. 
Datatype 
EditModeEnum (Long) 
Description 
Use the EditMode property to determine whether the current record is being edited when an 
editing process has been interrupted. With this information, you can determine whether you need 
to call the Update method or the CancelUpdate method. 
The value of the EditMode property can be one of the EditModeEnum enumerations listed in 
Appendix E. 
See Also 
EditModeEnum Enumeration, Recordset.AddNew Method, Recordset.CancelUpdate Method, 
Recordset.Update Method 
Recordset.EndOfRecordset 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
EndOfRecordset(fMoreData As Boolean, _ 
               adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, 
_ 
               ByVal pRecordset As 
ADODB.Recordset) 
 
The EndOfRecordset event is called when an attempt to move the record pointer past the end of 
the recordset has occurred. 
Arguments 
fMoreData  

IT-SC book 
437
A VARIANT_BOOL value that can be set to True if more data was added by the application to 
invalidate the current event. In other words, when this event is fired, it is an indication that the 
record pointer has gone outside the recordset. At this time, you can append more records to the 
recordset and set this fMoreData parameter to True, so that the operation can be attempted 
again. 
adStatus  
An EventStatusEnum value indicating the status of the current operation. The adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusOK if the operation causing this event was successful. If the 
adStatus parameter is set to adStatusCantDeny, the event cannot request that the operation 
be canceled. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this event will not 
be called again. 
pRecordset  
The Recordset object that fired this event. 
See Also 
EventStatusEnum Enumeration, Recordset.MoveNext Method 
Recordset.EOF Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
See Recordset.BOF Property. 
Recordset.FetchComplete 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
FetchComplete(ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
              adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
              ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
The FetchComplete event is called when a long asynchronous operation (fetch) has completed 
and all of the records have been returned. 
Arguments 
pError  
An Error object containing details about an error that occurred if the adStatus parameter is set 
to adStatusErrorsOccurred. 
adStatus  

IT-SC book 
438 
An EventStatusEnum value indicating the status of the current operation. If the adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusOK the operation was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set 
to adStatusErrorsOccurred, the operation failed and the pError object contains the details 
regarding the error. By setting the adStatus parameter to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this 
event will not be called again. 
pRecordset  
The Recordset object that fired this event. 
See Also 
EventStatusEnum Enumeration 
Recordset.FetchProgress 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
FetchProgress(ByVal Progress As Long, _ 
              ByVal MaxProgress As Long, _ 
              adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
              ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
The FetchProgress event is called during a long asynchronous operation (fetch) to report the 
progress of the fetch. 
Arguments 
Progress  
A Long value that indicates the number of records that have been retrieved so far by the operation. 
MaxProgress  
A Long value that indicates the maximum number of records that are expected to be retrieved. 
adStatus  
An EventStatusEnum value indicating the status of the current operation. The adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusOK if the operation causing this event was successful. If the 
adStatus parameter is set to adStatusCantDeny, the event cannot request that the operation 
be canceled. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this event will not 
be called again. 
pRecordset  
The Recordset object that fired this event. 
See Also 
EventStatusEnum Enumeration, Recordset.FetchProgress Event 

IT-SC book 
439
Recordset.FieldChangeComplete 
Event  
(Versions 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
FieldChangeComplete(ByVal cFields As Long, _ 
                    ByVal Fields As Variant, _ 
                    ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
                    adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                    ByVal pRecordset As 
ADODB.Recordset) 
 
The FetchChangeComplete event is called after an operation changes one or more Field object 
values. 
Arguments 
cFields (Long)  
Indicates the number of Field objects within the Fields parameter. 
Fields (Variant array)  
Contains the Field objects that are waiting to be changed. 
pError (Error)  
Contains details about an error that occurred if the adStatus parameter is set to 
adStatusErrorsOccurred. 
adStatus (EventStatusEnum)  
Indicates the status of the current operation. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusOK, 
the operation was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusErrorsOccurred, 
the operation failed, and the pError object contains the details regarding the error. If the 
adStatus parameter is set to adStatusCancel, then the operation has been canceled before 
completion by the application. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, 
this event will not be called again. 
pRecordset  
Represents the Recordset object that fired this event. 
See Also 
EventStatusEnum 
Enumeration, 
Recordset.WillChangeField 
Event, 
Recordset.Value, 
Recordset.Update 
Recordset.Fields 
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 

IT-SC book 
440 
Collection  
 
record.Fields 
 
The Field collection contains multiple Field objects for the current Recordset object, one for each 
column in the Recordset object. 
Datatype 
Fields (Collection object) 
Description 
The Fields collection of a Recordset object can be populated before opening a Recordset object 
by calling the Refresh method of the Fields collection. 
Field objects can be added to the collection either by calling the Field.Append method or by 
referencing by name a Field object that is not already part of the collection. Calling the 
Field.Update method will add the field to the collection, if possible, within the data source. Until 
this moment, the Field.Status property will return adFieldPendingInsert. 
See Also 
Field.Append Method, Field.Refresh Method, Field.Update Method 
Recordset.Filter Property (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.CancelBatch AffectRecords 
 
The Filter property filters a selection of records within the current Recordset object. 
Datatype 
Variant 
Description 
When you set the Filter property, the cursor type is changed to the current filtered recordset. In 
this case, the AbsolutePosition, AbsolutePage, RecordCount, and PageCount properties are 
affected, since the current record is changed to the first record that meets the requirements 
dictated by the Filter property. 
The Filter property can have one of three types of values: 
A set of clauses that are connected with the AND or OR keywords. 

IT-SC book 
441
An array of bookmark values. 
A FilterGroupEnum enumeration value. 
Clauses are similar to WHERE clauses in SQL statements. They consist of a field name, an 
operator, and a value. Multiple clauses can be grouped and joined together with the AND and OR 
keywords. The field name in a clause has to be a valid field name within the current recordset and 
if it contains spaces, it has to be placed in brackets ([First Name]). The operator within a clause 
can be any of the following: <, >, <=, >=, <>, =, or LIKE. The value within a clause is similar to 
the data within the field specified. Numbers can use decimal points, dollar signs, and scientific 
notation. Dates are surrounded by pound signs (#) (#06/20/1973#) and strings are surrounded 
by single quotes ('Jason T. Roff'). 
If you are using the LIKE keyword as an operator, only the asterisk (*) and percent sign (%) can 
be used as wildcards, as long as one of the two is at the end of the value (Jason* or *as*). 
When setting the Filter property to an array of bookmarks, the bookmarks must be unique -- 
pointing to different records -- within the associated recordset. 
When setting the Filter to a FilterGroupEnum enumeration value, choose from one of the 
constants listed in Table E-25. 
The Filter property can fail because of a record that has been deleted by another user. In this case, 
a runtime error does not occur. Instead, the Errors collection is populated with warnings. A 
runtime error occurs only if all of the requested records to be filtered have a conflict for some 
reason. You can use the Status property to locate any records with conflicts. 
See Also 
AffectEnum Enumeration, FilterGroupEnum Enumeration, Recordset.AbsolutePage Property, 
Recordset.AbsolutePosition Property, Recordset.CancelBatch Method, Recordset.Delete Property, 
Recordset.PageCount Property, Recordset.RecordCount Property, Recordset.Resync Method, 
Recordset.UpdateBatch Method 
Recordset.Find Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.Find (Criteria, SkipRows, 
SearchDirections, Start) 
 
The Find method moves the record pointer to a row within the current recordset that matches the 
single-column search criteria specified. 
Arguments 
Criteria (String)  
Specifies a single-column search criteria in the form of 'Column Operator Value'. The 
Column portion is a name of a column in the Recordset object. The Operator can be >, <, =, >=, 
<=, <>, or LIKE. The value can be written as a string, floating point number, or date. Strings are 

IT-SC book 
442 
deliminated with single strings or number signs (#) and dates are deliminated with number signs 
(#). When using the LIKE operator, asterisks (*) can be used at the end or both the beginning and 
the end of the value ('*jr*', 'jr*'). If the asterisks is used at the beginning only, an error will 
occur. 
SkipRows (Long)  
Optional. Indicates how many rows to skip before searching the recordset for a match to the 
Criteria argument. The default is 0, meaning the search will begin on the current row. 
SearchDirection (SearchDirectionEnum)  
Optional. Indicates whether to search forward or backward through the recordset. If a match is 
not found and a forward search is being done, the record pointer will point to the EOF marker. If 
a backward search is done and a match is not found, the record pointer will point to the BOF 
marker. By default, a forward search is done. 
Start (Variant)  
Optional. Specifies a starting position for the search in the form of a bookmark. The default value 
for this argument is the current row. 
Description 
If a current record is not set prior to calling the Find method, an error will occur. It is good 
practice to call the MoveFirst method prior to the Find method. 
The Find method works only with single-column search critierias. 
Not all providers support Bookmarks and, therefore, cannot search backwards. Use the Supports 
method to determine whether your current data provider can support the Find operation that you 
want to use. 
See Also 
CursorOptionEnum Enumeration, Recordset.MoveFirst Method, Recordset.Supports Method, 
SearchDirectionEnum Enumeration 
Recordset.GetRows 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Set record_array = recordset.GetRows(Rows, Start, 
Fields) 
 
The GetRows method of the Recordset object returns multiple records from an open Recordset 
object in the form of an array. 
Arguments 

IT-SC book 
443
Rows (Long)  
Optional. Indicates the number of records to retrieve. The default value for this argument is 
adGetRowsRest (value of -1). 
Start (String or Variant)  
Optional. Evaluates to a bookmark where the GetRows method should begin. 
Fields (Variant)  
Optional. Specifies which fields should be returned for each record by the GetRows method. 
Represents a single field name, a single field-ordinal number, an array of field names, or an array 
of field-ordinal numbers. 
Returns 
Variant (two-dimensional array)  
Description 
The GetRows method of the Recordset object returns multiple records from the same Recordset 
object into a two-dimensional array. The records are returned in the form of a Variant array that is 
automatically dimensioned by ADO. The first subscript is the field; the second is the record 
number. The data returned is read-only. 
You can specify the number of records to be returned through the first argument. If this value is 
larger than the number of records, only the remaining records are returned. 
If the selected Recordset object supports bookmarks, you can specify the starting location by 
passing the value of the record's Bookmark property. 
After the call to GetRows, the record pointer is set to the next unread record, unless there is no 
more records, in which case the EOF property is set to True. 
The last argument, Fields, can represent a single field or a group of fields to be returned by the 
GetRows method. This is done with a field name, a field-ordinal position, an array of field names, 
or an array of field-ordinal positions. 
Note 
Not all providers support the Find method. 
See Also 
BookmarkEnum 
Enumeration, 
CursorOptionEnum 
Enumeration, 
GetRowsOptionEnum 
Enumeration, Recordset.Bookmark Property, Recordset.EOF Property, Recordset.Supports 
Method 
Recordset.GetString 
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 

IT-SC book 
444 
Method  
2.6) 
 
Set Variant = recordset.GetString(StringFormat, 
NumRows, ColumnDelimiter, _ 
                                  RowDelimiter, 
NullExpr) 
 
The GetString method returns the entire Recordset object as a String value. 
Arguments 
StringFormat (StringFormatEnum)  
Indicates the format of the returned Recordset in String form. 
NumRows  
Optional. Indicates the number of rows to be converted to a String. If the value of this parameter 
is either missing or greater than the total number of records in the Recordset object, then all of the 
records are converted. 
ColumnDelimeter  
Optional. Used only when the StringFormat parameter is set to adClipString. Indicates the 
delimeter used between columns. The tab character is the default character. 
RowDelimeter  
Optional. Used only when the StringFormat parameter is set to adClipString. Indicates the 
delimeter used between rows. The carriage return character is the default character. 
NullExpr  
Optional. Used only when the StringFormat parameter is set to adClipString. Indicates the 
String used to replace Null characters. The default for this parameter is the empty String. 
Returns 
Variant 
Description 
The GetString method converts the contents of the Recordset object to a String value. 
See Also 
StringFormatEnum Enumeration 
Recordset.Index Property  
(Versions 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 

IT-SC book 
445
 
recordset.Index = index 
 
The Index property sets the current index for a given recordset. 
Datatype 
String 
Description 
The Index property is both read- and write-enabled. However, it cannot be set within a 
WillRecordsetChange or RecordsetChangeComplete event or during an asynchronous execution. 
The Index property is used in conjunction with the Seek method to take advantage of the 
underlying table's indexed structure (as compared to the Find method, which operates 
sequentially). 
The position of the record pointer may change when the Index is set (changing the 
AbsolutePosition property value). In addition, the following events occur: WillRecordsetChange, 
RecordsetChangeComplete, WillMove, and MoveComplete. 
If the LockType property is set to adLockPessimistic or adLockOptimistic, then the 
UpdateBatch method is called releasing any filter that may be applied. In addition, the record 
pointer is moved to the first record in the indexed recordset. 
Note 
Not all providers support indexes; therefore, they do not all support the Index property. 
See Also 
CursorOptionEnum 
Enumeration, 
Recordset.MoveComplete 
Event, 
Recordset.RecordsetChangeComplete Event, Recordset.Seek Method, Recordset.UpdateBatch 
Method, Recordset.WillMove Event, Recordset.WillRecordsetChange Event, Recordset.Supports 
Method 
Recordset.LockType 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
locktype = recordset.LockType 
 
The LockType property indicates the type of locks that are set on records when they are being 
edited. 
Datatype 

IT-SC book 
446 
LockTypeEnum (Long) 
Description 
The LockType property is read- and write-enabled when the Recordset object is closed, but read-
only once it is opened. The LockType property may be any one of the values in Table E-29. 
Note 
Not all data providers support every type of record locking. In this case, the data provider may 
automatically select a different type of lock type. Check the available functionality of a data 
provider with the Supports property. 
See Also 
LockTypeEnum 
Enumeration, 
Recordset.Open 
Method, 
Recordset.Supports 
Method, 
Recordset.Update Method 
Recordset.MarshalOptions 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.MarshalOptions = marshaloptions 
 
The MarshalOptions property indicates which records are to be marshaled back to the server. 
Datatype 
MarshalOptionsEnum (Long) 
Description 
The MarshalOptions property can be one of the MarshalOptionsEnum enumeration values listed 
in Appendix E. 
See Also 
MarshalOptionsEnum Enumeration 
Recordset.MaxRecords 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
recordset.MaxRecords = maxrecords 
 
The MaxRecords property indicates the maximum number of records to be returned to a recordset 
from a query. 

IT-SC book 
447
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
The MaxRecords property is read- and write-enabled when the Recordset object is open, but read-
only when it is closed. A value of 0 (default) indicates that all of the valid records will be returned 
from a query. 
Recordset.Move Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.Move NumRecords, Start 
 
The Move method of the Recordset object moves the position of the record pointer within the 
specified Recordset object. 
Arguments 
NumRecords (Long)  
Specifies the number of records you want the record pointer to move. 
Start (String or Variant)  
Optional. Represents the bookmark from which you want the record pointer to move. 
Description 
The Move method of the Recordset object moves the record pointer a specified number of records. 
If the NumRecords argument is less than zero, the pointer is moved forward the desired number. 
If the NumRecords argument is greater than zero, the record pointer is moved forward the 
desired number of records. 
If the current Recordset object supports bookmarks, then you can indicate a beginning position to 
start moving from with the Start argument. The Start argument should be set to a valid bookmark 
within the current Recordset object, and the record pointer will be moved the desired number of 
records from that point. If no bookmark is used, the record pointer will move from the current 
record. 
Attempting to move to a point before the first record will result in moving to the record before the 
first record, which is a BOF. Attempting to move past the last record will result in the record 
pointer moving to the record after the last record, which is the EOF. In either case, if the Move 
method is used to attempt to move past the BOF or EOF, an error is generated. 
If the CacheSize property is set to cache records locally from the data provider and you pass a 
NumRecords that ventures outside of the cache, ADO is forced to retrieve a new group of records 
from the data provider. The number of records received is dependent upon the CacheSize 

IT-SC book 
448 
property. This also happens if you are using a local cache and use the Start argument. The first 
record to be received, in this case, would be the desired destination record. 
Even if the Recordset object is forward-only, you can still pass a NumRecords value that is less 
than zero, as long as the destination record is within the current cache. If it is before the current 
cache, an error is generated. 
Note 
Not all providers support the Move method. 
See Also 
BookmarkEnum Enumeration, Recordset.Bookmark Property, Recordset.CacheSize Property 
Recordset.MoveComplete 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
MoveComplete(ByVal adReason As 
ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
             ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, _ 
             adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
             ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
The MoveComplete event is called after an operation changes the position of the record pointer 
within the Recordset object. 
Arguments 
adReason (EventReasonEnum)  
Indicates the reason for this event. Proper values for the adReason parameter are: 
adRsnMoveFirst, adRsnMoveLast, adRsnMoveNext, adRsnMovePrevious, adRsnMove, 
and adRsnRequery. 
pError (Error)  
Contains details about an error that occurred if the adStatus parameter is set to 
adStatusErrorsOccurred. 
adStatus (EventStatusEnum)  
Indicates the status of the current operation. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusOK, 
the operation was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusErrorsOccurred, 
the operation failed, and the pError object contains the details regarding the error. If the 
adStatus parameter is set to adStatusCancel, the operation has been canceled before 
completion by the application. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, 
this event will not be called again. 

IT-SC book 
449
pRecordset  
Represents the Recordset object that fired this event. 
See Also 
EventReasonEnum Enumeration, EventStatusEnum Enumeration, Recordset.AbsolutePage 
Property, 
Recordset.AbsolutePosition 
Property, 
Recordset.AddNew 
Method, 
Recordset.Bookmark 
Method, 
Recordset.Filter 
Property, 
Recordset.Index 
Property, 
Recordset.Open 
Method, 
Recordset.Move 
Method, 
Recordset.MoveFirst 
Method, 
Recordset.MoveLast Method, Recordset.MoveNext Method, Recordset.MovePrevious Method, 
Recordset.Requery Method, Recordset.WillMove Event 
Recordset.MoveFirst Method 
Recordset.MoveLast Method 
Recordset.MoveNext Method 
Recordset.MovePrevious 
Method  
RMF Method(Versions 
2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) RML 
Method(Versions 2.0, 
2.1, 2.5, 2.6) RMN 
Method(Versions 2.0, 
2.1, 2.5, 2.6) RMP 
Method(Versions 2.0, 
2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.MoveFirst 
recordset.MoveLast 
recordset.MoveNext 
recordset.MovePrevious 
 
The MoveFirst, MoveLast, MoveNext, and MovePrevious methods of the Recordset object move 
the record pointer to the first, last, next, and previous records, respectively, and make that record 
the current record. 
Description 
The MoveFirst, MoveLast, MoveNext, and MovePrevious methods of the Recordset object allow 
you to move freely throughout the specified open Recordset object. 
The MoveFirst method moves to the first record in the recordset, making it the current record. 
The MoveLast method moves to the last record in the recordset, making it the current record. This 
method requires the Recordset object to support bookmarks. If it does not, an error is generated 
when attempting to use the MoveLast method. 
The MoveNext method moves to the next record in the recordset, making it the current record. If 
the current record is the last record in the recordset before the call to MoveNext, then the record 
pointer is moved to the record after the last in the recordset and sets the EOF property to True. 
Attempting to move past the EOF results in an error. 

IT-SC book 
450 
The MovePrevious method moves to the record directly before the current record in the recordset. 
This record is then set to the current record. This method requires that the recordset support either 
bookmarks or backward cursor movement; otherwise, an error is generated. If the current record -
- before calling the MovePrevious method -- is the first record in the recordset, the record pointer 
is set to the record directly before the first record, and the BOF property is set to True. 
Attempting to move before the beginning of the recordset results in an error. 
Note 
Not all providers support the MoveFirst and MovePrevious methods. 
See Also 
CursorOptionEnum 
Enumeration, 
Recordset.BOF 
Property, 
Recordset.EOF 
Property, 
Recordset.Supports Method 
Recordset.NextRecordset 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
Set resulting_recordset = 
recordset.NextRecordset(RecordsAffected) 
 
The NextRecordset method of the Recordset object returns the next recordset by advancing 
through a series of commands: 
recordset.MoveFirst 
Arguments 
RecordsAffected (Long)  
Set to the number of records that the current operation affected. The data provider does this. 
Description 
Use the NextRecordset method of the Recordset object to obtain the next recordset in a 
compound command statement or a stored procedure that returns multiple results. An example of 
a compound command statement is: 
SELECT * FROM upstairs; SELECT * FROM downstairs 
The recordset that is originally created with either the Execute or Open methods returns a 
Recordset object based only on the first SQL statement in this compound statement. You must 
call NextRecordset to obtain each additional recordset. If the Recordset object is closed and there 
are remaining statements, those statements will never be executed. 
The NextRecordset method continues to return recordsets as long as there are more in the list. If a 
row-returning statement successfully executes, and the result is zero records, then the Recordset 
object's EOF and BOF properties are both be set to True. If a non-row-returning statement 

IT-SC book 
451
successfully executes, then the Recordset object should not be set to Nothing, but the EOF 
property should be True. 
If there are no more statements in the compound command statement, the returned Recordset 
object is set to Nothing. 
You must call the Update or the CancelUpdate methods before requesting the next recordset if 
you are in immediate update mode and editing. Otherwise, an error will be generated. 
Parameters for compound command statements are passed like those of regular statements; all 
parameters must be filled in the Parameters collection in the proper order across statements. In 
addition, you must read all the results of a recordset before reading output parameter values. 
See Also 
Recordset.Update 
Method, 
Recordset.CancelUpdate 
Method, 
Recordset.BOF 
Property, 
Recordset.EOF Property 
Recordset.Open Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.Open Source, ActiveConnection, 
CursorType, LockType, Options 
 
The Open method opens a cursor within a Recordset object. 
Arguments 
Source (Variant)  
Optional. Indicates the actual data that is used to open the Recordset object. This can be a 
Command object, a SQL statement, a table name, a stored procedure, a URL, a filename, or a 
Stream object that contains a previously persisted Recordset object. 
ActiveConnection (Variant)  
Optional. Specifies either an open Connection object or a connection string to be used when the 
Recordset object creates its own Connection object. 
CursorType (CursorTypeEnum)  
Optional. Indicates the type of cursor that is to be used when opening the Recordset object. By 
default this value is adLockReadOnly. 
LockType (LockTypeEnum)  
Optional. Specifies the locking to be used on the opened Recordset object. The 
adLockReadOnly enumeration value is the default value for this argument. 
Options (Long -- CommandTypeEnum and ExecuteOptionEnum)  

IT-SC book 
452 
Optional. Specifies the type of data that is to be specified by the Source argument; additionally, 
can indicate that the Recordset object is to be opened asynchronously. The default value for the 
Options argument if a Command object is not the source of the Recordset object is adCmdFile. 
Description 
The Source, ActiveConnection, CursorType, and LockType arguments have matching properties 
within the Recordset object. If the arguments are omitted in the Open method call, the individual 
values are obtained from the corresponding properties. If a value is specified for a given argument, 
however, it will overwrite the previous value stored in the property value. 
The source of a Recordset object can be one of the following: 
Command object 
SQL statement 
Stored procedure 
Table name 
URL 
Filename 
Stream object (with the contents of a previously persisted Recordset object) 
If anything other than a Command object is used to open a Recordset, specify the data source by 
using the Options argument. If you do not, ADO must call the data provider repeatedly to 
determine the type of data that it is opening. 
When specifying a file as a Recordset object's source, you can do so with a full pathname, a 
relative pathname, or even a URL value (http://www.domain.com). 
The ActiveConnection argument is used only if you do not specify a Command object. In fact, it 
is read-only if a valid Command object is set to the Source property. 
The ActiveConnection argument can be either an already opened Connection object or a 
connection string, which will be used to open a new Connection object for the Recordset object. 
It is possible to change the value of the ActiveConnection property after a Recordset object is 
opened, in order to send the updates to the recordset to another data source. However, the 
remaining arguments and their corresponding properties become read-only once the Recordset 
object is opened. 
You can also open a Recordset asynchronously by adding the adAsyncFetch enumeration value 
(from the ExecuteOptionEnum enumeration). 
Once the Recordset is opened if it is empty, both the BOF and the EOF properties will be set 
True. Close the Recordset object by calling the Close method. This doesn't remove the Recordset 

IT-SC book 
453
object from memory because you can reopen a Recordset object. To remove the Recordset from 
memory, set the object to Nothing. 
When opening a Recordset object with a Stream object, the Recordset will automatically be 
opened synchronously regardless of the ExecuteOptionEnum values specified. In addition, you 
should not specify any other arguments to the Open method when opening a Recordset object 
from a Stream object. 
See Also 
CommandTypeEnum Enumeration, CursorTypeEnum Enumeration, ExecuteOptionEnum, 
LockTypeEnum Enumeration, Recordset.ActiveConnection Property, Recordset.BOF Property, 
Recordset.Close 
Method, 
Recordset.CursorType 
Property, 
Recordset.EOF 
Property, 
Recordset.LockType Property, Recordset.Source Property 
Recordset.PageCount 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
pagecount = recordset.PageCount 
 
The PageCount property returns the number of logical pages that are in the current Recordset 
object. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
The PageCount property returns a value indicating how many logical pages of data are contained 
within the recordset. A page is determined by the number of records in the recordset divided by 
the number of records per page (determined by the PageSize property). 
If the last page does not contain the number of records in the PageSize property, that page is still 
counted as a page in the PageCount property. 
Returns 
If the Recordset object does not support the PageCount property, the return value is -1. This 
indicates that the number of pages could not be determined. 
See Also 
Recordset.AbsolutePage Property, Recordset.PageSize Property 
Recordset.PageSize 
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 

IT-SC book 
454 
Property  
 
pagesize = recordset.PageSize 
 
The PageSize property indicates the number of records in a logical page. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
The PageSize property determines how many records belong to a logical page within your 
recordset. The default value is 10. This property can be set at any time and is used with the 
AbsolutePage property to move to the first record within a specified page. 
See Also 
Recordset.AbsolutePage Property, Recordset.PageCount Property 
Recordset.Properties 
Collection  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Set properties = recordset.Properties 
 
The Properties collection contains characteristics specific to the Recordset object for the currently 
used provider. 
Datatype 
Properties (Collection object) 
Description 
The Properties collection class contains a Property class instance for each property specific to the 
Recordset object for the data provider. 
The Properties collection of the Command object is not populated until the ActiveConnection 
property of the Command object has been set to an open Connection object or a valid connection 
string value. 
See Also 
Command.ActiveConnection Property 

IT-SC book 
455
Recordset.RecordChangeComplete 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 
2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
RecordChangeComplete(ByVal adReason As 
ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                     ByVal cRecords As Long, _ 
                     ByVal pError As ADODB.Error, 
_ 
                     adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                     ByVal pRecordset As 
ADODB.Recordset) 
 
The RecordChangeComplete event is called after an operation changes one or more records in the 
Recordset object. 
Arguments 
adReason (EventReasonEnum)  
Indicates the reason for this event. Proper values for the adReason parameter 
are: 
adRsnAddNew, 
adRsnDelete, 
adRsnUpdate, 
adRsnUndoUpdate, 
adRsnUndoAddNew, adRsnUndoDelete, and adRsnFirstChange. 
cRecords (Long)  
Indicates how many records are affected by the operation causing this event. 
pError (Error)  
Contains details about an error that occurred if the adStatus parameter is set to 
adStatusErrorsOccurred. 
adStatus(EventStatusEnum)  
Indicates the status of the current operation. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusOK, 
the operation was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusErrorsOccurred, 
the operation failed, and the pError object contains the details regarding the error. If the 
adStatus parameter is set to adStatusCancel, the operation has been canceled before 
completion by the application. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, 
this event will not be called again. 
pRecordset  
Represents the Recordset object that fired this event. 
See Also 

IT-SC book 
456 
EventReasonEnum Enumeration, EventStatusEnum Enumeration, Recordset.AddNew Method, 
Recordset.CancelBatch Method, Recordset.CancelUpdate Method, Recordset.Delete Method, 
Recordset.WillChangeRecord Event, Recordset.Update Method, Recordset.UpdateBatch Method 
Recordset.RecordsetChangeComplete 
Event  
(Versions 
2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
RecordsetChangeComplete(ByVal adReason As 
ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                        ByVal pError As 
ADODB.Error, _ 
                        adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                        ByVal pRecordset As 
ADODB.Recordset) 
 
The RecordsetChangeComplete event is called after an operation changes the Recordset object. 
Arguments 
adReason (EventReasonEnum)  
Indicates the reason for this event. Proper values for the adReason parameter are: 
adRsnReQuery, adRsnReSynch, adRsnClose, and adRsnOpen. 
pError (Error)  
Contains details about an error that occurred if the adStatus parameter is set to 
adStatusErrorsOccurred. 
adStatus (EventReasonEnum)  
Indicates the status of the current operation. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusOK, 
the operation was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusErrorsOccurred, 
the operation failed, and the pError object contains the details regarding the error. If the 
adStatus parameter is set to adStatusCancel, the operation has been canceled before 
completion by the application. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, 
this event will not be called again. 
pRecordset  
Represents the Recordset object that fired this event. 
See Also 
EventReasonEnum Enumeration, EventStatusEnum Enumeration, Recordset.Open Method, 
Recordset.Requery Method, Recordset.WillChangeRecordset Event 

IT-SC book 
457
Recordset.RecordCount 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordcount = recordset.RecordCount 
 
The RecordCount property returns the number of records in the current Recordset object. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
If the provider or the cursor does not support the RecordCount property, or if the number of 
records cannot be determined by ADO, -1 is returned. 
The actual number of records is always returned by the RecordCount property for Keyset or 
Static cursors, but -1 is always returned for a Forward Only cursor. Dynamic cursors can return 
either -1 or the actual number of records, depending upon the data source. 
The RecordCount efficiently reports the number of records in a recordset only if the current 
Recordset object supports approximate positioning (Supports -- adApproxPosition) or bookmarks 
(Supports -- adBookmark); otherwise, this property uses a lot of resources because ADO must 
load all of the records to count them. 
Recordset.Requery 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
recordset.Requery 
 
Description 
The Requery method of the Recordset object re-executes the command that created the recordset 
in the first place in order to cause a refresh of the recordset. This method has the same effect as 
calling the Close method followed by the Open method. 
If you are adding a new record or editing an existing one, when you call the Requery method, an 
error is generated. 
If you wish to change properties that are read-only while a Recordset object is open (CursorType, 
LockType, etc.), you must manually close and reopen the Recordset object by calling the Close 
method, editing the properties, and calling the Open method. 
See Also 

IT-SC book 
458 
ExecuteOptionEnum 
Recordset.Resync Method (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.Resync AffectRecords 
 
The Resync method of the Recordset object refreshes the data in the recordset from the 
underlying data source. 
Arguments 
AffectRecords (AffectEnum)  
Optional. An enumerator of type AffectEnum having the value of adAffectCurrent (1), 
adAffectGroup (2), or adAffectAll (3, the default). 
If the value of AffectRecords is adAffectCurrent, the Resync method call affects only the 
pending updates for the current record of the recordset. 
If the value of AffectRecords is adAffectGroup, the Resync method call affects only the 
pending records that are dictated through the Filter property of the current Recordset object. This 
property must be already set for the Resync method to be called with the adAffectGroup 
parameter. 
If the value of AffectRecords is adAffectAll, all records pending updates within the current 
Recordset object (including those hidden by the Filter property) are affected by the Resync 
method. 
Description 
The Resync method of the Recordset object is used to resynchronize the records in the current 
recordset with those found in the underlying data source. This is very useful when you have either 
a Static or a Forward Only cursor and you want to check whether anyone else has altered the 
records in the data source. 
The Resync method does not show you records that have been added to the data source; rather, it 
simply updates the ones that you already have. Therefore, the Resync method does not re-execute 
the underlying command that created the recordset in the first place. 
If the Resync method attempts to read a record that has been deleted by another user, a runtime 
error does not occur. Instead, the Errors collection is populated with warnings. A runtime error 
occurs only if all of the requested records to be updated have a conflict for some reason. You can 
use the Filter property with the adFilterAffectedRecords value and the Status property to 
locate any records with conflicts. 
Note 
Not all providers support the Resync method. 

IT-SC book 
459
See Also 
ADCPROP_UPDATERESYNC_ENUM 
Enumeration, 
AffectEnum 
Enumeration, 
CursorOptionEnum Enumeration, Recordset.Supports Method, ResyncEnum Enumeration 
Recordset.Save Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.Save Destination, PersistFormat 
 
The Save method saves the current Recordset object to a file or to a Stream object. 
Arguments 
Destination (Variant)  
Optional. Can be either a name of a file to create or a Stream object that is to accept the saved 
Recordset object. 
PersistFormat (PersistFormatEnum)  
Optional. Indicates the format of the Recordset object when it is saved. The default is ADTG, but 
XML can also be used. 
Description 
The Save method must be invoked on an Open Recordset object. The first time Save is called, 
you can specify the Destination argument, but subsequent calls should be made omitting this 
argument. If the same destination name is used on the same Recordset object, an error will occur, 
but if two different names are used, both files will remain open until the Close method is called. 
Omitting the Destination name on the initial call to Save causes a file to be created with the name 
of the Source to the Recordset object. 
When saving a Recordset object with a Filter, only visible records are saved. When saving a 
hierarchical recordset, the current child Recordset, its children, and the parent Recordset are all 
saved. When saving a child Recordset, only the child and its children are saved. 
If the Save method is called while an asynchronous operation is in effect for the Recordset object, 
the Save method waits until that operation is complete before attempting to persist the Recordset 
object. After the Recordset object is persisted, the record pointer points to the first record in the 
Recordset. 
You should obtain better results by setting the CursorLocation property to the client. If the data 
provider does not support the functionality necessary to save the Recordset object, then the cursor 
service will. When using the server as the cursor location, you can typically only insert, delete, or 
update a single table. In addition, the Resync method is not available. 
Microsoft warns that when persisting hierarchical recordsets in XML format, you cannot save the 
Recordset if it contains pending updates or is a parameterized hierarchical Recordset object. 

IT-SC book 
460 
See Also 
PersistFormatEnum Enumeration, Recordset.Close Method, Recordset.CursorLocation Property, 
Recordset.Filter Property, Recordset.Source Property 
Recordset.Seek Method  
(Versions 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.Seek KeyValues, SeekOptions 
 
The Seek method quickly changes the record pointer to the record in the Recordset object that 
matches the index provided. 
Arguments 
KeyValues (Variant)  
Indicates the values that are used in conjunction with the Recordset.Index value to locate a record. 
SeekOptions (SeekEnum)  
Indicates the type of comparison used when seeking a record. 
Description 
The Seek method is used with the Index property of the Recordset object. If the current Recordset 
supports indexes, you can use the Seek method. Check the value of the Recordset.Supports 
(adSeek) method call to determine whether the current Recordset object will support this method. 
The Index property indicates which Index is used with the Seek method. The Seek method's first 
parameter, an array of Variant values, should contain one value for each column within the 
currently used Index. 
If the record cannot be found, the record pointer is placed at the EOF marker. 
Notes 
The Seek method can be used only on server-side clients, which are opened with the 
CommandTypeEnum enumeration value, adCmdTableDirect. 
Not all providers support the Seek method. 
See Also 
CommandTypeEnum Enumeration, CursorOptionEnum Enumeration, Recordset.EOF Property, 
Recordset.Index Property, SeekEnum Enumeration, Recordset.Supports Method 
Recordset.Sort Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 

IT-SC book 
461
recordset.Sort = sortstring 
 
The Sort property sorts a recordset on one or more field names. 
Datatype 
String 
Description 
The Sort property can be set to sort a recordset based upon one or more fields in either ascending 
or descending order. The Sort property accepts a String value identical to a sort clause of a SQL 
statement. Fields are separated by commas with either the ASC or DESC keywords following 
each field name. If the ASC or DESC keyword is absent, ASC is inferred. 
Setting the Sort property to an empty String value ("") removes the sort from the recordset and 
returns the order to the default. 
For instance, the following value for the Sort property, "Company ASC, Contact DESC," would 
sort the recordset by the company in ascending order and then by the contact in descending order. 
The Sort property does not rearrange data within the recordset; instead, it creates a temporary 
index for each field that does not already have an index if the CursorLocation property is set to 
adUseClient. 
Note 
Not all providers support the Sort property. 
See Also 
Recordset.CursorLocation Property 
Recordset.Source 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
recordset.Source = source 
 
The Source property returns the source for the data in a Recordset object. 
Datatype 
String (Let, Get)  
Command (Set)  
Description 

IT-SC book 
462 
For a Recordset object, the Source property specifies from where a recordset's data comes. The 
Source property for the Recordset object is read- and write-enabled while the Recordset object is 
closed, but read-only once it is opened. 
The value of the Source property for the Recordset object can contain one of the following: 
Command object variable 
SQL statement 
Stored procedure name 
Table name 
File or URL 
If the Source property is set to a Command object, the ActiveConnection property of the 
Recordset object gets its value from the ActiveConnection property of the Command object, but 
reading the Source property does not return a Command object. Instead, it returns the 
CommandText property of the associated Command object from which you set the Source 
property. 
If the Source property is set to a SQL statement, a stored procedure name, or a table name, you 
would be better off specifying it in the Options argument of the Open method, in order for the 
Recordset object to optimize performance. 
See Also 
Recordset.Open Method 
Recordset.State Property (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
state = recordset.State 
 
The State property indicates the current state of the Recordset object. 
Datatype 
ObjectStateEnum 
Description 
The read-only State property indicates whether the current Recordset object is opened or closed. 
See Also 
ObjectStateEnum Enumeration 

IT-SC book 
463
Recordset.Status 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
status = recordset.Status 
 
The Status property indicates the status of the current record in relation to bulk operations. 
Datatype 
RecordStatusEnum 
Description 
The Status property can be set to one or more of the RecordStatusEnum enumeration values listed 
in Appendix E. 
The Status property indicates changes still pending for records that have been updated during a 
batch operation. 
In addition, the Status property indicates why the following functions have failed: Resync, 
UpdateBatch, CancelBatch, and Filter (setting equal to an array of bookmarks). 
See Also 
Recordset.CancelBatch 
Method, 
Recordset.Filter 
Property, 
Recordset.Resync 
Method, 
Recordset.UpdateBatch Method, RecordStatusEnum Enumeration 
Recordset.StayInSync 
Property  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
recordset.Resync AffectRecords 
 
The StayInSync property indicates when the references to chapter recordsets change if the record 
pointer moves to a different parent row for hierarchical recordsets. 
Datatype 
Boolean 
Description 
The StayInSync property is both read- and write-enabled. The default value for this property is 
True. 

IT-SC book 
464 
If the value of the StayInSync property is set to True, the references of chapter recordsets change 
when the parent recordset is changed. 
If the value of the StayInSync property is set to False, the references of chapter recordsets point 
to the previous parent recordset when moving the record pointer within a hierarchical recordset 
changes the parent recordset. 
Recordset.Supports 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
Set boolean = recordset.Supports(CursorOptions) 
 
The Supports method determines whether the current data provider supports specified 
functionality. 
Arguments 
CursorOptions (Long)  
Represents the type functionality that you are testing for. This value can be one or more of the 
CursorOptionEnum values listed in Appendix E. 
Returns 
Boolean 
Description 
The Supports method of the Recordset object tests whether the Recordset object supports 
individual types of functionality. 
If the values of the CursorOptionEnum values are added and passed as the sole argument to the 
Supports function, a return value indicates whether all of the questioned functionality is supported. 
See Also 
CursorOptionEnum Enumeration 
Recordset.Update Method (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
recordset.Update Fields, Values 
 
The Update method of the Recordset object saves the changes made to fields within the current 
record since a call to AddNew changes the contents of a field or array of fields. 
Arguments 

IT-SC book 
465
Fields (Variant or Variant array)  
This argument can hold the field, ordinal position, array of fields, or an array of ordinal positions 
that you wish to update in the current record. The Fields argument must be of the same type and 
dimension as that of the Values argument. 
Values (Variant or Variant array)  
Optional. This argument can hold the value or values of the fields specified in the Fields 
argument. The Values argument must be of the same type and dimension as that of the Fields 
argument. 
Description 
The current record remains the current record after the call to the Update method. 
If you specify an array of field names for the Fields argument to the Update method, the 
Values argument must have the same dimensional array passed to it, containing the 
corresponding values for each field listed in the Fields array. Otherwise, an error will be 
generated. 
If you move to another record while editing a record, that record will be saved -- by an automatic 
call to the Update method -- before the record position is changed. In addition, if you are editing 
the current record and you call the UpdateBatch method, the Update method will again -- 
automatically be called. 
Conversely, the CancelUpdate method cancels any changes made to the current record. 
Note 
Not all providers support the Update method. 
See Also 
CursorOptionEnum Enumeration, Recordset.Supports Method 
Recordset.UpdateBatch 
Method  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
recordset.UpdateBatch AffectRecords 
 
The UpdateBatch method of the Recordset object writes all pending batch updates to disk when 
called. 
Arguments 
AffectRecords (AffectEnum)  

IT-SC book 
466 
The optional parameter to the UpdateBatch method is an enumerator of type AffectEnum having 
the value of adAffectCurrent (1), adAffectGroup (2), or adAffectAll (3, the default). 
If the value of AffectRecords is adAffectCurrent, the UpdateBatch method call affects 
only the pending updates for the current record of the recordset. 
If the value of AffectRecords is adAffectGroup, the UpdateBatch method call affects only 
the pending records that are dictated through the Filter property of the current Recordset object. 
This property must be already set for the UpdateBatch method to be called with the 
adAffectGroup parameter. 
If the value of AffectRecords is adAffectAll, all records pending updates within the current 
Recordset object (including those hidden by the Filter property) are affected by the UpdateBatch 
method. 
Description 
The UpdateBatch method transmits all pending batch updates to the data source. This method is 
for use only when in batch update mode, which should be used only with a Keyset or Static 
cursor. 
It is possible to update cached field values multiple times before committing the changes of the 
pending batch updates. The Update method is automatically called if the UpdateBatch method is 
called while in edit mode. 
If you attempt to update a record that has already been deleted by another user, a runtime error 
does not occur; instead, the Errors collection is populated with warnings. A runtime error occurs 
only if all of the requested records to be updated have a conflict for some reason. You can use the 
Filter property with the adFilterAffectedRecords value and the Status property to locate 
any records with conflicts. 
Conversely, the CancelBatch method cancels all pending batch updates, 
Note 
Not all providers support the UpdateBatch method. 
See Also 
AffectEnum Enumeration, Recordset.Supports Method, CursorOptionEnum Enumeration 
Recordset.WillChangeField 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
WillChangeField(ByVal cFields As Long, _ 
                ByVal Fields As Variant, _ 
                adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, 
_ 
 

IT-SC book 
467
                ByVal pRecordset As 
ADODB.Recordset) 
The WillChangeField event is called before an operation changes one or more Field object values. 
Arguments 
cFields (Recordset object)  
Represents the actual recordset that you wish to refresh. 
Fields (Variant array)  
Contains the Field objects that are waiting to be changed. 
adStatus (EventStatusEnum)  
Indicates the status of the current operation. The adStatus parameter is set to adStatusOK if 
the operation causing this event was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set to 
adStatusCantDeny, the event cannot request that the operation be canceled. If the adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this event will not be called again. If the 
adStatus parameter is set to adStatusCancel, a cancellation request will be made for this 
operation. 
pRecordset  
Represents the Recordset object that fired this event. 
See Also 
EventStatusEnum Enumeration, Recordset.FieldChangeComplete Event, Recordset.Update 
Method, Recordset.Value Property 
Recordset.WillChangeRecord 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
WillChangeRecord(ByVal adReason As 
ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                 ByVal cRecords As Long, _ 
                 adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                 ByVal pRecordset As 
ADODB.Recordset) 
 
The WillChangeRecord event is called before an operation changes one or more records in the 
Recordset object. 
Arguments 

IT-SC book 
468 
adReason (EventStatusEnum)  
Indicates the reason for this event. Proper values for the adReason parameter 
are: 
adRsnAddNew, 
adRsnDelete, 
adRsnUpdate, 
adRsnUndoUpdate, 
adRsnUndoAddNew, adRsnUndoDelete, and adRsnFirstChange. 
cRecords (Long)  
Indicates how many records are affected by the operation causing this event. 
adStatus (EventStatusEnum)  
Indicates the status of the current operation. The adStatus parameter is set to adStatusOK if 
the operation causing this event was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set to 
adStatusCantDeny, the event cannot request that the operation be canceled. If the adStatus 
parameter to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this event will not be called again. If the adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusCancel, a cancellation request will be made for this operation. 
pRecordset  
Represents the Recordset object that fired this event. 
See Also 
EventReasonEnum Enumeration, EventStatusEnum Enumeration, Recordset.AddNew Method, 
Recordset.CancelBatch Method, Recordset.CancelUpdate Method, Recordset.Delete Method, 
Recordset.RecordChangeComplete Event, Recordset.Update Method, Recordset.UpdateBatch 
Method 
Recordset.WillChangeRecordset 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 
2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
WillChangeRecordset(ByVal adReason As 
ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                    adStatus As 
ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                    ByVal pRecordset As 
ADODB.Recordset) 
 
The WillChangeRecordset event is called before an operation changes the Recordset object. 
Arguments 
adReason (EventReasonEnum)  
Indicates the reason for this event. Values for the adReason parameter are: adRsnReQuery, 
adRsnReSynch, adRsnClose, and adRsnOpen. 
adStatus (EventReasonEnum)  

IT-SC book 
469
Indicates the status of the current operation. The adStatus parameter is set to adStatusOK if 
the operation causing this event was successful. If the adStatus parameter is set to 
adStatusCantDeny, the event cannot request that the operation be canceled. If the adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this event will not be called again. If the 
adStatus parameter is set to adStatusCancel, a cancellation request will be made for this 
operation. 
pRecordset  
Represents the Recordset object that fired this event. 
See Also 
EventReasonEnum Enumeration, EventStatusEnum Enumeration, RecordsetChangeComplete 
Event, Recordset.Requery, Recordset.Open 
Recordset.WillMove 
Event  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
WillMove(ByVal adReason As ADODB.EventReasonEnum, 
_ 
         adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
         ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
 
The WillMove event is called before an operation changes the position of the record pointer 
within the Recordset object. 
Arguments 
adReason (EventReasonEnum)  
Indicates the reason for this event. Values for the adReason parameter are: 
adRsnMoveFirst, adRsnMoveLast, adRsnMoveNext, adRsnMovePrevious, adRsnMove, 
adRsnRequery. 
adStatus  
Holds an EventStatusEnum value indicating the status of the current operation. The adStatus 
parameter is set to adStatusOK if the operation causing this event was successful. If the 
adStatus parameter is set to adStatusCantDeny, the event cannot request that the operation 
be canceled. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusUnwantedEvent, this event will not 
be called again. If the adStatus parameter is set to adStatusCancel, a cancellation request 
will be made for this operation. 
pRecordset  
Represents the Recordset object that fired this event. 
See Also 

IT-SC book 
470 
EventReasonEnum Enumeration, EventStatusEnum Enumeration, Recordset.AbsolutePage 
Property, 
Recordset.AbsolutePosition 
Property, 
Recordset.AddNew 
Method, 
Recordset.Bookmark 
Method, 
Recordset.Filter 
Property, 
Recordset.Index 
Property, 
Recordset.Move 
Method, 
Recordset.MoveFirst 
Method, 
Recordset.MoveLast 
Method, 
Recordset.MoveNext Method, Recordset.MovePrevious Method, Recordset.Open Method, 
Recordset.Requery Method, Recordset.WillMove Event 
Stream Object  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Dim stream As ADODB.Stream 
 
A Stream object represents a stream of data that is obtained from a URL, a Record object, or 
nothing at all. 
Methods 
Cancel  
Cancels an asynchronous operation for the Stream object. 
Close  
Closes an opened Stream object. 
CopyTo  
Copies data from one stream to another. 
Flush  
Ensures that all changes made to a Stream object have been persisted to the resource that the 
Stream object represents. 
LoadFromFile  
Loads a file's contents into an already open Stream object. 
Open  
Opens a Stream object from a URL, an opened Record object, or without a source at all, in 
memory. 
Read  
Reads a number of bytes from a binary stream. 
ReadText  
Reads a number of characters from a binary stream. 
SaveToFile  
Persists the data of a binary stream to a local file. 

IT-SC book 
471
SetEOS  
Changes the EOS within a given Stream object and to truncate any data that lies past the new 
EOS pointer. 
SkipLine  
Skips entire lines when reading text streams. 
Write  
Writes a number of bytes to a binary stream. 
WriteText  
Writes a number of bytes to a binary stream. 
Properties 
CharSet  
Indicates the character set to which the contents of a text Stream should be translated. 
EOS  
Indicates that the stream pointer is currently at the end of the stream. 
LineSeparator  
Indicates the character (or characters) that are used to indicate the end of a line in text streams. 
Mode  
Indicates the permissions for modifying data within a Stream object. 
Position  
Indicates the position of the stream pointer within the Stream object. 
Size  
Represents the number of bytes in a Stream object. 
State  
Indicates the current state of the Stream object. 
Type  
Indicates how a Stream object's data should be analyzed. 
Description 
A Stream object created with no source can be instantiated in memory without a data provider. 

IT-SC book 
472 
A Stream object can contain binary or textual data. It can be persisted to a file, retrieved from a 
file, or copied to a file or another Stream object in memory. 
 
MSDAIPP is needed to browse filesystem data sources; it is the Microsoft 
OLE DB Provider for Internet Publishing. 
 
Examples 
In this section, we will be looking at three examples that show how to do the following: 
Open a Stream object with a URL. 
Open a Stream object with a Record object. 
Open a Stream object without a physical data source. 
The examples for the Stream object require you to create a test text file placed at the root 
directory of your web server. For these examples, our text file is named text.txt and contains the 
following information: 
This is the first line of the file. 
This is the second line of the file. 
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 
1234567890 
This is the sixth line of the file. 
This is the last line of the file. 
Example 13-23 opens the test.txt file with a URL, which means that you must have Internet 
Information Server running (or equivalent). Once the file is opened, it is sent to the Immediate 
Window with the ReadText method. After this is done, we write to and read from the file a little 
bit more, displaying its size as we go along. 
Example 13-23. Opening a Stream Object with a URL  
Dim sText As String 
 
Dim str As ADODB.Stream 
 
' 
' instantiate and open the Stream object for a resource 
' 
Set str = New ADODB.Stream 
 
str.Open "URL=http://localhost/test.txt", _ 
         adModeReadWrite 
 
' 
' set the characterset and data type of the stream 
' 
str.Charset = "iso-8859-1" 
str.Type = adTypeText 
 

IT-SC book 
473
' 
' output the entire resource 
' 
Debug.Print str.ReadText 
 
' 
' add a line of data 
' 
str.Position = 0 
str.WriteText "<some added data>", adWriteLine 
 
' 
' output the entire resource and display the size 
' 
str.Position = 0 
Debug.Print 
Debug.Print str.ReadText 
 
MsgBox "The size of the stream is: " & CStr(str.Size) 
 
' 
' write a piece of text to the resource and set a new EOS 
' 
str.Position = 10 
str.WriteText "New text" 
str.SetEOS 
 
' 
' output the entire resource and display the size 
' 
str.Position = 0 
Debug.Print 
Debug.Print str.ReadText 
 
MsgBox "The size of the stream is: " & CStr(str.Size) 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
str.Close 
 
Set str = Nothing 
The following is sent as output to the Immediate Window once the example has executed: 
This is the first line of the file. 
This is the second line of the file. 
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 
1234567890 
This is the sixth line of the file. 
This is the last line of the file. 
 
<some added data> 
ine of the file. 
This is the second line of the file. 
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz 
1234567890 

IT-SC book 
474 
This is the sixth line of the file. 
This is the last line of the file. 
 
<some addeNew text 
Example 13-24 illustrates how a Stream object can be opened from a Record object in two 
different ways. The first method passes the Record object to the Open method of the Stream 
object, while the second method requests the default Stream object from the Record object's 
Fields collection. 
Example 13-24. Opening a Stream Object from a Record Object  
Dim rec As ADODB.Record 
Dim str As ADODB.Stream 
 
' 
' open a stream from a Record object 
' 
Set rec = New ADODB.Record 
rec.Open "test.txt", _ 
         "URL=http://localhost/" 
 
Set str = New ADODB.Stream 
str.Open rec, _ 
         , _ 
         adOpenStreamFromRecord 
 
' 
' do something 
' 
 
str.Close 
Set str = Nothing 
 
' 
' open a stream from the default stream for a Record object 
' 
Set str = rec.Fields.Item(ADODB.FieldEnum.adDefaultStream).Value 
 
' 
' do something 
' 
 
str.Close 
Set str = Nothing 
 
Set str = New ADODB.Stream 
str.Open 
str.LoadFromFile "C:\autoexec.bat" 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
str.Close 
rec.Close 
 

IT-SC book 
475
Set str = Nothing 
Set rec = Nothing 
Example 13-25 illustrates how a stream can be created without a physical data source (resource) 
associated with it; instead, the stream is created from memory. After opening the Stream object 
without a resource, data is written to it and saved to a local file on the local machine. 
Example 13-25. Creating a Stream Object Without a Physical Data Source  
Dim str As ADODB.Stream 
 
' 
' instantiate and open a Stream object in memory 
' 
Set str = New ADODB.Stream 
str.Open 
 
' 
' add some data to the Stream object 
' 
str.WriteText "This is a test.", adWriteLine 
str.WriteText "Just want to see something...", adWriteChar 
str.WriteText "hopefully this will work...", adWriteLine 
str.WriteText "(I bet it does)", adWriteLine 
 
' 
' save the Stream object to a file 
' 
str.SaveToFile "C:\newfile.txt", _ 
               adSaveCreateOverWrite 
 
' 
' clean up 
' 
str.Close 
 
Set str = Nothing 
The following text represents the contents of the file created after running Example 13-25: 
This is a test. 
Just want to see something...hopefully this will work... 
(I bet it does) 
Stream.Cancel Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.Cancel 
 
The Cancel method cancels an asynchronous operation for the Stream object. 
Description 

IT-SC book 
476 
The Cancel method cancels an asynchronous operation of the Record object invoked by the Open 
method. 
See Also 
Stream.Open Method 
Stream.CharSet Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
stream.CharSet = characterset 
 
The CharSet property indicates the character set to whioch the contents of a text Stream should be 
translated. 
Datatype 
String 
Description 
The CharSet property can be set to a valid character set only if the Position property of the Stream 
object 
is 
set 
to 
0. 
Valid 
character 
sets 
for 
a 
system 
are 
defined 
in 
the 
HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT\MIME\Database\CharSet subkeys. 
The default value for the CharSet property is "unicode". If the character set is changed on the fly, 
the data is translated as it is read from the stream and passed to the application. When writing 
data, the information is translated before being saved to the data source. 
This property is only valid for text streams, which are Stream objects having a value of 
adTypeText for their Type property value. 
See Also 
Stream.Type Property 
Stream.Close Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
record.Close 
 
The Close method closes an opened Stream object. 
Description 
The Close method can be called only on an open Stream object. After calling the Close method, 
the Open method can be called again to reopen the Stream object. Calling the Close method 
releases any resources allocated to the Stream object. 

IT-SC book 
477
Stream.CopyTo Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
stream.CopyTo DestStream, NumChars 
 
The CopyTo method copies data from one stream to another. 
Arguments 
DestStream (Stream Object)  
Must be set to a valid open Stream object, otherwise a runtime error occurs. 
NumChars (Integer)  
Optional. Specifies the number of characters to copy from the source to the destination Stream 
object. The default value is -1, which indicates that all remaining data should be copied. 
Description 
The CopyTo method copies data from the source Stream object starting at the current stream 
pointer position (indicated by the Stream.Position property). The number of characters copied is 
either the number indicated by the NumChars argument or the rest of the source stream if the 
NumChars argument is greater than the number of remaining characters in the source stream or 
the NumChars argument value is -1. 
The stream pointer position of the destination Stream object is automatically set to the next byte 
available in the Stream object. The CopyTo method will not remove excess data from the 
destination Stream object past the copy. To do this, call the SetEOS method. 
You can copy data from a textual Stream to a binary Stream object, but not from a binary Stream 
to a textual Stream object. 
See Also 
Stream.Position Property, Stream.SetEOS Method 
Stream.EOS Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
Boolean = stream.EOS 
 
The EOS property indicates that the stream pointer is currently at the end of the stream. 
Datatype 
Boolean 

IT-SC book 
478 
Description 
The EOS property is True when the stream pointer is located directly after the last piece of 
information within the stream and is now pointing to the End-Of-Stream pointer. 
Stream.Flush Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
stream.Flush 
 
The Flush method ensures that all changes made to a Stream object have been persisted to the 
resource that the Stream object represents. 
Description 
The Flush method persists any outstanding changes of the Stream object to the resource that is 
represented by the Stream object. Microsoft claims that this is very rarely necessary, as ADO 
calls this method internally in the background whenever possible. In addition, when closing a 
Stream object, the stream is first flushed to the data source. 
Stream.LineSeparator Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
stream.LineSeparator = lineseparator 
 
The LineSeparator indicates the character (or characters) that are used to indicate the end of a line 
in text streams. 
Datatype 
LineSeparatorEnum 
Description 
The default value for the LineSeparator property is adCRLF, which indicates both a carriage 
return and a line feed. 
This property is valid only for text streams, which are Stream objects having a value of 
adTypeText for their Type property value. 
See Also 
LineSeparatorEnum Enumeration, Stream.SkipLine Method 
Stream.LoadFromFile Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 

IT-SC book 
479
stream.LoadFromFile FileName 
 
The LoadFromFile method loads a file contents into an already open Stream object. 
Arguments 
FileName (String)  
Must contain a name of a valid file to be loaded into the currently opened Stream object. If the 
file specified by this argument cannot be found, a runtime error occurs. 
Description 
The LoadFromFile method works only with an already opened Stream object, replacing the 
contents of the object with the contents of the file specified within the LoadFromFile argument, 
FileName. All pre-existing data is overwritten, and any extra data is truncated. However, the 
Stream object does not lose its relationship to the resource with which it was originally opened. 
The LoadFromFile method can be used to upload a file to a server from a client. 
Stream.Mode Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
stream.Mode = ConnectModeEnum 
 
The Mode property indicates the permissions for modifying data within a Stream object. 
Datatype 
ConnectModeEnum 
Description 
The default value for the Mode property of a Stream object that is associated with an underlying 
source is adModeRead. Stream objects that are instantiated in memory have a default value of 
adModeUnknown for the Mode property. 
The Mode property is read- and write-enabled while the Stream object is closed, but read-only 
once it is opened. 
If the Mode property is not specified for a Stream object, it is inherited from the source used to 
open the object, such as a Record object. 
See Also 
ConnectModeEnum Enumeration, Stream.Open Method 

IT-SC book 
480 
Stream.Open Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
stream.Open Source, Mode, OpenOptions, UserName, 
Password 
 
The Open method opens a Stream object from a URL, an opened Record object, or without a 
source at all, in memory. 
Arguments 
Source (Variant)  
Optional. Indicates the source of the resource to open. This can be a URL or an open Record 
object. Omitting this argument instructs ADO to open the Stream object in memory only. 
Mode (ConnectModeEnum)  
Optional. Indicates the access permissions with which to open the Stream object. The default 
value is adModeUnknown; if the Stream object is opened with a Record object, the Mode value is 
taken from that object, ignoring this argument. 
OpenOptions (StreamOpenOptions)  
Optional. Can be one or more StreamOpenOptions enumeration values, which indicate whether 
the Stream object should be opened asynchronously or if it is being opened from a Record object, 
but the default value is adOpenStreamUnspecified. 
UserName (String)  
Optional. Indicates, if necessary, the username that will be used to access the resource indicated 
by the source argument. If the Stream object is being opened with a Record object, this value is 
ignored because access is already available for the resource. 
Password (String)  
Optional. Indicates, if necessary, the password to verify the UserName argument. If the Stream 
object is being opened with a Record object, this value is ignored because access is already 
available for the resource. 
Description 
The Open method of the Stream object can be invoked with a URL source, an already opened 
Record object, or without a source at all, indicating that the Stream object is opened in memory. 
If this last method is used, you can read and write to the Stream object just as you can any other 
way, but you can persist and retrieve data only by using the SaveToFile or LoadFromFile 
methods. 
When opening a Stream object from an already opened Record object, the Mode value is taken 
from the Record object, and the UserName and Password properties, if specified, are ignored 
because access has to be already granted to the Record object if it is open. If opening a Stream 

IT-SC book 
481
from a Record object, specify the adOpenStreamFromRecord enumeration value as the 
OpenOptions argument, and ADO will use the Record's default stream to populate the Stream 
object. 
If you are opening the Stream object with a URL, you must use the URL keyword 
(URL=scheme://server/folder). 
See Also 
ConnectModeEnum Enumeration, Stream.LoadFromFile Method, Stream.Mode Property, 
Stream.SaveToFile Method, StreamOpenOptionsEnum Enumeration 
Stream.Position Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
stream.Position = number 
 
The Position property indicates the position of the stream pointer within the Stream object. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
The Position property can be set to any positive number or 0. It can also be set to a value greater 
than the size of the current Stream object. In doing so, for streams with write permissions you 
may increase the size of a Stream object by automatically adding Null values. You can, although 
you are not advised to, do the same for read-only streams, but the size is not altered. 
The Position property indicates the number of bytes the stream pointer is located away from the 
first byte in the stream. If your character set contains multiple bytes for each character, you must 
multiply this number by the position desired to get the actual character position. For example, 
when using Unicode, 0 represents the first character, and 2 represents the second. 
Stream.Read Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
bytes = stream.Read (NumBytes) 
 
The Read method reads a number of bytes from a binary stream. 
Arguments 
NumBytes (Long or StreamReadEnum)  
Optional. Specifies the number of bytes to read from the binary stream. The default value is 
adReadAll, which returns all the remaining bytes in the stream. 

IT-SC book 
482 
Returns 
Variant (array) 
Description 
The Read method is used to read binary streams (Stream.Type property is equal to 
adTypeBinary), while the ReadText method is used to read textual streams (Stream.Type 
property is equal to adTypeText). 
The return value is a Variant array of bytes, which will equal the number of bytes requested or the 
number of remaining bytes in the stream if the number of remaining bytes is less than the 
requested number of bytes. If there is no data to return, a Null Variant value is returned. 
See Also 
Stream.ReadText Method, Stream.Type Property, StreamReadEnum Enumeration 
Stream.ReadText Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
string = stream.ReadText (NumChars) 
 
The ReadText method reads a number of characters from a binary stream. 
Arguments 
NumChars (Long or StreamReadEnum)  
Optional. Specifies the number of characters to read from the text stream. The default value is 
adReadAll, which returns all the remaining characters in the stream. You can also specify to 
return the next line of data with the adReadLine enumeration value. 
Returns 
String 
Description 
The ReadText method reads textual streams (Stream.Type property is equal to adTypeText), 
while the Read method is used to read binary streams (Stream.Type property is equal to 
adTypeBinary). 
The return value is a String of values, which equals the number of characters requested or the 
number of remaining characters in the stream if the number of remaining characters is less than 
the requested number of characters. If there is no data to return, a Null Variant value is returned. 
See Also 

IT-SC book 
483
Stream.Read Method, Stream.Type Property, StreamReadEnum Enumeration 
Stream.SaveToFile Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
stream.SaveToFile (FileName, SaveOptions) 
 
The SaveToFile method persists the data of a binary stream to a local file. 
Arguments 
FileName (String)  
Indicates where the contents of the current Stream object are to be persisted. 
SaveOptions (SaveOptionsEnum)  
Specifies whether a file is to be created if one doesn't exist, if an existing file should be 
overwritten, or, if a file already exists, whether an error should occur. 
Description 
The SaveToFile method completely overwrites an existing file if the adSaveCreateOverwrite 
enumeration value is used in the SaveOptions argument. 
Using this method does not change the contents of the Stream object nor its association to the 
original resource with which the Stream object was opened. The only difference from the Stream 
object is that the Position property is set to the beginning of the stream (0). 
See Also 
SaveOptionsEnum Enumeration, Stream.Position Property 
Stream.SetEOS Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
stream.SetEOS 
 
The SetEOS method changes the EOS within a given Stream object and truncates any data that 
lies past the new EOS pointer. 
Description 
The SetEOS method can shorten a Stream object's length when using the Write, WriteText, and 
CopyTo methods, which cannot truncate the stream themselves. 
See Also 

IT-SC book 
484 
Stream.CopyTo Method, Stream.Write Method, Stream.WriteText Method 
Stream.Size Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
size = stream.Size 
 
The Size property represents the number of bytes in a Stream object. 
Datatype 
Long 
Description 
Because the Stream object's size is only restricted by resources, a Long value may not correctly 
contain the size of a Stream if it exceeds the largest possible number a Long value can contain. 
If the size of a stream is unknown, -1 is returned. 
Stream.SkipLine Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
stream.SkipLine 
 
The SkipLine method skips entire lines when reading text streams. 
Description 
The SkipLine method skips an entire line in a textual stream (Stream.Type is equal to 
adTypeText). This is done by searching for the next occurrence of a line separator (indicated by 
the LineSeparator property which is, by default, set to adCRLF) or the EOS pointer. 
See Also 
LineSeparatorEnum Enumeration, Stream.LineSeparator Property, Stream.Type Property 
Stream.State Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
state = record.State 
 
The State property indicates the current state of the Stream object. 
Datatype 
Long (ObjectStateEnum) 

IT-SC book 
485
Description 
The State property is read-only; returning a Long value that can be evaluated as an 
ObjectStateEnum enumeration value. The default value for the Stream object is closed. 
For the Stream object, the State property can return multiple values when the object is executing 
an operation asynchronously (i.e., adStateOpen and adStateExecuting). 
See Also 
ObjectStateEnum Enumeration 
Stream.Type Property  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
streamtype = stream.Type 
 
The Type property indicates how a Stream object's data should be analyzed. 
Datatype 
StreamTypeEnum Enumeration 
Description 
The default value for a Stream object is adTypeText, but if binary data is written to a new 
Stream object, the Type property will automatically be changed to adTypeBinary. 
The Type property is read- and write-enabled while the stream pointer is at zero (Position 
property equals 0) and read-only at any other position. 
If the Type property is set to adTypeText, you should use the ReadText and WriteText methods 
for data manipulation and retrieval. If the Type property is set to adTypeBinary, you should use 
the Read and Write methods for data manipulation and retrieval. 
See Also 
Stream.Read Method, Stream.ReadText Method, Stream.Write Method, Stream.WriteText 
method, StreamTypeEnum Enumeration 
Stream.Write Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
stream.Write Buffer 
 
The Write method writes a number of bytes to a binary stream. 
Arguments 

IT-SC book 
486 
Buffer (Variant)  
Contains an array of Byte values to be written to the current binary stream. 
Description 
After writing the specified bytes to the Stream object, the Position property is set to the next byte 
following the last byte written. If there is existing data past the end of what has been written, it is 
not truncated. If you want to truncate this data, call the SetEOS method. 
If the written data exceeds the length of the Stream object, the new data is appended to the Stream 
object, the length of the stream is increased, and the EOS pointer is moved to the new end of the 
stream. 
The Write method is used to write to binary streams (Stream.Type property is equal to 
adTypeBinary), while the WriteText method is used to write textual streams (Stream.Type 
property is equal to adTypeText). 
See Also 
Stream.EOS Property, Stream.SetEOS Method, Stream.Type Property, Stream.WriteText Method, 
StreamWriteEnum Enumeration 
Stream.WriteText Method  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
stream.WriteText Data, Options 
 
The WriteText method writes a number of bytes to a binary stream. 
Arguments 
Data (String)  
Represents the String data to be written to the Stream object. 
Options (StreamWriteEnum)  
Optional. Indicates whether just the data is written to the Stream object or if the data and a line 
separator (indicated by the LineSeparator property) are added to the Stream object. The default is 
not to add the line separator. 
Description 
After writing the specified string to the Stream object, the Position property is set to the next 
character following the last character written. If there is existing data past the end of what has 
been written, it is not truncated. If you want to truncate this data, call the SetEOS method. 

IT-SC book 
487
If the written data exceeds the length of the Stream object, the new data is appended to the Stream 
object, the length of the stream is increased, and the EOS pointer is moved to the new end of the 
stream. 
The WriteText method is used to write to text streams (Stream.Type property is equal to 
adTypeText), while the Write method is used to write binary streams (Stream.Type property is 
equal to adTypeBinary). 
See Also 
Stream.EOS Property, Stream.SetEOS Method, Stream.Type Property, Stream.WriteText Method, 
StreamWriteEnum Enumeration 

IT-SC book 
488 
Part III: Appendixes 
Appendix A. Introduction to SQL 
The SQL, or Structured Query Language, specification has many varieties. All are used for either 
data selection, data manipulation, or database modification. Through this language we can 
gracefully create queries, store procedures, filter recordsets, create tables -- you name it. Just 
about everything that you can do with a database, you can do with SQL.  
In this appendix, you will learn the Microsoft Jet Engine SQL language. This form of SQL is very 
similar to the ANSI SQL specification. Differences exist between these two specifications in a 
number of places, the most important difference being datatypes. ANSI SQL and Microsoft use 
different names for datatypes. The SQL language described in this appendix uses the Microsoft 
datatypes, for obvious reasons.  
Other differences arise when ANSI SQL conflicts with Microsoft standards. In addition, some 
functions have been removed from the ANSI standard by Microsoft because there are already 
ways to accomplish these functions through ADO. Also, some statements (listed next) are unique 
to Microsoft, including TRANSFORM, PARAMETERS, STDEV, and STDEVP. We will be 
taking a look at these statements and functions shortly.  
A.1 Record Selection 
The most basic SQL statements are constructed through selection statements. Selection 
statements return a group of records whose values can be filtered, grouped, ordered, or altered. To 
jump into the basics of SQL, you must first learn how to create a simple selection query.  
A.1.1 Selection Statements 
Statements that select records all begin with the keyword SELECT. The syntax for a simple select 
statement is as follows:  
SELECT [predicate] {* | 
                    field_name1 [AS alias_name1] 
                    [field_name2 [AS alias_name2]] [, ...]]} 
FROM table_expression 
 [IN external_database] 
This syntax declaration might be slightly intimidating if you have never seen SQL before, but rest 
assured, you will know this like the back of your hand before long.  
Let's begin by taking a look at the simplest of all select statements, one without any predicate (or 
secondary keyword), the SELECT statement.  
A.1.1.1 SELECT 
The SELECT statement is used to return selected fields from all records, in one or more tables, 
located in the current database or an external database. Let's image that we have a table named 
Employees in our current database. The Employees table has the following field names: 
FirstName, LastName, and EmployeeID. The Employees table is populated as in Table A-1.  

IT-SC book 
489
Table A-1. The Employees Table  
FirstName 
LastName 
EmployeeID 
Jason 
Roff 
100 
Tammi 
Roff 
101 
Kimberly 
Roff 
102 
John 
DelWhatta 
200 
John 
Katsosing 
201 
By using a simple SELECT statement, we can list all of the employees and their IDs:  
SELECT *  
FROM Employees; 
The asterisk (*) in the preceding SQL statement indicates that you want all of the fields that 
belong to the chosen record to be returned. The FROM portion of this statement indicates that you 
want to select the fields from the Employees table. Results of this statement look like this:  
 
FirstName  LastName   EmployeeID 
Jason      Roff       100 
Tammi      Roff       101 
Kimberly   Roff       102 
John       DelWhatta  200 
John       Katsosing  201 
The first line of the preceding output should be the field names as the SQL statement returned 
them. Now let's suppose that we want to return partial data on the given table. Let's face it: we are 
not always going to need every field in a particular table, and by requesting them all, we waste 
resources. Take a look at this statement:  
SELECT LastName AS Name,  
       EmployeeID AS Number  
FROM Employees; 
This time, we have added a new keyword, AS, to the statement. The AS keyword alters the field 
name in the resulting recordset to the new name. The results of this query are:  
Name       Number 
Roff       100 
Roff       101 
Roff       102 
DelWhatta  200 
Katsosing  201 

IT-SC book 
490 
Notice how the field names on the first line of the result set have changed to the names indicated 
in the SQL statement.  
A.1.1.2 SELECT ALL 
In the Microsoft Jet Engine SQL Language, SELECT ALL has the same effects as the SELECT 
statement. You can use them interchangeably; the predicate ALL is the default for the SELECT 
statement. In other words, if you leave out the predicate altogether, the Jet Engine inserts the ALL 
keyword.  
A.1.1.3 SELECT DISTINCT 
The SELECT DISTINCT phrase is very commonly used in SQL. The purpose of the DISTINCT 
keyword is to filter the selected records down to those that have unique values. Take a look at the 
following statement and its results:  
SELECT DISTINCT LastName  
FROM Employees; 
 
LastName 
Roff 
Ann 
DelWhatta 
Katsosing 
Notice how one two of the Roffs were left out because we used the DISTINCT predicate within 
the SQL statement. Now take a look at this SQL statement and result combination:  
SELECT DISTINCT FirstName, LastName  
FROM Employees; 
 
FirstName  LastName 
Jason      Roff 
Tammi      Roff 
Kimberly   Roff 
John       DelWhatta 
John       Katsosing 
The Roff records are still in the result set. This is because the DISTINCT predicate returns distinct 
rows based on the sum of its fields. In this example, Jason Roff and Tammi Roff are two unique 
records and should both be included.  
A.1.1.4 SELECT DISTINCTROW 
The DISTINCTROW predicate is used with joins within your SQL statement. This concept is 
explained later under "Joining Tables."  
A.1.1.5 SELECT TOP 
The TOP predicate is used to return only the first number of fields specified, based on records or 
on a percentage of the records in the table. The TOP predicate works with the ORDER BY clause 
and is discussed under Section A.1.4 later in this appendix.  

IT-SC book 
491
A.1.2 Aggregate Functions 
Aggregate functions are a very powerful feature of any SQL language. They report numeric 
statistics on a field for the entire record set that is a product of a SQL statement.  
A.1.2.1 AVG 
The AVG function returns a value that is the average of all of the records selected, for a particular 
field. Let's suppose that we have the table Sales as shown in Table A-2.  
Table A-2. The Sales Table  
EmployeeID 
CrossStitch 
Hammocks 
Automobiles 
TotalRevenue 
100 
1,012 
1,234 
456 
21,100 
101 
450 
345 
45 
62,758 
102 
21,018 
3,234 
765 
1,154,001 
200 
17 
32 
143 
991 
201 
3 
1 
0 
17 
By using the AVG function, we can obtain important statistics from our Sales table:  
SELECT AVG(CrossStitch) AS Average  
FROM Sales; 
 
Average 
4500 
Notice that the SQL statement returns a single record. You can also create AVG functions for other 
fields in the SQL statement.  
A.1.2.2 COUNT 
The COUNT function displays a count of the number of records selected from a recordset. The 
COUNT function takes as an argument a string expression that evaluates to one or more field 
names. It accepts the asterisk (*), which specifies all fields to be included. If a string is used, only 
records that have no NULL values in the fields indicated are counted. If the asterisk is used, all 
records are counted as long as at least one field in each record has a non-NULL value. This is the 
fastest method of using the COUNT function. Following is an example of using COUNT:  
SELECT COUNT(*) AS CountOfPeople  
FROM Employees; 
 
CountOfPeople 

IT-SC book 
492 
5 
A.1.2.3 MIN and MAX 
The MIN and MAX functions return the minimum and the maximum value, respectively, within a 
chosen recordset. Take a look at an example of both the MIN and MAX functions:  
SELECT MIN(CrossStitch) AS Minimum,  
       MAX(Hammocks) AS Maximum  
FROM Sales; 
 
Minimum  Maximum 
3        3234 
A.1.2.4 STDEV and STDEVP 
The STDEV and STDEVP functions are not part of the ANSI SQL specification. These functions 
are used to report the standard deviation of a sample (STDEV) and the standard deviation of a 
population (STDEVP). The following is an example of both these functions:  
SELECT STDEV(CrossStitch) AS Sample,  
       STDEVP(Hammocks) AS Population  
FROM Sales; 
 
Sample           Population 
9243.01447039871 1216.94854451616 
A.1.2.5 SUM 
The SUM function returns a sum of a field in a selection statement:  
SELECT SUM(CrossStitch) AS CrossStitchSum,  
       SUM(CrossStictch + Hammocks) AS Both 
FROM Sales; 
 
CrossStitchSum  Both 
22500           27346 
In this example, a sum was taken from a single field and from the sum of two fields.  
A.1.2.6 VAR and VARP 
The VAR and VARP functions return the variance of a sample and the variance of a population, 
respectively:  
SELECT VAR(CrossStitch) AS Sample,  
       VARP(Hammocks) AS Population  
FROM Sales; 
 
Sample     Population 
85433316.5 88855543.76 
If you can find a reason to use this . . . go for it. 

IT-SC book 
493
A.1.3 Setting Conditions 
Conditions can be set in a number of places to specify which records the SQL statement returns. 
The most common place for these conditions is in the WHERE clause.  
A.1.3.1 WHERE 
The WHERE clause can contain expressions that limit the amount of records returned. In the 
following example, I filter the records with ordinary comparison operators:  
SELECT EmployeeID, 
       CrossStitch, 
       Hammocks 
FROM   Sales 
WHERE ((CrossStitch >= 450) 
       AND (Hammocks < 2000)); 
 
EmployeeID  CrossStitch  Hammocks 
100         1012         1234 
101         450          345 
In the next example, I limit the records returned with the IN keyword:  
SELECT FirstName 
FROM Employees 
WHERE LastName NOT IN (Roff, Katsosing); 
 
FirstName 
John 
In this example, I limit the records returned with the LIKE keyword:  
SELECT FirstName 
FROM Employees 
WHERE ((FirstName LIKE "[A-M]*") 
       AND (LastName LIKE "RO*")); 
 
FirstName 
Jason 
Kimberly 
A.1.3.2 WHERE 
Another useful clause is the BETWEEN...AND... clause. The following two statements are 
equivalent:  
SELECT... 
WHERE ((Field >= 100)  
       AND (Field <= 200)) 
 
SELECT... 
WHERE Field BETWEEN 100 AND 200 
Take a look at the BETWEEN...AND... clause in action with the optional NOT keyword:  
SELECT EmployeeID,  

IT-SC book 
494 
       TotalRevenue 
WHERE TotalRevenue NOT Between 10000 AND 100000; 
 
EmployeeID  TotalRevenue 
1154001 
991 
17 
A.1.4 Grouping and Ordering 
With other SQL clauses, you can group records in your recordset or order them according to a 
particular field or group of fields. You can also perform conditional statements on the groups that 
you have formed or limit the amount of records that are returned to your recordset with the TOP 
predicate of the SELECT statement. Table A-3 contains the Automobile table, which will serve as 
our recordset for the following sections.  
Table A-3. The Automobile Table  
EmployeeID 
Year 
Make 
Model 
Color 
Cost 
102 
1998 
BMW 
323I 
Black 
40,000 
100 
1989 
Mercury 
Sable 
Blue 
0 
100 
1987 
Ford 
Mustang 
Red 
4,500 
100 
1979 
Chevy 
Nova 
Red 
800 
100 
1975 
Chevy 
Camaro 
Blue 
800 
100 
1981 
Mercury 
Capri 
Brown 
0 
A.1.4.1 GROUP BY 
The GROUP BY clause of a selection statement combines records based on the fields that you 
specify. The following combination of SQL statement and result uses the GROUP BY clause:  
SELECT Make, 
       COUNT(Make) AS NumOfMake 
FROM Automobile 
GROUP BY Make; 
 
Make     NumOfMake 
BMW      1 
Mercury  2 
Ford     1 
Chevy    2  

IT-SC book 
495
Notice how the Make field was unique, while the NumOfMake field contained the number of 
records for each Make in the recordset.  
A.1.4.2 HAVING 
The HAVING clause works with the GROUP BY clause to set one or more conditions on the groups 
created by the SQL statement. In this example, the HAVING clause restricts the outputed records 
to those that represent more than one car for the same Make value:  
SELECT Make 
FROM Automobile 
GROUP BY Make 
HAVING (COUNT(Make) < 1); 
 
Make     NumOfMake 
Mercury  2 
Chevy    2  
A.1.4.3 ORDER BY 
The ORDER BY clause sets the order of the resulting records of a SQL statement. The syntax for an 
ORDER BY clause of a SQL statement is as follows:  
SELECT field_name1 [, field_name2 ...] 
FROM table_expression 
ORDER BY field_name1 [ASC | DESC] [, field_name2 [ASC | DESC]...] 
The ASC and DESC keywords tell the SQL statement to order the records, by the specified field, in 
either ascending or descending order. Both of these are optional; however, if you do not specify 
one, ascending order is the default. Here are some examples:  
SELECT DISTINCT Make 
FROM Automobile 
ORDER BY Make; 
 
Make 
BMW 
Chevy 
Ford 
Mercury 
 
SELECT Make, Model, Color 
FROM Automobile 
ORDER BY Color DESC, Make ASC; 
 
Make     Model    Color 
Chevy    Nova     Red 
Ford     Mustang  Red 
Mercury  Capri    Brown 
Chevy    Camaro   Blue 
Mercury  Sable    Blue  
BMW      323I     Black 
In this last example, the ORDER BY clause sorts first by the Color field in descending order and 
then sorts multiple Color records by the Make field in ascending order.  

IT-SC book 
496 
A.1.4.4 SELECT TOP 
The TOP predicate returns a subset of fields -- it returns the first x fields from the recordset, or the 
first y percentage of fields from the recordset. The TOP predicate works in conjunction with the 
ORDER BY clause. The syntax for the TOP predicate of the SELECT statement is as follows:  
SELECT TOP number [PERCENT] field_name1 [, field_name2 ...] 
FROM table_expression 
ORDER BY field_name1 [ASC | DESC] [, field_name2 [ASC | DESC]...] 
The first form of the SELECT TOP clause is illustrated here:  
SELECT TOP 2 Model,  
             Cost 
FROM Automobile 
ORDER BY Cost DESC; 
 
Model    Cost 
323I     40,000 
Mustang  4,500 
As you can see, the number 2 is placed after the TOP predicate to indicate that you want only the 
top two records based on the ORDER BY clause, which specifies that the records should be sorted 
in descending order based on the Cost field.  
In the next example, we see the second form of the SELECT TOP clause, with the use of the 
PERCENT keyword:  
SELECT TOP 50 PERCENT Model,  
                      Cost 
FROM Automobile 
ORDER BY Cost ASC; 
 
Model    Cost 
Sable    0 
Capri    0 
Nova     800 
Here, the SQL statement returns the top 50 percent of the records, based on the ORDER BY clause. 
This example highlights a very useful piece of information about the TOP predicate: even if there 
are more than the specified number or percentage of records available, only the amount requested 
is returned. In this last example, you could argue that the Camaro also had a Cost value of 800, as 
did the Nova. The thing to remember is that no matter what, the TOP predicate will return the 
number or percentage of records from the top of the recordset. In this case 50 percent meant 3 
records.  
A.1.5 Joining Tables 
Joins are used to include multiple tables in the same result set from a SQL statement. Technically, 
there is no limit to the number of tables that you can join together in a single query, but 
practically speaking, it is greatly limited by the abilities of your data provider. There are two 
major types of joins.  
A.1.5.1 INNER JOIN 

IT-SC book 
497
The first type of join is the inner join, which joins two tables that have one or more matching 
fields. One record is chosen from each table when all of the conditions are met in the ON clause.  
The following example uses the INNER JOIN clause:  
SELECT Employees.FirstName, 
       Employees.LastName, 
       Sales.TotalRevenue 
FROM Employees 
INNER JOIN Sales 
ON (Employees.EmployeeID = Sales.EmployeeID); 
 
FirstName  LastName   TotalRevenue 
Jason      Roff       21,100 
Tammi      Roff       62,758 
Kimberly   Roff       1,154,001 
John       DelWhatta  991 
John       Katsosing  17 
As you can see, by using the INNER JOIN clause, you can greatly expand the number of tricks in 
your bag.  
A.1.5.2 LEFT JOIN and RIGHT JOIN 
The second type of join is the outer join. An outer join can be categorized as either a left outer 
join or a right outer join. A left outer join includes all the records from the first table, even if 
there is not a matching record, based on the ON clauses in the second table. A right outer join 
includes all the records in the second table, regardless of whether they are present in the first.  
The following query represents the use of the LEFT JOIN clause:  
SELECT Employees.FirstName, 
       Employees.LastName, 
       Automobile.Make 
FROM Employees 
LEFT JOIN Automobile 
ON (Employees.EmployeeID = Automobile.EmployeeID); 
 
FirstName  LastName   Make 
Jason      Roff       Mercury 
Jason      Roff       Ford 
Jason      Roff       Chevy 
Jason      Roff       Chevy 
Jason      Roff       Mercury 
Tammi      Roff        
Kimberly   Roff       BMW 
John       DelWhatta   
John       Katsosing   
Notice how in this query, Jason Roff comes up five times, and other people don't have a car 
associated to them. The outer join gathers all data from one table, regardless of whether there is a 
matching record in the second table.  
A.1.5.3 SELECT DISTINCTROW 

IT-SC book 
498 
The DISTINCTROW predicate is used with joins in your SQL statement to weed out distinct rows 
within a recordset of two or more tables. Look back at the previous example. If the LEFT JOIN 
had been an INNER JOIN, people without a car would not have been included. Now, if we include 
the DISTINCTROW predicate of the SELECT statement, we also weed out duplicate rows:  
SELECT Employees.FirstName, 
       Employees.LastName, 
       Automobile.Make 
FROM Employees 
LEFT JOIN Automobile 
ON (Employees.EmployeeID = Automobile.EmployeeID); 
 
FirstName  LastName   Make 
Jason      Roff       Mercury 
Jason      Roff       Ford 
Jason      Roff       Chevy 
Kimberly   Roff       BMW 
The DISTINCTROW predicate operates just as the DISTINCT predicate does, but it spans across 
tables when they are joined. Remember, a record's uniqueness is determined by the sum of all of 
its displayed fields.  
A.1.6 Subqueries 
Subqueries are very useful statements. They are actually one or more nested SQL statements. 
Subqueries are frequently very resource-intensive, especially in large databases, because the data 
provider must gather a lot of information in memory to determine which fields the SQL statement 
returns.  
The following is an example of a subquery: 
SELECT FirstName, 
       LastName 
FROM Employees 
WHERE EmployeeID IN 
  (SELECT EmployeeID 
   FROM Sales 
   WHERE (TotalRevenues > 10,000)); 
 
FirstName  LastName 
Jason      Roff 
Tammi      Roff 
Kimberly   Roff 
A.1.7 Unions 
Unions are used to produce the combination of one or more queries into one resultset of a SQL 
statement.  
A.1.7.1 UNION 
Use the UNION keyword with the following syntax:  
[TABLE] query_expression1 UNION [ALL] 

IT-SC book 
499
[TABLE] query_expression2 
[UNION [ALL] [TABLE] query_expression3 [...]] 
Does this look a little overwhelming? Well, let's take a look at a typical UNION query:  
(SELECT EmployeeID, 
        TotalRevenue 
 FROM Employees 
 WHERE (TotalRevenue < 1000)) 
 UNION 
(SELECT EmployeeID, 
        TotalRevenue 
 FROM Employees 
 WHERE (TotalRevenue > 100000)); 
 
EmployeeID  TotalRevenue 
1154001 
991 
17 
Notice that the two queries report the same field names. This output looks like one query. You 
can also use the UNION keyword with the TABLE and ALL keywords, as in this senseless query:  
TABLE Employees 
UNION ALL 
(SELECT * 
 FROM Employees 
 WHERE (TotalRevenue < 20)); 
 
EmployeeID  CrossStitch  Hammocks  Automobiles  TotalRevenue 
100         1012         1234      456          21100 
101         450          345       45           62758 
102         21018        3234      765          1154001 
200         17           32        143          991 
201         3            1         0            17 
I called this query "senseless" because no matter what records the second query returns, the 
resulting recordset contains all of the records of the Employees table. In real-world applications, 
use two different tables with the same structure when using the TABLE...UNION ALL clause.  
When using the UNION clause, only distinct records (unique based on the sum of all the fields) are 
returned.  
A.1.8 Other Options 
There are additional capabilities for selection statements that I have not yet covered. These 
include parameter capabilities, the creation of stored procedures, and an option that allows the 
user of a query to have the same access privileges as its owner.  
A.1.8.1 PARAMETERS 
The PARAMETERS clause is used to insert variables into your SQL statement so that it can be used 
under different conditions. Here is an example of the PARAMETERS clause in action:  
PARAMETERS 

IT-SC book 
500 
[First Name Parameter] AS STRING, 
[Last Name Parameter] AS STRING; 
SELECT FirstName,  
       LastName 
FROM Employees 
WHERE ((FirstName LIKE [First Name Parameter]) 
       AND (LastName LIKE [Last Name Parameter]); 
 
[First Name Parameter] = "*" 
[Last Name Parameter] = "Roff" 
 
FirstName  LastName 
Jason      Roff 
Tammi      Roff 
Kimberly   Roff 
As you can see, the PARAMETERS clause can be very helpful when creating complex queries 
within a large database application.  
A.1.8.2 PROCEDURE 
The PROCEDURE clause creates and names stored procedures from a SQL statement. The 
PROCEDURE clause can also accept parameters, much like the PARAMETERS clause:  
PROCEDURE ReturnEmployeeID 
[First Name Parameter] AS STRING, 
[Last Name Parameter] AS STRING; 
SELECT FirstName,  
       LastName, 
       EmployeeID 
FROM Employees 
WHERE ((FirstName LIKE [First Name Parameter]) 
       AND (LastName LIKE [Last Name Parameter]); 
 
[First Name Parameter] = "Jason" 
[Last Name Parameter] = "Roff" 
 
FirstName  LastName  EmployeeID 
Jason      Roff      100 
A.1.8.3 WITH OWNERACCESS OPTION 
The WITH OWNERACCESS OPTION is used at the end of any SQL statement to allow the user of 
the query to access information for which she otherwise would not have the proper permissions. 
Of course, this is all dependent on the owner of the query having the proper permissions to access 
the information.  
The WITH OWNERACCESS OPTION appears in a SQL statement as shown here:  
PROCEDURE GetFinancialInformation 
[First Name Parameter] AS STRING, 
[Last Name Parameter] AS STRING; 
SELECT Employees.FirstName, 
       Employees.LastName, 
       Sales.TotalRevenue 

IT-SC book 
501
FROM Employees 
INNER JOIN Sales 
ON (Employees.EmployeeID = Sales.EmployeeID) 
WHERE ((Employees.FirstName = [First Name Parameter]) 
       AND (Employees.LastName = [Last Name Parameter])) 
WITH OWNERACCESS OPTION; 
 
[First Name Property] = "Kimberly" 
[Last Name Property] = "Roff" 
 
FirstName  LastName  TotalRevenue 
Kimberly   Roff      1154001 
A.2 Data Manipulation 
SQL is much more than just a data-retrieving language. It is also manipulates data within a given 
data source. The three types of data manipulation are the addition of data, the modification of data, 
and the removal of data.  
A.2.1 Adding Records 
Adding records in SQL is very easy. It is done through an append query. This type of query can 
add one or more records to an existing table through the INSERT...INTO clause.  
A.2.1.1 INSERT . . . INTO 
The INSERT...INTO clause syntax for appending a single record is as follows:  
INSERT INTO target_table 
[IN external_database] 
            [(field_name1 [, field_name2 [, ...]])] 
SELECT [source_table].field_name1 [, field_name2 [, ...] 
FROM source_table 
The following example inserts multiple records into the Automobile table, based on cost, from an 
additional table, NewAutomobiles:  
INSERT INTO Automobile 
SELECT * 
FROM NewAutomobiles 
WHERE (Cost >= 100000); 
The INSERT...INTO clause syntax for appending multiple records is as follows:  
INSERT INTO target_table 
            [(field_name1 [, field_name2 [, ...]])] 
VALUES (value1 [, value2 [, ...]]) 
The following SQL statement adds a new record to the Automobile table:  
INSERT INTO Automobile 
            (EmployeeID,  
             Year, 
             Make, 
             Model, 

IT-SC book 
502 
             Color, 
             Cost) 
VALUES      (100, 
             1997, 
             Chevy 
             Cavalier, 
             Teal, 
             14000); 
A.2.2 Modifying Records 
To modify values of a field in an existing table, use an update query.  
A.2.2.1 UPDATE 
The UPDATE clause syntax is:  
UPDATE table_name 
SET new_value_of_field 
WHERE criteria_for_update 
The following example increments the value of the TotalRevenue field of the Sales table based on 
the amount of hammocks sold:  
UPDATE Sales  
SET (TotalRevenue = TotalRevenue + (Hammocks * 1.25)) 
WHERE (Hammocks >= 1000); 
This example makes changes to the indicated records: 
 
Hammocks  TotalRevenue  TotalRevenue 
          (Before)      (After) 
21100     22642.5 
3234      1154001       11548043.5 
The UPDATE clause can also update multiple fields within the qualifying records (based upon the 
WHERE clause) with the same SQL statement, as demonstrated in the following example:  
UPDATE Sales 
SET (TotalRevenue = TotalRevenue + (Hammocks * 1.25)), 
    (UnitsSold = UnitsSold + 1) 
WHERE (Hammocks >= 1000); 
A.2.3 Deleting Records 
The DELETE method deletes one or more records of a specified table with optional conditions.  
A.2.3.1 DELETE 
The DELETE clause syntax is:  
DELETE [table_name.*] 
FROM table_name 
WHERE criteria_for_delete 

IT-SC book 
503
The following examples delete all records from the Automobile table:  
DELETE 
FROM Automobile; 
 
DELETE * 
FROM Automobile; 
 
DELETE Automobile.* 
FROM Automobile; 
The following example deletes blue cars from the Automobile table:  
DELETE Automobile.* 
FROM Automobile 
WHERE (Automobile.Color = "Blue"); 
A.3 Database Modification 
The last part of the functionality of SQL is database modification. With SQL, you can 
dynamically change the structure of a database by adding, modifying, and deleting tables. When 
you perform database modification on tables, either by adding or modifying them, you can add or 
modify indexes and constraints.  
A.3.1 CREATE TABLE 
The CREATE TABLE statement creates a new table in the current data source. This statement has 
the following syntax:  
CREATE TABLE table_expression 
             (field_name1 data_type [(size)] [NOT NULL] 
             [, field_name2 data_type [(size)] [NOT NULL] [, ...]]) 
The following CREATE TABLE statement creates the Automobile table:  
CREATE TABLE Automobile 
             (Year LONG NOT NULL, 
              Make TEXT (12) NOT NULL, 
              Model TEXT (15) NOT NULL, 
              Color TEXT (10) NOT NULL, 
              Cost LONG); 
The NOT NULL keywords in the preceding example tell the data provider to create the particular 
field so that it does not accept NULLs as legal values for that field.  
A.3.2 ALTER TABLE 
The ALTER TABLE clause alters an existing table in your current data source. The syntax for the 
ALTER TABLE clause is:  
ALTER TABLE table_expression 
  [ADD COLUMN field_name1 data_type [(size)] [NOT NULL] 
              [CONSTRAINT index_name1 | CONSTRAINT 
multifield_index_name]] | 
  [DROP {COLUMN field_name1 | CONSTRAINT index_name1}] 

IT-SC book 
504 
The ALTER TABLE statement is very powerful. You can add or delete a particular field in a table 
or add or delete a CONSTRAINT within a table. The following example illustrates adding a field to 
the Automobile table:  
ALTER TABLE Automobile 
   ADD COLUMN MotorSize TEXT(5); 
The following example shows you how to remove that field from the Automobile table:  
ALTER TABLE Automobile 
   DROP COLUMN MotorSize; 
The following example illustrates how to add a CONSTRAINT to the Automobile table:  
ALTER TABLE Employees 
   ADD CONSTRAINT EmployeeIDConst REFERENCES Automobile (EmployeeID); 
The following example shows you how to remove this last CONSTRAINT from the Automobile 
table:  
ALTER TABLE Automobile 
   DROP CONSTRAINT Automobile; 
A.3.3 CONSTRAINT 
The CONSTRAINT clause can be used with either the CREATE TABLE statement or the ALTER 
TABLE statement. The CONSTRANT clause can be used to create both single-field constraints and 
multiple-field constraints. The syntax for the single-field CONSTRAINT clause is as follows:  
CONSTRAINT constraint_name 
  {PRIMARY KEY |  
   UNIQUE |  
   NOT NULL | 
   REFERENCES foreign_table [(foreign_field1, foreignfield2)]} 
An example of a CONSTRAINT is shown in this SQL statement, which adds the EmployeeID 
field to the Sales table:  
ALTER TABLE Sales 
  ADD COLUMN EmployeeID LONG NOT NULL 
      CONSTRAINT EmployeeIDConst  
      REFERENCES Employees (EmployeeID); 
The syntax for a multiple-field constraint is as follows: 
CONSTRAINT constraint_name 
  {PRIMARY KEY (primary1 [, primary2 [, ...]]) |  
   UNIQUE (unique1 [, unique2, [, ...]]) |  
   NOT NULL (not_null1, [, not_null2 [, ...]]) |  
   FOREIGN KEY (ref1 [, ref2  [, ...]]) | 
   REFERENCES foreign_table [(foreign_field1, foreignfield2)]} 
A.3.4 CREATE INDEX 
The CREATE INDEX statement creates an index within the current data source with the 
information that you provide. The syntax for the CREATE INDEX statement is as follows:  

IT-SC book 
505
CREATE [UNIQUE] INDEX index_name 
  ON table_name (field_name1 [ASC | DESC] [,field_name2 [ASC | DESC] 
[, ...]]) 
  [WITH {PRIMARY | 
         DISALLOW NULL | 
         IGNORE NULL}] 
The following two examples show you how to use the CREATE INDEX statement within your SQL 
statements:  
CREATE UNIQUE INDEX EmployeeIDIndex 
ON Employees (EmployeeID ASC) 
WITH PRIMARY; 
 
CREATE INDEX CarType 
ON Automobile (Make ASC, Model ASC)' 
A.3.5 DROP 
The DROP statement removes either a table from the associated data source or an index from the 
indicated table. The following statement removes the Automobile table from our data source:  
DROP TABLE Automobile; 
This example removes the CarTypeIndex from the Automobile table:  
DROP TABLE CarTypeIndex 
ON Automobile; 
Appendix B. The Properties Collection 
The Properties collection exists within the Connection, Command, Recordset, and Field objects. 
This collection provides dynamic property information about its corresponding ADO object 
directly from the underlying data provider. 
The Properties collection is not very complicated. Because the capabilities with the Properties 
collection is limited, so are the number of properties and methods. In fact, there is only one 
property, Count, which returns the number of Property objects within the Properties collection. 
Only two methods belong to the Properties collection: Item and Refresh. Item, as its name implies, 
accesses an individual Property object within the Properties collection. The Refresh method 
repopulates the corresponding ADO object with the dynamic Property objects that describe the 
characteristics of the underlying data provider. 
Each Property object within the Properties collection represents a single attribute of the 
underlying data provider that pertains to the associated ADO object, whether it is the Connection, 
Command, Recordset, or Field object. 
An individual Property object does not have any methods, but it does have four properties of its 
own: 
Name  
Returns a string value representing the name of the property. 

IT-SC book 
506 
Type  
Returns a valid DataTypeEnum value indicating the datatype of the property's value. 
Value  
Sets or returns a variant value representing the value of the datatype. 
Attributes  
Returns a valid PropertyAttributesEnum value that indicates the attributes associated with the 
given Property object. The Attributes property can contain a sum of any of the valid 
PropertyAttributesEnum values shown in Table B-1. 
Table B-1. The PropertyAttributesEnum Enumeration  
Value 
Description 
adPropNotSupported Indicates that the characteristic defined by the current Property object is 
not supported by the data provider. 
adPropRequired 
Indicates that the characteristic defined by the current Property object 
must be set by the application before connecting to the data source. 
Most of the time, a required field has a default value so that actually 
populating the Property object with a value is unnecessary. 
adPropOptional 
Indicates that the characteristic defined by the current Property object is 
optional and does not have to be set in order to establish a connection to 
the data source. 
adPropRead 
Indicates that the value of the characteristic defined by the current 
Property object can be read. 
adPropWrite 
Indicates that the value of the characteristic defined by the current 
Property object can be written by the application. 
Now that we understand Property objects and the Properties collection, let's take a look at a neat 
example that allows you to view the contents of different ADO objects' Properties collections. 
B.1 The Property Example 
The Property Example is a simple application that utilizes the Properties collection and the 
Property object to report in a user-friendly manner the dynamic characteristics that are exposed 
by a data provider for any of the given ADO objects that support the Properties collection. Figure 
B-1 shows the Property Example main dialog box when the program is executing. 
Figure B-1. The Property Example 

IT-SC book 
507
 
To begin, create a new Visual Basic project, select the Standard EXE project type, name the 
default form frmPropertyExample, and change its Caption property to "Property Example". Next, 
add two labels, a List View control, and five command buttons. For each of these controls, set the 
values of the properties shown in Table B-2. 
Table B-2. The Property Example Control Settings  
Control 
Property 
Value 
Label 
Caption 
Properties for: 
Label 
Name 
lblObject 
List View 
Name 
lvwProperties 
  
View 
3 - lvwReport 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdConnection 
  
Caption 
Co&nnection 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdRecordset 
  
Caption 
&Recordset 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdCommand 
  
Caption 
Co&mmand 

IT-SC book 
508 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdField 
  
Caption 
&Field 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdClose 
  
Caption 
&Close 
Next, you need to add the four column headers through the Custom property in the property 
dialog box in the Visual Basic IDE for the List View. The four columns that you need to create 
are: 
Name 
Value 
Type 
Attributes 
Now we are ready for the code.[A] In the General Declarations section of the form, declare the four 
variables shown in the following code, one for each of the ADO objects that contains the 
Properties collection. Remember to include the ADO runtime DLL within the References dialog 
box of your Visual Basic project, or you will have some trouble when it comes time to compile: 
[A] This and all other code examples from this book are available for download from the book's 
web site, http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/ado/. 
Option Explicit 
 
Private m_oCon As Connection 
Private m_oCom As Command 
Private m_oRst As Recordset 
Private m_oFld As Field 
Make sure that all of the objects are set to Nothing when the application exits by adding the 
following code to the cmdClose_Click event: 
Private Sub cmdClose_Click(  ) 
    Set m_oCon = Nothing 
    Set m_oRst = Nothing 
    Set m_oCom = Nothing 
    Unload Me 
End Sub 
Now enter the following code for the cmdConnection_Click event, which is used to establish 
a connection with a data source. The form frmConnnection is used to gather the 
ConnectionString and CursorLocation information for the Connection object. We will enter the 
frmConnection code later. After the connection is established, the DisplayProperties method is 

IT-SC book 
509
called with the Connection object as a parameter. We will soon see that the DisplayProperties 
method is used to populate the List View control with the Properties collection of the ADO object 
that is passed to it: 
Private Sub cmdConnection_Click(  ) 
 
    frmConnection.Show vbModal 
    If (frmConnection.Canceled) Then Exit Sub 
     
    Set m_oCon = New Connection 
    m_oCon.ConnectionString = frmConnection.ConnectionString 
    m_oCon.CursorLocation = frmConnection.CursorLocation 
    Unload frmConnection 
     
    m_oCon.Open 
     
    cmdRecordset.Enabled = True 
    cmdCommand.Enabled = True 
    cmdField.Enabled = False 
    Set m_oRst = Nothing 
     
    DisplayProperties m_oCon, "Connection" 
     
End Sub 
The code for the cmdRecordset_Click event is very similar to that for the 
cmdConnection_Click event. To open a Recordset object, the application uses the form 
frmRecordset to gather the CursorType, LockType, and Source property values. Once the 
Recordset object is opened, the DisplayProperties method is called to populate the List View 
control: 
Private Sub cmdRecordset_Click(  ) 
     
    frmRecordset.Show vbModal 
    If (frmRecordset.Canceled) Then Exit Sub 
     
    Set m_oRst = New ADODB.Recordset 
     
    m_oRst.ActiveConnection = m_oCon 
    m_oRst.CursorType = frmRecordset.CursorType 
    m_oRst.LockType = frmRecordset.LockType 
    m_oRst.Source = frmRecordset.Source 
    Unload frmRecordset 
     
    m_oRst.Open 
     
    cmdField.Enabled = True 
     
    DisplayProperties m_oRst, "Recordset" 
 
End Sub 
The cmdCommand_Click event uses the frmCommand form to gather the CommandText to open 
a Command object: 
Private Sub cmdCommand_Click(  ) 
     

IT-SC book 
510 
    frmCommand.Show vbModal 
    If (frmCommand.Canceled) Then Exit Sub 
     
    Set m_oCom = New ADODB.Command 
    Set m_oRst = New ADODB.Recordset 
     
    m_oCom.ActiveConnection = m_oCon 
    m_oCom.CommandText = frmCommand.CommandText 
    Unload frmCommand 
     
    Set m_oRst = m_oCom.Execute 
         
    cmdField.Enabled = True 
     
    DisplayProperties m_oCom, "Command" 
 
End Sub 
Finally, enter the code for the cmdField_Click event, which displays the frmField form so 
that the user can select a field from the currently opened Recordset or Command object to display 
its Properties collection: 
Private Sub cmdField_Click(  ) 
     
    Set frmField.Recordset = m_oRst 
    frmField.Show vbModal 
    If (frmField.Canceled) Then Exit Sub 
     
    Set m_oFld = m_oRst.Fields(frmField.Field) 
    Unload frmField 
     
    DisplayProperties m_oFld, "Field" 
 
End Sub 
Now enter the following code for the DisplayProperties method. The following code sets the 
width of the columns within the List View control then loops through each of the Property objects 
in the Properties collection of the ADO object that has been passed to the method. For each 
property, a ListItem is added to the List View control. The ListItem contains all of the Property 
object's properties: Name, Value, Type, and Attributes. Because the values returned from the 
Type and Attributes properties are numeric, the GetPropertyType and GetAttributes methods are 
used to return a string value that is easy for the user to understand: 
Private Sub DisplayProperties(oObject As Object, _ 
                              sUsing As String) 
     
    Dim lColumnCount As Long 
    Dim lColumnWidth As Long 
     
    Dim oProperty As Property 
    Dim oListItem As ListItem 
     
    lblObject.Caption = sUsing 
     
    lColumnWidth = lvwProperties.Width / 4 
    For lColumnCount = 1 To 4 

IT-SC book 
511
        lvwProperties.ColumnHeaders.Add 
        lvwProperties.ColumnHeaders(lColumnCount).Width = lColumnWidth 
    Next lColumnCount 
     
    lvwProperties.ListItems.Clear 
     
    For Each oProperty In oObject.Properties 
        Set oListItem = lvwProperties.ListItems.Add(  ) 
        oListItem.Text = oProperty.Name 
        oListItem.SubItems(1) = oProperty.Value & "" 
        oListItem.SubItems(2) = GetPropertyType(oProperty.Type) 
        oListItem.SubItems(3) = GetAttributes(oProperty.Attributes) 
    Next oProperty 
     
End Sub 
The code for the GetAttributes method is as follows: 
Private Function GetAttributes(lAttributes As Long) As String 
 
    If (lAttributes And adPropNotSupported) Then _ 
        GetAttributes = "Not Supported, " 
     
    If (lAttributes And adPropRequired) Then _ 
        GetAttributes = GetAttributes & "Required, " 
     
    If (lAttributes And adPropOptional) Then _ 
        GetAttributes = GetAttributes & "Optional, " 
     
    If (lAttributes And adPropRead) Then _ 
        GetAttributes = GetAttributes & "Read, " 
     
    If (lAttributes And adPropWrite) Then _ 
        GetAttributes = GetAttributes & "Write, " 
     
    If (Right$(GetAttributes, 2) = ", ") Then _ 
        GetAttributes = Left$(GetAttributes, Len(GetAttributes) - 2) 
 
End Function 
Because the value within the Attributes property of a Property object can be the sum of any of the 
PropertyAttributesEnum values, the Attributes value is logically Anded with each enumeration 
constant to see whether that particular flag is set. For each flag that is set, a string value is 
appended to the description of the attributes. 
The code for the GetPropertyType method is as follows. This code also returns a string value to 
describe the enumeration value that is passed to it: 
Private Function GetPropertyType(lType As Long) As String 
    Select Case (lType) 
        Case adBigInt:              GetPropertyType = "BigInt" 
        Case adBinary:              GetPropertyType = "Binary" 
        Case adBoolean:             GetPropertyType = "Boolean" 
        Case adBSTR:                GetPropertyType = "BSTR" 
        Case adChar:                GetPropertyType = "Char" 
        Case adCurrency:            GetPropertyType = "Currency" 
        Case adDate:                GetPropertyType = "Date" 

IT-SC book 
512 
        Case adDBDate:              GetPropertyType = "DBDate" 
        Case adDBTime:              GetPropertyType = "DBTime" 
        Case adDBTimeStamp:         GetPropertyType = "DBTimeStamp" 
        Case adDecimal:             GetPropertyType = "Decimal" 
        Case adDouble:              GetPropertyType = "Double" 
        Case adEmpty:               GetPropertyType = "Empty" 
        Case adError:               GetPropertyType = "Error" 
        Case adGUID:                GetPropertyType = "GUID" 
        Case adIDispatch:           GetPropertyType = "IDispatch" 
        Case adInteger:             GetPropertyType = "Integer" 
        Case adIUnknown:            GetPropertyType = "IUnknown" 
        Case adLongVarBinary:       GetPropertyType = "LongVarBinary" 
        Case adLongVarChar:         GetPropertyType = "LongVarChar" 
        Case adLongVarWChar:        GetPropertyType = "LongVarWChar" 
        Case adNumeric:             GetPropertyType = "Numeric" 
        Case adSingle:              GetPropertyType = "Single" 
        Case adSmallInt:            GetPropertyType = "SmallInt" 
        Case adTinyInt:             GetPropertyType = "TinyInt" 
        Case adUnsignedBigInt:      GetPropertyType = "UnsignedBigInt" 
        Case adUnsignedInt:         GetPropertyType = "UnsignedInt" 
        Case adUnsignedSmallInt:    GetPropertyType = 
"UnsignedSmallInt" 
        Case adUnsignedTinyInt:     GetPropertyType = "UnsignedTinyInt" 
        Case adUserDefined:         GetPropertyType = "UserDefined" 
        Case adVarBinary:           GetPropertyType = "VarBinary" 
        Case adVarChar:             GetPropertyType = "VarChar" 
        Case adVariant:             GetPropertyType = "Variant" 
        Case adVarWChar:            GetPropertyType = "VarWChar" 
        Case adWChar:               GetPropertyType = "WChar" 
        Case Else:                  GetPropertyType = "Unknown" 
    End Select 
End Function 
Finally, enter the code for the Form_Load event, which sets the Enabled property of the 
command buttons: 
Private Sub Form_Load(  ) 
    cmdConnection.Enabled = True 
    cmdRecordset.Enabled = False 
    cmdCommand.Enabled = False 
    cmdField.Enabled = False 
End Sub 
Now that the main form, frmPropertiesExample, is complete, add another form to your project, 
name it frmConnection, and change its Caption property to "Connection Information". This form 
gathers the ConnectionString and CursorLocation property values from the user so that the 
frmPropertiesExample form can open a Connection object. Figure B-2 shows the frmConnection 
form at runtime. 
Figure B-2. The Connection Information dialog box 

IT-SC book 
513
 
Add two frames to your new form. Within the first frame, add a control array of four option 
buttons. Within this frame, create a text box next to the last option button in the control array. 
Within the second frame, add a control array of two option buttons. Add two command buttons in 
the area outside of the frames, and then set the properties of all the controls as shown in Table B-
3. 
Table B-3. The Connection Information Dialog Box Control Settings  
Control 
Property 
Value 
Frame 
Caption 
Connection String 
Option Button 
Name 
optConnectionString 
  
Index 
0 
Option Button 
Name 
optConnectionString 
  
Index 
1 
Option Button 
Name 
optConnectionString 
  
Index 
2 
Option Button 
Name 
optConnectionString 
  
Index 
3 

IT-SC book 
514 
  
Caption 
Other 
Text Box 
Name 
txtConnectionString 
  
MultiLine 
True 
Option Button 
Name 
optCursorLocation 
  
Index 
0 
  
Caption 
Use Server 
Option Button 
Name 
optCursorLocation 
  
Index 
1 
  
Caption 
Use Client 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdOpen 
  
Caption 
&Open 
  
Default 
True 
Command Button 
Name 
CmdCancel 
  
Caption 
&Cancel 
  
Cancel 
True 
Once all of the properties are set for the controls, enter the following code to handle the command 
button's Click events and the Cancel property. When the user clicks the Cancel command button, 
the Canceled property will be set to True, but it will be set to False when the user clicks Open: 
Option Explicit 
 
Private m_bCanceled As Boolean 
 
Private Sub cmdCancel_Click(  ) 
    m_bCanceled = True 
    Me.Hide 

IT-SC book 
515
End Sub 
 
Private Sub cmdOpen_Click(  ) 
    m_bCanceled = False 
    Me.Hide 
End Sub 
 
Public Property Get Canceled(  ) As Boolean 
    Canceled = m_bCanceled 
End Property 
The code for the Form_Load event, shown next, populates the ConnectionString option button 
array with different connection strings. In addition, the User Server CursorLocation value is 
chosen as the default for startup: 
Private Sub Form_Load(  ) 
 
    optConnectionString(0).Caption = "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
     
    optConnectionString(1).Caption = "driver={SQL Server}; " _ 
                                   & "server=JROFF_LAPTOP; " _ 
                                   & "uid=sa; " _ 
                                   & "database=Northwind" 
     
    optConnectionString(2).Caption = "DSN=OtherDSN" 
     
    optConnectionString(0).Value = True 
    optCursorLocation(0).Value = True 
 
End Sub 
When the fourth option button is pressed (indicated by an Index value of 3), the Connection 
String text box has to be enabled. The Connection String text box allows users to enter their own 
connection string rather than picking one of the "hard-coded" choices. The following code takes 
care of this: 
Private Sub optConnectionString_Click(Index As Integer) 
    If (Index = 3) Then 
        txtConnectionString.Enabled = True 
        txtConnectionString.BackColor = vbWhite 
    Else 
        txtConnectionString.Enabled = False 
        txtConnectionString.BackColor = &H8000000F  ' light grey 
    End If 
End Sub 
Next, enter the code for the CursorLocation property, which returns a valid CursorLocationEnum 
enumeration value based upon which option button the user has selected: 
Public Property Get CursorLocation(  ) As ADODB.CursorLocationEnum 
    If (optCursorLocation(0).Value = True) Then 
        CursorLocation = adUseServer 
    Else 
        CursorLocation = adUseClient 
    End If 
End Property 

IT-SC book 
516 
The code for the ConnectionString property returns a connection string based upon the option 
button selected by the user or the connection string entered into the Connection text box next to 
the last option button: 
Public Property Get ConnectionString(  ) As String 
 
    If (optConnectionString(0).Value = True) Then _ 
        ConnectionString = optConnectionString(0).Caption 
     
    If (optConnectionString(1).Value = True) Then _ 
        ConnectionString = optConnectionString(1).Caption 
     
    If (optConnectionString(2).Value = True) Then _ 
        ConnectionString = optConnectionString(2).Caption 
     
    If (optConnectionString(3).Value = True) Then _ 
        ConnectionString = txtConnectionString.Text 
         
End Property 
That's it for the frmConnection form. 
Now move onto the frmRecordset form, which allows the user to select the Source, CursorType, 
and LockType property values prior to opening a new Recordset object. The frmRecordset form 
is shown in Figure B-3. 
Figure B-3. The Recordset Information dialog box 
 
To begin, add a new form to your project, name it frmRecordset, and change its Caption property 
to "Recordset Information". Now add the three frames and the three control arrays of option 
buttons. Add the text-box control and two command buttons, and enter the properties for each of 
these controls as shown in Table B-4. 
Table B-4. The Recordset Information Dialog Box Control Settings  

IT-SC book 
517
Control 
Property 
Value 
Frame 
Caption 
Source 
Option Button 
Name 
optSource 
  
Index 
0 
Option Button 
Name 
optSource 
  
Index 
1 
Option Button 
Name 
optSource 
  
Index 
2 
Option Button 
Name 
optSource 
  
Index 
3 
  
Caption 
Other 
Text Box 
Name 
txtSource 
  
MultiLine 
True 
Frame 
Caption 
CursorType 
Option Button 
Name 
optCursorType 
  
Index 
0 
  
Caption 
Dynamic 
Option Button 
Name 
optCursorType 
  
Index 
1 

IT-SC book 
518 
  
Caption 
Keyset 
Option Button 
Name 
OptCursorType 
  
Index 
2 
  
Caption 
Forward Only 
Option Button 
Name 
OptCursorType 
  
Index 
3 
  
Caption 
Static 
Frame 
Caption 
Lock Type 
Option Button 
Name 
optLockType 
  
Index 
0 
  
Caption 
Batch Optimistic 
Option Button 
Name 
optLockType 
  
Index 
1 
  
Caption 
Pessimistic 
Option Button 
Name 
optLockType 
  
Index 
2 
  
Caption 
Optimistic 
Option Button 
Name 
optLockType 
  
Index 
3 

IT-SC book 
519
  
Caption 
Read-Only 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdOpen 
  
Caption 
&Open 
  
Default 
True 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdCancel 
  
Caption 
&Cancel 
  
Cancel 
True 
Begin the frmRecordset code by entering in the command-button Click-event code and the 
Cancel property support just as you did for the frmConnection form: 
Option Explicit 
 
Private m_bCanceled As Boolean 
 
Private Sub cmdCancel_Click(  ) 
    m_bCanceled = True 
    Me.Hide 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub cmdOpen_Click(  ) 
    m_bCanceled = False 
    Me.Hide 
End Sub 
 
Public Property Get Canceled(  ) As Boolean 
    Canceled = m_bCanceled 
End Property 
Use the Form_Load event to populate the Source option buttons with source-string values that 
can be used to open recordsets: 
Private Sub Form_Load(  ) 
     
    optSource(0).Caption = "Authors" 
     
    optSource(1).Caption = "SELECT * FROM Authors;" 
     
    optSource(2).Caption = "SELECT * FROM Orders;" 
     
    optSource(0).Value = True 
    optCursorType(0).Value = True 
    optLockType(0).Value = True 

IT-SC book 
520 
 
End Sub 
To enable the text box when the user selects the last option button in the Source control array, 
enter the following code: 
Private Sub optSource_Click(Index As Integer) 
    If (Index = 3) Then 
        txtSource.Enabled = True 
        txtSource.BackColor = vbWhite 
    Else 
        txtSource.Enabled = False 
        txtSource.BackColor = &H8000000F  ' light grey 
    End If 
End Sub 
Now enter the code that returns a valid CursorTypeEnum enumeration value for the CursorType 
property based upon the option button that is selected by the user: 
Public Property Get CursorType(  ) As ADODB.CursorTypeEnum 
    If (optCursorType(0).Value = True) Then CursorType = adOpenDynamic 
    If (optCursorType(1).Value = True) Then CursorType = adOpenKeyset 
    If (optCursorType(2).Value = True) Then CursorType = 
adOpenForwardOnly 
    If (optCursorType(3).Value = True) Then CursorType = adOpenStatic 
End Property 
Do the same for the LockType property so that a valid LockTypeEnum value is returned: 
Public Property Get LockType(  ) As ADODB.LockTypeEnum 
    If (optLockType(0).Value = True) Then LockType = 
adLockBatchOptimistic 
    If (optLockType(1).Value = True) Then LockType = adLockPessimistic 
    If (optLockType(2).Value = True) Then LockType = adLockOptimistic 
    If (optLockType(3).Value = True) Then LockType = adLockReadOnly 
End Property 
Finish by entering the code for the Source property, which returns the Caption of a chosen option 
button unless the last one is selected, in which case the value of the Source text box is returned: 
Public Property Get Source(  ) As String 
 
    If (optSource(0).Value = True) Then _ 
        Source = optSource(0).Caption 
     
    If (optSource(1).Value = True) Then _ 
        Source = optSource(1).Caption 
     
    If (optSource(2).Value = True) Then _ 
        Source = optSource(2).Caption 
     
    If (optSource(3).Value = True) Then _ 
        Source = txtSource.Text 
         
End Property 

IT-SC book 
521
Now that you are done with the frmRecordset form, begin the frmCommand form, which is very 
similar. The frmCommand form, shown in Figure B-4, is used to allow the user to select the 
CommandText property used when opening a new Command object. 
Figure B-4. The Command Information dialog box 
 
Add a new form to your project, name it frmCommand, and set its Caption property to 
"Command Information". This form only has one frame and control array, as compared to the last 
two forms, which had at least two. Add the two command buttons, and then set all of the 
properties shown in Table B-5 to the values specified. 
Table B-5. The Command Information Dialog Box Control Settings  
Control 
Property 
Value 
Frame 
Caption 
Command Text 
Option Button 
Name 
optCommandText 
  
Index 
0 
Option Button 
Name 
optCommandText 
  
Index 
1 
Option Button 
Name 
optCommandText 
  
Index 
2 
Option Button 
Name 
optCommandText 

IT-SC book 
522 
  
Index 
3 
Text Box 
Name 
txtCommandText 
  
MultiLine 
True 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdOpen 
  
Caption 
&Open 
  
Default 
True 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdCancel 
  
Caption 
&Cancel 
  
Cancel 
True 
Enter the usual code for the command buttons and the Cancel property: 
Option Explicit 
 
Private m_bCanceled As Boolean 
 
Private Sub cmdCancel_Click(  ) 
    m_bCanceled = True 
    Me.Hide 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub cmdOpen_Click(  ) 
    m_bCanceled = False 
    Me.Hide 
End Sub 
 
Public Property Get Canceled(  ) As Boolean 
    Canceled = m_bCanceled 
End Property 
Now enter the Form_Load event procedure, which contains the code to populate the 
CommandText properties on the frmCommand form: 
Private Sub Form_Load(  ) 
 
    optCommandText(0).Caption = "SELECT * FROM Authors;" 
     
    optCommandText(1).Caption = "DELETE * FROM Authors _ 
                                 WHERE (Author = 'Jason');" 

IT-SC book 
523
     
    optCommandText(2).Caption = "SELECT * " _ 
                     & "FROM Customers " _ 
                     & "WHERE (ContactTitle = 'Sales Representative') " 
_ 
                     & "AND (Country = 'USA'); " 
    
    optCommandText(0).Value = True 
 
End Sub 
The following code enables the CommandText text box when the user selects the last option 
button in the control array: 
Private Sub optCommandText_Click(Index As Integer) 
    If (Index = 3) Then 
        txtCommandText.Enabled = True 
        txtCommandText.BackColor = vbWhite 
    Else 
        txtCommandText.Enabled = False 
        txtCommandText.BackColor = &H8000000F  ' light grey 
    End If 
End Sub 
When the CommandText property is read, a CommandText string value is passed from either the 
selected option button or the text box containing a user-entered CommandText value: 
Public Property Get CommandText(  ) As String 
 
    If (optCommandText(0).Value = True) Then _ 
        CommandText = optCommandText(0).Caption 
     
    If (optCommandText(1).Value = True) Then _ 
        CommandText = optCommandText(1).Caption 
     
    If (optCommandText(2).Value = True) Then _ 
        CommandText = optCommandText(2).Caption 
     
    If (optCommandText(3).Value = True) Then _ 
        CommandText = txtCommandText.Text 
         
End Property 
Now that the frmCommand form is complete, you can move on to the last form, the frmField 
form. This form allows the user to select a Field object from the currently open Recordset or 
Command object. The Field form is shown in Figure B-5. Begin by adding the form to your 
project, changing its Name property to frmField and changing its Caption property to "Field 
Information." 
Figure B-5. The Field Information dialog box 

IT-SC book 
524 
 
The frmField form consists of a Label, a List View control, and two command buttons. After 
placing these controls onto the form, set the properties shown in Table B-6 to the values 
specified. 
Table B-6. The Field Information Dialog Control Settings  
Control 
Property 
Value 
Label 
Caption 
Fields: 
List Box 
Name 
lstFields 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdOk 
  
Caption 
&Ok 
  
Default 
True 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdCancel 
  
Caption 
&Cancel 
  
Cancel 
True 
Enter the usual command-button and Cancel-property code -- this should be familiar by now: 
Option Explicit 
 
Private m_bCanceled As Boolean 
 
Private Sub cmdCancel_Click(  ) 
    m_bCanceled = True 
    Me.Hide 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub cmdOk_Click(  ) 

IT-SC book 
525
    m_bCanceled = False 
    Me.Hide 
End Sub 
 
Public Property Get Canceled(  ) As Boolean 
    Canceled = m_bCanceled 
End Property 
Enter the following code to enable the cmdOK command button only when a valid Field object is 
selected from the List View control: 
Private Sub Form_Load(  ) 
    cmdOk.Enabled = False 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub lstFields_Click(  ) 
    cmdOk.Enabled = True 
End Sub 
The following code populates the List View control with a Recordset object that has been passed 
to it: 
Public Property Set Recordset(rec As Recordset) 
     
    Dim fld As Field 
     
    For Each fld In rec.Fields 
        lstFields.AddItem fld.Name 
    Next fld 
 
End Property 
Finally, the Field property returns the name of the field that was chosen by the user from the list: 
Public Property Get Field(  ) As String 
    Field = lstFields.List(lstFields.ListIndex) 
End Property 

IT-SC book 
526 
Appendix C. ADO Errors 
Errors are commonplace to any application. Usually, the development environment has a default 
exception-handling mechanism. In Visual Basic, this mechanism is the On Error statement.  
All Visual Basic errors can be trapped using this mechanism, but sometimes errors occur outside 
of Visual Basic. In these cases, the Visual Basic exception-handling mechanism does little if any 
good. This is especially true with ADO where errors can occur after execution has left your 
Visual Basic application and has gone to the data providers.  
ADO allows your Visual Basic application to deal with data-provider errors through a special 
object: the Error object.  
C.1 Working with Errors in ADO 
Two types of errors are of interest to us when using ActiveX Data Objects. The first of these 
types are those ADO errors that can be trapped within the development environment by using the 
default exception-handling mechanism. In Visual Basic, this mechanism is accessed using the On 
Error statement.  
The second type of error are those that are reported by a data provider and that can't be trapped 
within the development environment. These errors are reported within the Errors collection of the 
Connection object. Within this collection, one or more Error objects are used to represent the 
individual errors that are reported by the data provider.  
C.1.1 ADO Trappable Errors 
Table C-1 lists the trappable errors related to ADO.  
Table C-1. The ErrorValueEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adErrBoundToCommand 
(BOUNDTOCOMMAND) 
3707 
(&HE7B)
The 
ActiveConnection 
property 
of 
a 
Recordset object cannot be changed because 
the Recordset object's source is a Command 
object.  
adErrCannotComplete 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3732 
(&HE94) The server that owns the source row cannot 
complete the operation.  
adErrCantChangeConnection (no
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3748 
(&HEA4)
The Connection was denied because it has 
different characteristics than the one already 
in use.  
adErrCantChangeProvider 
(no 
3220 
(&HC94) The supplied provider is different from the 

IT-SC book 
527
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
one already in use.  
adErrCantConvertvalue 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3724 
(&HE8C)
Data value could not be converted for reasons 
other than sign mismatch or data overflow. 
For 
example, 
conversion 
would 
have 
truncated data.  
adErrCantCreate (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3725 
(&HE8D)
Data could not be set or retrieved because the 
column datatype was unknown or the 
provider had insufficient resources to perform 
the operation.  
adErrCatalogNotSet 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3747 
(&HEA3) The operation requires a valid ParentCatalog. 
adErrColumnNotOnThisRow 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3726 
(&HE8E) Column does not exist on this row. 
adErrDataConversion 
(DATACONVERSION) 
3421 
(&HD5D) A wrong datatype is being used for the 
operation. 
adErrDataOverflow (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3721 
(&HE89) Data value is too large to be represented by 
the column datatype. 
adErrDelResOutOfScope 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3738 
(&HE9A)
The URL of the object to be deleted is outside 
the scope of the current row. Make sure the 
URL is inside the scope.  
adErrDenyNotSupported 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3750 
(&HEA6) The data provider does not support sharing 
restrictions. 
adErrDenyTypeNotSupported (no
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3751 
(&HEA7) The data provider does not support the 
requested sharing restriction type.  
adErrFeatureNotAvailable 
(FEATURENOTAVAILABLE) 
3251 
(&HCB3) The provider does not support the operation.
adErrFieldsUpdateFailed 
3749 
(&HEA5) The Fields update failed. 
adErrIllegalOperation 
(ILLEGALOPERATION) 
3219 
(&HC93) The operation cannot be performed during 
this context. 

IT-SC book 
528 
adErrIntegrityViolation 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3719 
(&HE87) The data value conflicts with the integrity 
constraints of the field.  
adErrInTransaction 
(INTRANSACTION) 
3246 
(&HCAE) The operation is in the middle of a transaction 
and cannot close the Connection object.  
adErrInvalidArgument 
(INVALIDARGUMENT) 
3001 
(&HBB9)
The argument either is not of the correct type, 
has a value that is not in the acceptable range, 
or is in conflict with another argument.  
adErrInvalidConnection 
(INVALIDCONNECTION) 
3709 
(&HE7D) The operation cannot be performed because 
the Connection object is closed.  
adErrInvalidParamInfo 
(INVALIDPARAMINFO) 
3708 
(&HE7C) The parameter information is not defined 
correctly.  
adErrInvalidTransaction 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3714 
(&HE82) The coordinating transaction is invalid or has 
not started. 
adErrInvalidURL (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3729 
(&HE91)
The 
specified 
URL 
contains 
invalid 
characters. Make sure the URL is typed 
correctly.  
adErrItemNotFound 
(ITEMNOTFOUND) 
3265 
(&HCC1)
The object requested does not exist in the 
ADO collection at the ordinal position or with 
the name provided.  
adErrNoCurrentRecord 
(NOCURRENTRECORD) 
3021 
(&HBCD) The record pointer does not point to a valid 
record, and one is needed for the operation.  
adErrNotExecuting 
(NOTEXECUTING) (This seemed to be 
missing in 2.6)  
3715 
The execution could not be canceled because 
it was not executing.  
adErrNotReentrant 
(NOTREENTRANT) 
3710 
(&HE7E) The code within the event would cause the 
event to be fired again. 
adErrObjectClosed 
(OBJECTCLOSED) 
3704 
(&HE78) The object that is needed by the operation is 
closed.  
adErrObjectInCollection 
(OBJECTINCOLLECTION) 
3367 
(&HD27) The attempt to add the object to the collection 

IT-SC book 
529
was unsuccessful because the object is 
already in the collection.  
adErrObjectNotSet 
(OBJECTNOTSET) 
3420 
(&HD5C) The object does not point to a valid ADO 
object. 
adErrObjectOpen (OBJECTOPEN) 3705 
(&HE79) The operation requires that the object is not 
open. 
adErrOpeningFile (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3002 
(&HBBA) The file could not be opened.  
adErrOperationCancelled 
(OPERATIONCANCELLED) 
3712 
(&HE80) An ADO operation has been canceled. 
adErrOutOfSpace (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3734 
(&HE96) The provider is unable to obtain enough 
storage space to complete the copy operation. 
adErrPermissionDenied 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3720 
(&HE88) User does not have permission to write to the 
column. Check Column Privileges property. 
adErrPropConflicting 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3742 
(&HE9E)
The property value was not set because it 
would have conflicted with an existing 
property.  
adErrPropInvalidColumn 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3739 
(&HE9B) The property cannot apply to the specified 
column. 
adErrPropInvalidOption 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3740 
(&HE9C) The specified option is invalid. 
adErrPropInvalidValue 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3741 
(&HE9D) The specified value is invalid. Make sure the 
value is typed correctly.  
adErrPropNotAllSettable 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3743 
(&HE9F) The property is read-only or could not be set 
for the particular column.  
adErrPropNotSet (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3744 
(&HEA0)
The property value was not set. The value of 
dwOptions
was 
DBPROPOPTIONS_OPTIONAL, 
and 
the 
property could not be set to the specified 
value.  

IT-SC book 
530 
adErrPropNotSettable 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3745 
(&HEA1)
The property was read-only or the consumer 
attempted to set values of properties in the 
Initialization property group after the data-
source object was initialized. Consumers can 
set the value of a read-only property to its 
current value. This value is also returned if a 
settable column property could not be set for 
the particular column.  
adErrPropNotSupported 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3746 
(&HEA2) The property value was not set. The provider 
does not support the property.  
adErrProviderFailed 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3000 
(&HBB8) The provider failed to perform the requested 
operation. 
adErrProviderNotFound 
(PROVIDERNOTFOUND) 
3706 
(&HE7A) The provider could not be found. 
adErrReadFile 
(no 
ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3003 
(&HBBB) The file could not be read. 
adErrResourceExists 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3731 
(&HE93)
The copy operation cannot be performed. The 
object named by destination URL already 
exists. Specify adCopyOverwrite to replace 
the object.  
adErrResourceLocked 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3730 
(&HE92)
The object represented by the specified URL 
is locked by one or more other processes. 
Wait until the process has finished, and 
attempt the operation again.  
adErrResourceOutOfScope 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3735 
(&HE97)
The source or destination URL is outside the 
scope of the current row. Make sure the URL 
is inside the scope.  
adErrSchemaViolation 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3722 
(&HE8A) Data value conflicted with the datatype or 
constraints of the column. 
adErrSignMismatch (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3723 
(&HE8B)
Conversion failed because the data value was 
signed and the column datatype used by the 
provider was unsigned.  
adErrStillConnecting 
(STILLCONNECTING) 
3713 
(&HE81) The operation cannot be executed because 

IT-SC book 
531
ADO was still connecting to the data source. 
adErrStillExecuting 
(STILLEXECUTING) 
3711 
(&HE7F) The operation cannot be executed because 
another command is still being executed.  
adErrTreePermissionDenied (no
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3728 
(&HE90) The operation is unable to access a tree or 
subtree due to a permissions failure.  
adErrUnavailable (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3736 
(&HE98) An operation failed to complete, and the 
status is unavailable. 
adErrUnsafeOperation 
(UNSAFEOPERATION) 
3716 
(&HE84) The operation is not considered safe by the 
environment that is currently running ADO. 
adErrURLDoesNotExist 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3727 
(&HE8F) Either the source URL or the parent of the 
destination URL does not exist.  
adErrURLNamedRowDoesNotExist 
(no ADO/WFC equivalent)  
3737 
(&HE99) The row named by this URL does not exist. 
Make sure the URL is typed correctly.  
adErrVolumeNotFound 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3733 
(&HE95)
The provider is unable to locate the storage 
volume indicated by the URL. Make sure the 
URL is typed correctly.  
adErrWriteFile 
(no 
ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3004 
(&HBBC) The file could not be written to.  
adwrnSecurityDialog 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3717 
(&HE85) This is an internal constant only, and 
Microsoft asks that you do not use it.  
adwrnSecurityDialogHeader (no
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3718 
(&HE86) This is an internal constant only, and 
Microsoft asks that you do not use it.  
The errors listed in Table C-1 are generated by using ADO itself rather than from an underlying 
problem occurring within the data provider. These are errors that are caused by using ADO 
improperly.  
C.1.2 Data-Provider Errors 
Errors that occur within the data provider are not easily trappable within the traditional runtime 
exception-handling mechanism of a development environment like those generated by ADO itself.  

IT-SC book 
532 
These errors, generated by the data provider, are visible through the Error objects within the 
Errors collection of the Connection object. Every time an ADO operation causes a data-provider 
error, the Errors collection is populated within one or more errors (and in some cases, warnings) 
through individual Error objects.  
The Errors collection is not cleared until a new ADO operation causes a data provider error or the 
user manually clears the Errors collection with the Clear method. Warnings do not clear the 
Errors object, so it is a good idea to clear the Errors collection manually with the Clear method 
before calling any ADO operation that can generate warnings in order to determine whether a 
warning has been reported.  
The Resync, UpdateBatch, and CancelBatch methods, as well as the Filter property, of the 
Recordset object can generate warnings. In addition, the Open method of a Connection object can 
also generate data-provider warnings.  
Each Error object within the Errors collection can be accessed through the use of the default 
property of the Errors collection (Item), and the number of Error objects within the Errors 
collection can be obtained by using the Count property.  
Each Error object has properties that access the details about the error or warning generated by a 
data provider:  
Number  
Returns a Long value representing the constant value of the error or warning.  
Description  
Returns a String value representing the textual description of the error or warning.  
Source  
Returns a String value representing the object or the application that raised the error or warning. 
This value can be the object's class name or programmatic identification.  
SQL State  
Returns a String value five characters long. This value represents the ANSI SQL standard for 
error codes generated by SQL data sources.  
NativeError  
Returns a Long value representing the native error code from the data provider. This number does 
not have any meaning to ADO itself, but it can be used in conjunction with the data provider to 
gather more information about the error or warning.  
HelpFile  
Returns a String value representing the name of a file, if any, that contains more information 
about the particular error or warning.  
HelpContext  
Returns a Long value representing context identification within the help file named by the 
HelpFile property, which contains more information about the particular error or warning.  

IT-SC book 
533
The most common and useful properties that are used to determine a data-provider error are the 
first three described previously -- the Number, Description, and Source properties of the Error 
object.  
C.2 The Errors Example 
To better understand how the Errors collection of the Connection object works, I have come up 
with an example application conveniently named the Errors Collection Example.  
This example allows you to execute an operation within ADO that will (hopefully) generate an 
error. In addition, you can add more error-generating code to the example to further investigate 
the usage of error handling within ADO.  
The first form within the Errors Collection Example asks the user what type of error he would 
like to generate, as shown in Figure C-1.  
Figure C-1. The Errors Collection Example form 
 
After the user selects an error from the list and presses the Ok button, the operation that generates 
the error or errors is attempted, and with any luck, the ADO Error(s) form is displayed detailing 
each error, as shown in Figure C-2.  
Figure C-2. The ADO Error(s) form 
 

IT-SC book 
534 
To begin this example, create a new project within Visual Basic, and be sure to set a reference to 
the Microsoft ActiveX Data Objects xx Library, where xx represents the version of ADO that you 
have on your machine (1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.1). Name the project ErrorsCollectionExample.  
C.2.1 The Main Form 
Once your new project is created, change the name of Form1 to frmErrorsCollectionExample, 
and add a label, a list box, and two command buttons, as shown in Figure C-3.  
Figure C-3. The Errors Collection Example form in Design mode 
 
Once the controls have been placed on the form, set the values of the properties listed in Table 
C-2.  
Table C-2. The Errors Collection Form Control Settings  
Control 
Property 
Value 
Form 
Caption 
Errors Collection Example 
Label 
Caption 
Generate Error: 
List Box 
Name 
LstErrors 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdOk 
  
Caption 
&Ok 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdClose 
  
Caption 
&Close 

IT-SC book 
535
Begin entering the following code. This is a list of constant values that represent each error the 
user can generate. If you want to add additional errors to the list, create a new constant for it here:  
Option Explicit 
 
Private Const BAD_CONNECTION_ERROR = 1 
Private Const SQL_SERVER_NOT_STARTED_ERROR = 2 
Private Const BAD_USER_NAME_ERROR = 3 
Private Const INVALID_COMMANDTEXT_VALUE_ERROR = 4 
Private Const TABLE_NOT_AVAILABLE_ERROR = 5 
Private Const NOT_AN_ADO_ERROR = 6 
Now add the code for the Command buttons. The Close button unloads the form, but the Ok 
button calls the GenerateError method with the constant representing the error selected. You will 
see later that each item in the list box has its ItemData property to set the constant value of its 
corresponding error:  
Private Sub cmdClose_Click(  ) 
    Unload Me 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub cmdOk_Click(  ) 
    GenerateError lstErrors.ItemData(lstErrors.ListIndex) 
End Sub 
Enter the following code to populate the list box with the errors that have been predefined. As 
you can see, the Form_Load event calls the PopulateErrors method, which in turn calls the 
AddToErrorList method for each possible error that can be generated. A description of the error 
and the constant representing the error is used for each item within the list box.  
If you want to add additional errors to the list, enter another call to the AddToErrorList method 
within the PopulateErrors method for each:  
Private Sub Form_Load(  ) 
    PopulateErrors 
End Sub 
 
Private Sub PopulateErrors(  ) 
         
    AddToErrorList "Bad connection", BAD_CONNECTION_ERROR 
    AddToErrorList "SQL Server not started", 
SQL_SERVER_NOT_STARTED_ERROR 
    AddToErrorList "Bad user name", BAD_USER_NAME_ERROR 
    AddToErrorList "Invalid command text value", 
INVALID_COMMANDTEXT_VALUE_ERROR 
    AddToErrorList "Table not available", TABLE_NOT_AVAILABLE_ERROR 
    AddToErrorList "Not an ADO error", NOT_AN_ADO_ERROR 
    lstErrors.ListIndex = 0 
     
End Sub 
 
Private Sub AddToErrorList(sError As String, _ 
                           lErrorIndex As Long) 
                             
    lstErrors.AddItem sError 
    lstErrors.ItemData(lstErrors.ListCount - 1) = lErrorIndex 
 

IT-SC book 
536 
End Sub 
The GenerateError method generates the error that was chosen by the user. Again, if you have 
added additional errors to the list, add another Case statement to generate the error that you want:  
Private Sub GenerateError(lErrorIndex As Long) 
On Error GoTo ERR_GenerateError: 
 
    Dim con As ADODB.Connection 
     
    Set con = New ADODB.Connection 
 
    Select Case (lErrorIndex) 
         
        Case BAD_CONNECTION_ERROR: 
            con.Open "Bad Connection" 
     
        Case SQL_SERVER_NOT_STARTED_ERROR: 
            MsgBox "Make sure that the SQL Server service is not 
started.", _ 
                   vbInformation + vbOKOnly, _ 
                   "Information" 
            con.Open "DSN=NorthwindDSN" 
             
        Case BAD_USER_NAME_ERROR: 
            MsgBox "Make sure that the SQL Server service is started.", 
_ 
                   vbInformation + vbOKOnly, _ 
                   "Information" 
            con.Open "DSN=NorthwindDSN", "INVALID USER" 
             
        Case INVALID_COMMANDTEXT_VALUE_ERROR: 
            con.Open "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
            con.Execute "INVALID COMMANDTEXT VALUE" 
             
        Case TABLE_NOT_AVAILABLE_ERROR: 
            con.Open "DSN=BiblioDSN" 
            con.Execute "MISSINGTABLE", _ 
                        , _ 
                        adCmdTable 
             
        Case NOT_AN_ADO_ERROR: 
            con.Execute "SELECT * FROM Authors;" 
             
    End Select 
 
    Set con = Nothing 
 
Exit Sub 
 
ERR_GenerateError: 
     
    If (Not frmDisplayADOError.IsAnADORelatedError(Err, con.Errors)) 
Then 
         
        MsgBox Err.Number & ": " & Err.Description, _ 
               vbExclamation + vbOKOnly, _ 

IT-SC book 
537
               "General Error" 
     
    Else 
        Resume Next 
    End If 
 
End Sub 
Notice that in the previous GenerateError method, the Visual Basic exception handling 
mechanism, On Error, is used to trap a Visual Basic runtime error. If one is generated, the method 
IsAnADORelatedError of the frmDisplayADOError form is called with the Visual Basic runtime-
error information to determine whether it is an ADO-related error.  
You will soon see that if it is in fact an ADO-related error, the error is handled through the 
frmDisplayADOError form, but if it is not, the value FALSE is returned so that the GenerateError 
method can display its own error message.  
C.2.2 The ADO Error(s) Form 
Begin creating the ADO Error(s) form as shown in Figure C-4. Create a list box control within 
one frame and a number of controls within another. This second frame should contain eight labels 
and eight text boxes. In addition, add a Command button to the bottom of the form as shown in 
order to unload the form from memory.  
Figure C-4. The ADO Error(s) form in Design mode 
 
Once you have placed all of the controls on the form, you can enter the values for the properties 
shown in Table C-3.  
Table C-3. The ADO Error(s) Form Control Settings  

IT-SC book 
538 
Control 
Property 
Value 
Form 
Name 
frmDisplayADOError 
  
Caption 
ADO Error(s) 
Frame 
Caption 
Errors 
List Box 
Name 
lstErrors 
Label 
Caption 
Number: 
Text Box 
Name 
txtText 
  
BackColor 
Button Face 
  
Enabled 
False 
Label 
Caption 
Description: 
Text Box 
Name 
txtDescription 
  
MultiLine 
1-True 
  
BackColor 
Button Face 
  
Enabled 
False 
Label 
Caption 
Last DLL Error: 
Text Box 
Name 
txtLastDLLError 
  
BackColor 
Button Face 
  
Enabled 
False 
Label 
Caption 
Native Number: 

IT-SC book 
539
Text Box 
Name 
txtNativeNumber 
  
BackColor 
Button Face 
  
Enabled 
False 
Label 
Caption 
SQL State: 
Text Box 
Name 
txtSQLState 
  
BackColor 
Button Face 
  
Enabled 
False 
Label 
Caption 
Source: 
Text Box 
Name 
txtSource 
  
BackColor 
Button Face 
  
Enabled 
False 
Label 
Caption 
Help Context: 
Text Box 
Name 
txtHelpContext 
  
BackColor 
Button Face 
  
Enabled 
False 
Label 
Caption 
Help File: 
Text Box 
Name 
txtHelpFile 
  
BackColor 
Button Face 
  
Enabled 
False 

IT-SC book 
540 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdClose 
  
Caption 
&Close 
Begin by entering the following code into the General Declarations section of the 
frmDisplayADOError form. The type TVBAError, shown next, is used to hold the information 
from a Visual Basic runtime error as you will soon see:  
Option Explicit 
 
Private Type TVBAError 
    Number As Long 
    Description As String 
    LastDllError As Long 
    Source As String 
    HelpContext As Long 
    HelpFile As String 
End Type 
 
Private m_oVBAError As TVBAError 
Private m_oADOErrors As ADODB.Errors 
 
Private Const VBA_ERROR = 1 
Private Const ADO_ERROR = 2 
Add the following code to close the form: 
Private Sub cmdClose_Click(  ) 
    Unload Me 
End Sub 
The following function, AddErrorToList, adds a single error -- either a Visual Basic runtime error 
or an ADO data-provider error -- to the list box shown on the form:  
Private Function AddErrorToList(lErrorNumber As Long, _ 
                                lErrorType As Long) 
                                  
    Dim sErrorType As String 
     
    Select Case (lErrorType) 
        Case VBA_ERROR: sErrorType = "(VBA)" 
        Case ADO_ERROR: sErrorType = "(ADO)" 
    End Select 
         
    lstErrors.AddItem CStr(lErrorNumber) & " " & sErrorType 
    lstErrors.ItemData(lstErrors.ListCount - 1) = lErrorType 
         
End Function 
The following method, IsAnADORelatedError, is the method that was called by the 
frmErrorsCollectionExample form to display the errors if they related to an ADO operation or 
return False if they didn't. In the conditional shown later, if the ADO Errors collection passed to 
the method has any Error objects in it, then the errors are ADO-related.  

IT-SC book 
541
With the Else portion of the conditional, the Visual Basic runtime error that was trapped in the 
frmErrorsCollectionExample is copied into the TVBAError type that was declared earlier. It is 
important to note whether this information has to be copied, because the ErrObject object can be 
cleared without warning by Visual Basic itself.  
Once the Visual Basic error is copied, it is added to the list via the AddErrorToList method call. 
The same is done for each Error object within the Errors collection passed to the method:  
Public Function IsAnADORelatedError(oVBAError As VBA.ErrObject, _ 
                                    oADOErrors As ADODB.Errors) As 
Boolean 
     
    Dim oADOError As ADODB.Error 
     
    If (oADOErrors.Count = 0) Then 
     
        IsAnADORelatedError = False 
        Unload Me 
     
    Else 
     
        m_oVBAError.Number = oVBAError.Number 
        m_oVBAError.Description = oVBAError.Description 
        m_oVBAError.LastDllError = oVBAError.LastDllError 
        m_oVBAError.Source = oVBAError.Source 
        m_oVBAError.HelpContext = oVBAError.HelpContext 
        m_oVBAError.HelpFile = oVBAError.HelpFile 
         
        AddErrorToList m_oVBAError.Number, VBA_ERROR 
         
        Set m_oADOErrors = oADOErrors 
         
        For Each oADOError In m_oADOErrors 
            AddErrorToList oADOError.Number, ADO_ERROR 
        Next oADOError 
     
        lstErrors.ListIndex = 0 
         
        IsAnADORelatedError = True 
        Me.Show 
     
    End If 
                 
End Function 
When a new error is selected from the list box on the form, the lstErrors_Click event is raised. 
Enter the code for this event as shown in the next code. Notice that for each type of error, there is 
different information. The Visual Basic error does not have a NativeNumber or SQLState 
property, but it does have a LastDLLError property that the ADO Error object does not:  
Private Sub lstErrors_Click(  ) 
         
    Dim lIndex As Long 
     
    lIndex = lstErrors.ListIndex 
     

IT-SC book 
542 
    Select Case (lstErrors.ItemData(lIndex)) 
         
        Case VBA_ERROR: 
             
            With m_oVBAError 
                txtNumber.Text = .Number 
                txtDescription.Text = .Description 
                txtLastDLLError = .LastDllError 
                txtNativeNumber = "" 
                txtSQLState = "" 
                txtSource = .Source 
                txtHelpContext.Text = .HelpContext 
                txtHelpFile.Text = .HelpFile & "" 
            End With 
             
        Case ADO_ERROR: 
             
            With m_oADOErrors(lIndex - 1) 
                txtNumber.Text = .Number 
                txtDescription.Text = .Description 
                txtLastDLLError = "" 
                txtNativeNumber = .NativeError 
                txtSQLState = .SQLState 
                txtSource = .Source 
                txtHelpContext.Text = .HelpContext 
                txtHelpFile.Text = .HelpFile & "" 
            End With 
               
    End Select 
     
End Sub 
Once you have entered all of the code, your Errors Collection Example is ready to go. Simply run 
it, and generate all the errors you want.  

IT-SC book 
543
Appendix D. The ADO Data Control 
The ADO Data Control is the third in a line of controls that are used to easily create a connection 
to a database. The first of these three was the intrinsic Data Control that utilized DAO technology. 
The next in line was the Remote Data Control that used the RDO technology. What would a data-
access technology be without the familiar VCR button-style interface that was called the data 
control?  
The ADO Data Control allows for an easy way to connect to a data source. Once that connection 
is made, it can be easily bound to data-aware controls such as the DBList and DBCombo controls 
found in the Microsoft Data Bound List Controls component.  
D.1 The ADO Data Control Property Pages 
The ADO Data Control is very easy to configure by means of its Property Pages, which are 
accessible through the Custom property shown in the controls property list.  
The first page of the ADO Data Control Property Pages allows you to select a source of 
connection in one of three ways. This tab is shown in Figure D-1.  
Figure D-1. The General tab of the ADO Data Control Property Pages 
 
The first way to specify a source of connection is by specifying a Data Link File. A Data Link file 
is a file that contains the Connection-string information used to establish a connection to a data 
source. We will look into how to create Data Link Files in the next section of this chapter.  
The second way to select a source of the database connection is by specifying a Data Source 
Name. To create a new DSN you can use the ODBC Data Source Administrator, which can be 
found in the Control Box or by pressing the New button located to the right of the Combo Box.  

IT-SC book 
544 
The third way to select a source of the database connection is to specify a Connection-string value. 
If you would like to, you can create a connection string by using the Build button. Creating 
connection-string values is also covered in the next section of this chapter.  
Once you have specified the correct connection information for a data source, you can use the 
next tab of the Property Pages dialog box, the Authentication tab, to enter a username and 
password. This is shown in Figure D-2.  
Figure D-2. The Authentication tab of the ADO Data Control Property Pages 
 
The third tab, the RecordSource tab, allows you to specify the information necessary to create a 
recordset from the data source specified. This tab is shown in Figure D-3.  
Figure D-3. The RecordSource tab of the ADO Data Control Property Pages 
 
The RecordSource tab of the Property Pages dialog box allows you to specify the CommandType 
property of the recordset that is going to be created internally by the ADO Data Control.  
If you specify that the CommandType is either adCmdTable or adCmdStoredProc, then you can 
select a Table or Stored Procedure Name from the drop-down list provided. If you specify that the 
CommandType is either adCmdUnknown or adCmdText, you can enter in a CommandText value 
in the section provided.  

IT-SC book 
545
The last two tabs of the ADO Data Control's Property Pages dialog box are used for setting the 
physical characteristics of the data control, the Color and Font.  
D.2 Creating Connection Strings with the ADO Data 
Control 
One of the best features of the ADO Data Control is its ability to create connection strings. From 
the beginning of ADO (somewhere around Version 1.5), connection strings have been a daunting 
and tedious task. The ADO Data Control has given us a wizard to guide us through these rough 
waters.  
D.2.1 Data Link Properties Dialog Box 
The Data Link Properties dialog box is a wizard that allows you to create ADO connection strings. 
To access the Data Link Properties dialog box, press the Build button for the Connection-string 
property in either the first tab of the Property Pages dialog box (Figure D-1) or the Property 
Pages dialog box that is shown when you go into the Connection String property dialog box 
(Figure D-4). Incidentally, the first tab of the Property Pages dialog box is identical to the 
property dialog box of the Connection String dialog box.  
Figure D-4. The Connection String Property dialog box 
 
D.2.1.1 Entering provider information 
Afteryou press the Build button, the Data Link Properties dialog box will appear as shown in 
Figure D-5.  
Figure D-5. The Provider tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box 

IT-SC book 
546 
 
The first tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box is the Provider tab, which allows the user to 
select an installed Data Provider from a list of available data providers.  
D.2.1.2 Entering connection information 
The second tab in the Data Link Properties is dependent upon the provider chosen in the first tab. 
Currently, there are four types of data providers included with the Microsoft Data Access 
Components:  
Jet 
ODBC 
SQL Server 
Oracle 
For each of the providers shown here, there is a specific Connection tab with unique property 
combinations that are used by that provider. For all other providers not included in the Microsoft 
Data Access Components, a generic Connection tab is used.  
D.2.1.2.1 The Jet providers 
The Connection tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box for Jet connections is shown in Figure 
D-6.  
Figure D-6. The Connection tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box for Jet 
providers 

IT-SC book 
547
 
Within this dialog box you can select an Access database, the username and password and a few 
settings regarding the password itself.  
The first option, Blank Password, will place a blank password in the connection string. The 
second option, Allow saving password, will place the password in the connection string 
unmasked and unencrypted.  
To test the connection after you have made the proper settings, click the Test Connection button. 
If the connection was made successfully, you should see the message box shown in Figure D-7.  
Figure D-7. The Test Connection Succeeded message box 
 
If you don't see the Test Connection Succeeded dialog box, check the properties that you have 
entered for an error.  
D.2.1.2.2 The ODBC provider 
The Connection tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box for ODBC connections is shown in 
Figure D-8.  
Figure D-8. The Connection tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box for 
the ODBC provider 

IT-SC book 
548 
 
The first step in specifying the connection information for ODBC connections is to enter either a 
data source name (DSN) or an ODBC connection string. If you want to build an ODBC 
connection string, you can click the Build button for the Connection-string property. This will 
allow you to create either a File DSN (DSN-less connection string) or a Machine DSN (DSN-
based connection string).  
The second step allows you to enter a username and password. You can also indicate if the 
password should be blank in the connection string (the Blank password option) or if the password 
should be saved in the connection string (the Allow saving password option), which will neither 
mask or encrypt the password.  
Finally, you can choose which database to use for the connection under the Initial Catalog 
property.  
Once you have completed this information, test the connection with the Test Connection button.  
D.2.1.2.3 The SQL Server providers 
The Connection tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box for SQL Server connections is shown 
in Figure D-9.  
Figure D-9. The Connection tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box for 
SQL Server providers 

IT-SC book 
549
 
The first step in specifying the connection information for SQL Server connections is entering the 
server name from which the database resides.  
Next, you can choose to use the Windows NT integrated-security option if your OLE DB 
provider supports an authentication service and you have permission in the data source to use that 
authentication service. If you choose not to use the Windows NT integrated security, you can 
enter a username and password manually. In addition, you can specify that the password is blank 
in the connection string or the password is saved in the connection string (although it is not 
masked or encrypted).  
Finally, select the database to use that is on the server specified. You can either select a database 
from a list, or if you have SQL Server 7.0, you can attach a SQL-database file as a database name 
and enter the name of the single-file database file.  
Once you are done setting up the connection specifications, you can test the connection with the 
Test Connection button.  
D.2.1.2.4 The Oracle providers 
The Connection tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box for Oracle connections is shown in 
Figure D-10.  
Figure D-10. The Connection tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box for 
Oracle providers 

IT-SC book 
550 
 
When specifying Oracle connection information, first enter the name of the server on which the 
Oracle database resides.  
Next, enter the username and password to be used when establishing the connection. In addition, 
you can specify to include a blank password in the connection string or to save the password in 
the connection string unmasked and unencrypted.  
Once you have specified all of the Oracle connection information, you can test the connection 
with the Test Connection button on the bottom of this tab.  
D.2.1.2.5 Other OLE DB providers 
The Connection tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box for all other connections is shown in 
Figure D-11.  
Figure D-11. The Connection tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box for 
other providers 

IT-SC book 
551
 
When connecting with any other type of OLE DB provider, the first step is to specify the data 
source and its location. The data source would usually be a server name, and the location would 
be a database name.  
Next, choose to use either Windows NT integrated security or to enter a username and password 
manually.  
If you choose to use the Windows NT integrated-security option, you must be sure that the OLE 
DB provider that you are using supports an authentication service, and you must have permission 
to use that authentication service in the data source that you are choosing.  
If you choose to enter a username and password manually, you can also specify to have a blank 
password entered in the connection string or, if you have a password, have it saved to the 
connection string although it will be done so unmasked and unencrypted.  
The final step on this tab would be to identify the initial catalog that the connection will use. This 
means that you need to enter the database that you want to access.  
Once you are done with all of this information, you can test the connection by using the Test 
Connection button.  
D.2.1.3 Entering advanced information 
The third tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box is shown in Figure D-12. This tab is used to 
set the advanced properties of a data-source connection: the impersonation level, the protection 
level, the connection timeout, and the access permissions.  
Figure D-12. The Advanced tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box 

IT-SC book 
552 
 
D.2.1.3.1 Impersonation level 
The impersonation level only applies to network connections that are not RPC (Remote 
Procedure Call) connections. This property indicates what level of impersonation the server can 
use when it is impersonating the client. The value of the impersonation-level property can be set 
to any of the values shown in Table D-1.  
Table D-1. Impersonation Level Settings  
Value 
Description 
Anonymous 
Indicates that the server cannot get identification information about the client and, 
therefore, cannot impersonate it.  
Identify 
Indicates that the server can identify the client, allowing it to impersonate it. 
However, it cannot access system objects as the client.  
Impersonate Indicates that the server can impersonate the client's security context.  
Delegate 
Indicates that not only can the server impersonate the client's security context, but 
it can also make calls to other servers on behalf of the client.  
D.2.1.3.2 Protection level 
The protection level also only applies to network connections that are not RPC connections. This 
property represents the level of protection of the data that is sent across the network, between the 
client and the server. The value of the protection-level property can be set to any of the values 
shown in Table D-2.  
Table D-2. Protection Level Settings  

IT-SC book 
553
Value 
Description 
None 
Indicates that no authentication of data is done between the client and the server. 
Connect 
Indicates that authentication is done only when the client connects with the server. 
Call 
Indicates that authentication is done at the beginning of each request to the server 
from the client.  
Pkt 
Indicates that authentication is done on all data received by the client.  
Pkt 
Integrity Indicates that authentication is done on all data received by the client and that the 
client checks to ensure that the date has not changed during the transmission.  
Pkt 
Privacy 
Indicates that authentication is done on all data received by the client, that the 
client checks to ensure that the data has not changed during the transmission, and 
that the data has been encrypted to protect its privacy.  
D.2.1.3.3 Connection timeout 
The connection-timeout property indicates, in seconds, the time that the OLD DB provider is to 
wait for initialization of the connection to complete.  
If the connection-timeout value causes the connection to actually timeout, an error is raised, and 
the attempt to create a connection is canceled.  
D.2.1.3.4 Access permissions 
The access permissions of a connection can be one or more of the values shown in Table D-3.  
Table D-3. Access-Permission Settings  
Value 
Description 
Read 
Indicates that the connection is read-only. 
Write 
Indicates that the connection is write-only. 
ReadWrite 
Indicates that the connection is both read- and write-enabled. 
Share Deny None Indicates that the connection cannot deny read or write access to other 
connections.  

IT-SC book 
554 
Share Deny Read Indicates that the connection prevents read access to other connections.  
Share Deny 
Write 
Indicates that the connection prevents write access to other connections.  
Share Exclusive Indicates that the connection prevents other connections from read and 
write access.  
D.2.1.4 Reviewing all of the Data Link information 
The last tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box is the All tab, which shows all of the 
providers' initialization properties and their set values. Figure D-13 shows the All tab of the 
Data Link Properties dialog box.  
Figure D-13. The All tab of the Data Link Properties dialog box 
 
The properties shown in this tab will vary from provider to provider. You can alter individual 
values by selecting a property in the list and by clicking on the Edit Value button.  
Once you are done setting these properties, simply click the OK button to finish. Depending on 
where you invoked the Data Link Properties dialog box, you should see a created connection 
string. If you are not using the ADO Data Control and you are coding by hand, you can cut this 
connection string and paste it into your application.  
D.2.2 Data Link Files 

IT-SC book 
555
Microsoft allows you to save connection string information into a file called a Data Link File. 
This file has the .UDL extension.  
To create a Data Link File, first press the Browse button for the Data Link File property in either 
the first tab of the Property Pages dialog box (Figure D-1) or the Property Pages dialog box that 
is shown when you go into the Connection String property dialog box (Figure D-4). Once you 
have pressed the Browse button on one of these dialog boxes, you are presented with Select Data 
Link File dialog box as shown in Figure D-14.  
Figure D-14. Selecting a Data Link File 
 
This dialog box will direct you to the Program Files\Common Files\System\OLE DB\Data Links 
directory, which will contain a list of the currently installed Data Link Files on your computer. 
Chances are if you are reading this section, the list will be empty.  
The dialog box also instructs you on how to create a new Data Link File by clicking the right 
mouse button anywhere within the file list of the dialog box.  
Once you perform the right-click on the mouse and select New from the pop-up menu, you 
should be presented with a menu that looks like that shown in Figure D-15. Choose the 
Microsoft Data Link from this cascading pop-up menu.  
Figure D-15. The Microsoft Data Link menu 

IT-SC book 
556 
 
This will add a new file to the current directory shown in the dialog box with the name "New 
Microsoft Data Link.UDL". You can rename this file if you like.  
Double click on the file, as the dialog box instructs, or right click on the file and chose Properties 
from the menu to modify its contents. Once you have double-clicked on this file, you should see 
the now familiar Data Link Properties dialog box shown in Figure D-5. Begin creating your 
connection string. It will be saved to your Data Link File when you close this dialog box.  
D.3 The ADO Data Control Example 
Lets take a look at the ADO Data Control with an example. We will be using the ADO Data 
Control to bind text-box controls to the Publishers table of the Biblio.mdb Access database file. 
Figure D-16 shows the ADO Data Control Example during runtime.  
Figure D-16. The ADO Data Control Example 

IT-SC book 
557
 
To begin, place the controls shown in Figure D-17 onto a form. This includes an ADO Data 
Control, ten labels, ten text boxes, and three command buttons.  
Begin by setting the properties for the ADO Data Control. You can use the steps outlined earlier 
to create a Data Link File that points to the Biblio.mdb database file. After you have created a 
Data Link File, you can use the Custom property of the ADO Data Control to point to that Data 
Link File through the first tab of the dialog box, the General tab (shown in Figure D-1). Then 
switch to the RecordSource tab (shown in Figure D-3) to set the CommandType property to 
adCmdTable and the Table property to Publishers.  
Figure D-17. The ADO Data Control Example in Design mode 
 
Now you are ready to set the rest of the properties as specified in Table D-4.  

IT-SC book 
558 
Notice that the two properties that are being selected for all of the text boxes are DataField and 
DataSource. First choose the DataSource property for the text box from the drop-down list. There 
should only be one valid ADO Data Control listed since it is the only one on your form. Because 
all of the ten text boxes should have the same value for the DataSource property, you can set 
them all at once by multiselecting all of the text boxes before setting the DataSource property.  
Once the DataSource property is set for a given text box, the list box for the DataField property 
will contain all of the valid Field names within the Recordset specified by the ADO Data Control. 
Choose the appropriate Field name for the text box you are setting.  
Table D-4. The ADO Data Control Example Control Settings  
Control 
Property 
Value 
Form 
Name 
FrmADODCExample 
ADO Data Control 
Name 
adcPublishers 
Label 
Caption 
Publisher ID: 
Text Box 
BackColor 
'Button Face 
  
DataField 
"PubID" 
  
DataSource 
"adcPublishers" 
  
Enabled 
0 'False 
Label 
Caption 
Name: 
Text Box 
DataField 
"Name" 
  
DataSource 
"adcPublishers" 
Label 
Caption 
Company Name: 
Text Box 
DataField 
"Company Name" 
  
DataSource 
"adcPublishers" 
Label 
Caption 
Address: 

IT-SC book 
559
Text Box 
DataField 
"Address" 
  
DataSource 
"adcPublishers" 
Label 
Caption 
City: 
Text Box 
DataField 
"City" 
  
DataSource 
"adcPublishers" 
Label 
Caption 
State: 
Text Box 
DataField 
"State" 
  
DataSource 
"adcPublishers" 
Label 
Caption 
ZIP: 
Text Box 
DataField 
"Zip" 
  
DataSource 
"adcPublishers" 
Label 
Caption 
Telephone: 
Text Box 
DataField 
"Telephone" 
  
DataSource 
"adcPublishers" 
Label 
Caption 
Fax: 
Text Box 
DataField 
"Fax" 
  
DataSource 
"adcPublishers" 
Label 
Caption 
Comments: 
Text Box 
DataField 
"Comments" 

IT-SC book 
560 
  
DataSource 
"adcPublishers" 
  
MultiLine 
-1 'True 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdAddNew 
  
Caption 
&AddNew 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdDelete 
  
Caption 
&Delete 
Command Button 
Name 
cmdClose 
  
Caption 
Close 
The point of the ADO Data Control is minimal coding. When the application is run as it is right 
now, the recordset will be created by the ADO Data Control, and the text boxes will be populated 
with the information bound to the data control. When the navigation buttons on the ADO Data 
Control are used, the record displayed through the ten text boxes will change.  
To make things a little more interesting, we are going to add the ability to add and delete records 
from the recordset in a neat and efficient manner, but first, let's get the closing code out of the 
way:  
Private Sub cmdClose_Click(  ) 
    Unload Me 
End Sub 
The easiest of the two new methods is adding a new record. Accessing the Recordset object of the 
ADO Data Control directly, as shown in the following code, can do this:  
Private Sub cmdAddNew_Click(  ) 
    adcPublishers.Recordset.AddNew 
    txtName.SetFocus 
End Sub 
After entering this code, try running the application. When you press the AddNew button, the 
record is cleared, and the cursor is placed in the Name text box waiting for you to add the record 
information. As you know with the AddNew method, the record is not saved until the record 
pointer changes location or the Update method is called. In this example, we are relying on the 
user to change the record pointer by using one of the navigation controls of the ADO Data 
Control.  
To code the functionality to delete a record, enter the cmdDelete_Click event shown in the 
following code:  

IT-SC book 
561
Private Sub cmdDelete_Click(  ) 
On Error GoTo ERR_cmdDelete_Click: 
 
    adcPublishers.Recordset.Delete 
    adcPublishers.Recordset.MovePrevious 
    If (adcPublishers.Recordset.BOF) Then _ 
        adcPublishers.Recordset.MoveFirst 
 
Exit Sub 
 
ERR_cmdDelete_Click: 
    Select Case (Err.Number) 
        Case -2147217842: ' canceled by user 
        Case Else: 
            MsgBox "Error #" & Err.Number & ": " & Err.Description, _ 
                   vbExclamation + vbOKOnly, _ 
                   "Error" 
    End Select 
End Sub 
For a moment, ignore the code labeled by ERR_cmdDelete_Click.  
When the user clicks the Delete button on our example form, this method calls the Delete method 
of the Recordset object belonging to the ADO Data Control. As with the AddNew method, the 
change does not take place until the record pointer is moved. This is then done with the call to 
MovePrevious (and the call to MoveFirst if the MovePrevious call moved the record pointer 
before the first record -- this will occur if the user deletes the first record in the recordset).  
Too often users delete things they don't mean to. Even more often users expect to be asked if they 
are sure they want to go ahead with their instructions. Our example should cater to this.  
Because the ADO Data Control exposes the Recordset object, it also exposes the Recordset's 
events. Of interest to us is the WillChangeRecord event, which we can use to trap the deletion of 
the current record, as shown in the following code:  
Private Sub adcPublishers_WillChangeRecord( _ 
                                   ByVal adReason As 
ADODB.EventReasonEnum, _ 
                                   ByVal cRecords As Long, _ 
                                   adStatus As ADODB.EventStatusEnum, _ 
                                   ByVal pRecordset As ADODB.Recordset) 
     
    Dim lResponse As Long 
     
    If (adReason = adRsnDelete) Then 
        lResponse = MsgBox("Are you sure that you want to delete " _ 
                           & "the current record?", _ 
                           vbQuestion + vbYesNo, _ 
                           "Delete") 
     
        If (lResponse = vbNo) Then adStatus = adStatusCancel 
    End If 
     
End Sub 

IT-SC book 
562 
In the adcPublishers_WillChangeRecord event shown previously, if the record is being deleted 
(adReason is equal to adRsnDelete), then the user is asked if they are sure they want to proceed 
with this action. If the user responds No, then the adStatus flag is set to adStatusCancel.  
At this point, we are referred back to the code in the cmdDelete_Click event:  
ERR_cmdDelete_Click: 
    Select Case (Err.Number) 
        Case -2147217842: ' canceled by user 
        Case Else: 
            MsgBox "Error #" & Err.Number & ": " & Err.Description, _ 
                   vbExclamation + vbOKOnly, _ 
                   "Error" 
    End Select 
End Sub 
Once ADO attempts to move the record pointer, directly after the Delete method call, the 
WillChangeRecord event is fired. When the user answers No to cancel the deletion, an error is 
raised in the calling method (cmdDelete_Click) and is trapped in the code shown previously.  
If the error number is equal to -2147217842, it is an indication that the user canceled the method 
(by changing the adStatus flag to adStatusCancel in the WillChangeRecord event), as well as an 
indicator to continue without stopping.  
As an added safety measure, since we are trapping errors, we added the Case Else: statement to 
display any other errors that may have occurred in this method. If we hadn't added this statement, 
errors could go unnoticed.  
Although this is an extremely basic example of how you can use the ADO Data Control, it proves 
that using the ADO Data Control is extremely basic to implement. In addition, it should be noted 
that additional code would still need to be implemented in order to perform other "basic" 
requirements of any application, such as validation of field data and additional error handling.  

IT-SC book 
563
Appendix E. Enumeration Tables 
This appendix contains an alphabetical list of the Enumerations used by the members of ADO 
objects and collections.  
Next to each enumeration name is a list of the versions of ADO that contained the particular 
enumeration. For each enumeration, there is a description, a table, and in some cases a "See Also" 
section with a list of related ADO objects, collections, methods, properties, events, and 
enumerations.  
In each enumeration table, the first column, "Enumeration (ADO/WFC)," contains the 
enumeration constant for both ADO and WFC (Java). The middle column displays the numeric 
value for the enumeration constant, and the last column contains the description.  
ADCPROP_ASYNCTHREADPRIORITY_ENUM 
Enumeration  
(Versions 
2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The ADCPROP_ASYNCTHREADPRIORITY_ENUM enumeration sets the execution priority 
of an asynchronous thread receiving data. This enumeration value is used within the Recordset 
dynamic property, Background Thread Priority.  
Table E-1. The ADCPROP_ASYNCTHREADPRIORITY_ENUM Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adPriorityAboveNormal 
(ABOVENORMAL) 
4 
The priority is set between normal and 
highest. 
adPriorityBelowNormal 
(BELOWNORMAL) 
2 
The priority is set between lowest and 
normal. 
adPriorityHighest (HIGHEST) 
5 
The priority is set to the highest possible 
setting. 
adPriorityLowest (LOWEST) 
1 
The priority is set to the lowest possible 
setting. 
adPriorityNormal (NORMAL) 
3 
The priority is set to the normal setting. 
ADO/WFC 

IT-SC book 
564 
The 
ADCPROP_ASYNCTHREADPRIORITY_ENUM 
enumeration 
is 
part 
of 
the 
com.ms.wfc.data 
package, 
and 
the 
constant 
values 
are 
preceded 
with 
AdoEnums.AdcPropAsyncThreadPriority.  
ADCPROP_AUTORECALC_ENUM 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The ADCPROP_AUTORECALC_ENUM enumeration dictates whether, within a hierarchical 
recordset, the MSDataShape provider recalculates the aggregate and calculated columns. This 
enumeration value is used within the Recordset dynamic property, Auto Recalc.  
Table E-2. The ADCPROP_AUTORECALC_ENUM Enumeration  
Enumeration 
Value Description 
adRecalcAlways 1 
Default. Indicates that values are recalculated whenever the 
MSDataShape provider can determine that data used for calculated 
columns have changed.  
adRecalcUpFront 0 
Indicates that the calculation is done only when building the 
hierarchical recordset.  
ADO/WFC 
The ADCPROP_AUTORECALC_ENUM enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants.  
ADCPROP_UPDATECRITERIA_ENUM 
Enumeration  
(Versions 
2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The ADCPROP_UPDATECRITERIA_ENUM enumeration indicates which fields dictate 
conflicts during optimistic updates. This enumeration value is used within the Recordset dynamic 
property, Update Criteria.  
Table E-3. The ADCPROP_UPDATECRITERIA_ENUM Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adCriteriaAllCols 
(ALLCOLS) 
1 
If any column of the data-source row has been changed, a 
conflict is detected.  

IT-SC book 
565
adCriteriaKey (KEY) 
0 
If the key column of the data-source row has changed (the 
row has been deleted), a conflict is detected.  
adCriteriaTimeStamp 
(TIMESTAMP) 
3 
If the timestamp of the data-source row has been changed 
(the row has been accessed after the Recordset was 
obtained), a conflict is detected.  
adCriteriaUpdCols 
(UPDCOLS) 
2 
If any columns of the data-source row that correspond to 
the updated fields in the Recordset object have changed, a 
conflict is detected.  
ADO/WFC 
The ADCPROP_UPDATECRITERIA_ENUM enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data 
package and the constant values are preceded with AdoEnums.AdcPropUpdateCriteria.  
ADCPROP_UPDATERESYNC_ENUM 
Enumeration  
(Versions 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The ADCPROP_UPDATERESYNC_ENUM enumeration specifies whether calling the 
UpdateBatch method automatically calls the Resync method afterwards -- including some 
additional options. This enumeration value is used within the Recordset dynamic property, 
Update Resync.  
Table E-4. The ADCPROP_UPDATERESYNC_ENUM Enumeration  
Enumeration 
Value Description 
adResyncAll 
15 
Indicates that the Resync method is called, but with the 
combined 
values 
of 
the 
other 
ADCPROP_UPDATERESYNC_ENUM 
enumeration 
values.  
adResyncAutoIncrement 1 
Default. Indicates that the new value for columns that are 
automatically updated by the data source are retrieved if 
possible. This would include any automatic row-ID values or 
auto-number datatypes.  
adResyncConflicts 
2 
Indicates that the Resync method is called for all rows for 
which an update or delete failed because of a conflict.  

IT-SC book 
566 
adResyncInserts 
8 
Indicates that the Resync method is called for all successfully 
inserted rows.  
adResyncNone 
0 
Indicates that the Resync method is not invoked. 
adResyncUpdates 
4 
Indicates that the Resync method is invoked for all 
successfully updated rows.  
ADO/WFC 
The ADCPROP_UPDATERESYNC_ENUM enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants.  
See Also 
Recordset.Resync Method 
AffectEnum Enumeration  (Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The AffectEnum enumeration indicates which records are affected by an invoked operation.  
Table E-5. The AffectEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adAffectAll (ALL) 
3 
Indicates that all records will be affected by the operation 
if there is no Filter applied or if a Filter is set to a member 
of the FilterGroupEnum enumeration or an array of 
bookmarks.  
If the Filter property is set to a String value, then the 
operation will affect only those rows that are visible within 
the current chapter.  
adAffectAllChapters 
(ALLCHAPTERS) 
4 
Indicates that all records in all sibling chapters of the 
Recordset object will be affected by the operation. This 
includes those records not visible with an applied filter.  
adAffectCurrent 
(CURRENT) 
1 
Indicates that only the current row will be affected by the 
operation. 
adAffectGroup (GROUP) 2 
Indicates that all records, which satisfy the current Filter if 

IT-SC book 
567
it is set to a member of the FilterGroupEnum enumeration 
or an array of bookmarks, will be affected.  
Note 
The adAffectAll enumeration value does not appear in the Object Browser.  
ADO/WFC 
The AffectEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant values are 
preceded with AdoEnums.Affect.  
See Also 
FilterGroupEnum Enumeration, Recordset.CancelBatch Method, Recordset.Delete Method, 
Recordset.Resync 
Method, 
Recordset.UpdateBatch 
Method, 
Recordset.Filter 
Property, 
FilterGroupEnum Enumeration  
BookmarkEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The BookmarkEnum enumeration specifies a bookmark that indicates where an operation is to 
begin.  
Table E-6. The BookmarkEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adBookmarkCurrent 
(CURRENT) 
0 
Indicates that the operation will start at the current 
record. 
adBookmarkFirst (FIRST) 
1 
Indicates that the operation will start at the first 
record. 
adBookmarkLast (LAST) 
2 
Indicates that the operation will start at the last record.
ADO/WFC 
The BookmarkEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.Bookmark.  
See Also 

IT-SC book 
568 
Recordset.GetRows Method, Recordset.Move Method 
CommandTypeEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The CommandTypeEnum enumeration indicates how a command argument should be interpreted.  
Table E-7. CommandTypeEnum Enumeration Values  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) Value 
Description 
adCmdFile (FILE) 
256 
(&H100)
Indicates that the CommandText property should be 
evaluated as a name of a file that contains a persisted 
recordset.  
adCmdStoredProc 
(STOREDPROC) 
4 
Indicates that the CommandText property should be 
evaluated as a stored-procedure name.  
adCmdTable (TABLE) 
2 
Indicates that the CommandText property should be 
evaluated as a table name. This table name will be 
converted to a SQL statement by ADO to return all of its 
columns.  
adCmdTableDirect 
(TABLEDIRECT) 
512 
(&H200) Indicates that the CommandText property should be 
evaluated as a table name.  
adCmdText (TEXT) 
1 
Default. Indicates that the CommandText property should
be evaluated as a SQL statement or a data provider-specific 
command (including a stream).  
adCmdUnknown 
(UNKNOWN) 
8 
Indicates that the type of the CommandText property is not 
specified. 
ADO/WFC 
The CommandTypeEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.CommandType.  
See Also 
Command.CommandStream Property, Command.CommandType Property, Command.Execute 
Method, Connection.Execute Method, Recordset.Open Method, Recordset.Seek Method  

IT-SC book 
569
CompareEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The CompareEnum enumeration indicates how two bookmarks compare.  
Table E-8. The CompareEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adCompareEqual (EQUAL) 
1 
Indicates 
that 
the 
two 
bookmarks 
are 
equivalent. 
adCompareGreaterThan 
(GREATERTHAN) 
2 
Indicates that the first bookmark is located 
after the second bookmark.  
adCompareLessThan (LESSTHAN) 
0 
Indicates that the second bookmark is located 
after the first bookmark.  
adCompareNotComparable 
(NOTCOMPARABLE) 
4 
Indicates that the two bookmarks cannot be 
compared. 
adCompareNotEqual (NOTEQUAL) 
3 
Indicates that the two bookmarks are not equal 
and not ordered. 
ADO/WFC 
The CompareEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant values 
are preceded with AdoEnums.Compare.  
See Also 
Recordset.CompareBookmarks Method 
ConnectModeEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 

IT-SC book 
570 
The ConnectModeEnum enumeration indicates the available permissions for modifying data in a 
Connection object, opening data in a Record object, or specifying values within a Record or 
Stream object.  
Table E-9. The ConnectModeEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adModeRead (READ) 
1 
Indicates that the data has read-only privileges. 
adModeReadWrite 
(READWRITE) 
3 
Indicates that the data has both read and write 
privileges. 
adModeRecursive 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
4194304 
(&H400000) 
Used 
with 
adModeShareDenyNone, 
adModeShareDenyWrite, 
and 
adModeShareDenyRead
to 
extend 
sharing 
restrictions to all children records of the current 
record. This value has no effect if the current record 
has no children and causes an error if it is used with 
adModeShareDenyNone alone.  
adModeShareDenyNone 
(SHAREDENYNONE) 
16 (&H10) 
Prevents other users from opening the connection 
with any permissions. 
adModeShareDenyRead 
(SHAREDENYREAD) 
4 
Prevents other users from opening the connection 
with read permissions.  
adModeShareDenyWrite 
(SHAREDENYWRITE) 
8 
Prevents other users from opening the connection 
with write permissions.  
adModeShareExclusive 
(SHAREEXCLUSIVE) 
12 
Prevents other users from opening the connection 
with read and write permissions.  
adModeUnknown 
(UNKNOWN) 
0 
Default. Indicates that the permissions have not yet 
been set or that they cannot be determined by ADO. 
adModeWrite (WRITE) 
2 
Indicates that the data has write-only privileges. 
ADO/WFC 
The ConnectModeEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.ConnectMode.  
See Also 

IT-SC book 
571
Connection.Open Method, Record.Mode Property, Record.Open Method, Stream.Mode Property, 
Stream.Open Method  
ConnectOptionEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The ConnectOptionEnum enumeration specifies whether a connection to a data source is opened 
synchronously or asynchronously.  
Table E-10. The ConnectOptionEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adAsyncConnect (ASYNCCONNECT) 
16 
(&H10) Indicates that the connection will be 
opened asynchronously. 
adConnectUnspecified 
(CONNECTUNSPECIFIED) 
-1 
Default. Indicates that the connection will 
be opened synchronously. 
ADO/WFC 
The ConnectOptionEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.ConnectOption.  
See Also 
Connection.ConnectComplete Event, Connection.Open Method 
ConnectPromptEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The ConnectPromptEnum enumeration indicates whether the user is prompted to enter missing 
parameters when opening connection. This enumeration value is used within the Connection 
dynamic property, Prompt.  
Table E-11. The ConnectPrompt Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adPromptAlways (ALWAYS) 
1 
Indicates that the user is always prompted for 

IT-SC book 
572 
parameter information. 
adPromptComlete (COMPLETE) 
2 
Indicates that the user is prompted for 
additionally required parameters.  
adPromptComleteRequired 
(COMPLETEREQUIRED) 
3 
Indicates that the user is prompted for 
parameters that are required, but optional 
parameters are not allowed.  
adPromptNever (NEVER) 
4 
Indicates that the user is never prompted for 
parameter information. 
ADO/WFC 
The ConnectPromptEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.ConnectPrompt.  
CopyRecordOptionsEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The CopyRecordOptionsEnum enumeration indicates the behavior of the CopyRecord method.  
Table E-12. The CopyRecordOptionsEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
Value 
Description 
adCopyAllowEmulation 4 
Indicates that the CopyRecord method will attempt 
to simulate the copy using the downloaded and 
uploaded operations if the method fails due to the 
Destination being on a different server or being 
serviced by a different provider than the Source.  
adCopyNonRecursive 
2 
Indicates that the CopyRecord method copies only 
the current directory and its subdirectories.  
adCopyOverWrite 
1 
Indicates that the CopyRecord method will 
overwrite the file or directory specified as the 
Destination, if it already exists.  
adCopyUnspecified 
-1 
(&HFFFFFFFF) Default. Indicates that the CopyRecord method will 
copy all of the subdirectories and files of the 

IT-SC book 
573
current directory and that it will not overwrite 
existing files and directories if they already exist.  
ADO/WFC 
The ADCPROP_UPDATERESYNC_ENUM enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants.  
See Also 
Record.CopyRecord Method 
CursorLocationEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The CursorLocationEnum enumeration specifies the location of the cursor service.  
Table E-13. The CursorLocationEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) Value Description 
adUseClient 
(CLIENT) 
3 
Indicates that the cursor service is located on the client 
machine. 
adUseServer 
(SERVER) 
2 
Indicates that the cursor service is located on the server 
machine. 
ADO/WFC 
The CursorLocationEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.CursorLocation.  
See Also 
Connection.CursorLocation Property, Recordset.CursorLocation Property 
CursorOptionEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 

IT-SC book 
574 
The CursorOptionEnum enumeration indicates for which functionality the Supports method is 
testing.  
Table E-14. The CursorOption Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) Value 
Description 
adAddNew (ADDNEW) 
16778240 
(&H10004000) 
Indicates that the AddNew method is supported.
adApproxPosition 
(APPROXPOSITION) 
16384 (&H4000) Indicates 
that 
the 
AbsolutePosition 
and 
AbsolutePage properties are supported.  
adBookmark 
(BOOKMARK) 
8192 (&H2000)
Indicates 
that 
the 
Bookmark 
property
is 
supported. 
adDelete (DELETE) 
16779264 
(&H1000800) 
Indicates that the Delete method is supported. 
adFind (FIND) 
524288 
(&H80000) 
Indicates that the Find method is supported. 
adHoldRecords 
(HOLDRECORDS) 
256 (&H100) 
Indicates that the Recordset can retrieve more 
records or change the position of the record 
pointer without committing all pending changes. 
adIndex (INDEX) 
8388608 
(&H800000) 
Indicates that the Index property is supported. 
adMovePrevious 
(MOVEPREVIOUS) 
512 (&H200) 
Indicates that the MoveFirst, MovePrevious, 
Move, and GetRows methods can be used to 
move the record pointer backwards without the 
use of bookmarks.  
adNotify (NOTIFY) 
262144 
(&H40000) 
Indicates that the data provider supports 
notifications and in turn indicates that Recordset 
events are supported.  
adResync (RESYNC) 
131072 
(&H20000) 
Indicates that the Resync method is supported. 
adSeek (SEEK) 
4194303 
(&H400000) 
Indicates that the Seek method is supported. 
adUpdate (UPDATE) 
16809984 
(&H1008000) 
Indicates that the Update method is supported. 
adUpdateBatch 
(UPDATEBATCH) 
65536 
(&H10000) 
Indicates 
that 
the 
UpdateBatch 
and 
the 
CancelBatch methods are supported.  

IT-SC book 
575
ADO/WFC 
The CursorOptionEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.CursorOption.  
See Also 
Recordset.AbsolutePage Property, Recordset.AbsolutePosition Property, Recordset.AddNew 
Method, Recordset.Bookmark Property, Recordset.CancelBatch Method, Recordset.Delete 
Method, Recordset.Find Method, Recordset GetRows Method, Recordset.Index Property, 
Recordset.Move Method, Recordset.MoveFirst Method, Recordset.MovePrevious Method, 
Recrodset.Seek 
Method, 
Recordset.Supports 
Method, 
Recordset.Update 
Method, 
Recordset.UpdateBatch Method  
CursorTypeEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The CursorTypeEnum enumeration indicates the type of cursor to be used with the Recordset 
object.  
Table E-15. The CursorTypeEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) Value Description 
adOpenDynamic 
(DYNAMIC) 
2 
Indicates a dynamic cursor for the recordset. The recordset 
allows the application to see new records, edited records, and 
deletions by other users.  
adOpenForwardOnly 
(FORWARDONLY) 
0 
Default. Indicates a forward-only cursor for the recordset. The 
recordset does not report added, edited, or deleted records by 
other users. Think of this cursor as a snapshot of the recordset. 
This is the fastest type of cursor and is the default setting.  
adOpenKeyset 
(KEYSET) 
1 
Indicates a keyset cursor for the recordset. The recordset 
allows the application to see changes in records made by other 
users. It also denies access to deleted records, but it does not 
allow you to see records that have been added by other users. 
adOpenStatic 
(STATIC) 
3 
Indicates a static cursor for the recordset. The recordset does 
not allow the application to see any changes in the recordset at 
all. This cursor is only surpassed in speed only by the forward-
only cursor.  

IT-SC book 
576 
ADO/WFC 
The CursorTypeEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.CursorType.  
See Also 
Recordset.CursorType Property, Recordset.Open Method 
DataTypeEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The DataTypeEnum enumeration indicates the datatype of the particular parameter, field, or 
property.  
Table E-16. DataTypeEnum Enumeration Values  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adArray (ARRAY) 
8192 
(&H2000)
Indicates an array of values. This value is always 
combined with another DataTypeEnum enumeration 
value.  
adBigInt (BIGINT) 
20 (&H14) Indicates an 8-byte signed integer. 
adBinary (BINARY) 
128 
(&H80) 
Indicates a binary value. 
adBoolean (BOOLEAN) 
11 
Indicates a Boolean value (True or False). 
adBSTR (BSTR) 
8 
Indicates a null-terminated character Unicode string.
adChapter (CHAPTER) 
136 
(&H88) 
Indicates a 4-byte Chapter recordset (for hierarchical 
recordsets). 
adChar (CHAR) 
129 
(&H81) 
Indicates a String value. 
adCurrency (CURRENCY) 6 
Indicates a currency value that is an 8-byte signed 
integer with a scale factor of 10,000.  
adDate (DATE) 
7 
Indicates a Date value stored as a Double, where the 
whole part is the number of days since December 

IT-SC book 
577
30, 1899, and the fraction represents the time of day. 
adDBDate (DBDATE) 
133 
(H&85) 
Indicates a date value in the form of yyyymmdd.  
adDBTime (DBTIME) 
134 
(&H86) 
Indicates a time value in the form of hhmmss.  
adDBTimeStamp 
(DBTIMESTAMP) 
135 
(&H87) 
Indicates a date/time stamp in the form of 
yyyymmddhhmmss, 
including 
a 
fraction 
in 
billionths.  
adDecimal (DECIMAL) 
14 
Indicates an exact numeric value with a fixed-
precision and scale factor.  
adDouble (DOUBLE) 
5 
Indicates a double-precision floating-point number.
adEmpty (EMPTY) 
0 
Indicates that no value is specified. 
adError (ERROR) 
10 
Indicates a 32-byte error code. 
adFileTime (FILETIME) 64 (&H40) Indicates a file's time with a 64-bit value that 
represents the number of 100-nanosecond intervals 
since January 1, 1601.  
adGUID (GUID) 
72 (&H48) Indicates a globally unique identifier. 
adIDispatch 
(IDISPATCH) 
9 
Indicates a pointer to an IDispatch interface on an 
OLE object. 
adInteger (INTEGER) 
3 
Indicates a 4-byte signed integer. 
adIUnknown (IUNKNOWN) 13 
Indicates a pointer to an IUknown interface on an 
OLE object. 
adLongVarBinary 
(LONGVARBINARY) 
205 
(&HCD) 
Indicates a long binary value only for a Parameter 
object. 
adLongVarChar 
(LONGVARCHAR) 
201 
(&HC9) 
Indicates a long String value only for a Parameter 
object. 
adLongVarWChar 
(LONGVARWCHAR) 
203 
(&HCB) 
Indicates a long null-terminated string value only for 

IT-SC book 
578 
a Parameter object.  
adNumeric (NUMERIC) 
131 
(&H83) 
Indicates an exact numeric value with a fixed-
precision and scale factor.  
adPropVariant 
(PROPVARIANT) 
138 
(&H8A) 
Indicates an automation PROPVARIANT. 
adSingle (SINGLE) 
4 
Indicates a single-precision floating-point number. 
adSmallInt (SMALLINT) 2 
Indicates a 2-byte signed integer. 
adTinyInt (TINYINT) 
16 (&H10) Indicates a 1-byte signed integer. 
adUnsignedBigInt 
(UNSIGNEDBIGINT) 
21 (&H15) Indicates an 8-byte unsigned integer. 
adUnsignedInt 
(UNSIGNEDINT) 
19 (&H13) Indicates a 4-byte unsigned integer. 
adUnsignedSmallInt 
(UNSIGNEDSMALLINT) 
18 (&H12) Indicates a 2-byte unsigned integer. 
adUnsignedTinyInt 
(UNSIGNEDTINYINT) 
17 (&H11) Indicates a 1-byte unsigned integer. 
adUserDefined 
(USERDEFINED) 
132 
(&H84) 
Indicates a user-defined variable. 
adVarBinary 
(VARBINARY) 
204 
(&HCC) 
Indicates a binary value only for a Parameter object.
adVarChar (VARCHAR) 
200 
(&HC8) 
Indicates a string value only for a Parameter object.
adVariant (VARIANT) 
12 
Indicates an OLE Automation Variant. 
adVarNumeric 
(VARNUMERIC) 
139 
(&H8B) 
Indicates a numeric value only for a Parameter 
object. 
adVarWChar (VARWCHAR) 202 
(&HCA) 
Indicates a null-terminated UNICODE character 
string only for a Parameter object.  
adWChar (WCHAR) 
130 
(&H82) 
Indicates a null-terminated UNICODE character 
string. 
ADO/WFC 

IT-SC book 
579
The DataTypeEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant values 
are preceded with AdoEnums.DataType.  
See Also 
Command.CreateParameter 
Method, 
Field.Type 
Property, 
Fields.Append 
Method, 
Parameter.Type Property, Property.Type Property  
EditModeEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The EditModeEnum enumeration indicates the current edit status of a record.  
Table E-17. The EditMode Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adEditAdd (ADD) 
2 
Indicates that the AddNew method has been called and the 
new record currently contains values that have not yet been 
saved.  
adEditDelete (DELETE) 4 
Indicates that the current record has been marked for 
deletion but has not yet been deleted in the database.  
adEditInProgress 
(INPROGRESS) 
1 
Indicates that there is currently no editing being done on the 
given record.  
adEditNone (NONE) 
0 
Indicates that there are currently values in the given record 
that have not yet been saved.  
ADO/WFC 
The EditModeEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant values 
are preceded with AdoEnums.EditMode.  
See Also 
Recordset.AddNew Method, Recordset.EditMode Property 
ErrorValueEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 

IT-SC book 
580 
 
 
The ErrorValueEnum enumeration contains the constants for ADO runtime errors.  
Table E-18. The ErrorValueEnum Enumeration Values  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adErrBoundToCommand 
(BOUNDTOCOMMAND) 
3707 
(&HE7B)
The 
ActiveConnection 
property 
of 
a 
Recordset object cannot be changed because 
the Recordset object's source is a Command 
object.  
adErrCannotComplete 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3732 
(&HE94) The server that owns the source row cannot 
complete the operation. 
adErrCantChangeConnection (no
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3748 
(&HEA4)
The Connection was denied because it has 
different characteristics than the one already 
in use.  
adErrCantChangeProvider 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3220 
(&HC94) The supplied provider is different from the 
one already in use. 
adErrCantConvertvalue 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3724 
(&HE8C)
Data value could not be converted for reasons 
other than sign mismatch or data overflow. 
For 
example, 
conversion 
would 
have 
truncated data.  
adErrCantCreate (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3725 
(&HE8D)
Data could not be set or retrieved because the 
column datatype was unknown or the provider 
had insufficient resources to perform the 
operation.  
adErrCatalogNotSet 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3747 
(&HEA3) The operation requires a valid ParentCatalog.
adErrColumnNotOnThisRow 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3726 
(&HE8E) Column does not exist on this row. 
adErrDataConversion 
(DATACONVERSION) 
3421 
(&HD5D) A wrong datatype is being used for the 
operation. 
adErrDataOverflow (no ADO/WFC 
3721 
(&HE89) Data value is too large to be represented by 

IT-SC book 
581
equivalent) 
the column datatype. 
adErrDelResOutOfScope 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3738 
(&HE9A)
The URL of the object to be deleted is outside 
the scope of the current row. Make sure the 
URL is inside the scope.  
adErrDenyNotSupported 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3750 
(&HEA6) The data provider does not support sharing 
restrictions. 
adErrDenyTypeNotSupported (no
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3751 
(&HEA7) The data provider does not support the 
requested sharing-restriction type.  
adErrFeatureNotAvailable 
(FEATURENOTAVAILABLE) 
3251 
(&HCB3) The provider does not support the operation. 
adErrFieldsUpdateFailed 
3749 
(&HEA5) The Fields update failed. 
adErrIllegalOperation 
(ILLEGALOPERATION) 
3219 
(&HC93) The operation cannot be performed during 
this context. 
adErrIntegrityViolation 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3719 
(&HE87) The data value conflicts with the integrity 
constraints of the field. 
adErrInTransaction 
(INTRANSACTION) 
3246 
(&HCAE) The operation is in the middle of a transaction 
and cannot close the Connection object.  
adErrInvalidArgument 
(INVALIDARGUMENT) 
3001 
(&HBB9)
The argument either is not of the correct type, 
has a value that is not in the acceptable range, 
or is in conflict with another argument.  
adErrInvalidConnection 
(INVALIDCONNECTION) 
3709 
(&HE7D) The operation cannot be performed because 
the Connection object is closed.  
adErrInvalidParamInfo 
(INVALIDPARAMINFO) 
3708 
(&HE7C) The parameter information is not defined 
correctly. 
adErrInvalidTransaction 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3714 
(&HE82) The coordinating transaction is invalid or has 
not started. 
adErrInvalidURL (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3729 
(&HE91)
The 
specified 
URL 
contains 
invalid 
characters. Make sure the URL is typed 
correctly.  

IT-SC book 
582 
adErrItemNotFound 
(ITEMNOTFOUND) 
3265 
(&HCC1)
The object requested does not exist in the 
ADO collection at the ordinal position or with 
the name provided.  
adErrNoCurrentRecord 
(NOCURRENTRECORD) 
3021 
(&HBCD) The record pointer does not point to a valid 
record, and one is needed for the operation.  
adErrNotExecuting 
(NOTEXECUTING) 
(This seemed to be missing in 2.6) 
3715 
The execution could not be canceled because 
it was not executing. 
adErrNotReentrant 
(NOTREENTRANT) 
3710 
(&HE7E) The code within the event would cause the 
event to be fired again. 
adErrObjectClosed 
(OBJECTCLOSED) 
3704 
(&HE78) The object that is needed by the operation is 
closed. 
adErrObjectInCollection 
(OBJECTINCOLLECTION) 
3367 
(&HD27)
The attempt to add the object to the collection 
was unsuccessful because the object is already 
in the collection.  
adErrObjectNotSet 
(OBJECTNOTSET) 
3420 
(&HD5C) The object does not point to a valid ADO 
object. 
adErrObjectOpen (OBJECTOPEN) 3705 
(&HE79) The operation requires that the object is not 
open. 
adErrOpeningFile (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3002 
(&HBBA) The file could not be opened. 
adErrOperationCancelled 
(OPERATIONCANCELLED) 
3712 
(&HE80) An ADO operation has been canceled. 
adErrOutOfSpace (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3734 
(&HE96) The provider is unable to obtain enough 
storage space to complete the copy operation. 
adErrPermissionDenied 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3720 
(&HE88)
The user does not have permission to write to 
the 
column. 
Check 
Column 
Privileges 
property.  
adErrPropConflicting 
(no 
3742 
(&HE9E) The property value was not set because it 
would have conflicted with an existing 

IT-SC book 
583
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
property.  
adErrPropInvalidColumn 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3739 
(&HE9B) The property cannot apply to the specified 
column. 
adErrPropInvalidOption 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3740 
(&HE9C) The specified option is invalid. 
adErrPropInvalidValue 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3741 
(&HE9D) The specified value is invalid. Make sure the 
value is typed correctly.  
adErrPropNotAllSettable 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3743 
(&HE9F) The property is read-only or could not be set 
for the particular column.  
adErrPropNotSet (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3744 
(&HEA0)
The property value was not set. The value of 
dwOptions
was 
DBPROPOPTIONS_OPTIONAL, 
and 
the 
property could not be set to the specified 
value.  
adErrPropNotSettable 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3745 
(&HEA1)
The property is read-only or the consumer 
attempted to set values of properties in the 
Initialization property group after the data-
source object was initialized. Consumers can 
set the value of a read-only property to its 
current value. This value is also returned if a 
settable column property could not be set for 
the particular column.  
adErrPropNotSupported 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3746 
(&HEA2) The property value was not set. The provider 
does not support the property.  
adErrProviderFailed 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3000 
(&HBB8) The provider failed to perform the requested 
operation. 
adErrProviderNotFound 
(PROVIDERNOTFOUND) 
3706 
(&HE7A) The provider could not be found. 
adErrReadFile 
(no 
ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3003 
(&HBBB) The file could not be read. 
adErrResourceExists 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3731 
(&HE93)
The copy operation cannot be performed. The 
object named by destination URL already 
exists. Specify adCopyOverwrite to replace 

IT-SC book 
584 
the object.  
adErrResourceLocked 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3730 
(&HE92)
The object represented by the specified URL 
is locked by one or more other processes. 
Wait until the process has finished, and 
attempt the operation again.  
adErrResourceOutOfScope 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3735 
(&HE97)
The source or destination URL is outside the 
scope of the current row. Make sure the URL 
is inside the scope.  
adErrSchemaViolation 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3722 
(&HE8A) The data value conflicts with the datatype or 
constraints of the column.  
adErrSignMismatch (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3723 
(&HE8B)
The conversion failed because the data value 
was signed and the column datatype used by 
the provider was unsigned.  
adErrStillConnecting 
(STILLCONNECTING) 
3713 
(&HE81) The operation cannot be executed because 
ADO was still connecting to the data source. 
adErrStillExecuting 
(STILLEXECUTING) 
3711 
(&HE7F) The operation cannot be executed because 
another command is still being executed.  
adErrTreePermissionDenied (no
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3728 
(&HE90) The operation is unable to access a tree or 
sub-tree due to a permissions failure.  
adErrUnavailable (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3736 
(&HE98) An operation failed to complete, and the 
status is unavailable. 
adErrUnsafeOperation 
(UNSAFEOPERATION) 
3716 
(&HE84) The operation is not considered safe by the 
environment that is currently running ADO.  
adErrURLDoesNotExist 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3727 
(&HE8F) Either the source URL or the parent of the 
destination URL does not exist.  
adErrURLNamedRowDoesNotExist 
(no ADO/WFC equivalent)  
3737 
(&HE99) The row named by this URL does not exist. 
Make sure the URL is typed correctly.  
adErrVolumeNotFound 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3733 
(&HE95)
The provider is unable to locate the storage 
volume indicated by the URL. Make sure the 
URL is typed correctly.  

IT-SC book 
585
adErrWriteFile 
(no 
ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
3004 
(&HBBC) The file could not be written to. 
adwrnSecurityDialog 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3717 
(&HE85) This is an internal constant only, and 
Microsoft asks that you do not use it.  
adwrnSecurityDialogHeader (no
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
3718 
(&HE86) This is an internal constant only, and 
Microsoft asks that you do not use it.  
ADO/WFC 
The ErrorValueEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.ErrorValue.  
See Also 
Error.Number Property 
EventReasonEnum  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The EventReasonEnum enumeration indicates why a given event was fired.  
Table E-19. The EventReasonEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adRsnAddNew (ADDNEW) 
1 
Indicates that a new record has been added by an 
operation. 
adRsnClose (CLOSE) 
9 
Indicates that the Recordset object has been closed by an 
operation. 
adRsnDelete (DELETE) 
2 
Indicates that a record has been deleted by an operation. 
adRsnFirstChange 
(FIRSTCHANGE) 
11 
Indicates that the first change to a record has been made 
by an operation.  
adRsnMove (MOVE) 
10 
Indicates that the record pointer has moved within the 
Recordset object by an operation.  

IT-SC book 
586 
adRsnMoveFirst 
(MOVEFIRST) 
12 
Indicates that the record pointer has been moved to the 
first record of the Recordset object by an operation.  
adRsnMoveLast 
(MOVELAST) 
15 
Indicates that the record pointer has been moved to the 
last record of the Recordset object by an operation.  
adRsnMoveNext 
(MOVENEXT) 
13 
Indicates that the record pointer has moved to the next 
record in the Recordset object by an operation.  
adRsnMovePrevious 
(MOVEPREVIOUS) 
14 
Indicates that the record pointer has moved to the 
previous record in the Recordset object by an operation. 
adRsnRequery (REQUERY) 
7 
Indicates that an operation has required the Recordset 
object. 
adRsnResynch (RESYNCH) 
8 
Indicates that an operation has resynchronized the 
Recordset object. 
adRsnUndoAddNew 
(UNDOADDNEW) 
5 
Indicates that a newly added record has been reversed by 
an operation. 
adRsnUndoDelete 
(UNDODELETE) 
6 
Indicates that a deleted record has been reversed by an 
operation. 
adRsnUndoUpdate 
(UNDOUPDATE) 
4 
Indicates that an update has been reversed by an 
operation. 
adRsnUpdate (UPDATE) 
3 
Indicates that an operation has updated an existing record 
within the Recordset object.  
ADO/WFC 
The EventReasonEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.EventReason.  
See Also 
Recordset.MoveComplete 
Event, 
Recordset.RecordChangeComplete 
Event, 
Recordset.RecordsetChangeComplete Event, Recordset.WillChangeRecord Event, Recordset 
WillChangeRecordset Event, Recordset.WillMove Event  
EventStatusEnum 
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 

IT-SC book 
587
Enumeration  
2.6) 
 
 
 
The EventStatusEnum enumeration specifies the current status of an executed event.  
Table E-20. The EventStatusEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adStatusCancel (CANCEL) 
4 
Indicates that the application is requesting the 
cancelation of the operation that has caused the 
current event to occur.  
adStatusCantDeny (CANTDENY) 3 
Indicates that the operation that has caused the 
current event to occur cannot be canceled.  
adStatusErrorsOccurred 
(ERRORSOCCURRED) 
2 
Indicates that the operation that has caused this 
event to occur did not complete successfully.  
adStatusOK (OK) 
1 
Indicates that the operation that has caused this 
event to occur completed successfully.  
adStatusUnwantedEvent 
(UNWANTEDEVENT) 
5 
Indicates that the application no longer wishes to 
receive subsequent notifications of the event that 
has been fired.  
ADO/WFC 
The EventStatusEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.EventStatus.  
See Also 
Connection.BeginTransComplete 
Event, 
Connection.CommitTransComplete 
Event, 
Connection.ConnectComplete 
Event, 
Connection.Disconnect 
Event, 
Connection.ExecuteComplete 
Event, 
Connection.InfoMessage 
Event, 
Connection.RollbackTransComplete 
Event, 
Connection.WillConnect 
Event, 
Connection.WillExecute Event, Recordset.EndOfRecordset Event, Recordset.FetchComplete 
Event, 
Recordset.FetchProgress 
Event, 
Recordset.FieldChangeComplete 
Event, 
Recordset.MoveComplete 
Event, 
Recordset.RecordChangeComplete 
Event, 
Recordset.RecordsetChangeComplete 
Event, 
Recordset.WillChangeField 
Event, 
Recordset.WillChangeRecord 
Event, 
Recordset.WillChangeRecordset 
Event, 
Recordset.WillMove Event  

IT-SC book 
588 
ExecuteOptionEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The ExecuteOptionEnum enumeration indicates how a data provider should execute a command.  
Table E-21. The ExecuteOptionEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adAsyncExecute 
(ASYNCEXECUTE) 
16 
(&H10) Instructs 
ADO 
to 
execute 
the 
command 
asynchronously. 
adAsyncFetch (ASYNCFETCH) 32 
(&H20) 
Instructs ADO to fetch the records returned from 
this command asynchronously after the initial 
number of rows (indicated by the CacheSize 
property) are returned.  
adAsyncFetchNonBlocking 
(ASYNCFETCHNONBLOCKING) 
64 
(&H40) 
Instructs ADO to never block the main thread 
while executing. If the row that is requested has 
not been read, it is automatically moved to the 
end of the file.  
adExecuteNoRecords 
(NORECORDS) 
128 
(&H80) 
Instructs ADO that the CommandText property 
does not return rows and, if it does, to discard 
them. This value is always combined with 
adCmdText 
or 
adCmdStoredProc 
of 
the 
CommandTypeEnum enumeration.  
adExecuteStream 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
1024 
(&H400)
Indicates that the returned object of the 
Command object's Execute method will be a 
Stream object. This value is invalid for all other 
uses.  
ADO/WFC 
The ExecuteOptionEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.ExecuteOption.  
See Also 
Command.Execute 
Method, 
Connection.Execute 
Method, 
Recordset.Open 
Method, 
Recordset.Requery Method  

IT-SC book 
589
FieldAttributesEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The FieldAttributesEnum enumeration indicates attributes of a field.  
Table E-22. The FieldAttributesEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adFldCacheDeferred 
(CACHEDEFERRED) 
4096 
(&H1000) 
Indicates that the ADO caches the value of 
this field, and any future attempts to read this 
value will be read from the cache.  
adFldFixed (FIXED) 
16 (&H10) Indicates that the field's value is of fixed 
length. 
adFldIsChapter 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
8192 
(&H2000) 
Indicates that the field specifies a chapter 
value, which in turn contains a child 
recordset.  
adFldIsCollection 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
262144 
(&H40000) Indicates that the field is a collection of other 
resources such as a folder, directory, etc.  
adFldIsDefaultStream 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
131072 
(&H20000) Indicates that the field contains the default 
Stream object for the record.  
adFldIsNullable 
(ISNULLABLE) 
32 (&H20) Indicates that the field accepts Null values. 
adFldIsRowURL (no ADO/WFC 
equivalent) 
65536 
(&H10000) Indicates that the field contains the URL that 
names the resource from the data store.  
adFldKeyColumn 
(no 
ADO/WFC equivalent) 
32768 
(&H8000) 
Indicates that the field belongs to a key within 
its table. 
adFldLong (LONG) 
128 (&H80)
Indicates that the field's value is a long binary 
field. This also indicates that you may use the 
AppendChunk and GetChunk methods on this 
field.  
adFldMayBeNull 
(MAYBENULL) 
64 (&H40) Indicates that this field may have Null values 

IT-SC book 
590 
that you can read. 
adFldMayDefer (MAYDEFER) 2 
Indicates that this field's value is not retrieved 
from the current record until it is explicitly 
requested.  
adFldNegativeScale 
(NEGATIVESCALE) 
16384 
(&H4000) 
Indicates that the field is based upon a 
negative scale. 
adFldRowID (ROWID) 
256 
(&H100) 
Indicates that this field contains a record 
identifier. 
adFldRowVersion 
(ROWVERSION) 
512 
(&H200) 
Indicates that this field contains a time or date 
stamp to track changes.  
adFldUnknownUpdatable 
(UNKNOWNUPDATABLE) 
8 
Indicates that the data provider cannot 
determine whether you can write to this field. 
adFldUpdatable 
(UPDATABLE) 
4 
Indicates that you can write to this field. 
ADO/WFC 
The FieldAttributeEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.FieldAttribute.  
See Also 
Fields.Append Method, Field.Attributes Property 
FieldEnum Enumeration  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The FieldEnum enumeration indicates the special fields referenced in a Record object's Fields 
collection.  
Table E-23. The FieldEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
Value 
Description 
adDefaultStream -1 
(&HFFFFFFFF) 
Indicates that the field contains the default Stream 
object for the Record object.  

IT-SC book 
591
adRecordURL 
-2 
(&HFFFFFFFE) 
Indicates that the field contains the absolute URL of the 
current Record object.  
ADO/WFC 
The FieldEnum enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants. 
FieldStatusEnum Enumeration  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The FieldStatusEnum specifies the status of the current field.  
Table E-24. The FieldStatusEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
Value 
Description 
adFieldAlreadyExists 
26 (&H1A) 
Indicates that the field already exists. 
adFieldBadStatus 
12 
Indicates that an invalid status value was 
sent from ADO to the OLE DB provider.  
adFieldCannotComplete 
20 (&H14) 
Indicates that the server of the URL 
specified by Source could not complete the 
operation.  
adFieldCannotDeleteSource 
23 (&H17) 
Indicates that during a move, a tree or 
subtree was moved to a new location, but 
the source could not be deleted.  
adFieldCantConvertValue 
2 
Indicates that the field cannot be persisted 
or retrieved without losing some data.  
adFieldCantCreate 
7 
Indicates that the field cannot be added 
because a limitation has been reached.  
adFieldDataOverflow 
6 
Indicates that the data returned from the 
provider has overflowed the datatype that is 
used to store it.  
adFieldDefault 
13 
Indicates that the default value for the field 
was used. 

IT-SC book 
592 
adFieldDoesNotExist 
16 (&H10) 
Indicates that the field does not exist. 
adFieldIgnore 
15 
Indicates that the field was skipped when 
setting data values in the source.  
adFieldIntegrityViolation 
10 
Indicates that the field is a calculated field 
and cannot be directly modified.  
adFieldInvalidURL 
17 (&H11) 
Indicates that the URL specifying the data 
source contains invalid characters.  
adFieldIsNull 
3 
Indicates that the data provider returned a 
Null value for the value of the field.  
adFieldOK 
0 
Default. Indicates that the field was 
successfully added or deleted. 
adFieldOutOfSpace 
22 (&H16) 
Indicates that the data provider cannot 
obtain enough space to perform the move 
or copy.  
adFieldPendingChange 
262144 
(&H40000) 
Indicates that a change is pending for the 
field. 
adFieldPendingDelete 
131072 
(&H20000) 
Indicates that the field has been marked for 
deletion. 
adFieldPendingInsert 
65536 
(&H10000) 
Indicates that the field has been marked to 
be added to the Fields collection after the 
Update method is called.  
adFieldPendingUnknown 
524288 
(&H80000) 
Indicates that the data provider cannot 
determine what operation has caused the 
status of the field to be updated.  
adFieldPendingUnknownDelete 1048576 
(&H100000) 
Indicates that the data provider cannot 
determine what operation has caused the 
status of the field to be updated, but it will 
be removed from the Fields collection after 
a call to the Update method.  
adFieldPermissionDenied 
9 
Indicates that the field cannot be modified 

IT-SC book 
593
because it is read-only. 
adFieldReadOnly 
24 (&H18) 
Indicates that the field is read-only. 
adResourceExists 
19 (&H13) 
Indicates that the data provider was unable 
to perform the specified operation because 
the resulting resource already exists.  
adFieldRsouceLocked 
18 (&H12) 
Indicates that the resource specified is 
locked by another process and the data 
provider is unable to perform the operation 
specified.  
adFieldResourceOutOfScope 
25 (&H19) 
Indicates that a URL value specified is 
outside the scope of the current record.  
adFieldSchemaViolation 
11 
Indicates that a schema constraint for the 
field has been violated by the value.  
adFieldSignMismatch 
5 
Indicates that the data returned by the data 
provider is unsigned because the datatype 
for the ADO field will not accept signed 
data.  
adFieldTruncated 
4 
Indicates that the data has been truncated 
(in the case of variable-length data).  
adFieldUnavailable 
8 
Indicates that the data provider cannot 
determine the value from the data source.  
adFieldVolumnNotFound 
21 (&H15) 
Indicates that the storage volume indicated 
by the URL cannot be found.  
ADO/WFC 
The FieldStatusEnum enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants. 
See Also 
Field.Status Property 
FilterGroupEnum 
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 

IT-SC book 
594 
Enumeration  
 
 
 
The FilterGroupEnum enumeration specifies which groups of records are to be filtered out of the 
Recordset object.  
Table E-25. The FilterGroupEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adFilterAffectedRecords 
(AFFECTEDRECORDS) 
2 
Filters the recordset so that you can see only 
records affected by the last Delete, Resync, 
UpdateBatch, or CancelBatch method call.  
adFilterConflictingRecords 
(CONFLICTINGRECORDS) 
5 
Filters the recordset to include only those records 
that failed the last batch update.  
adFilterFetchedRecords 
(FETCHEDRECORDS) 
3 
Filters the recordset so that you can see only 
records from the last fetch from the database --
only the records in the current cache.  
adFilterNone (NONE) 
0 
Tells the Filter property to remove any current 
filter and restore the recordset to its original state, 
showing all records. If you set the Filter property 
to an empty string (""), it is the same as setting it 
to the adFilterNone value.  
adFilterPendingRecords 
(PENDINGRECORDS) 
1 
Used when in batch update mode. Filters the 
recordset so that you can see only the records that 
have since changed but have not yet been sent to 
the data provider to be saved.  
ADO/WFC 
The FilterGroupEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.FilterGroup.  
See Also 
AffectEnum Enumeration, Recordset.Filter Property 
GetRowsOptionEnum 
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 

IT-SC book 
595
Enumeration  
 
 
 
The GetRowsOptionEnum enumeration indicates how many records are to be retrieved from the 
Recordset object.  
Table E-26. The GetRowsOptionEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
(ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adGetRowsRest 
(REST) 
-1 
(&HFFFFFFFF) Indicates that the rest of the rows are to be retrieved 
from the Recordset object.  
ADO/WFC 
The GetRowsOptionEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.GetRowsOption.  
See Also 
Recordset.GetRows Method 
IsolationLevelEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The IsolationLevelEnum enumeration indicates the level of transaction isolation for the 
Connection object.  
Table E-27. The IsolationLevelEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adXactBrowse (BROWSE) 
adXactReadUnCommitted 
(READUNCOMMITTED) 
256 (&H100) 
Indicates that you can view uncommitted 
values within other transactions.  
adXactChaos (CHAOS) 
16 (&H10) 
Indicates that you cannot change values 
that 
are 
pending 
from 
higher-level 
transactions.  

IT-SC book 
596 
adXactCursorStability 
(CURSORSTABILITY) 
adXactReadCommitted 
(READCOMMITTED) 
4096 (&H1000) Indicates 
that 
you 
cannot 
view 
uncommitted 
values 
within 
other 
transactions.  
adXactIsolated (ISOLATED) 
adXactSerializable 
(SERIALIZABLE) 
1048576 
(&H100000) 
Indicates 
that 
each 
transaction 
is 
conducted in complete isolation of other 
transactions.  
adXactRepeatableRead 
(REPEATABLEREAD) 
65536 
(&10000) 
Indicates 
that 
you 
cannot 
view 
uncommitted 
values 
within 
other 
transactions, but by requerying, you can 
see new recordsets.  
adXactUnspecified 
(UNSPECIFIED) 
-1 
(&HFFFFFFFF) 
Returned if the data provider is using a 
level 
of 
isolation 
that 
cannot 
be 
determined.  
ADO/WFC 
The IsolationLevelEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.IsolationLevel.  
See Also 
Connection.IsolationLevel Property 
LineSeparatorEnum Enumeration (Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The LineSeparatorEnum enumeration indicates the character(s) used as line separators for text in 
Stream objects.  
Table E-28. The LineSeparator Enumeration  
Enumeration 
Value 
Description 
adCR 
13 
Carriage return. 
adCRLF 
-1 (&HFFFFFFFF) 
Default. Carriage return and line feed. 
adLF 
10 
Line feed. 

IT-SC book 
597
ADO/WFC 
The LineSeparatorEnum enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants. 
See Also 
Stream.LineSeparator Property, Stream.SkipLine Method 
LockTypeEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The LockTypeEnum enumeration specifies the lock to use on records while they are being edited.  
Table E-29. The LockTypeEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adLockBatchOptimistic 
(BATCHOPTIMISTIC) 
4 
Required for batch update mode. Should be used 
only by a keyset or static cursor.  
adLockOptimistic (OPTIMISTIC) 3 
Indicates that the record is locked once the 
Update method has been called.  
adLockPessimistic 
(PESSIMISTIC) 
2 
Indicates that the record is locked once editing 
has begun. 
adLockReadOnly (READONLY) 
1 
Default. Indicates that the data is read-only. 
ADO/WFC 
The LockTypeEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant values 
are preceded with AdoEnums.IsolationLevel.  
See Also 
Connection.WillExecute Event, Recordset.Clone Method, Recordset.LockType Property, 
Recordset.Open Method  
MarshalOptionsEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 

IT-SC book 
598 
 
 
The MarshalOptionsEnum enumeration indicates which records should be returned to the server.  
Table E-30. The MarshallOptionsEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adMarshalAll (ALL) 
0 
Default. Returns all of the records to the server. 
adMarshalModifiedOnly 
(MODIFIED) 
1 
Returns only those records that have been 
modified to the server. 
ADO/WFC 
The MarshalOptionsEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.MarshallOptions.  
See Also 
Recordset.MarshalOptions Property 
MoveRecordOptionsEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The MoveRecordOptionsEnum enumeration indicates the behavior of the MoveRecord method.  
Table E-31. The MoveRecordOptionsEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
Value 
Description 
adMoveAllowEmulation 4 
Indicates that the data provider will attempt to 
simulate the move. 
adMoveDontUpdateLinks 2 
Indicates that the MoveRecord method will not 
update the hypertext links.  
adMoveOverWrite 
1 
Indicates that the MoveRecord method will 
overwrite the destination if it already exists.  
adMoveUnspecified 
-1 
(&HFFFFFFFF) Default. Indicates that the MoveRecord method 

IT-SC book 
599
will fail if the destination already exists and that 
all hypertext links will be updated.  
ADO/WFC 
The MoveRecordOptionsEnum enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants. 
See Also 
Record.MoveRecord Method 
ObjectStateEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The ObjectStateEnum enumeration provides a status of the current object.  
Table E-32. The ObjectStateEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adStateClosed (CLOSED) 
0 
Default. Indicates that the current object is closed. 
adStateConnecting 
(CONNECTING) 
2 
Indicates that the current object is connecting to the 
data source. 
adStateExecuting 
(EXECUTING) 
4 
Indicates that the current object is executing a 
command. 
adStateFetching (FETCHING) 8 
Indicates that the current object is fetching rows from 
the data source.  
adStateOpen (OPEN) 
1 
Indicates that the current object is open. 
ADO/WFC 
The ObjectStateEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.ObjectState.  
See Also 

IT-SC book 
600 
Command.State Property, Connection.State Property, Record.State Property, Recordset.State 
Property, Stream.State Property  
ParameterAttributesEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The ParameterAttributesEnum enumeration specifies the attributes of a Parameter object.  
Table E-33. The ParameterArgumentsEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adParamLong (LONG) 
128 
(&H80) 
Indicates that the current parameter can accept long 
binary-data values.  
adParamNullable 
(NULLABLE) 
64 
(&H40) 
Indicates that the current parameter can accept Null 
values. 
adParamSigned (SIGNED) 16 
(&H10) 
Indicates that the current parameter can accept 
signed values. 
ADO/WFC 
The ParameterAttributesEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the 
constant values are preceded with AdoEnums.ParameterAttributes.  
See Also 
Parameter.Attributes Property 
ParameterDirectionEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The ParameterDirectionEnum enumeration indicates whether the parameter receives information, 
returns information, both receives and returns information, or if it is a return value of a stored 
procedure.  
Table E-34. The ParameterDirectionEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 

IT-SC book 
601
adParamInput (INPUT) 
1 
Default. Input parameter only. 
adParamInputOutput (INPUTOUTPUT) 
3 
Both an input and output parameter. 
adParamOutput (OUTPUT) 
2 
Output parameter only. 
adParamReturnValue (RETURNVALUE) 
4 
A return value from a command. 
adParamUnknown (UNKNOWN) 
0 
Unknown parameter type. 
ADO/WFC 
The ParameterDirectionEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the 
constant values are preceded with AdoEnums.ParameterDirection.  
See Also 
Command.CreateParameter Method, Parameter.Direction Property 
PersistFormatEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The PersistFormatEnum enumeration indicates in which format a Recordset object will be 
persisted.  
Table E-35. The PersistFormatEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
(ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
AdPersistADTG 
(ADTG) 
0 
Indicates that the Recordset object will be saved in the Microsoft 
Advanced Data TableGram (ADTG) format.  
AdPersistXML 
(XML) 
1 
Indicates that the Recordset object will be saved in the Extensible 
Markup Language (XML) format.  
ADO/WFC 
The PersistFormatEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.PersistFormat.  

IT-SC book 
602 
See Also 
Recordset.Save Method 
PositionEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The PositionEnum enumeration specifies the current position of the record pointer within a 
Recordset object.  
Table E-36. The PositionEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
(ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adPosBOF (BOF) 
-2 
(&HFFFFFFFE)
Indicates that the record pointer is immediately before 
the first record in the Recordset object.  
adPosEOF (EOF) 
-3 
(&HFFFFFFFD)
Indicates that the record pointer is immediately after the 
last record in the Recordset object.  
adPosUnknown 
(UNKNOWN) 
-1 
(&HFFFFFFFF)
Indicates that the Recordset is empty, the position is 
unknown, or the data provider cannot determine the 
current position.  
ADO/WFC 
The PositionEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant values 
are preceded with AdoEnums.Position.  
See Also 
Recordset.AbsolutePage Property, Recordset.AbsolutePosition Property 
PropertyAttributesEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The PropertyAttributesEnum enumeration specifies the attributes of a Property object.  
Table E-37. The PropertyAttributesEnum Enumeration  

IT-SC book 
603
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adPropNotSupported 
(NOTSUPPORTED) 
0 
Indicates that the current property is not supported 
by the data provider.  
adPropOptional 
(OPTIONAL) 
2 
Indicates that the current property does not have to 
receive a value before the data source can be 
initialized.  
adPropRead (READ) 
512 
(&H200) 
Indicates that the property can be read. 
adPropRequired 
(REQUIRED) 
1 
Indicates that the current property must receive a 
value before the data source can be initialized.  
adPropWrite (WRITE) 
1024 
(&H400) 
Indicates that the current property object can be 
set. 
ADO/WFC 
The PropertyAttributesEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the 
constant values are preceded with AdoEnums.PropertyAttributes.  
See Also 
Property.Attributes Property 
RecordCreateOptionsEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The RecordCreateOptionsEnum enumeration indicates whether the new record should be created 
or an existing record should be opened when using the Open method of the Record object.  
Table E-38. The RecordCreateOptionsEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
Value 
Description 
adCreateCollection 
8192 (&H2000)
Indicates that a new record is to be created. If 
one already exists, a runtime error is generated 
unless 
if 
this 
value 
is 
combined 
with 
adOpenIfExists or adCreateOverwrite.  

IT-SC book 
604 
adCreateNonCollection 0 
Indicates 
that 
a 
simple 
record 
(type 
adSimpleRecord) will be created. 
adCreateOverwrite 
67108864 
(&H4000000) 
Indicates that a new record is to be created if 
one does not already exists, or, if it does exist, 
that it will be overwritten.  
adCreateStructDoc 
-2147483648 
(&H80000000) 
Indicates that a structured document (type 
adStructDoc) will be created.  
adFailIfNotExists 
-1 
(&HFFFFFFFF) 
Default. Indicates that a runtime error will be 
generated if the record specified does not 
already exist.  
adOpenIfExists 
33554432 
(&H2000000) 
Indicates that the record specified will be 
opened only if it exists. 
ADO/WFC 
The RecordCreateOptionsEnum enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants.  
See Also 
Record.Open Method 
RecordOpenOptionsEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The RecordOpenOptionsEnum enumeration indicates options for opening a Record object.  
Table E-39. The RecordOpenOptionsEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
Value 
Description 
adDelayFetchFields 
32768 
(&H8000) 
Indicates that the provider need only retrieve 
the fields when they are accessed, rather than 
in advance.  
adDelayFetchStream 
16384 
(&H4000) 
Indicates that the provider need only retrieve 
the default stream when it is accessed, rather 

IT-SC book 
605
than in advance.  
adOpenAsync 
4096 (&1000) Indicates that the Record object should be 
opened asynchronously. 
adOpenExecuteCommand 
65536 
(&H10000) 
Indicates that the Source field of the Record 
object contains a command that should be 
executed.  
adOpenOutput 
8388608 
(&H800000) 
Indicates that if the source of the Record 
object points to an executable script, then the 
Record object contains the results of the 
executed script.  
adOpenRecordUnspecified -1 
(&HFFFFFFFF) Default. Indicates that no special options are 
specified. 
ADO/WFC 
The RecordOpenOptionsEnum enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants. 
See Also 
Record.Open Method 
RecordStatusEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.6, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The RecordStatusEnum enumeration indicates the status of a record within a Recordset object 
with regards to bulk operations such as batch updates.  
Table E-40. The RecordStatusEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adRecCanceled (CANCELED) 
256 
(&H100) 
Indicates that the record has not been saved 
because the operation was canceled.  
adRecCantRelease 
(CANTRELEASE) 
1024 
(&H400) 
Indicates that the new record has not been 
saved because of record locks.  

IT-SC book 
606 
adRecConcurrencyViolation 
(CONCURRENCYVIOLATION) 
2048 
(&H800) 
Indicates that the record has not been saved 
because 
optimistic 
concurrency 
(the 
assumption that collisions between data 
rarely occur, and therefore the row is left 
unlocked until update or deletion) was in 
use.  
adRecDBDeleted (DBDELETED) 
262144 
(&H40000)
Indicates that the record has already been 
deleted from the data source.  
adRecDeleted (DELETED) 
4 
Indicates that the record has been deleted.
adRecIntegrityViolation 
(INTEGRITYVIOLATION) 
4096 
(&H1000) 
Indicates that the record had not been 
saved because the user violated integrity 
constraints.  
adRecInvalid (INVALID) 
16 (&H10)
Indicates that the bookmark of the record is 
bad and therefore that record was not 
saved.  
adRecMaxChangesExceeded 
(MAXCHANGESEXCEEDED) 
8192 
(&H2000) 
Indicates that the record has not been saved 
because there were too many pending 
changes.  
adRecModified (MODIFIED) 
2 
Indicates 
that 
the 
record 
has 
been 
modified. 
adRecMultipleChanges 
(MULTIPLECHANGES) 
64 (&H40)
Indicates that the record has not been saved 
because it would have affected multiple 
records.  
adRecNew (NEW) 
1 
Indicates that the record is new. 
adRecObjectOpen (OBJECTOPEN) 16384 
(&H4000) 
Indicates that the record has not been saved 
because of a conflict with an open storage 
object.  
adRecOK (OK) 
0 
Indicates that the record was successfully 
updated. 
adRecOutOfMemory 
(OUTOFMEMORY) 
32768 
(&H8000) 
Indicates that the record has not been saved 
because the computer has run out of 

IT-SC book 
607
memory.  
adRecPendingChanges 
(PENDINGCHANGES) 
128 (&H80) Indicates that the record has not been saved 
because it refers to a pending insert.  
adRecPermissionDenied 
(PERMISSIONDENIED) 
65536 
(&H10000)
Indicates that the record has not been saved 
because 
the 
user 
has 
insufficient 
permissions.  
adRecSchemaViolation 
(SCHEMAVIOLATION) 
131072 
(&H20000)
Indicates that the record has not been saved 
because it violated the structure of its 
underlying database.  
adRecUnmodified (UNMODIFIED) 8 
Indicates that the record has not been 
modified. 
ADO/WFC 
The RecordStatusEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.RecordStatus.  
See Also 
Recordset.Status Property 
RecordTypeEnum Enumeration  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The RecordTypeEnum enumeration indicates the type of the current Record object.  
Table E-41. The RecordTypeEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
Value Description 
adCollectionRecord 1 
Indicates the current record is a collection (containing child 
nodes). 
adSimpleRecord 
0 
Indicates the current record is a simple record (not containing 
child nodes).  
adStructDoc 
2 
Indicates the current record is a COM structured document. 

IT-SC book 
608 
ADO/WFC 
The RecordTypeEnum enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants. 
See Also 
Record.RecordType Property 
ResyncEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The ResyncEnum enumeration indicates whether underlying data is overwritten and if pending 
updates are lost when the Resync method is called.  
Table E-42. The ResyncEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adResyncAllValues (ALLVALUES) 
2 
Default. Indicates that a call to the Resync 
method overwrites data and cancels pending 
updates.  
adResyncUnderlyingValues 
(UNDERLYINGVALUES) 
1 
Indicates that a call to the Resync method does 
not overwrite data and that pending updates are 
not canceled.  
ADO/WFC 
The ResyncEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant values 
are preceded with AdoEnums.Resync.  
See Also 
Recordset.Resync Method, Fields.Resync Method 
SaveOptionsEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The SaveOptionsEnum enumeration indicates whether a file should be created or overwritten 
when saving a Stream object.  

IT-SC book 
609
Table E-43. The SaveOptionsEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
Value Description 
adSaveCreateNotExist 1 
Default. Indicates that a new file will be created if it does not 
already exist when using the SaveToFile method.  
adSaveCreateOverWrite 2 
Indicates that if the file exists, it will be overwritten when 
using the SaveToFile method.  
ADO/WFC 
The SaveOptionsEnum enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants. 
See Also 
Stream.SaveToFile Method 
SchemaEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The SchemaEnum enumeration indicates the type of schema information that is returned from the 
OpenSchema method of the Connection object.  
Table E-44. The SchemaEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adSchemaAsserts (ASSERTS) 
0 
Returns assertions for a catalog of a 
user. Constraint columns include:  
CONSTRAINT_CATALOG 
CONSTRAINT_SCHEMA 
CONSTRAINT_NAME 
adSchemaCatalogs (CATALOGS) 
1 
Returns 
the 
physical 
arguments 
associated with catalogs accessible 
from the data source. Constraint 
columns include:  
CATALOG_NAME 

IT-SC book 
610 
adSchemaCharacterSets 
(CHARACTERSETS) 
2 
Returns the available character sets 
for a catalog of a user. Constraint 
columns include:  
CHARACTER_SET_CATALOG 
CHARACTER_SET_SCHEMA 
CHARACTER_SET_NAME 
adSchemaCheckConstraints 
(CHECKCONTRAINTS) 
5 
Returns the check constraints for a 
catalog of a user. Constraint columns 
include:  
CONSTRAINT_CATALOG 
CONSTRAINT_SCHEMA 
CONSTRAINT_NAME 
adSchemaCollations 
(COLLATIONS) 
3 
Returns the character collations for a 
catalog of a user. Constraint columns 
include:  
COLLATION_CATALOG 
COLLATION_SCHEMA 
COLLATION_NAME 
adSchemaColumnPrivileges 
(COLUMNPRIVILEGES) 
13 
Returns privileges for columns of 
tables in a catalog of -- or granted by 
-- a user. Constraint columns include: 
TABLE_CATALOG 
TABLE_SCHEMA 
TABLE_NAME 
COLUMN_NAME 
GRANTOR 
GRANTEE 
adSchemaColumns (COLUMNS) 
4 
Returns columns of tables and views 
for a catalog of a user. Constraint 

IT-SC book 
611
columns include:  
TABLE_CATALOG 
TABLE_SCHEMA 
TABLE_NAME 
COLUMN_NAME 
adSchemaColumnsDomainUsage 
(COLUMNSDOMAINUSAGE) 
11 
Returns 
columns 
of 
a 
catalog 
dependent on a domain for a catalog 
for a user. Constraint columns 
include:  
DOMAIN_CATALOG 
DOMAIN_SCHEMA 
DOMAIN_NAME 
COLUMN_NAME 
adSchemaConstraintColumnUsage 
(CONSTRAINTCOLUMNUSAGE) 
6 
Returns 
the 
columns 
used 
by 
referential 
constraints, 
unique 
constraints, check constraints, and 
assertions for a catalog of a user. 
Constraint columns include:  
TABLE_CATALOG 
TABLE_SCHEMA 
TABLE_NAME 
COLUMN_NAME 
adSchemaConstraintTableUsage 
(CONSTRAINTTABLEUSAGE) 
7 
Returns the tables that are used by 
referential 
constraints, 
unique 
constraints, check constraints, and 
assertions for a catalog of a user. 
Constraint columns include:  
TABLE_CATALOG 
TABLE_SCHEMA 
TABLE_NAME 

IT-SC book 
612 
adSchemaCubes (CUBES) 
32 (&H20) 
Returns 
information 
about 
the 
available cubes in a schema (or 
catalog for providers that do not 
support 
schemas). 
Constraint 
columns include:  
CATALOG_NAME 
SCHEMA_NAME 
CUBE_NAME 
adSchemaDBInfoKeywords 
(DBINFOKEYWORDS) 
30 (&H1E) 
Returns a list of keywords that are 
specific to the provider. There are no 
constraint columns for this schema.  
adSchemaDBInfoLiterals 
(DBINFOLITERALS) 
31 (&H1F) 
Returns a list of literals for text 
commands that are specific to the 
provider.  
There are no constraint columns for 
this schema. 
adSchemaDimensions 
(DIMENSIONS) 
33 (&H21) 
Returns one row of information for 
each dimension of a cube. Constraint 
columns include:  
CATALOG_NAME 
SCHEMA_NAME 
CUBE_NAME 
DIMENSION_NAME 
DIMENSION_UNIQUE_NAME 
adSchemaForieignKeys 
(FOREIGNKEYS) 
27 (&H1B) 
Returns foreign key columns for a 
catalog of a user. Constraint columns 
include:  
PK_TABLE_CATALOG 
PK_TABLE_SCHEMA 
PK_TABLE_NAME 

IT-SC book 
613
FK_TABLE_CATALOG 
FK_TABLE_SCHEMA 
FK_TABLE_NAME 
adSchemaHierarchies 
(HIERARCHIES) 
34 (&H22) 
Returns 
information 
about 
the 
hierarchies available in a dimension. 
Constraint columns include:  
CATALOG_NAME 
SCHEMA_NAME 
CUBE_NAME 
DIMENSION_UNIQUE_NAME 
HIERARCHY_NAME 
HIERARCHY_UNIQUE_NAME 
adSchemaIndexes (INDEXES) 
12 
Returns the indexes for a catalog of a 
user. Constraint columns include:  
TABLE_CATALOG 
TABLE_SCHEMA 
INDEX_NAME 
TYPE 
TABLE_NAME 
adSchemaKeyColumnUsage 
(KEYCOLUMNUSAGE) 
8 
Returns the columns for a catalog that 
are constrained as keys for a user. 
Constraint columns include:  
CONSTRAINT_CATALOG 
CONSTRAINT_SCHEMA 
CONSTRAINT_NAME 
TABLE_CATALOG 
TABLE_SCHEMA 

IT-SC book 
614 
TABLE_NAME 
COLUMN_NAME 
adSchemaLevels (LEVELS) 
35 (&H23) 
Returns the information regarding the 
levels in a dimension. Constraint 
columns include:  
CATALOG_NAME 
SCHEMA_NAME 
CUBE_NAME 
DIMENSION_UNIQUE_NAME 
HIERARCHY_UNIQUE_NAME 
LEVEL_NAME 
LEVEL_UNIQUE_NAME 
adSchemaMeasures (MEASURES) 
36 (&H24) 
Returns information about the levels 
available in a dimension. Constraint 
columns include:  
CATALOG_NAME 
SCHEMA_NAME 
CUBE_NAME 
DIMENSION_UNIQUE_NAME 
HIERARCHY_UNIQUE_NAME 
LEVEL_NAME 
LEVEL_UNIQUE_NAME 
adSchemaMembers (MEMBERS) 
38 (&H26) 
Returns 
information 
about 
the 
available 
measures. 
Constraint 
columns include:  
CATALOG_NAME 
SCHEMA_NAME 

IT-SC book 
615
CUBE_NAME 
DIMENSION_UNIQUE_NAME 
HIERARCHY_UNIQUE_NAME 
LEVEL_UNIQUE_NAME 
LEVEL_NUMBER 
MEMBER_NAME 
MEMBER_UNIQUE_NAME 
MEMBER_CAPTION 
MEMBER_TYPE 
An OLAP Tree Operator 
adSchemaPrimaryKeys 
(PRIMARYKEYS)  
28 (&H1C) 
Returns the primary key columns 
defined for a catalog of a user. 
Constraint columns include:  
PK_TABLE_CATALOG 
PK_TABLE_SCHEMA 
PK_TABLE_NAME 
adSchemaProcedureColumns 
(PROCEDURECOLUMNS)  
29 (H1D) 
Returns 
information 
about 
the 
columns of rowsets returned by 
procedures. 
Constraint 
columns 
include:  
PROCEDURE_CATALOG 
PROCEDURE_SCHEMA 
PROCEDURE_NAME 
COLUMN_NAME 
adSchemaProcedureParameters 
(PROCEDUREPARAMETERS)  
26 (&H1A) 
Returns the tables on which viewed 
tables, for a catalog of a user, are 
dependent. 
Constraint 
columns 
include:  

IT-SC book 
616 
PROCEDURE_CATALOG 
PROCEDURE_SCHEMA 
PROCEDURE_NAME 
PARAMETER_NAME 
adSchemaProcedures (PROCEDURES) 16 (&H10) 
Returns the procedures for a catalog 
owned by a user. Constraint columns 
include:  
PROCEDURE_CATALOG 
PROCEDURE_SCHEMA 
PROCEDURE_NAME 
PROCEDURE_TYPE 
adSchemaProperties (PROPERTIES) 37 (&H25) 
For each level of the dimension, 
returns 
information 
about 
the 
available 
properties. 
Constraint 
columns include:  
CATALOG_NAME 
SCHEMA_NAME 
CUBE_NAME 
DIMENSION_UNIQUE_NAME 
HIERARCHY_UNIQUE_NAME 
LEVEL_UNIQUE_NAME 
MEMBER_UNIQUE_NAME 
PROPERTY_TYPE 
PROPERTY_NAME 
adSchemaProviderSpecific 
(PROVIDERSPECIFIC)  
-1 
(&HFFFFFFFF)
Used if the data provider has defined 
its own nonstandard schema queries. 
Constraint columns are provider 
specific. 

IT-SC book 
617
adSchemaProviderTypes 
(PROVIDERTYPES)  
22 (&H16) 
Returns the base datatypes supported 
by the data provider. Constraint 
columns include:  
DATA_TYPE 
BEST_MATCH 
adSchemaReferentialConstraints 
(REFERENTIALCONTRAINTS)  
9 
Returns the referential constraints for 
a 
catalog, 
owned 
by 
a 
user. 
Constraint columns include:  
CONSTRAINT_CATALOG 
CONSTRAINT_SCHEMA 
CONSTRAINT_NAME 
adSchemaSchemata (SCHEMATA) 
17 (&H11) 
Returns the schemas owned by a user. 
Constraint columns include: 
CATALOG_NAME 
SCHEMA_NAME 
SCHEMA_OWNER 
adSchemaSQLLanguages 
(SQLLANGUAGES)  
18 (&H12) 
Returns the conformance levels, 
options, and dialects supported by the 
SQL-implementation processing data 
for a catalog. There are no defined 
constraint columns for this schema.  
adSchemaStatistics (STATISTICS) 19 (&H13) 
Returns the statistics defined in the 
catalog that are owned by a user. 
Constraint columns include:  
TABLE_CATALOG 
TABLE_SCHEMA 
TABLE_NAME 
adSchemaTableConstraints 
(TABLECONSTRAINTS)  
10 
Returns the table constraints for a 
catalog that are owned by a user. 
Constraint columns include:  

IT-SC book 
618 
CONSTRAINT_CATALOG 
CONSTRAINT_SCHEMA 
CONSTRAINT_NAME 
TABLE_CATALOG 
TABLE_SCHEMA 
TABLE_NAME 
CONSTRAINT_TYPE 
adSchemaTablePrivelages 
(TABLEPRIVILEGES)  
14 
Returns the privileges on tables for a 
catalog that are available or granted 
by 
a 
user. 
Constraint 
columns 
include:  
TABLE_CATALOG 
TABLE_SCHEMA 
TABLE_NAME 
GRANTOR 
GRANTEE 
adSchemaTables (TABLES) 
20 (&14) 
Returns the tables and views for a 
catalog of a user. Constraint columns 
include:  
TABLE_CATALOG 
TABLE_SCHEMA 
TABLE_NAME 
TABLE_TYPE 
adSchemaTranslations 
(TRANSLATIONS)  
21 (&15) 
Returns the character translations 
defined for a catalog of a user. 
Constraint columns include:  
TRANSLATION_CATALOG 
TRANSLATION_SCHEMA 

IT-SC book 
619
TRANSLATION_NAME 
adSchemaTrustees (TRUSTEES) 
39 (&H27) 
Returns 
information 
about 
trustees.There 
are 
no 
defined 
constraint columns for this schema.  
adSchemaUsagePrivileges 
(USAGEPRIVILEGES)  
15 
Returns the usage privileges on 
objects for a catalog that are available 
or granted by a user. Constraint 
columns include:  
OBJECT_CATALOG 
OBJECT_SCHEMA 
OBJECT_NAME 
OBJECT_TYPE 
GRANTOR 
GRANTEE 
adSchemaViewColumnUsage 
(VIEWCOLUMNUSAGE)  
24 (&H18) 
Returns the columns on which 
viewed tables, for a catalog and 
owned by a user, are dependent. 
Constraint columns include:  
VIEW_CATALOG 
VIEW_SCHEMA 
VIEW_NAME 
adSchemaViews (VIEWS) 
23 (&H17) 
Returns the views for a catalog of a 
user. Constraint columns include: 
TABLE_CATALOG 
TABLE_SCHEMA 
TABLE_NAME 
adSchemaViewTableUsage 
(VIEWTABLEUSAGE)  
25 (&H19) 
Returns the tables on which viewed 
tables -- for a catalog and owned by a 
user -- are dependent. Constraint 
columns include:  

IT-SC book 
620 
VIEW_CATALOG 
VIEW_SCHEMA 
VIEW_NAME 
adSchemaPrimaryKeys 
(PRIMARYKEYS)  
28 (&H1C) 
Returns the primary key columns 
defined for a catalog of a user. 
Constraint columns include:  
PK_TABLE_CATALOG 
PK_TABLE_SCHEMA 
PK_TABLE_NAME 
ADO/WFC 
The SchemaEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant values 
are preceded with AdoEnums.Schema.  
See Also 
Connection.OpenSchema Method 
SearchDirectionEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 
2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The SearchDirectionEnum enumeration indicates in which direction the Find method of the 
Recordset object is to look.  
Table E-45. The SearchDirectionEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) Value 
Description 
adSearchBackward 
(BACKWARD) 
-1 
(&HFFFFFFFF)
Indicates that the Find method will search 
backwards until either a match is found or the 
BOF marker is reached.  
adSearchForward 
(FORWARD) 
1 
Indicates that the Find method will search forward 
until either a match is found or the EOF marker is 
reached.  

IT-SC book 
621
ADO/WFC 
The SearchDirectionEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.SearchDirection.  
See Also 
Recordset.Find Method 
SeekEnum Enumeration  
(Versions 2.1, 2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The SeekEnum enumeration indicates the type of Seek to perform.  
Table E-46. The SeekEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
(ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adSeekAfter (AFTER) 8 
Indicates that the Seek will occur just after where a match 
with KeyValues would have occurred.  
adSeekAfterEQ 
(AFTEREQ) 
4 
Indicates that the Seek will occur where a key equals 
KeyValues or just after where a match would have 
occurred.  
adSeekBefore 
(BEFORE) 
32 
(&H20) Indicates that the Seek will occur just before where a match 
with KeyValues would have occurred.  
adSeekBeforeEQ 
(BEFOREEQ) 
16 
(&H10) 
Indicates that the Seek will occur where a key equals 
KeyValues or just before where a match would have 
occurred.  
adSeekFirstEQ 
(FIRSTEQ) 
1 
Indicates that the Seek will occur to the first key equal to 
KeyValues.  
adSeekLastEQ 
(LASTEQ) 
2 
Indicates that the Seek will occur to the last key equal to 
KeyValues. 
ADO/WFC 
The SeekEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant values are 
preceded with AdoEnums.Seek.  

IT-SC book 
622 
See Also 
Recordset.Seek Method 
StreamOpenOptionsEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The StreamOpenOptionsEnum enumeration specifies options for opening a Stream object.  
Table E-47. The StreamOpenOptionsEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
Value 
Description 
adOpenStreamAsync 
1 
Indicates that the Stream will be opened 
asynchronously. 
adOpenStreamFromRecord 4 
Indicates that the contents of the Source 
parameter to the Open method contain an 
already open Record object.  
adOpenStreamUnspecified -1 
(&HFFFFFFFF)
Default. Indicates that no special options are 
selected. 
ADO/WFC 
The StreamOpenOptionsEnum enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants. 
See Also 
Stream.Open Method 
StreamReadEnum Enumeration  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The StreamReadEnum enumeration indicates whether one line or the entire Stream should be 
read.  
Table E-48. The StreamReadEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration Value 
Description 

IT-SC book 
623
adReadAll -1 (&HFFFFFFFF) Default. Indicates that the entire Stream is to be read. 
adReadLine -2 (&HFFFFFFFE) Indicates that the next line is to be read in from the Stream. 
ADO/WFC 
The StreamReadEnum enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants. 
See Also 
Stream.Read Method, Stream.ReadText Method 
StreamTypeEnum Enumeration  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The StreamTypeEnum enumeration indicates what type of data is stored in a Stream object.  
Table E-49. The StreamTypeEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
Value 
Description 
adTypeBinary 
1 
Indicates that the Stream contains binary data. 
adTypeText 
2 
Indicates that the Stream contains textual data. 
ADO/WFC 
The StreamTypeEnum enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants. 
See Also 
Stream.Type Property 
StreamWriteEnum Enumeration  
(Versions 2.5, 2.6) 
 
 
 
The StreamWriteEnum enumeration indicates whether a line separator is appending to a String 
written to a Stream object.  
Table E-50. The StreamWriteEnum Enumeration  

IT-SC book 
624 
Enumeration 
Value Description 
adWriteChar 0 
Default. Indicates that the specified text string is written to the Stream 
object.  
adWriteLine 1 
Indicates that the specified text string followed by a line separator will be 
written to the Stream object.  
ADO/WFC 
The StreamWriteEnum enumeration does not have ADO/WFC constants. 
See Also 
Stream.WriteText Method 
StringFormatEnum 
Enumeration  
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 
2.6) 
 
 
 
The StringFormatEnum enumeration indicates the format of a recordset when retrieving it as a 
string value.  
Table E-51. The StringFormatEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration 
(ADO/WFC) 
Value Description 
adClipString 
(CLIPSTRING) 
2 
Indicates that when importing a Recordset as a String value, rows 
are delimited by RowDelimiter, columns by ColumnDelimiter, and 
NULL value by NullExpr.  
ADO/WFC 
The StringFormatEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.StringFormat.  
See Also 
Recordset.GetString Method 
XactAttributeEnum 
(Versions 2.0, 2.1, 2.5, 

IT-SC book 
625
Enumeration  
2.6) 
 
 
 
The XactAttributeEnum enumeration indicates the transaction attributes of a Connection object.  
Table E-52. The XactAttributeEnum Enumeration  
Enumeration (ADO/WFC) 
Value 
Description 
adXactAbortRetaining 
(ABORTRETAINING) 
262144 
(&H40000) 
Indicates that by calling the RollbackTrans 
method, ADO will start a new transaction 
automatically.  
adXactCommitRetaining 
(COMMITRETAINING) 
131072 
(&H20000) 
Indicates that by calling the CommitTrans 
method, ADO will start a new transaction 
automatically.  
ADO/WFC 
The XactAttributeEnum enumeration is part of the com.ms.wfc.data package, and the constant 
values are preceded with AdoEnums.IsolationLevel.  
See Also 
Connection.Attributes Property 

IT-SC book 
626 
Colophon 
Our look is the result of reader comments, our own experimentation, and feedback from 
distribution channels. Distinctive covers complement our distinctive approach to technical topics, 
breathing personality and life into potentially dry subjects. 
The bird on the cover of ADO: ActiveX Data Objects is an ivory-billed woodpecker 
(Campephilus principalis ). Considered extinct by many naturalists and ornithologists (the last 
confirmed sighting was in the 1950s), the "ivory-bill" was never abundant in its habitat, the 
southeastern United States and Cuba. With glossy black plumage, white markings, and a red 
tufted crest (males only), the ivory-bill looks extremely similar to the pileated woodpecker, with 
whom it also shared its habitat. The similarities between the two birds has been the cause of much 
trouble, as eager amateurs add to unconfirmed sighting reports of the ivory-bill when they have 
probably spotted the pileated woodpecker. This is especially troublesome for naturalists who hold 
out hope that the ivory-bill may still exist in the far reaches of Louisiana forests or in Cuba. In the 
early 1990s, many nature and birding groups spent considerable amounts of money mounting 
search efforts for the ivory-bill. 
As do all woodpeckers, the ivory-bill has a chisel-like bill and a long, hard-tipped, sticky tongue; 
the first for drilling and scaling bark, the latter for retrieving beetles and grubs on which to feed. 
Retrieving food in this manner, however, is not what creates the drumming sound that many 
associate with woodpeckers. Rather, woodpeckers drum when reinforcing their claim to a 
territory, creating the loudest drum possible by striking the tops of dead, hollow trees. 
Important differences between the closely linked ivory-billed and pileated woodpeckers include 
their bills (the ivory-bill's was, well, ivory, while the pileated woodpecker's bill is gray), their 
sizes (the ivory-bill was the largest of all North American woodpeckers), and their calls (the 
ivory-bill's was a "toot"; the pileated's is a "kuk"). In 1987, Dr. Jerome A. Jackson of Florida Gulf 
University caught the ivory-bill's distinctive call on eighteen minutes of tape in Louisiana, adding 
to the excitement created by various unconfirmed sightings. The most recent and credulous 
sighting occurred in 1999, when graduate student David Kulivan sighted a pair of what were 
supposedly ivory-bills in southeastern Louisiana. 
While The Nature Conservancy declared the ivory-bill extinct in 1994, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service has not yet added it to its extinction list. The reason for its near or possible extinction: 
logging of the old-growth forests in which it lived. 
Jeffrey Holcomb and Sarah Jane Shangraw were the production editors for ADO: ActiveX Data 
Objects. Jeffrey Holcomb copyedited the text. Linley Dolby, Matt Hutchinson, and Claire 
Cloutier provided quality control. Pamela Murray, Sarah Jane Shangraw, and Joe Wizda wrote 
the index. Sarah Jane Shangraw did page composition. 
Hanna Dyer designed the cover of this book, based on a series design by Edie Freedman. The 
cover image is a 19th-century engraving from the Dover Pictorial Archive. Erica Corwell 
produced the cover layout with Quark
XPress 4.1 using Adobe's ITC Garamond font. 
Melanie Wang designed the interior layout based on a series design by Nancy Priest. Anne-Marie 
Vaduva converted the files from Microsoft Word to FrameMaker 5.5.6 using tools created by 
Mike Sierra. The text and heading fonts are ITC Garamond Light and Garamond Book; the code 
font is Constant Willison. The illustrations that appear in the book were produced by Robert 

IT-SC book 
627
Romano and Jessamyn Read using Macromedia FreeHand 9 and Adobe Photoshop 6. This 
colophon was written by Jeffrey Holcomb. 
 

