
About This E-Book
EPUB is an open, industry-standard format for e-books. However, support for EPUB
and its many features varies across reading devices and applications. Use your device
or app settings to customize the presentation to your liking. Settings that you can
customize often include font, font size, single or double column, landscape or portrait
mode, and figures that you can click or tap to enlarge. For additional information about
the settings and features on your reading device or app, visit the device manufacturer’s
Web site.
Many titles include programming code or configuration examples. To optimize the
presentation of these elements, view the e-book in single-column, landscape mode and
adjust the font size to the smallest setting. In addition to presenting code and
configurations in the reflowable text format, we have included images of the code that
mimic the presentation found in the print book; therefore, where the reflowable format
may compromise the presentation of the code listing, you will see a “Click here to view
code image” link. Click the link to view the print-fidelity code image. To return to the
previous page viewed, click the Back button on your device or app.

Adobe Photoshop CC 2017 release
CLASSROOM IN A BOOK
The official training workbook from Adobe
Andrew Faulkner and Conrad Chavez

Adobe Photoshop CC Classroom in a Book® (2017 release)
© 2017 Adobe. All rights reserved.
If this guide is distributed with software that includes an end user license agreement,
this guide, as well as the software described in it, is furnished under license and may be
used or copied only in accordance with the terms of such license. Except as permitted
by any such license, no part of this guide may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, recording,
or otherwise, without the prior written permission of Adobe Systems Incorporated.
Please note that the content in this guide is protected under copyright law even if it is not
distributed with software that includes an end user license agreement.
The content of this guide is furnished for informational use only, is subject to change
without notice, and should not be construed as a commitment by Adobe Systems
Incorporated. Adobe Systems Incorporated assumes no responsibility or liability for any
errors or inaccuracies that may appear in the informational content contained in this
guide.
Please remember that existing artwork or images that you may want to include in your
project may be protected under copyright law. The unauthorized incorporation of such
material into your new work could be a violation of the rights of the copyright owner.
Please be sure to obtain any permission required from the copyright owner.
Any references to company names in sample files are for demonstration purposes only
and are not intended to refer to any actual organization.
Adobe, the Adobe logo, Adobe Authorized Training Center, Adobe Bridge, Adobe
Capture, Adobe Camera Raw, Adobe Certified Associate, Adobe Generator, Adobe
PDF, Adobe Premiere Pro, Adobe Press, Adobe Portfolio, Adobe Preview, Adobe
RGB, Adobe RGB (1998), Adobe Stock, After Effects, Behance, Classroom in a Book,
Creative Cloud and the Creative Cloud logo, Illustrator, InDesign, Lightroom,
Photoshop, and PostScript are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Adobe
Systems Incorporated in the United States and/or other countries. Adobe product
screenshots reprinted with permission from Adobe Systems Incorporated.
Apple, iPhone, Mac, Macintosh, macOS, and QuickTime are trademarks of Apple,
registered in the U.S. and other countries. Microsoft, and Windows are either registered
trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the U.S. and/or other countries.
All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
Adobe Systems Incorporated, 345 Park Avenue, San Jose, California 95110-2704, USA
Notice to U.S. Government End Users. The Software and Documentation are
“Commercial Items,” as that term is defined at 48 C.F.R. §2.101, consisting of
“Commercial Computer Software” and “Commercial Computer Software
Documentation,” as such terms are used in 48 C.F.R. §12.212 or 48 C.F.R. §227.7202,
as applicable. Consistent with 48 C.F.R. §12.212 or 48 C.F.R. §§227.7202-1 through

227.7202-4, as applicable, the Commercial Computer Software and Commercial
Computer Software Documentation are being licensed to U.S. Government end users (a)
only as Commercial Items and (b) with only those rights as are granted to all other end
users pursuant to the terms and conditions herein. Unpublished-rights reserved under the
copyright laws of the United States. Adobe Systems Incorporated, 345 Park Avenue, San
Jose, CA 95110-2704, USA. For U.S. Government End Users, Adobe agrees to comply
with all applicable equal opportunity laws including, if appropriate, the provisions of
Executive Order 11246, as amended, Section 402 of the Vietnam Era Veterans
Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974 (38 USC 4212), and Section 503 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, and the regulations at 41 CFR Parts 60-1
through 60-60, 60-250, and 60-741. The affirmative action clause and regulations
contained in the preceding sentence shall be incorporated by reference.
Adobe Press books are published by Peachpit, a division of Pearson Education located
in San Francisco, California. For the latest on Adobe Press books, go to
www.adobepress.com. To report errors, please send a note to errata@peachpit.com.
For information on getting permission for reprints and excerpts, contact
permissions@peachpit.com.
Printed and bound in the United States of America
ISBN-13: 978-0-13-466345-6
ISBN-10: 0-134-66345-4
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Where are the Lesson Files?
Purchase of this Classroom in a Book in any format gives you access to the lesson files
you’ll need to complete the exercises in the book.
You’ll find the files you need on your Account page at peachpit.com on the Registered
Products tab.
1 Go to www.peachpit.com/register.
2 Sign in or create a new account.
3 Enter the ISBN: 9780134664361
4 Answer the questions as proof of purchase.
5 The lesson files can be accessed through the Registered Products tab on your
Account page.
6 Click the Access Bonus Content link below the title of your product to proceed to
the download page. Click the lesson file links to download them to your computer.


Contents
GETTING STARTED
About Classroom in a Book
What’s new in this edition
Prerequisites
Installing Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Bridge
Starting Adobe Photoshop
Online content
Restoring default preferences
Additional resources
Adobe Authorized Training Centers
1 GETTING TO KNOW THE WORK AREA
Starting to work in Adobe Photoshop
Using the tools
Sampling a color
Working with tools and tool properties
Undoing actions in Photoshop
More about panels and panel locations
Finding resources for using Photoshop
2 BASIC PHOTO CORRECTIONS
Strategy for retouching
Resolution and image size
Opening a file with Adobe Bridge
Straightening and cropping the image in Photoshop
Adjusting the color and tone
Using the Spot Healing Brush tool
Applying a content-aware patch
Repairing areas with the Clone Stamp tool
Sharpening the image
3 WORKING WITH SELECTIONS
About selecting and selection tools
Getting started
Using the Quick Selection tool
Moving a selected area
Manipulating selections
Using the Magic Wand tool
Selecting with the lasso tools
Rotating a selection
Selecting with the Magnetic Lasso tool
Selecting from a center point

Resizing and copying a selection
Cropping an image
4 LAYER BASICS
About layers
Getting started
Using the Layers panel
Rearranging layers
Applying a gradient to a layer
Applying a layer style
Adding an adjustment layer
Updating layer effects
Adding a border
Flattening and saving files
5 QUICK FIXES
Getting started
Improving a snapshot
Adjusting facial features with Liquify
Blurring a background
Creating a panorama
Filling empty areas when cropping
Correcting image distortion
Extending depth of field
Moving objects with the Content-Aware Move tool
Adjusting perspective in an image
6 MASKS AND CHANNELS
Working with masks and channels
Getting started
Using Select and Mask
Creating a quick mask
Manipulating an image with Puppet Warp
Using an alpha channel to create a shadow
7 TYPOGRAPHIC DESIGN
About type
Getting started
Creating a clipping mask from type
Creating type on a path
Warping point type
Designing paragraphs of type
Adding a rounded rectangle
Adding vertical text
8 VECTOR DRAWING TECHNIQUES
About bitmap images and vector graphics

About paths and the Pen tool
Getting started
Drawing with the Pen tool
Working with defined custom shapes
Importing a Smart Object
Adding color and depth to a shape using layer styles
9 ADVANCED COMPOSITING
Getting started
Arranging layers
Using Smart Filters
Painting a layer
Adding a background
Using the History panel to undo edits
Upscaling a low-resolution image
10 PAINTING WITH THE MIXER BRUSH
About the Mixer Brush
Getting started
Selecting brush settings
Mixing colors
Creating a custom brush preset
Mixing colors with a photograph
11 EDITING VIDEO
Getting started
About the Timeline panel
Creating a new video project
Animating text with keyframes
Creating effects
Adding transitions
Adding audio
Muting unwanted audio
Rendering video
12 WORKING WITH CAMERA RAW
Getting started
About camera raw files
Processing files in Camera Raw
Applying advanced color correction
13 PREPARING FILES FOR THE WEB

Getting started
Using layer groups to create button graphics
Automating a multistep task
Designing with artboards
14 PRODUCING AND PRINTING CONSISTENT COLOR
Preparing files for printing
Getting started
Performing a “zoom test”
Identifying out-of-gamut colors
Adjusting an image
Converting an image to CMYK
About color management
Specifying color-management settings
Proofing an image on screen
Saving the image as a CMYK EPS file
Printing a CMYK image from Photoshop
15 PRINTING 3D FILES
Getting started
Understanding the 3D environment
Positioning 3D elements
Printing a 3D file
APPENDICES
INDEX

Getting Started
Adobe® Photoshop® CC, the benchmark for digital imaging excellence, provides strong
performance, powerful image editing features, and an intuitive interface. Adobe Camera
Raw, included with Photoshop CC, offers flexibility and control as you work with raw
images as well as TIFF and JPEG images. Photoshop CC gives you the digital-editing
tools you need to transform images more easily than ever before.
About Classroom in a Book
Adobe Photoshop CC Classroom in a Book® (2017 release) is part of the official
training series for Adobe graphics and publishing software, developed with the support
of Adobe product experts. The lessons are designed to let you learn at your own pace. If
you’re new to Adobe Photoshop, you’ll learn the fundamental concepts and features
you’ll need to master the program. And if you’ve been using Adobe Photoshop for a
while, you’ll find that Classroom in a Book teaches many advanced features, including
tips and techniques for using the latest version of the application and preparing images
for the web.
Although each lesson provides step-by-step instructions for creating a specific project,
there’s room for exploration and experimentation. You can follow the book from start to
finish, or do only the lessons that match your interests and needs. Each lesson concludes
with a review section summarizing what you’ve covered.
What’s new in this edition
This edition covers new features in Adobe Photoshop CC, such as using the updated
Start Screen and New Document dialog box to open or create the right document more
quickly, using the Select and Mask feature to more easily isolate subjects and remove
backgrounds, using Face-Aware Liquify to alter facial features and expressions, and
quickly finding Photoshop tools, features, and tutorials. In addition, these lessons lead
you through using multiple artboards to design screens more efficiently for a range of
display sizes across desktop and mobile devices, previewing mobile designs on actual
hardware, using the Export As command to generate optimized web and mobile assets,
showing your work on your own Adobe Portfolio website, and more.
This edition is also chock-full of extra information on Photoshop features and how to
work effectively with this robust application. You’ll learn best practices for organizing,
managing, and showcasing your photos, as well as how to optimize images for the web.
And throughout this edition, look for tips and techniques from one of Adobe’s own
experts, Photoshop evangelist Julieanne Kost.
Prerequisites
Before you begin to use Adobe Photoshop CC Classroom in a Book (2017 release), you
should have a working knowledge of your computer and its operating system. Make sure

that you know how to use the mouse and standard menus and commands, and also how to
open, save, and close files. If you need to review these techniques, see the
documentation for your Microsoft® Windows® PC or Apple® Mac® computer.
To complete the lessons in this book, you’ll need to have both Adobe Photoshop CC
(2017 release) and Adobe Bridge CC installed.
Installing Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Bridge
Before you begin using Adobe Photoshop CC Classroom in a Book (2017 release),
make sure that your system is set up correctly and that you’ve installed the required
software and hardware. You must license the Adobe Photoshop CC software separately.
For system requirements and complete instructions on installing the software, visit
helpx.adobe.com/photoshop/system-requirements.html. Note that some Photoshop CC
features, including all 3D features, require at least 512MB of VRAM (graphics
memory), and in Windows a 64-bit operating system is required.
Many of the lessons in this book use Adobe Bridge. You must install Photoshop and
Bridge on your computer using the Adobe Creative Cloud desktop application, available
at adobe.com/creativecloud/desktop-app.html. Follow the onscreen instructions.
Starting Adobe Photoshop
You start Photoshop just as you do most software applications.
To start Adobe Photoshop in Windows: Click the Start button in the taskbar, and in the
alphabetical list under A, click Adobe Photoshop CC 2017.
To start Adobe Photoshop in Mac: Click the Adobe Photoshop CC 2017 icon in the
Launchpad or Dock.
If you don’t see Adobe Photoshop CC, type Photoshop into the search box in the taskbar
(Windows) or in Spotlight (Mac), and when the Adobe Photoshop CC 2017 application
icon appears, select it, and press Enter or Return.
Online content
Your purchase of this Classroom in a Book includes online materials provided by way
of your Account page on peachpit.com. These include:
Lesson Files
To work through the projects in this book, you will need to download the lesson files
from peachpit.com. You can download the files for individual lessons or it may be
possible to download them all in a single file.
Web Edition
The Web Edition is an online interactive version of the book, providing an enhanced
learning experience. Your Web Edition can be accessed from any device with a
connection to the Internet, and it contains:

• The complete text of the book
• Hours of instructional video keyed to the text
• Interactive quizzes
In addition, the Web Edition may be updated when Adobe adds significant feature
updates between major Creative Cloud releases. To accommodate the changes, sections
of the online book may be updated or new sections may be added.
Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition
If you purchased an eBook from peachpit.com or adobepress.com, your Web Edition
will automatically appear under the Digital Purchases tab on your Account page. Click
the Launch link to access the product. Continue reading to learn how to register your
product to get access to the lesson files.
If you purchased an eBook from a different vendor or you bought a print book, you
must register your purchase on peachpit.com in order to access the online content:
1 Go to www.peachpit.com/register.
2 Sign in or create a new account.
3 Enter ISBN: 9780134664361.
4 Answer the questions as proof of purchase.
5 The Web Edition will appear under the Digital Purchases tab on your Account
page. Click the Launch link to access the product.
The Lesson Files can be accessed through the Registered Products tab on your Account
page. Click the Access Bonus Content link below the title of your product to proceed to
the download page. Click the lesson file links to download them to your computer.
 Note:
As you complete each lesson, you may want to keep your start files. In case
you overwrite them, you can restore the original files by downloading the
corresponding lesson files from your Account page at peachpit.com.
Restoring default preferences
The preferences file stores information about panel and command settings. Each time
you quit Adobe Photoshop, the positions of the panels and certain command settings are
recorded in the preferences file. Any selections you make in the Preferences dialog box
are also saved in the preferences file.
To ensure that what you see onscreen matches the images and instructions in this book,
you should restore the default preferences as you begin each lesson. If you prefer to
preserve your preferences, be aware that the tools, panels, and other settings in
Photoshop CC may not match those described in this book.
If you have customized your color settings, use the following procedure to save them as
a preset before you start work in this book. When you want to restore your color

settings, you can simply select the preset you created.
To save your current color settings:
1 Start Adobe Photoshop.
2 Choose Edit > Color Settings.
3 Note what is selected in the Settings menu:
• If it is anything other than Custom, write down the name of the settings file, and
click OK to close the dialog box. You do not need to perform steps 4–6 of this
procedure.
• If Custom is selected in the Settings menu, click Save (not OK).
The Save dialog box opens. The default location is the Settings folder, which is where
you want to save your file. The default filename extension is .csf (color settings file).
4 In the File Name field (Windows) or Save As field (Mac), type a descriptive
name for your color settings, preserving the .csf file extension. Then click Save.
5 In the Color Settings Comment dialog box, type any descriptive text that will help
you identify the color settings later, such as the date, specific settings, or your
workgroup.
6 Click OK to close the Color Settings Comment dialog box, and again to close the
Color Settings dialog box.
To restore your color settings:
1 Start Adobe Photoshop.
2 Choose Edit > Color Settings.
3 From the Settings menu in the Color Settings dialog box, choose the settings file
you noted or saved in the previous procedure, and click OK.
Additional resources
Adobe Photoshop CC Classroom in a Book (2017 release) is not meant to replace
documentation that comes with the program or to be a comprehensive reference for
every feature. Only the commands and options used in the lessons are explained in this
book. For comprehensive information about program features and tutorials, refer to
these resources:
Adobe Photoshop Help and Support: helpx.adobe.com/photoshop is where you can
find and browse Help and Support content on Adobe.com.
Adobe Forums: forums.adobe.com lets you tap into peer-to-peer discussions, questions,
and answers on Adobe products.
Adobe Photoshop CC product home page: adobe.com/products/photoshop.html
Adobe Add-ons: creative.adobe.com/addons is a central resource for finding tools,
services, extensions, code samples, and more to supplement and extend your Adobe
products.

Resources for educators: adobe.com/education and edex.adobe.com offer a treasure
trove of information for instructors who teach classes on Adobe software. Find
solutions for education at all levels, including free curricula that use an integrated
approach to teaching Adobe software and can be used to prepare for the Adobe
Certified Associate exams.
Adobe Authorized Training Centers
Adobe Authorized Training Centers offer instructor-led courses and training on Adobe
products.
A directory of AATCs is available at training.adobe.com/trainingpartners.

1. Getting to Know the Work Area
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Open image files in Adobe Photoshop.
• Select and use tools in the Tools panel.
• Set options for a selected tool using the options bar.
• Use various methods to zoom in to and out from an image.
• Select, rearrange, and use panels.
• Choose commands in panel and context menus.
• Open and use a panel in the panel dock.
• Undo actions to correct mistakes or to make different choices.
This lesson will take about an hour to complete. Please log in to your account on
peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.”
As you work on this lesson, you’ll preserve the start files. If you need to restore
the start files, download them from your Account page.

As you work with Adobe Photoshop, you’ll discover that you can often
accomplish the same task in several ways. To make the best use of the extensive
editing capabilities in Photoshop, you must first learn to navigate the work
area.
PROJECT: BIRTHDAY CARD DESIGN
Starting to work in Adobe Photoshop
The Adobe Photoshop work area includes menus, toolbars, and panels that give you
quick access to a variety of tools and options for editing and adding elements to your
image. You can also add commands and filters to the menus by installing third-party
software known as plug-ins.
In Photoshop, you primarily work with bitmapped digital images (continuous-tone
images that have been converted into a series of small squares, or picture elements,
called pixels). You can also work with vector graphics, which are drawings made of
smooth lines that retain their crispness when scaled. You can create original artwork in
Photoshop, or you can import images from many sources, such as:
• Photographs from a digital camera or mobile phone
• Stock photography, such as images from the Adobe Stock service
• Scans of photographs, transparencies, negatives, graphics, or other documents

• Captured video images
• Artwork created in drawing programs
Starting Photoshop and opening a file
To begin, you’ll start Adobe Photoshop and reset the default preferences.
 Note:
Typically, you won’t need to reset defaults when you’re working on your
own projects. However, you’ll reset the preferences before working on
most lessons in this book to ensure that what you see onscreen matches the
descriptions in the lessons. For more information, see “Restoring Default
Preferences” on page 5.
1 Click the Adobe Photoshop CC 2017 icon in your Start menu (Windows) or the
Launchpad or Dock (Mac), and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift
(Windows) or Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to reset the default settings.
If you don’t see Adobe Photoshop CC 2017, type Photoshop into the search box in the
taskbar (Windows) or in Spotlight (Mac), and when the Adobe Photoshop CC 2017
application icon appears, select it, and press Enter or Return.
2 When prompted, click Yes to confirm that you want to delete the Adobe
Photoshop Settings file.
In Photoshop, the Start workspace appears as shown in the following illustration.
 Note:
The Start workspace may have a different appearance depending on the
width of the Photoshop application window, or if you’re using a trial
version of Photoshop.

A. Display choices for center of Start workspace
B. New/Open buttons
C. Adobe Stock search
D. Recent files, Libraries, or Presets
E. Links to tutorials
When you start Photoshop, it displays the Start workspace. In the middle, you’ll usually
see a list of recent documents you’ve opened, although the list is cleared every time you
reset Photoshop settings. Along the left, you can click Recent Files, Libraries, and
Presets to change what the middle of the workspace displays. You can also click the
New and Open buttons, which are shortcuts for the New and Open commands on the File
menu. Along the bottom are links to Adobe Stock content and tutorials for useful
techniques and new features.
3 Choose File > Open, and navigate to the Lessons/Lesson01 folder that you copied
to your hard drive from the peachpit.com website. (If you haven’t downloaded the
files, see “Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition” on page 4.)
4 Select the 01End.psd file, and click Open. Click OK if the Embedded Profile
Mismatch dialog box appears, click Cancel if the New Library From Document
dialog box appears, and click No if a message about updating text layers appears.
The 01End.psd file opens in its own window, in the default Photoshop workspace. The
end files in this book show you what you are creating in each project. In this project,
you’ll create a birthday card.

On the Mac, the application frame keeps the image, panels, and menu bar together.
A. Menu bar
B. Options bar
C. Tools panel
D. In-app search
E. Workspaces menu
F. Panels
 Note:
This illustration shows the Mac version of Photoshop. The arrangement is
similar on Windows, but operating system styles may vary.
The default workspace in Photoshop consists of the menu bar and options bar at the top
of the screen, the Tools panel on the left, and several open panels in the panel dock on
the right. When you have documents open, one or more image windows also appear, and
you can display them at the same time using the tabbed interface. The Photoshop user
interface is very similar to the one in Adobe Illustrator® and Adobe InDesign®, so
learning how to use the tools and panels in one application means that you’ll be familiar
with them when you work in the others.
There is one main difference between the Photoshop work area on Windows and that on

the Mac: Windows always presents Photoshop in a contained window. On the Mac, you
can choose whether to work with an application frame, which contains the Photoshop
application’s windows and panels within a frame that is distinct from other applications
you may have open; only the menu bar is outside the application frame. The application
frame is enabled by default; to disable the application frame, choose Window >
Application Frame.
5 Choose File > Close, or click the close button (the x next to the filename) on the
title bar of the image window. (Do not close Photoshop.) Notice that the filename
was added to the Recent Files list in the Start workspace.
Using the tools
Photoshop provides an integrated set of tools for producing sophisticated graphics for
print, web, and mobile viewing. We could easily fill the entire book with details on the
wealth of Photoshop tools and tool configurations. While that would certainly be a
useful reference, it’s not the goal of this book. Instead, you’ll start gaining experience by
configuring and using a few tools on a sample project. Every lesson will introduce you
to more tools and ways to use them. By the time you finish all the lessons in this book,
you’ll have a solid foundation for further explorations of the Photoshop toolset.
Selecting and using a tool from the Tools panel
The Tools panel is the long, narrow panel on the far left side of the work area. It
contains selection tools, painting and editing tools, foreground- and background-color
selection boxes, and viewing tools.
 Note:
For a complete list of the tools in the Tools panel, see the Appendix, “Tools
panel overview.”
You’ll start by using the Zoom tool, which also appears in many other Adobe
applications, including Illustrator, InDesign, and Acrobat.
1 Choose File > Open, navigate to the Lessons/Lesson01 folder, and double-click
the 01Start.psd file to open it.

The 01Start.psd file contains the background image and a ribbon graphic that you’ll use
to create the birthday card that you viewed in the end file.
2 Click the double arrows just above the Tools panel to toggle to a double-column
view. Click the double arrows again to return to a single-column Tools panel and
use your screen space more efficiently.
 Tip:
You can customize the Tools panel by arranging, removing, and adding
tools. To do this, hold down the Edit Toolbar icon just below the Zoom tool
and choose Edit Toolbar.

3 Examine the status bar at the bottom of the work area (Windows) or image
window (Mac), and notice the percentage that appears on the far left. This
represents the current enlargement view of the image, or zoom level.
4 Move the pointer over the Tools panel, and hover it over the magnifying-glass
icon until a tool tip appears. The tool tip displays the tool’s name (Zoom tool) and
keyboard shortcut (Z).
5 Click the Zoom tool icon (
) in the Tools panel, or press Z to select it.
6 Move the pointer over the image window. The pointer now looks like a tiny
magnifying glass with a plus sign in the center of the glass (
).
7 Click anywhere in the image window.
The image enlarges to a preset percentage level, which replaces the previous value in
the status bar. If you click again, the zoom advances to the next preset level, up to a
maximum of 3200%.
8 Hold down the Alt key (Windows) or Option key (Mac) so that the Zoom tool
pointer appears with a minus sign in the center of the magnifying glass (
), and
then click anywhere in the image. Then release the Alt or Option key.
Now the view zooms out to a lower preset magnification, so that you can see more of the
image, but in less detail.
9 If Scrubby Zoom is selected in the options bar, click anywhere on the image and
drag the Zoom tool to the right. The image enlarges. Drag the Zoom tool to the left
to zoom out.
When Scrubby Zoom is selected, you can drag the Zoom tool across the image to zoom

in and out.
10 Deselect Scrubby Zoom in the options bar if it’s selected. Then, using the Zoom
tool, drag a rectangle to enclose part of the rose blossom.
The image enlarges so that the area you enclosed in your rectangle now fills the entire
image window.
11 Click Fit Screen in the options bar to see the entire image again.
You have used the Zoom tool in four different ways to change the magnification in the
image window: clicking, holding down a keyboard modifier while clicking, dragging to
zoom in and out, and dragging to define a magnification area. Many of the other tools in
the Tools panel can be used with keyboard combinations and options as well. You’ll
have opportunities to use these techniques as you work through the lessons in this book.
 Note:
You can use other methods to zoom in and out. For example, when the
Zoom tool is selected, you can select the Zoom In or Zoom Out mode on the
options bar. You can choose View > Zoom In or View > Zoom Out. Or, you
can type a new percentage in the status bar and press Enter or Return.
Zooming and scrolling with the Navigator panel
The Navigator panel is another speedy way to make large changes in the
zoom level, especially when the exact percentage of magnification is
unimportant. It’s also a great way to scroll around in an image, because the
thumbnail shows you exactly what part of the image appears in the image
window. To open the Navigator panel, choose Window > Navigator.
The slider under the image thumbnail in the Navigator panel enlarges the

image when you drag to the right (toward the large mountain icon) and
reduces it when you drag to the left.
The red rectangular outline represents the area of the image that appears in
the image window. When you zoom in far enough that the image window
shows only part of the image, you can drag the red outline around the
thumbnail area to see other areas of the image. This is also an excellent
way to verify which part of an image you’re working on when you work at
very high zoom levels.
Brightening an image
One of the most common edits you’re likely to make is to brighten an image taken with a
digital camera or phone. You’ll brighten this image by changing its brightness and
contrast values.
1 In the Layers panel, on the right side of the workspace, make sure the Rose layer
is selected.
2 In the Adjustments panel, which is above the Layers panel in the panel dock, click
the Brightness/Contrast icon to add a Brightness/Contrast adjustment layer. The
Properties panel opens, displaying the Brightness/Contrast settings.

3 In the Properties panel, move the Brightness slider to 98 and the Contrast slider to
18.
The image of the rose brightens.
In these lessons, we’ll often instruct you to enter specific numbers in panels and dialog
boxes to achieve particular effects. When you’re working on your own projects,
experiment with different values to see how they affect your image. There is no right or
wrong setting; the values you should use depend on the results you want.
4 In the Layers panel, click the eye icon for the Brightness/Contrast adjustment layer
to hide its effect, and then click the eye icon again to show the effect.
Adjustment layers let you make changes to your image, such as adjusting the brightness
of the rose, without affecting the actual pixels. Because you’ve used an adjustment layer,
you can always return to the original image by hiding or deleting the adjustment layer—
and you can edit the adjustment layer at any time. You’ll use adjustment layers in several
lessons in this book.
Layering is one of the fundamental and most powerful features in Photoshop. Photoshop
includes many kinds of layers, some of which contain images, text, or solid colors, and
others that simply interact with layers below them. You’ll learn more about layers in
Lesson 4, “Layer Basics,” and throughout the book.
5 Click the double arrows at the top of the Properties panel to collapse it.

6 Choose File > Save As, name the file 01Working.psd, and click OK or Save.
7 Click OK in the Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
Saving the file with a different name ensures that the original file (01Start.psd) remains
unchanged. That way, you can return to it if you want to start over.
You’ve just completed your first task in Photoshop. Your image is bright and punchy and
ready for a birthday card.
Sampling a color
By default, the foreground color in Photoshop is black and the background color is
white. You can change the foreground and background colors in several ways. One way
is to use the Eyedropper tool to sample a color from the image. You’ll use the
Eyedropper tool to sample the blue of one ribbon so that you can match that color when
you create another ribbon.
First, you’ll need to display the Ribbons layer so you can see the color you want to
sample.
1 In the Layers panel, click the Visibility column for the Ribbons layer to make the
layer visible. When a layer is visible, an eye icon ( ) appears in that column.
A ribbon with “Happy Birthday” written on it appears in the image window.
2 Select the Ribbons layer in the Layers panel so that it’s the active layer.
3 Select the Eyedropper tool (
) in the Tools panel.
4 Click the blue area in the Happy Birthday ribbon to sample a blue color.
The foreground color changes in the Tools panel and the Color panel. Anything you

draw will be this color until you change the foreground color again.
Working with tools and tool properties
When you selected the Zoom tool in the previous exercise, you saw that the options bar
provided ways for you to change the view of the current image window. Now you’ll
learn more about setting tool properties using context menus, the options bar, panels, and
panel menus. You’ll use all of these methods as you work with tools to add the second
ribbon to your birthday card.
Using context menus
Context menus are short menus that contain commands and options appropriate to
specific elements in the work area. They are sometimes referred to as “right-click” or
“shortcut” menus. Usually, the commands on a context menu are also available in the
menu bar or panel menus, but using the context menu can save time.
1 Select the Zoom tool (
), and zoom in so you can clearly see the lower third of
the card.
2 Select the Rectangular Marquee tool (
) in the Tools panel.
The Rectangular Marquee tool selects rectangular areas. You’ll learn more about
selection tools in Lesson 3, “Working with Selections.”
3 Drag the Rectangular Marquee tool to create a selection about 3/4 inch tall and
21/2 inches wide, ending at the right edge of the card. (See the illustration below.)
As you drag the tool, Photoshop displays the width and height of the selected area.
It’s okay if the size of your selection is a little different from ours.
Selection areas are shown by moving dotted lines, sometimes referred to as marching
ants.
4 Select the Brush tool (
) in the Tools panel.
5 In the image window, right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac) anywhere in
the image to open the Brush tool context menu.
Context menus vary with their context, of course, so what appears can be a menu of
commands or a panel-like set of options, which is what happens in this case.

6 Select the first brush (Soft Round), and change the size to 65 pixels.
7 Click anywhere outside the selection to close the panel.
8 Drag the cursor across the selected area until it’s fully painted blue. Don’t worry
about staying within the selection; you can’t affect anything outside the selection as
you paint.
 Note:
Clicking anywhere in the work area closes the context menu.
9 When the bar is colored in, choose Select > Deselect so that nothing is selected.
The selection is gone, but the blue bar remains.
Selecting and using a hidden tool
Photoshop has many tools you can use to edit image files, but you will probably work
with only a few of them at a time. The Tools panel arranges some of the tools in groups,
with only one tool shown for each group. The other tools in the group are hidden behind
that tool. A small triangle in the lower right corner of a button is your clue that other
tools are available but hidden under that tool.
You’ll use the Polygonal Lasso tool to remove a triangular notch from the color bar so
that it matches the ribbon at the top of the card.

1 Position the pointer over the third tool from the top in the Tools panel until the
tool tip appears. The tool tip identifies the Lasso tool (
), with the keyboard
shortcut L. Select the Lasso tool.
2 Select the Polygonal Lasso tool (
), which is hidden behind the Lasso tool, using
one of the following methods:
• Press and hold the mouse button over the Lasso tool to open the pop-up list of
hidden tools, and select the Polygonal Lasso tool.
• Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) the tool button in the Tools panel to
cycle through the hidden lasso tools until the Polygonal Lasso tool is selected.
• Press Shift+L, which cycles between the Lasso, Polygonal Lasso, and Magnetic
Lasso tools.
With the Lasso tool, you can draw free-form selections; the Polygonal Lasso tool makes
it easier to draw straight-edged sections of a selection border. You’ll learn more about
selection tools, making selections, and adjusting the selection contents in Lesson 3,
“Working with Selections.”
3 Move the pointer over the left edge of the blue color bar that you just painted.
Click just to the left of the upper left corner of the bar to start your selection. You
should begin your selection just outside the colored area.
4 Move the cursor to the right a little more than 1/4 inch, and click about halfway
between the top and bottom of the bar. You’re creating the first side of the triangle.
It doesn’t need to be perfect.
5 Click just to the left of the bottom left corner of the bar to create the second side
of the triangle.
6 Click the point where you started to finish the triangle.
7 Press the Delete key on your keyboard to delete the selected area from the colored
bar, creating a notch for your ribbon.
8 Choose Select > Deselect to deselect the area you deleted.

The ribbon is ready. Now you can add a name to your birthday card.
Setting tool properties in the options bar
Next you’ll use the options bar to select the text properties and then to type the name.
1 In the Tools panel, select the Horizontal Type tool ( ).
The buttons and menus in the options bar now relate to the Type tool.
2 In the options bar, select a font you like from the first pop-up menu. (We used
Minion Pro Italic, but you can use another font if you prefer.)
3 Specify 32 pt for the font size.
You can specify 32 points by typing directly in the font-size text box and pressing Enter
or Return, or by scrubbing the font-size menu label. You can also choose a standard font
size from the font-size pop-up menu.
4 Click once anywhere on the left side of the colored bar, and type Elaine. Or you
can type a different name, if you like. Don’t worry if the text isn’t positioned well;
you’ll correct that later.

The text is the same color as the bar you typed it on. You’ll fix that next.
 Tip:
You can place the pointer over the labels of most numeric settings in the
tool options bar, in panels, and in dialog boxes in Photoshop to display a
“scrubby slider.” Dragging the pointing-finger slider to the right increases
the value; dragging to the left decreases the value. Alt-dragging (Windows)
or Option-dragging (Mac) changes the values in smaller increments; Shift-
dragging changes them in larger increments.
Using panels and panel menus
The text color is the same as the Foreground Color swatch in the Tools panel, which is
the blue color you used to paint the bar. You’ll select the text and choose another color
from the Swatches panel.
1 Make sure the Horizontal Type tool ( ) is selected in the Tools panel.
2 Drag the Horizontal Type tool across the text to select the full name.
3 Click the Swatches tab to bring that panel forward, if it’s not already visible.
4 Select any light-colored swatch. (We chose pastel yellow.)
The color you select appears in three places: as the Foreground Color in the Tools
panel, in the text color swatch in the options bar, and in the text you selected in the
image window.
5 Click the check mark icon in the options bar ( ) to commit the text, deselecting it

so that you can see the text color.
That’s how easy it is to select a color, although there are other methods in Photoshop.
However, you’ll use a specific color for this project so that it matches the text in the
other ribbon. It’s easier to find it if you change the Swatches panel display.
 Note:
When you move the pointer over the swatches, it temporarily changes into
an eyedropper. Set the tip of the eyedropper on the swatch you want, and
click to select it.
6 Click the menu button ( ) on the Swatches panel to open the panel menu, and
choose Small List.
7 Select the Type tool, and reselect the text, as you did in steps 1 and 2.
8 In the Swatches panel, scroll about halfway down the list to find the Light Yellow
Orange swatch, and then select it.

9 Click the check mark button ( ) to commit and deselect the text.
Now the text appears in the orange color.
Undoing actions in Photoshop
In a perfect world, you’d never make a mistake. You’d never click the wrong object.
You’d always correctly anticipate how specific actions would bring your design ideas
to life exactly as you imagined them. You’d never have to backtrack.
For the real world, Photoshop gives you the power to step back and undo actions so that
you can try other options. You can experiment freely, knowing that you can reverse the
process.
Note:
The Undo command isn’t available if you’ve already saved your changes.
However, you can still use the Step Backward command and the History
panel (covered in Lesson 9), as long as you haven’t closed the project
since you made the changes.
Even beginning computer users quickly come to appreciate the familiar Undo command.
You’ll use it to move back one step, and then step further backward. In this case, you’ll
go back to the light color that you originally chose for the name.
1 Choose Edit > Undo Edit Type Layer, or press Ctrl+Z (Windows) or Command+Z
(Mac) to undo your last action.
The name returns to its previous color.
2 Choose Edit > Redo Edit Type Layer, or press Ctrl+Z (Windows) or Command+Z
(Mac) to reapply the orange color to the name.

The Undo command in Photoshop reverses only one step. This is a practicality, because
Photoshop files can be very large, and maintaining multiple Undo steps can tie up a lot
of memory, which tends to degrade performance. If you press Ctrl+Z or Command+Z
again, Photoshop restores the step you removed initially.
However, you can often use the Step Backward and Step Forward commands (in the
Edit menu) to move through multiple steps.
3 Once the name is back to the color you’d like it to be, use the Move tool ( ) to
drag the name so it’s centered in the blue bar.
4 Save the file. Your birthday card is done!
 Tip:
As you drag, magenta lines called Smart Guides may appear. They help
align the edges of dragged content to other edges and guides. If they are
getting in your way, you can disable them by deselecting the View > Show
> Smart Guides command, or by holding down the Control key as you drag.

More about panels and panel locations
Photoshop panels are powerful and varied. Rarely would you need to see all panels
simultaneously. That’s why they’re in panel groups, and why the default configurations
leave many panels unopened.
The complete list of panels appears in the Window menu. Check marks appear next to
the names of the panels that are open and active in their panel groups.
You can open a closed panel or close an open one by selecting the panel name in the
Window menu.
You can hide all panels at once—including the options bar and Tools panel—by
pressing the Tab key. To reopen them, press Tab again.
You already used panels in the panel dock when you used the Layers and Swatches
panels. You can drag panels to or from the panel dock. This is convenient for bulky
panels or ones that you use only occasionally but want to keep handy.
You can arrange panels in other ways, as well:
• To move an entire panel group, drag the title bar to another location in the work
area.
• To move a panel to another group, drag the panel tab into that panel group so that a
blue highlight appears inside the group, and then release the mouse button.
• To dock a panel or panel group, drag the title bar or panel tab onto the top of the
dock.
• To undock a panel or panel group so that it becomes a floating panel or panel group,
drag its title bar or panel tab away from the dock.

 Note:
When panels are hidden, a thin strip is visible at the edge of the document.
Hover the pointer over the strip to temporarily reveal the panels docked
along that edge.
Expanding and collapsing panels
You can resize panels to use screen space more efficiently and to see fewer or more
panel options, either by dragging or clicking to toggle between preset sizes:
• To collapse open panels to icons, click the double arrow in the title bar of the dock
or panel group. To expand a panel, click its icon or the double arrow.
• To change the height of a panel, drag its bottom edge.
• To change the width of the dock, position the pointer on the left edge of the dock
until it becomes a double-headed arrow, and then drag to the left to widen the dock,
or to the right to narrow it.
• To resize a floating panel, move the pointer over the right, left, or bottom edge of the
panel until it becomes a double-headed arrow, and then drag the edge in or out. You
can also pull the lower right corner in or out.
• To collapse a panel group so that only the dock header bar and tabs are visible,
double-click a panel tab or panel title bar. Double-click again to restore it to the
expanded view. You can open the panel menu even when the panel is collapsed.

Notice that the tabs for the panels in the panel group and the button for the panel menu
remain visible after you collapse a panel.
 Note:
Some panels cannot be resized, such as the Character and Paragraph
panels, but you can still collapse them.
Special notes about the Tools panel and options bar
The Tools panel and the options bar share some characteristics with other panels:
• You can drag the Tools panel by its title bar to a different location in the work area.
You can move the options bar to another location by dragging the grab bar at the far
left end of the panel.
• You can hide the Tools panel and options bar.
However, some panel features are not available or don’t apply to the Tools panel or
options bar:
 Tip:
To restore the default Essentials workspace, click the workspace icon at
the top right corner of the application window and choose Reset Essentials.
• You cannot group the Tools panel or options bar with other panels.
• You cannot resize the Tools panel or options bar.
• You cannot stack the Tools panel or options bar in the panel dock.
• The Tools panel and options bar do not have panel menus.
Finding resources for using Photoshop
The following resources can help you take your explorations even further, answer
questions you have, and help you resolve any issues you encounter as you work on your
own projects:
Adobe Photoshop Learn & Support: https://helpx.adobe.com/support/photoshop.html
is where you can click a Beginner’s Guide, User Guide, or Tutorial. Click User Guide to
browse a tool and command reference, and download a searchable PDF file of Adobe
Photoshop CC Help. You can open this link directly from Photoshop by choosing Help >
Photoshop Online Help.

Adobe Photoshop Learn and Support: https://helpx.adobe.com/photoshop.html is
where you can click tutorials in the Learn section, and find links to common questions,
top issues, the Photoshop user forum, and contact information in the Support section.
You can open this link directly in Photoshop by choosing Help > Photoshop Learn and
Support.
Adobe Support: https://helpx.adobe.com/support.html provides general help for all
Adobe products and your Creative Cloud account, key techniques, cross-product
workflows, and updates on new features.
Adobe Forums: https://forums.adobe.com/lets you tap into peer-to-peer discussions,
questions, and answers about Photoshop and other Adobe products.
Start screen: The bottom of the Start screen contains links to highlighted tutorials, or
click Show All to see many featured tutorials and links about new features, useful
techniques, and other Adobe products that complement Photoshop.
Changing interface settings
By default, the panels, dialog boxes, and background in Photoshop are
dark. You can lighten the interface or make other changes in the Photoshop
Preferences dialog box:
1 Choose Edit > Preferences > Interface (Windows) or Photoshop CC >
Preferences > Interface (Mac).
2 Select a different color theme, or make other changes.
When you select a different theme, you can see the changes immediately.
You can also select specific colors for different screen modes and change
other interface settings in this dialog box.

3 When you’re satisfied with the changes, click OK.
Review questions
1 Describe two types of images you can open in Photoshop.
2 How do you select tools in Photoshop?
3 Describe two ways to zoom in to or out from an image.
4 What are two ways to get more information about Photoshop?
Review answers
1 You can open a photograph from a digital camera. You can also open a scanned
image of a photographic print, a transparency or negative film frame, or a graphic.
You can open images downloaded from the Internet such as photography from
Adobe Stock, or artwork created in a drawing program such as Adobe Illustrator.
2 To select a tool in Photoshop, click its icon in the Tools panel, or press the tool’s
keyboard shortcut. A selected tool remains active until you select a different tool.
To select a hidden tool, either use a keyboard shortcut to toggle through the tools,
or click and hold the tool in the Tools panel to open a pop-up menu of the hidden
tools.
3 Choose commands from the View menu to zoom in on or out from an image, or to
fit it onscreen, or use the zoom tools and click or drag over an image to enlarge or
reduce the view. You can also use keyboard shortcuts or the Navigator panel to
control the display of an image.

4 You can choose Help > Photoshop Help to browse and search all Photoshop
support content on Adobe.com, including tutorials and workflow techniques. You
can choose Help > Photoshop Support Center to learn specifically about
Photoshop tools and commands. You can click the links at the bottom of the Start
screen to see featured tutorials about key techniques, cross-product workflows,
and updates on new features.

2. Basic Photo Corrections
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Understand image resolution and size.
• View and access files in Adobe Bridge.
• Straighten and crop an image.
• Adjust the tonal range of an image.
• Use the Spot Healing Brush tool to repair part of an image.
• Use the content-aware Patch tool to remove or replace objects.
• Use the Clone Stamp tool to touch up areas.
• Remove digital artifacts from an image.
• Apply the Smart Sharpen filter to finish retouching photos.
This lesson will take about an hour to complete. Please log in to your account on
peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” As you work on this lesson, you’ll
preserve the start files. If you need to restore the start files, download them from
your Account page.

Photoshop includes a variety of tools and commands for improving the quality
of a photographic image. This lesson steps you through the process of
acquiring, resizing, and retouching a vintage photograph.
PROJECT: VINTAGE PHOTOGRAPH RESTORATION
Strategy for retouching
How much retouching you do depends on the image you’re working on and your goals
for it. For many images, you may need only to change the resolution, lighten the image,
or repair a minor blemish. For others, you may need to perform several tasks and
employ more advanced tools and techniques.
Organizing an efficient sequence of tasks
Most retouching procedures follow these general steps, though not every task may be
necessary for all projects:
 Note:
In this lesson, you retouch an image using Photoshop. For some images,
such as those saved in camera raw format, it may be more efficient to work
in Adobe Camera Raw, which is installed with Photoshop. You’ll learn

about the tools Camera Raw has to offer in Lesson 12, “Working with
Camera Raw.”
• Duplicating the original image; working in a copy of the image file makes it easy to
recover the original later if necessary
• Ensuring that the resolution is appropriate for the way you’ll use the image
• Cropping the image to its final size and orientation
• Removing any color casts
• Adjusting the overall contrast or tonal range of the image
• Repairing flaws in scans of damaged photographs (such as rips, dust, or stains)
• Adjusting the color and tone in specific parts of the image to bring out highlights,
midtones, shadows, and desaturated colors
• Sharpening the image
The order of the tasks may vary depending on the project, though you should always start
by duplicating the image and adjusting its resolution. Sharpening should usually be your
final step. For the other tasks, consider your project and plan accordingly, so that the
results of one process do not cause unintended changes to other aspects of the image,
making it necessary for you to redo some of your work.
Adjusting your process for different intended uses
The retouching techniques you apply to an image depend in part on how you’ll use the
image. Whether an image is intended for black-and-white publication on newsprint or
for full-color online distribution affects everything from the resolution of the initial
image to the type of tonal range and color correction that the image requires. Photoshop
supports RGB color mode for web and mobile device authoring along with desktop
photo printing, CMYK color mode for preparing an image for printing using process
colors, Grayscale mode for black-and-white printing, and other color modes for more
specialized purposes.
Resolution and image size
When you edit an image in Photoshop for a specific use, you need to make sure the
image contains an appropriate number of pixels, the small squares that describe an
image and establish the degree of detail it contains. You can work this out from the pixel
dimensions, or the number of pixels along an image’s width and height.
 Note:
In Photoshop, the 100% view does not preview the image’s ppi value
(resolution); the image is shown at the ppi value of your display. In other
words, at 100% zoom, each display pixel shows one image pixel.

Pixels in a photographic image
When you multiply an image’s width by its height in pixels, you find out how many
pixels are in the image. For example, a 1000 × 1000 pixel image has 1,000,000 pixels
(one megapixel), and a 2000 × 2000 pixel image has 4,000,000 pixels (four
megapixels). In this way, pixel dimensions affect file size and upload/download time.
In Photoshop, resolution means the number of pixels per unit of physical length, such as
pixels per inch (ppi).
Does changing resolution affect file size? Only when the pixel dimensions change. For
example, a 7 × 7 inch image at 300 ppi is 2100 × 2100 pixels; if you change either the
size in inches or the ppi value (resolution) while keeping the pixel dimensions at 2100 ×
2100 pixels, the file size does not change. But if you change the size in inches without
changing the ppi value (or vice versa), the pixel dimensions must change, and so will the
file size. For example, if the image in the above example is changed to 72 ppi while
maintaining 7 × 7 inches, the pixel dimensions must change to 504 × 504 pixels, and the
file size decreases accordingly.
 Note:
For computer displays and televisions, the term resolution often describes
only the pixel dimensions (such as 1920 by 1080 pixels) instead of a pixel
density ratio (300 pixels per inch). In Photoshop, resolution is the pixels
per inch value, not the pixel dimensions.
Resolution requirements vary depending on the intended output. An image might be
considered low resolution when its ppi value is below 150 to 200 ppi. An image with a
ppi value above 200 ppi is generally considered high resolution because it can contain
enough detail to take advantage of the device resolution offered by commercial or fine
art printers and high-resolution (Retina/HiDPI) device displays.
Factors such as viewing distance and output technology influence the resolution our eyes
actually perceive, and this affects resolution requirements too. A 220 ppi laptop display
may appear to have the same high resolution as a 360 ppi smartphone, because the
laptop is viewed farther away. But 220 ppi might not be enough resolution for a high-
end printing press or fine art inkjet printer, which might reproduce the most detail at 300
ppi and up. At the same time, a 50 ppi image can appear perfectly sharp on a highway

billboard because it’s seen from hundreds of feet away.
 Note:
To determine the resolution needed for an image you’ll print on a press,
follow this industry guideline: Edit the image to a ppi value that is 1.5 to 2
times the halftone screen frequency (in lines per inch, or lpi) used by the
printer. For example, if the image will be printed using a screen frequency
of 133 lpi, the image should be 200 ppi (133 × 1.5).
Because of the way display and output technologies work, your images may not need to
match the device resolution of high-resolution printers. For example, while some
commercial printing platesetters and photo-quality inkjet printers may have a device
resolution of 2400 dots per inch (dpi) or more, the appropriate image resolution to send
to those devices may be only 200 to 360 ppi for photos. This is because the device dots
are grouped into larger halftone cells or inkjet dot patterns that build tones and colors.
Similarly, a 500 ppi smartphone display may not necessarily require 500 ppi images.
Whatever your medium, you should verify the appropriate image resolution of your final
images by consulting with your production team or output service provider.
Opening a file with Adobe Bridge
In this book, you’ll work with different start files in each lesson. You may make copies
of these files and save them under different names or locations, or you may work from
the original start files and then download them from the peachpit.com website again if
you want a fresh start.
In this lesson, you’ll retouch a scan of a damaged and discolored vintage photograph so
it can be shared or printed. The final image size will be 7 × 7 inches.
In Lesson 1, you used the Open command to open a file. You’ll start this lesson by
comparing the original scan to the finished image in Adobe Bridge, a visual file browser
that helps take the guesswork out of finding the image file that you need.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to reset the default settings.
2 When prompted, click Yes to confirm that you want to delete the Adobe
Photoshop Settings file.
3 Choose File > Browse In Bridge. If you’re prompted to enable the Photoshop
extension in Bridge, click OK.
Adobe Bridge opens, displaying a collection of panels, menus, and buttons.
4 Select the Folders tab in the upper left corner, and then browse to the Lessons
folder you downloaded onto your hard disk, so that the lessons in the Lessons
folder appear in the Content panel.

 Note:
If Bridge isn’t installed, you’ll need to install it from Adobe Creative
Cloud. For more information, see page 3.
5 With the Lessons folder still selected in the Folders panel, choose File > Add To
Favorites.
Adding files, folders, application icons, and other assets that you use often to the
Favorites panel lets you access them quickly.
6 Select the Favorites tab to open the panel, and click the Lessons folder to open it.
Then, in the Content panel, double-click the Lesson02 folder.
Thumbnail previews of the folder contents appear in the Content panel.
7 Compare the 02Start.tif and 02End.psd files. To enlarge the thumbnails in the
Content panel, drag the thumbnail slider at the bottom of the Bridge window to the
right.
In the 02Start.tif file, notice that the image is crooked, the colors are relatively dull, and
the image has a green color cast and a distracting crease. You’ll fix all of these
problems in this lesson, and a few others. You’ll start by cropping and straightening the
image.
 Tip:
In Bridge, you can see a larger preview of a selected item by displaying the
Preview panel (choose Window > Preview Panel).
8 Double-click the 02Start.tif thumbnail to open the file in Photoshop. Click OK if

you see the Embedded Profile Mismatch dialog box.
9 In Photoshop, choose File > Save As. Choose Photoshop from the Format menu,
and name the file 02Working.psd. Then click Save.
Straightening and cropping the image in Photoshop
You’ll use the Crop tool to straighten, trim, and scale the photograph. By default,
cropping deletes cropped pixels.
 Tip:
Deselect the Delete Cropped Pixels option if you want to crop
nondestructively, so that you can revise the crop later.
1 In the Tools panel, select the Crop tool (
).
Crop handles appear, and a crop shield covers the area outside the cropping region, to
help focus your attention on the cropped area.
2 In the options bar, choose W × H × Resolution from the Preset Aspect Ratio menu.
(Ratio is the default value.)
3 In the options bar, type 7 in for the width, 7 in for the height, and 200 px/in for the
resolution. A crop grid appears.

First, you’ll straighten the image.
4 Click the Straighten icon in the options bar. The pointer changes to the Straighten
tool.
5 Click at the top corner of the photo, press the mouse button as you drag a straight
line across the top edge of the photo, and then release.
 Tip:
If the Library panel is open and taking up a lot of screen space, go ahead
and collapse or close it, because it won’t be used in this lesson.
Photoshop straightens the image so that the line you drew is parallel with the top of the
image area. You drew a line across the top of the photo, but any line that defines either
the vertical or horizontal axis of the image will work.
Now, you’ll trim the white border and scale the image.
6 Drag the corners of the crop grid inward to the corners of the photo itself to crop
out the white border. If you need to adjust the position of the photo, click and drag
it within the crop grid.
7 Press Enter or Return to accept the crop.

The image is now cropped, and the cropped image fills the image window, straightened,
sized, and positioned according to your specifications.
8 To see the image dimensions, choose Document Dimensions from the pop-up
menu at the bottom of the application window.
9 Choose File > Save to save your work. Click OK if you see the Photoshop Format
Options dialog box.
 Tip:
To quickly straighten a photo and crop out the scanned background, choose
File > Automate > Crop And Straighten Photos. It can also automatically
separate multiple photos scanned in one image.
Adjusting the color and tone
You’ll use Curves and Levels adjustment layers to remove the color cast and adjust the
color and tone in the image. The Curves or Levels options may look complex, but don’t
be intimidated. You’ll work with them more in later lessons; for now, you’ll take
advantage of their tools to quickly brighten and adjust the tone of the image.
1 Click Curves in the Adjustments panel to add a Curves adjustment layer.
2 Select the White Point tool on the left side of the Properties panel.

Specifying a white point changes all the colors in the image. The white point is the color
that Photoshop defines as pure white, and it adjusts all other colors accordingly. To set
an accurate white point, select an area of the image that should be the brightest neutral
area of the image that should hold detail.
3 Click a white stripe on the girl’s dress.
The color tone of the image changes dramatically. You can click different white areas,
such as the child’s sailor dress, a stripe on the woman’s dress, or the girl’s sock, to see
how each selection changes the color.
In some images, adjusting the white point is enough to remove a color cast and correct
the tone of the image. Here, selecting a white point is a good start. You’ll use a Levels
adjustment layer to fine-tune the tone.
4 Click the Levels icon (
) in the Adjustments panel to add a Levels adjustment
layer.
The Levels histogram in the Properties panel displays the range of dark and light values
in the image. You’ll learn more about working with levels in later lessons. Right now,
you just need to know that the left triangle represents the black point (the point
Photoshop defines as the darkest in the image), the right triangle represents the white
point (the lightest in the image), and the middle triangle represents the midtones.
5 Drag the left triangle (blacks) under the histogram to the right, where the blacks
are more pronounced. Our value was 15.

6 Drag the middle triangle a little to the right to adjust the midtones. Our value was
.90.
 Note:
The color and tone edits in this section are relatively basic; it’s possible to
do them all using only Levels or Curves. Typically, Curves is used for edits
that are more specialized or complex.
Now that you’ve adjusted the color, you’ll flatten the image so it’s easier to work with
while you touch it up. Flattening an image merges all of its layers into the Background
layer, which reduces the file size; you can still make changes to the entire image. But
only flatten if you no longer need the flexibility of adjusting the edits you previously
made using separate layers.
7 Choose Layer > Flatten Image.
The adjustment layers merge with the Background layer.

Real-world photo restoration
As owner of Gawain Weaver Art Conservation, Gawain Weaver has conserved
and restored original works by artists ranging from Eadward Muybridge to
Man Ray, and from Ansel Adams to Cindy Sherman. He teaches workshops
internationally as well as online on the care and identification of photographs.
Find out more at gawainweaver.com.
The tools in Photoshop make restoration of old or damaged photographs seem like
magic, giving virtually anyone the power to scan, retouch, print, and frame their
photo collections.
However, when dealing with works by famous artists, museums, galleries, and
collectors need to preserve original objects to the greatest degree possible despite
deterioration or accidental damage. Professional art conservators are called upon
to clean dust and soiling from print surfaces, remove discoloration and staining,
repair tears, stabilize prints to prevent future damage, and even paint in missing
areas of a work.
Carleton E. Watkins, Nevada Fall, 700 FT, Yosemite Valley, CA, mammoth
albumen print, 15⅝" × 203/4". This print was removed from its mount to
remove the stains and then remounted.

“Photograph conservation is both a science and an art,” says Weaver. “We
must apply what we know about the chemistry of the photograph, its mount,
and any varnishes or other coatings in order to safely clean, preserve, and
enhance the image. Since we cannot quickly ‘undo’ a step in a conservation
treatment, we must always proceed with great caution and a healthy respect
for the fragility of the photographic object, whether it’s a 160-year-old salt
print of Notre Dame or gelatin silver print of Half Dome from the 1970s.”
Many of the manual tools of an art conservator have analogous digital versions in
Photoshop:
An art conservator might wash a photograph to remove the discolored components
of the paper, or even use a mild bleaching process known as light-bleaching to
oxidize and remove the colored components of a stain or overall discoloration. In
Photoshop, you can use a Curves adjustment layer to remove the color cast from
an image.
A conservator working on a fine-art photograph might use special paints and fine
brushes to manually “in-paint” damaged areas of a photograph. Likewise, you can
use the Spot Healing Brush in Photoshop to spot out specks of dust or dirt on a
scanned image.
A conservator might use Japanese papers and wheat-starch paste to carefully
repair and rebuild torn paper before finalizing the repair with some skillful in-
painting. In Photoshop, you can remove a crease or repair a tear in a scanned
image with a few clicks of the Clone tool.
A fixative was applied to the artist’s signature with a small brush to protect it
when the mount was washed.
“Although our work has always been first and foremost about the
preservation and restoration of the original photographic object, there are
instances, especially with family photographs, where the use of Photoshop is
more appropriate,” says Weaver. “More dramatic results can be achieved in
far less time. After digitization, the original print can be safely stored away,
while the digital version can be copied or printed for many family members.

Often, we first clean or unfold family photographs to safely reveal as much of
the original image as possible, and then we repair the remaining
discoloration, stains, and tears on the computer after digitization.”
Using the Spot Healing Brush tool
The next task is to remove the crease in the photo. You’ll use the Spot Healing Brush to
erase the crease. While you’re at it, you’ll use it to address a few other issues.
 Note:
The Healing Brush tool works similarly to the Spot Healing Brush tool,
except that it requires you to sample source pixels before retouching an
area.
 Tip:
To avoid creating obvious new seams or patterns, paint the Spot Healing
Brush closely around the area you’re repairing. Don’t cover more area than
necessary.
The Spot Healing Brush tool quickly removes blemishes and other imperfections. It
samples pixels around the retouched area and matches the texture, lighting, transparency,
and shading of the sampled pixels to the pixels being healed.
The Spot Healing Brush is excellent for retouching blemishes in portraits, but also
works nicely wherever there’s a uniform appearance near the areas you want to retouch.
1 Zoom in to see the crease clearly.
2 In the Tools panel, select the Spot Healing Brush tool (
).

3 In the options bar, open the Brush pop-up panel, and specify a 100% hard brush
about 25 px in diameter. Make sure Content-Aware is selected in the options bar.
4 In the image window, drag the Spot Healing Brush down from the top of the
crease. You can probably repair the entire crease with four to six neat downward
strokes. As you drag, the stroke at first appears black, but when you release the
mouse, the painted area is “healed.”
5 Zoom in to see the white hair in the upper right area of the image. Then select the
Spot Healing Brush again, and paint over the hair.
6 Zoom out, if necessary, to see the full sky. Then click the Spot Healing Brush
wherever there are dark areas you want to heal.
7 Save your work so far.
Applying a content-aware patch
Use the Patch tool to remove unwanted elements from an image. You’ll use a content-
aware patch to remove an unrelated person from the right side of the photo. In Content-
Aware mode, the Patch tool creates nearly seamless blending with the nearby content.
1 In the Tools panel, select the Patch tool (
), hidden beneath the Spot Healing
Brush tool (
).
2 In the options bar, choose Content-Aware from the Patch menu, and make sure that

Sample All Layers is selected. Type 4 into the Structure slider.
The Structure menu determines how closely the patch reflects the existing image
patterns. You can choose from 1 to 7, with 1 allowing the loosest adherence to the
source structure and 7 requiring the strictest.
3 Drag the Patch tool around the boy and his shadow, as closely as possible. You
may want to zoom in to see him more clearly.
4 Click within the area you’ve just selected, and drag it to the left. Photoshop
displays a preview of the content that will replace the boy. Keep dragging to the
left until the preview area no longer overlaps the area occupied by the boy, but
without overlapping the woman or the girl she’s holding. Release the mouse button
when the patch is positioned where you want it.
The selection changes to match the area around it. The boy is gone, and where he stood
is a section of the bridge wall and of a building.
5 Choose Select > Deselect.
The effect was pretty impressive, but not quite perfect. You’ll touch up the results next.
Repairing areas with the Clone Stamp tool
The Clone Stamp tool uses pixels from one area of an image to replace the pixels in
another part of the image. Using this tool, you can not only remove unwanted objects
from your images, but you can also fill in missing areas in photographs you scan from
damaged originals.
You’ll use the Clone Stamp tool to smooth out some irregularities in the height of the
bridge wall and the windows on the building.
1 Select the Clone Stamp tool (
) in the Tools panel, and select a 60 px brush
with 30% hardness. Make sure that the Aligned option is selected.
2 Move the Clone Stamp tool to an area where the top of the bridge wall is smooth.
That’s the area you want to copy to smooth out the area that was patched.

3 Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) to start sampling that part of the
image. (When you press Alt or Option, the pointer appears as target cross-hairs.)
4 Drag the Clone Stamp tool across the top of the bridge wall in the patched area to
even it out, and then release the mouse button.
Each time you click the Clone Stamp tool, it begins again with a new source point, in the
same relationship to the tool as the first stroke you made. That is, if you begin painting
further right, it samples from stone that is further right than the original source point.
That’s because Aligned is selected in the options bar. Deselect Aligned if you want to
start from the same source point each time.
5 Select a source point where the bottom of the bridge wall is even, and then drag
the Clone Stamp tool across the bottom of the wall where you patched it.
6 Select a smaller brush size, and deselect Aligned. Then select a source point over
the rightmost windows in the lowest row on the building you patched. Click
across to create accurate windows there.

7 Repeat step 6 to make any adjustments you want to apply to the lowest area of the
building and the wall that runs in front of it.
8 If you like, you can use a smaller brush size to touch up the stones in the patched
portion of the wall.
9 Save your work.
Sharpening the image
The last task you might want to do when retouching a photo is to sharpen the image.
There are several ways to sharpen an image in Photoshop, but the Smart Sharpen filter
gives you the most control. Because sharpening can emphasize artifacts, you’ll remove
those first.
1 Zoom in to about 400% to see the boy’s shirt clearly. The colored dots you see
are artifacts of the scanning process.
2 Choose Filter > Noise > Dust & Scratches.
3 In the Dust & Scratches dialog box, leave the default settings with a Radius of 1
pixel and Threshold at 0, and click OK.

The Threshold value determines how dissimilar the pixels should be before they are
eliminated. The Radius value determines the size of the area searched for dissimilar
pixels. The default values are great for tiny dots of color like the ones in this image.
Now that the artifacts are gone, you can sharpen the image.
4 Choose Filter > Sharpen > Smart Sharpen.
5 In the Smart Sharpen dialog box, make sure that Preview is selected, so you can
see the effect of settings you adjust in the image window.
You can drag inside the preview window in the dialog box to see different parts of the
image, or use the plus and minus buttons below the thumbnail to zoom in and out.
6 Make sure Lens Blur is chosen in the Remove menu.
You can choose to remove Lens Blur, Gaussian Blur, or Motion Blur in the Smart
Sharpen dialog box. Lens Blur provides finer sharpening of detail and reduced
sharpening halos. Gaussian Blur increases contrast along the edges in an image. Motion
Blur reduces the effects of blur that resulted from the camera or the subject moving when
the photo was taken.
7 Drag the Amount slider to about 60% to sharpen the image.
8 Drag the Radius slider to about 1.5.
The Radius value determines the number of pixels surrounding the edge pixels that affect
the sharpening. The higher the resolution, the higher the Radius setting should usually be.
9 When you’re satisfied with the results, click OK to apply the Smart Sharpen filter.

10 Choose File > Save, and then close the project file.
Your image is ready to share or print!
Extra credit
Converting a color image to black and white
You can get great results converting a color image to black and white (with
or without a tint) in Photoshop.
1 Choose File > Open, and navigate to the bike.tif file in the Lesson02
folder. Click Open.
2 In the Adjustments panel, click the Black & White button to add a Black
& White adjustment layer.
3 Adjust the color sliders to change the saturation of color channels. You
can also experiment with options from the preset menu, such as Darker
or Infrared. Or, select the targeted adjustment tool ( ) in the upper left

corner of the Properties panel, position it over a color you want to
adjust, and drag horizontally. The tool moves the sliders associated with
the original color of the pixels where you started dragging; for example,
dragging on the red bike frame adjusts the lightness of all red areas. We
darkened the bike and made the background areas lighter.
4 If you want to colorize the entire photo with a single hue, select Tint in
the Properties panel. Then, click the color swatch and select a tint color
(we used R=227, G=209, B=198).
Review questions
1 What does resolution mean?
2 What does the Crop tool do?
3 How can you adjust the tone and color of an image in Photoshop?
4 What tools can you use to remove blemishes in an image?
5 How can you remove digital artifacts such as colored pixels from an image?
Review answers
1 The term resolution refers to the number of pixels per unit of physical length in an
image, expressed in pixels per inch (ppi). Printer resolution may be expressed in
dots per inch (dpi) because device dots do not always correspond to image pixels.
2 You can use the Crop tool to trim, scale, or straighten an image.
3 You can adjust the tone and color of an image in Photoshop using the Curves and
Levels adjustment layers, such as applying the White Point tool.
4 The Healing Brush, Spot Healing Brush, Patch tool, and Clone Stamp tools let you
replace unwanted portions of an image with other areas of the image. The Clone
Stamp tool copies the source area exactly; the Healing Brush and Spot Healing
Brush tools blend the area with the surrounding pixels. The Spot Healing Brush
tool doesn’t require a source area at all; it “heals” areas to match the surrounding
pixels. In Content-Aware mode, the Patch tool replaces a selection with content

that matches the surrounding area.
5 The Dust & Scratches filter removes digital artifacts from an image.

3. Working with Selections
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Make specific areas of an image active using selection tools.
• Reposition a selection marquee.
• Move and duplicate the contents of a selection.
• Use keyboard-mouse combinations that save time and hand motions.
• Deselect a selection.
• Constrain the movement of a selected area.
• Adjust the position of a selected area using the arrow keys.
• Add to and subtract from a selection.
• Rotate a selection.
• Use multiple selection tools to make a complex selection.
This lesson will take about an hour to complete. Please log in to your account on
peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” As you work on this lesson, you’ll
preserve the start files. If you need to restore the start files, download them from
your Account page.

Learning how to select areas of an image is of primary importance—you must
first select what you want to affect. As long as a selection is active, only the
area within the selection can be edited.
PROJECT: SHADOWBOX COLLAGE
About selecting and selection tools
Making changes to an area within an image in Photoshop is a two-step process. You first
use one of the selection tools to select the part of an image you want to change. Then you
use another tool, filter, or other feature to make changes, such as moving the selected
pixels to another location or applying a filter to the selected area. You can make
selections based on size, shape, and color. When a selection is active, changes you make
apply only to the selected area; other areas are unaffected.
The best selection tool for a specific area often depends on the characteristics of that
area, such as shape or color. There are four primary types of selections:
Geometric selections The Rectangular Marquee tool (
) selects a rectangular area in
an image. The Elliptical Marquee tool (
), which is hidden behind the Rectangular
Marquee tool, selects elliptical areas. The Single Row Marquee tool (
) and Single
Column Marquee tool ( ) select either a 1-pixel-high row or a 1-pixel-wide column,
respectively.
 Note:
You’ll learn how to select vector areas using the pen tools in Lesson 8,
“Vector Drawing Techniques.”

Freehand selections The Lasso tool (
) traces a freehand selection around an area.
The Polygonal Lasso tool (
) sets anchor points in straight-line segments around an
area. The Magnetic Lasso tool (
) works something like a combination of the other two
lasso tools, and gives the best results when good contrast exists between the area you
want to select and its surroundings.
Edge-based selections The Quick Selection tool (
) quickly “paints” a selection by
automatically finding and following defined edges in the image.
Color-based selections The Magic Wand tool (
) selects parts of an image based on
the similarity in pixel color. It is useful for selecting odd-shaped areas that share a
specific range of colors.
Getting started
First, you’ll look at the image you will create as you explore the selection tools in
Photoshop.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to restore the default preferences. (See “Restoring
Default Preferences” on page 5.)
2 When prompted, click Yes to confirm that you want to delete the Adobe
Photoshop Settings file.
3 Choose File > Browse In Bridge to open Adobe Bridge.
4 In the Favorites panel, click the Lessons folder. Then double-click the Lesson03
folder in the Content panel to see its contents.
5 Study the 03End.psd file. Move the thumbnail slider to the right if you want to see
the image in more detail.

The project is a shadowbox that includes a piece of coral, a sand dollar, a mussel, a
nautilus, and a plate of small shells. The challenge in this lesson is to arrange these
elements, which were scanned together on the single page you see in the 03Start.psd file.
6 Double-click the 03Start.psd thumbnail to open the image file in Photoshop.
7 Choose File > Save As, rename the file 03Working.psd, and click Save.
By saving another version of the start file, you don’t have to worry about overwriting the
original.
 Note:
If Bridge isn’t installed, you’ll be prompted to install it when you choose
Browse In Bridge. For more information, see page 3.
Using the Quick Selection tool
The Quick Selection tool provides one of the easiest ways to make a selection. You
simply paint an area of an image, and the tool automatically finds the edges. You can add
or subtract areas of the selection until you have exactly the area you want.
The image of the sand dollar in the 03Working.psd file has clearly defined edges,
making it an ideal candidate for the Quick Selection tool. You’ll select just the sand
dollar, not the background behind it.
1 Select the Zoom tool in the Tools panel, and then zoom in so that you can see the
sand dollar well.
2 Select the Quick Selection tool (
) in the Tools panel.
3 Select Auto-Enhance in the options bar.
When Auto-Enhance is selected, the Quick Selection tool creates better quality
selections, with edges that are truer to the object. The selection process is a little slower
than using the Quick Selection tool without Auto-Enhance, but the results are superior.
4 Click on an off-white area near the outside edge of the sand dollar.

The Quick Selection tool finds the full edge automatically, selecting the entire sand
dollar. Leave the selection active so that you can use it in the next exercise.
Moving a selected area
Once you’ve made a selection, any changes you make apply exclusively to the pixels
within the selection. The rest of the image is not affected by those changes.
To move the selected area to another part of the composition, you use the Move tool.
This image has only one layer, so the pixels you move will replace the pixels beneath
them. This change is not permanent until you deselect the moved pixels, so you can try
different locations for the selection you’re moving before you make a commitment.
 Tip:
If you deselect an area by accident, you may be able to restore the selection
by choosing Edit > Undo or Select > Reselect.
1 If the sand dollar is not still selected, repeat the previous exercise to select it.
2 Zoom out so you can see both the shadowbox and the sand dollar.
3 Select the Move tool ( ). Notice that the sand dollar remains selected.
4 Drag the selected area (the sand dollar) up to the upper left area of the frame,
which is labeled “A.” Position it over the silhouette in the frame, leaving the
lower left part of the silhouette showing as a shadow.
5 Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

In Photoshop, it’s not easy to lose a selection. Unless a selection tool is active, clicking
elsewhere in the image will not deselect the active area. To deliberately deselect a
selection, you can choose Select > Deselect, press Ctrl+D (Windows) or Command+D
(Mac), or click outside the selection with any selection tool.
Tool tips from the Photoshop evangelist
Julieanne Kost is an official Adobe Photoshop evangelist.
Move tool tip
If you’re moving objects in a multilayer file with the Move tool and you
need to select one of the layers, try this: With the Move tool selected,
position the pointer over any area of an image, and right-click (Windows)
or Control-click (Mac). The context menu that appears lists all layers
where content exists under the pointer, so that you can select a different
layer.
Manipulating selections
You can move selections, reposition them as you create them, and even duplicate them.
In this section, you’ll learn several ways to manipulate selections. Most of these
methods work with any selection; you’ll use them here with the Elliptical Marquee tool,
which lets you select ovals or perfect circles.
One of the most useful things you may find in this section is the introduction of keyboard
shortcuts that can save you time and arm motions.
Repositioning a selection marquee while creating it

Selecting ovals and circles can be tricky. It’s not always obvious where you should start
dragging, so sometimes the selection will be off-center, or the ratio of width to height
won’t match what you need. In this exercise, you’ll learn techniques for managing those
problems, including two important keyboard-mouse combinations that can make your
Photoshop work much easier.
As you perform this exercise, be very careful to follow the directions about keeping the
mouse button or specific keys pressed. If you accidentally release the mouse button at
the wrong time, simply start the exercise again from step 1.
1 Select the Zoom tool (
), and click the plate of shells at the bottom of the image
window to zoom in to at least 100% view (use 200% view if the entire plate of
shells will still fit in the image window on your screen).
2 Select the Elliptical Marquee tool (
), hidden under the Rectangular Marquee
tool (
).
3 Move the pointer over the plate of shells, and drag diagonally across the oval
plate to create a selection, but do not release the mouse button. It’s OK if your
selection does not match the plate shape yet.
If you accidentally release the mouse button, draw the selection again. In most cases—
including this one—the new selection replaces the previous one.
4 Still holding down the mouse button, press the spacebar, and continue to drag the
selection. Instead of resizing the selection, now you’re moving it. Position it so
that it more closely aligns with the plate.
5 Carefully release the spacebar (but not the mouse button) and continue to drag,
trying to make the size and shape of the selection match the oval plate of shells as
closely as possible. If necessary, hold down the spacebar again and drag to move
the selection marquee into position around the plate of shells.
 Note:
You don’t have to include every pixel in the plate of shells, but the
selection should be the shape of the plate, and should contain the shells
comfortably.
6 When the selection border is positioned appropriately, release the mouse button.

7 Choose View > Fit On Screen or use the slider in the Navigator panel to reduce
the zoom view so that you can see all of the objects in the image window.
Leave the Elliptical Marquee tool and the selection active for the next exercise.
Moving selected pixels with a keyboard shortcut
Now you’ll use a keyboard shortcut to move the selected pixels onto the shadowbox.
The shortcut temporarily switches the active tool to the Move tool, so you don’t need to
select it from the Tools panel.
1 If the plate of shells is not still selected, repeat the previous exercise to select it.
2 With the Elliptical Marquee tool (
) selected in the Tools panel, press Ctrl
(Windows) or Command (Mac), and move the pointer within the selection.
The pointer icon now includes a pair of scissors (
) to indicate that the selection will
be cut from its current location.
3 Drag the plate of shells onto the area of the shadowbox labeled “B.” (You’ll use
another technique to nudge the oval plate into the exact position in a minute.)
4 Release the mouse button, but don’t deselect the plate of shells.
 Note:
You can release the Ctrl or Command key after you start dragging, and the
Move tool remains active. Photoshop reverts to the previously selected
tool when you deselect, whether you click outside the selection or use the
Deselect command.
Moving a selection with the arrow keys
You can make minor adjustments to the position of selected pixels by using the arrow
keys. You can nudge the selection in increments of either one pixel or ten pixels.
When a selection tool is active in the Tools panel, the arrow keys nudge the selection
border, but not the contents. When the Move tool is active, the arrow keys move both the
selection border and its contents.

You’ll use the arrow keys to nudge the plate of shells. Before you begin, make sure that
the plate of shells is still selected in the image window.
1 Press the Up Arrow key ( ) on your keyboard a few times to move the oval
upward.
Notice that each time you press the arrow key, the plate of shells moves one pixel.
Experiment by pressing the other arrow keys to see how they affect the selection.
2 Hold down the Shift key as you press an arrow key.
When you hold down the Shift key, the selection moves ten pixels every time you press
an arrow key.
Sometimes the border around a selected area can distract you as you make adjustments.
You can hide the edges of a selection temporarily without actually deselecting, and then
display the selection border once you’ve completed the adjustments.
3 Choose View > Show > Selection Edges to deselect the command, hiding the
selection border around the plate of shells.
4 Use the arrow keys to nudge the plate of shells until it’s positioned over the
silhouette, so that there’s a shadow on the left and bottom of the plate. Then
choose View > Show > Selection Edges to reveal the selection border again.
 Tip:
Selection edges, guidelines, and other visible items that aren’t actual
objects are called extras, so another way to hide the selection edges is to
deselect the Show > Extras command.
5 Choose Select > Deselect, or press Ctrl+D (Windows) or Command+D (Mac).
6 Choose File > Save to save your work so far.
Using the Magic Wand tool
The Magic Wand tool selects all the pixels of a particular color or color range. It’s most
useful for selecting an area of similar colors surrounded by areas of very different
colors. As with many of the selection tools, after you make the initial selection, you can

add or subtract areas of the selection.
The Tolerance option sets the sensitivity of the Magic Wand tool. This value limits or
extends the range of pixel similarity. The default tolerance value of 32 selects the color
you click plus 32 lighter and 32 darker tones of that color. You may need to adjust the
tolerance level up or down depending on the color ranges and variations in the image.
If a multicolored area that you want to select is set against a background of a different
color, it can be much easier to select the background than the area itself. In this
procedure, you’ll use the Rectangular Marquee tool to select a larger area, and then use
the Magic Wand tool to subtract the background from the selection.
1 Select the Rectangular Marquee tool (
), hidden behind the Elliptical Marquee
tool (
).
2 Drag a selection around the piece of coral. Make sure that your selection is large
enough so that a margin of white appears between the coral and the edges of the
marquee.
At this point, the coral and the white background area are selected. You’ll subtract the
white area from the selection so that only the coral remains in the selection.
3 Select the Magic Wand tool (
), hidden under the Quick Selection tool (
).
4 In the options bar, confirm that the Tolerance value is 32. This value determines
the range of colors the wand selects.
5 Click the Subtract From Selection button ( ) in the options bar.
A minus sign appears next to the wand in the pointer icon. Anything you select now will
be subtracted from the initial selection.
6 Click in the white background area within the selection marquee.

The Magic Wand tool selects the entire background, subtracting it from the selection.
Now all the white pixels are deselected, leaving the coral perfectly selected.
7 Select the Move tool ( ), and drag the coral to the area of the shadowbox labeled
“C,” positioning it so that a shadow appears to the left and below the coral.
8 Choose Select > Deselect, and then save your work.
Softening the edges of a selection
To smooth the hard edges of a selection, you can apply anti-aliasing or
feathering, or use the Select and Mask option.
Anti-aliasing smooths the jagged edges of a selection by softening the color
transition between edge pixels and background pixels. Since only the edge
pixels change, no detail is lost. Anti-aliasing is useful when cutting,
copying, and pasting selections to create composite images.
Anti-aliasing is available for the Lasso, Polygonal Lasso, Magnetic Lasso,
Elliptical Marquee, and Magic Wand tools. (Select the tool to display its
options in the options bar.) To apply anti-aliasing, you must select the
option before making the selection. Once a selection is made, you cannot
add anti-aliasing to it.
Feathering blurs edges by building a transition boundary between the
selection and its surrounding pixels. This blurring can cause some loss of

detail at the edge of the selection.
You can define feathering for the marquee and lasso tools as you use them,
or you can add feathering to an existing selection. Feathering effects
become apparent when you move, cut, or copy the selection.
• To use the Select and Mask option, first make a selection, and then click
Select and Mask in the options bar to open its dialog box. You can use
the Select and Mask option to smooth the outline, feather it, or contract
or expand it.
• To use anti-aliasing, select a lasso tool, or the Elliptical Marquee or
Magic Wand tool, and select Anti-alias in the options bar.
• To define a feathered edge for a selection tool, select any of the lasso or
marquee tools. Enter a Feather value in the options bar. This value
defines the width of the feathered edge and can range from 1 to 250
pixels.
• To define a feathered edge for an existing selection, choose Select >
Modify > Feather. Enter a value for the Feather Radius, and click OK.
Selecting with the lasso tools
As we mentioned earlier, Photoshop includes three lasso tools: the Lasso tool, the
Polygonal Lasso tool, and the Magnetic Lasso tool. You can use the Lasso tool to make
selections that require both freehand and straight lines, using keyboard shortcuts to move
back and forth between the Lasso tool and the Polygonal Lasso tool. You’ll use the
Lasso tool to select the mussel. It takes a bit of practice to alternate between straight-
line and freehand selections—if you make a mistake while you’re selecting the mussel,
simply deselect and start again.
1 Select the Zoom tool (
), and click the mussel until the view enlarges to 100%.
Make sure you can see the entire mussel in the window.
2 Select the Lasso tool (
). Starting at the lower left section of the mussel, drag
around the rounded end of the mussel, tracing the shape as accurately as possible.
Do not release the mouse button.
3 Press the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key, and then release the mouse button
so that the lasso pointer changes to the polygonal lasso shape (
). Do not release
the Alt or Option key.
4 Begin clicking along the end of the mussel to place anchor points, following the
contours of the mussel. Be sure to hold down the Alt or Option key throughout this
process.

The selection border automatically stretches like a rubber band between anchor points.
5 When you reach the tip of the mussel, hold down the mouse button as you release
the Alt or Option key. The pointer again appears as the lasso icon.
6 Carefully drag around the tip of the mussel, holding down the mouse button.
7 When you finish tracing the tip and reach the lower side of the mussel, first press
Alt or Option again, and then release the mouse button. Click along the lower side
of the mussel with the Polygonal Lasso tool as you did on the top. Continue to
trace the mussel until you arrive back at the starting point of your selection near
the left end of the image.
8 Click the starting point of the selection, and then release Alt or Option. The
mussel is now entirely selected. Leave the mussel selected for the next exercise.
 Note:
To make sure that the selection is the shape you want when you use the
Lasso tool, end the selection by dragging across the starting point of the
selection. If you start and stop the selection at different points, Photoshop
draws a straight line between the start and end points of the selection.
Rotating a selection
Now you’ll rotate the mussel.
 Tip:
You can constrain rotation to common angles such as 90 degrees by holding
down the Shift key as you drag the bounding box.

Before you begin, make sure that the mussel is still selected.
1 Choose View > Fit On Screen to resize the image window to fit on your screen.
2 Press Ctrl (Windows) or Command (Mac) as you drag the selected mussel to the
section of the shadowbox labeled “D.”
The pointer changes to the Move tool icon when you press Ctrl or Command.
3 Choose Edit > Transform > Rotate.
The mussel and selection marquee are enclosed in a bounding box.
4 Move the pointer outside the bounding box so that it becomes a curved, two-
headed arrow ( ). Drag to rotate the mussel to a 90-degree angle. You can verify
the angle in the transformation values display next to the pointer, or in the Rotate
box in the options bar. Press Enter or Return to commit the transformation.
5 If necessary, select the Move tool ( ) and drag to reposition the mussel, leaving a
shadow to match the others. When you’re satisfied, choose Select > Deselect.
6 Choose File > Save.
Selecting with the Magnetic Lasso tool
You can use the Magnetic Lasso tool to make freehand selections of areas with high-
contrast edges. When you draw with the Magnetic Lasso tool, the selection border
automatically snaps to the edge between areas of contrast. You can also control the
selection path by occasionally clicking the mouse to place anchor points in the selection
border.
You’ll use the Magnetic Lasso tool to select the nautilus so that you can move it to the
shadowbox.
1 Select the Zoom tool (
), and click the nautilus to zoom in to at least 100%.
2 Select the Magnetic Lasso tool (
), hidden under the Lasso tool (
).
3 Click once along the left edge of the nautilus, and then move the Magnetic Lasso
tool along the edge to trace its outline.

Even though you’re not holding down the mouse button, the tool snaps to the edge of the
nautilus and automatically adds fastening points.
4 When you reach the left side of the nautilus again, double-click to return the
Magnetic Lasso tool to the starting point, closing the selection. Or you can move
the Magnetic Lasso tool over the starting point and click once.
5 Double-click the Hand tool (
) to fit the image in the image window.
 Tip:
In low-contrast areas, you may want to click to place your own fastening
points. You can add as many as you need. To remove the most recent
fastening point, press Delete, and then move the mouse back to the
remaining fastening point and continue selecting.
6 Select the Move tool ( ), and drag the nautilus onto its silhouette in the section of
the frame labeled “E,” leaving a shadow below it and on the left side.
7 Choose Select > Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Selecting from a center point
In some cases, it’s easier to make elliptical or rectangular selections by drawing a
selection from an object’s center point. You’ll use this technique to select the head of the
screw for the shadowbox corners.
1 Select the Zoom tool (
), and zoom in on the screw to a magnification of about
300%. Make sure that you can see the entire screw head in your image window.
2 Select the Elliptical Marquee tool (
) in the Tools panel.
3 Move the pointer to the approximate center of the screw.
4 Click and begin dragging. Then, without releasing the mouse button, press Alt
(Windows) or Option (Mac) as you continue dragging the selection to the outer
edge of the screw.
The selection is centered over its starting point.
5 When you have the entire screw head selected, release the mouse button first, and
then release Alt or Option (and the Shift key if you used it). Do not deselect,
because you’ll use this selection in the next exercise.
6 If necessary, reposition the selection border using one of the methods you learned
earlier. If you accidentally released the Alt or Option key before you released the
mouse button, select the screw again.

 Tip:
To select a perfect circle, press Shift as you drag. Hold down Shift while
dragging the Rectangular Marquee tool to select a perfect square.
Resizing and copying a selection
Now you’ll move the screw to the lower right corner of the wooden shadowbox, and
then duplicate it for the other corners.
Resizing the contents of a selection
You’ll start by moving the screw, but it’s too large for the space. You’ll need to resize it
as well.
Before you begin, make sure that the screw is still selected. If it’s not, reselect it by
completing the previous exercise.
1 Choose View > Fit On Screen so that the entire image fits within the image
window.
2 Select the Move tool ( ) in the Tools panel.
3 Position the pointer within the screw selection.
The pointer becomes an arrow with a pair of scissors (
), indicating that dragging the
selection will cut it from its current location and move it to the new location.
4 Drag the screw onto the lower right corner of the shadowbox.
5 Choose Edit > Transform > Scale. A bounding box appears around the selection.
6 Press Shift as you drag one of the corner points inward to reduce the screw to
about 40% of its original size, or until it is small enough to sit on the shadowbox
frame. Then press Enter or Return to commit the change and remove the
transformation bounding box.
As you resize the object, the selection marquee resizes, too. Pressing the Shift key as
you resize the selection constrains the proportions so that the reduced object doesn’t
become distorted.
7 Use the Move tool to reposition the screw after resizing it, so that it is centered in
the corner of the shadowbox frame.

8 Leaving the screw selected, choose File > Save to save your work.
 Tip:
As you drag, magenta lines called Smart Guides may appear. They help
align the edges of dragged content to other edges and guides. If they are
getting in your way, you can disable them by deselecting the View > Show
> Smart Guides command, or by holding down the Control key as you drag.
Moving and duplicating a selection simultaneously
You can move and duplicate a selection at the same time. You’ll copy the screw for the
other three corners of the frame. If the screw is no longer selected, reselect it now, using
the techniques you learned earlier.
1 With the Move tool ( ) selected, press Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) as you
position the pointer inside the screw selection.
The pointer changes, displaying the usual black arrow and an additional white arrow,
which indicates that a duplicate will be made when you move the selection.
2 Continue holding down the Alt or Option key as you drag a duplicate of the screw
straight up to the top right corner of the frame. Release the mouse button and the
Alt or Option key, but don’t deselect the duplicate image.
3 Hold down Alt+Shift (Windows) or Option+Shift (Mac), and drag a new copy of
the screw straight left to the upper left corner of the frame.
Pressing the Shift key as you move a selection constrains the movement horizontally or
vertically in 45-degree increments.
4 Repeat step 3 to drag a fourth screw to the lower left corner of the frame.
5 When you’re satisfied with the position of the fourth screw, choose Select >
Deselect, and then choose File > Save.

Copying selections
You can use the Move tool to copy selections as you drag them within or
between images, or you can copy and move selections using commands on
the Edit menu. The Move tool uses less memory because it doesn’t use the
clipboard.
Photoshop has several copy and paste commands:
• Copy takes the selected area on the active layer and puts it on the
clipboard.
• Copy Merged creates a merged copy of all the visible layers in the
selected area.
• Paste inserts the clipboard contents at the center of the image. If you
paste into another image, the pasted content becomes a new layer.
On the Edit > Paste Special submenu, Photoshop also provides specialized
pasting commands to give you more options in certain situations:
• Paste in Place pastes clipboard content at the location it had in the
original image, instead of at the center of the document.
• Paste Into pastes clipboard content inside the active selection in the
same or a different image. The source selection is pasted onto a new
layer, and the area outside the selection is converted into a layer mask.
• Paste Outside is the same as Paste Into except that Photoshop pastes the
content outside the active selection and converts the area inside the
selection to a layer mask.
If two documents have different pixel dimensions, the content you paste between
them may appear to change size. This is because the content maintains its pixel
dimensions independently of the documents. You can resize a pasted selection, but
the image quality of the selection may decrease if it’s enlarged.
Cropping an image
Now that your composition is in place, you’ll crop the image to a final size. You can use
either the Crop tool or the Crop command to crop an image.
1 Select the Crop tool (
), or press C to switch from the current tool to the Crop
tool. Photoshop displays a crop boundary around the entire image.
2 In the options bar, make sure Ratio is selected in the Preset pop-up menu and that
there are no ratio values specified. Then confirm that Delete Cropped Pixels is
selected.
When Ratio is selected but no ratio values are specified, you can crop the image with
any proportions.
Tip:

To crop an image with its original proportions intact, choose Original Ratio
from the Preset pop-up menu in the options bar.
3 Drag the crop handles so that the shadowbox is in the highlighted area, omitting
the backgrounds from the original objects at the bottom of the image. Crop the
frame so that there’s an even area of white around it.
4 When you’re satisfied with the position of the crop area, click the Commit Current
Crop Operation button ( ) in the options bar.
5 Choose File > Save to save your work.
You’ve used several different selection tools to move all the seashells into place. The
shadowbox is complete!
Review questions
1 Once you’ve made a selection, what area of the image can be edited?
2 How do you add to and subtract from a selection?
3 How can you move a selection while you’re drawing it?

4 What does the Quick Selection tool do?
5 How does the Magic Wand tool determine which areas of an image to select?
What is tolerance, and how does it affect a selection?
Review answers
1 Only the area within an active selection can be edited.
2 To add to a selection, click the Add To Selection button in the options bar, and
then click the area you want to add. To subtract from a selection, click the Subtract
From Selection button in the options bar, and then click the area you want to
subtract. You can also add to a selection by pressing Shift as you drag or click; to
subtract, press Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) as you drag or click.
3 To reposition a selection while you’re drawing it, continue to press the mouse
button as you hold down the spacebar and drag.
4 The Quick Selection tool expands outward from where you click to automatically
find and follow defined edges in the image.
5 The Magic Wand tool selects adjacent pixels based on their similarity in color.
The Tolerance value determines how many color tones the Magic Wand tool will
select. The higher the tolerance setting, the more tones are selected.

4. Layer Basics
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Organize artwork on layers.
• Create, view, hide, and select layers.
• Rearrange layers to change the stacking order of artwork.
• Apply blending modes to layers.
• Resize and rotate layers.
• Apply a gradient to a layer.
• Apply a filter to a layer.
• Add text and layer effects to a layer.
• Add an adjustment layer.
• Save a copy of the file with the layers flattened.
This lesson will take less than an hour to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” As you work on this lesson, you’ll
preserve the start files. If you need to restore the start files, download them from
your Account page.

In Photoshop, you can isolate different parts of an image on layers. Each layer
can then be edited as discrete artwork, giving you tremendous flexibility as you
compose and revise an image.
PROJECT: TRAVEL POSTCARD
Pineapple and flower photography © Image Source, www.imagesource.com
About layers
Every Photoshop file contains one or more layers. New files are generally created with
a background layer, which contains a color or an image that shows through the
transparent areas of subsequent layers. All new layers in an image are transparent until
you add text or artwork.

Working with layers is analogous to placing portions of a drawing on clear sheets of
film, such as those viewed with an overhead projector: Individual sheets may be edited,
repositioned, and deleted without affecting the other sheets. When the sheets are stacked,
the entire composition is visible.
Getting started
You’ll start the lesson by viewing an image of the final composition.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to restore the default preferences. (See “Restoring
Default Preferences” on page 5.)
2 When prompted, click Yes to delete the Adobe Photoshop Settings file.
3 Choose File > Browse In Bridge to open Adobe Bridge.
4 In the Favorites panel, click the Lessons folder. Then double-click the Lesson04
folder in the Content panel to see its contents.
5 Study the 04End.psd file. Move the thumbnail slider to the right if you want to see
the image in more detail.
This layered composite represents a postcard. You will create it in this lesson as you
learn how to create, edit, and manage layers.
 Note:
If Bridge isn’t installed, you’ll be prompted to install it. For more
information, see page 3.
6 Double-click the 04Start.psd file to open it in Photoshop. Click Cancel if the New
Library From Document dialog box appears.
7 Choose File > Save As, rename the file 04Working.psd, and click Save. Click
OK if you see the Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
Saving another version of the start file frees you to make changes without worrying
about overwriting the original.
Using the Layers panel
The Layers panel lists all the layers in an image, displaying the layer names and
thumbnails of the content on each layer. You can use the Layers panel to hide, view,
reposition, delete, rename, and merge layers. The layer thumbnails are automatically
updated as you edit the layers.
1 If the Layers panel is not visible in the work area, choose Window > Layers.
The Layers panel lists five layers for the 04Working.psd file (from top to bottom):
Postage, HAWAII, Flower, Pineapple, and Background.
2 Select the Background layer to make it active (if it’s not already selected). Notice
the layer thumbnail and the icons shown for the Background layer:

• The lock icon ( ) indicates that the layer is protected.
• The eye icon ( ) indicates that the layer is visible in the image window. If you
click the eye, the image window no longer displays that layer.
The first task for this project is to add a photo of the beach to the postcard. First, you’ll
open the beach image in Photoshop.
 Tip:
Use the context menu to hide or resize the layer thumbnail. Right-click
(Windows) or Control-click (Mac) a thumbnail in the Layers panel to open
the context menu, and then choose a thumbnail size.
3 In Photoshop, choose File > Open, navigate to the Lesson04 folder, and then
double-click the Beach.psd file to open it.

The Layers panel changes to display the layer information for the active Beach.psd file.
Notice that only one layer appears in the Beach.psd image: Layer 1, not Background.
(For more information, see the sidebar “About the background layer.”)
About the background layer
When you create a new image with a white or colored background, the
bottom layer in the Layers panel is named Background, and is always
opaque. An image can have only one background layer. You cannot change
the stacking order of a background layer, its blending mode, or its opacity.
You can, however, convert a background layer to a regular layer.
When you create a new image with transparent content, the image doesn’t
have a background layer. The bottom layer isn’t constrained like the
background layer; you can move it anywhere in the Layers panel, and
change its opacity and blending mode.
To convert a background layer into a regular layer:
1 Click the lock icon next to the layer name.
2 Rename the layer.
To convert a regular layer into a background layer:
1 Select a layer in the Layers panel.
2 Choose Layer > New > Background From Layer.
Renaming and copying a layer
To add content to an image and simultaneously create a new layer for it, drag an object
or layer from one file into the image window of another file. Whether you drag from the
image window of the original file or from its Layers panel, only the active layer is
reproduced in the destination file.
You’ll drag the Beach.psd image onto the 04Working.psd file. Before you begin, make
sure that both the 04Working.psd and Beach.psd files are open, and that the Beach.psd
file is selected.
First, you’ll give Layer 1 a more descriptive name.
1 In the Layers panel, double-click the name Layer 1, type Beach, and then press
Enter or Return. Keep the layer selected.

 Note:
When you rename a layer, make sure you double-click the layer name text.
If you double-click outside the name, other layer options may appear
instead.
2 Choose Window > Arrange > 2-Up Vertical. Photoshop displays both of the open
image files. Select the Beach.psd image so that it is the active file.
3 Select the Move tool ( ), and use it to drag the Beach.psd image onto the
04Working.psd image window.
 Tip:
If you hold down Shift as you drag an image from one file into another, the
dragged image automatically centers itself in the target image window.
The Beach layer now appears in the 04Working.psd file image window and its Layers
panel, between the Background and Pineapple layers. Photoshop always adds new
layers directly above the selected layer; you selected the Background layer earlier.

4 Close the Beach.psd file without saving changes to it.
 Tip:
Need images for a project like this one? In Photoshop, choose File >
Search Adobe Stock to download low-resolution placeholder images from
the Adobe Stock online photo library. If you purchase the images,
Photoshop replaces the placeholders with high-resolution images.
Viewing individual layers
The 04Working.psd file now contains six layers. Some of the layers are visible and
some are hidden. The eye icon ( ) next to a layer thumbnail in the Layers panel
indicates that the layer is visible.
 Tip:
If you need to center the Beach layer, select the Beach layer in the Layers
panel, choose Select > All, and then choose Layer > Align Layers to
Selection > Horizontal Centers or Vertical Centers.
1 Click the eye icon ( ) next to the Pineapple layer to hide the image of the
pineapple.

You can hide or show a layer by clicking this icon or clicking in its column—also called
the Show/Hide Visibility column.
2 Click again in the Show/Hide Visibility column to display the pineapple.
Adding a border to a layer
Now you’ll add a white border around the Beach layer to create the impression that it’s
an old photograph.
1 Select the Beach layer. (To select the layer, click the layer name in the Layers
panel.)
The layer is highlighted, indicating that it is active. Changes you make in the image
window affect the active layer.
2 To make the opaque areas on this layer more obvious, hide all layers except the
Beach layer: Press Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) as you click the eye icon ( )
next to the Beach layer.

The white background and other objects in the image disappear, leaving only the beach
image against a checkerboard background. The checkerboard indicates transparent areas
of the active layer.
3 Choose Layer > Layer Style > Stroke.
The Layer Style dialog box opens. Now you’ll select the options for the white stroke
around the beach image.
4 Specify the following settings:
• Size: 5 px
• Position: Inside
• Blend Mode: Normal
• Opacity: 100%
• Color: White (Click the Color box, and select white in the Color Picker.)
5 Click OK. A white border appears around the beach photo.

Rearranging layers
The order in which the layers of an image are organized is called the stacking order.
The stacking order determines how the image is viewed—you can change the order to
make certain parts of the image appear in front of or behind other layers.
You’ll rearrange the layers so that the beach image is in front of another image that is
currently hidden in the file.
1 Make the Postage, HAWAII, Flower, Pineapple, and Background layers visible by
clicking the Show/Hide Visibility column next to their layer names.
The beach image is almost entirely blocked by images on other layers.

2 In the Layers panel, drag the Beach layer up so that it is positioned between the
Pineapple and Flower layers—when you’ve positioned it correctly, you’ll see a
thick line between the layers in the panel—and then release the mouse button.
The Beach layer moves up one level in the stacking order, and the beach image appears
on top of the pineapple and background images but under the postage, flower, and the
word “HAWAII.”
 Tip:
You can also control the stacking order of layered images by selecting them
in the Layers panel and choosing Layer > Arrange, and then choosing Bring
To Front, Bring Forward, Send To Back, or Send Backward.
Changing the opacity of a layer
You can reduce the opacity of any layer to reveal the layers below it. In this case, the
postmark is too dark on the flower. You’ll edit the opacity of the Postage layer to let the
flower and other images show through.
1 Select the Postage layer, and then click the arrow next to the Opacity field to
display the Opacity slider. Drag the slider to 25%. You can also type 25 in the
Opacity box or scrub the Opacity label.

The Postage layer becomes partially transparent, so you can better see the layers
underneath. Notice that the change in opacity affects only the image area of the Postage
layer. The Pineapple, Beach, Flower, and HAWAII layers remain opaque.
2 Choose File > Save to save your work.
Duplicating a layer and changing the blending mode
You can apply different blending modes to a layer. Blending modes affect how the color
pixels on one layer blend with pixels on the layers underneath. First you’ll use blending
modes to increase the intensity of the image on the Pineapple layer so that it doesn’t look
so dull. Then you’ll change the blending mode on the Postage layer. (Currently, the
blending mode for both layers is Normal.)
1 Click the eye icons next to the HAWAII, Flower, and Beach layers to hide them.
2 Right-click or Control-click the Pineapple layer, and choose Duplicate Layer
from the context menu. (Make sure you click the layer name, not its thumbnail, or
you’ll see the wrong context menu.) Click OK in the Duplicate Layer dialog box.
A layer called “Pineapple copy” appears above the Pineapple layer in the Layers panel.
3 With the Pineapple copy layer selected, choose Overlay from the Blending Modes
menu in the Layers panel.

The Overlay blending mode blends the Pineapple copy layer with the Pineapple layer
beneath it to create a vibrant, more colorful pineapple with deeper shadows and brighter
highlights.
4 Select the Postage layer, and choose Multiply from the Blending Modes menu.
The Multiply blending mode multiplies the colors in the underlying layers with the color
in the top layer. In this case, the postmark becomes a little stronger.
5 Choose File > Save to save your work.
Resizing and rotating layers
You can resize and transform layers.
1 Click the Visibility column on the Beach layer to make the layer visible.
2 Select the Beach layer in the Layers panel, and choose Edit > Free Transform.
A Transform bounding box appears around the beach image. The bounding box has
handles on each corner and each side.
First, you’ll resize and angle the layer.

3 Press Shift as you drag a corner handle inward to scale the beach photo down by
about 50%. (Watch the Width and Height percentages in the options bar.)
4 With the bounding box still active, position the pointer just outside one of the
corner handles until it becomes a curved double arrow. Drag clockwise to rotate
the beach image approximately 15 degrees. You can also enter 15 in the Set
Rotation box in the options bar.
5 Click the Commit Transform button ( ) in the options bar.
6 Make the Flower layer visible. Then, select the Move tool ( ), and drag the
beach photo so that its corner is tucked neatly beneath the flower, as in the
illustration.
7 Choose File > Save.

Using a filter to create artwork
Next, you’ll create a new layer with no artwork on it. (Adding empty layers to a file is
comparable to adding blank sheets of film to a stack of images.) You’ll use this layer to
add realistic-looking clouds to the sky with a Photoshop filter.
1 In the Layers panel, select the Background layer to make it active, and then click
the Create A New Layer button ( ) at the bottom of the Layers panel.
A new layer, named Layer 1, appears between the Background and Pineapple layers.
The layer has no content, so it has no effect on the image.
2 Double-click the name Layer 1, type Clouds, and press Enter or Return to rename
the layer.
 Note:
You can also create a new layer by choosing Layer > New > Layer, or by
choosing New Layer from the Layers panel menu.
 Tip:

If you expect to use a certain color frequently in multiple documents, add it
to your Creative Cloud Libraries. Create a swatch of the color in the
Swatches panel, and then drag the swatch to a library in the Libraries
panel. Now that color is available to any open Photoshop document.
3 In the Tools panel, click the foreground color swatch, select a sky blue color from
the Color Picker, and click OK. We selected a color with the following values:
R=48, G=138, B=174. The Background Color remains white.
4 With the Clouds layer still active, choose Filter > Render > Clouds.
Realistic-looking clouds appear behind the image.
5 Choose File > Save.
 Tip:
If you’re adding artwork from a Creative Cloud library, you can simply
drag and drop it from the Libraries panel into a Photoshop document. You
can also do this with Adobe Stock images stored in your Creative Cloud
Libraries.
Dragging to add a new layer
You can add a layer to an image by dragging an image file from the desktop, Bridge, or
Explorer (Windows) or the Finder (Mac). You’ll add another flower to the postcard
now.
1 If Photoshop fills your monitor, reduce the size of the Photoshop window:

• In Windows, click the Restore button ( ) in the upper right corner, and then drag
the lower right corner of the Photoshop window to make it smaller.
• In Mac, click the green Maximize/Restore button ( ) in the upper left corner of
the image window.
2 In Photoshop, select the Pineapple copy layer in the Layers panel to make it the
active layer.
Blending modes
Blending modes affect how the color pixels on one layer blend with pixels
on the layers beneath them. The default blending mode, Normal, hides
pixels beneath the top layer unless the top layer is partially or completely
transparent. Each of the other blending modes let you control the way the
pixels in the layers interact with each other.
Often, the best way to see how a blending mode affects your image is
simply to try it. You can easily experiment with different blending modes in
the Layers panel, applying one after another to compare the effects. As you
begin experimenting, keep in mind how different groups of blending modes
affect an image. Generally, if you want to:
• Darken your image, try Darken, Multiply, Color Burn, Linear Burn, or
Darker Color.
• Lighten your image, try Lighten, Screen, Color Dodge, Linear Dodge, or
Lighter Color.
• Increase the contrast in the image, try Overlay, Soft Light, Hard Light,
Vivid Light, Linear Light, Pin Light, or Hard Mix.
• Change the actual color values of the image, try Hue, Saturation, Color,
or Luminosity.
• Create an inversion effect, try Difference or Exclusion.
The following blending modes often come in handy, and can be a good
place to start your experimentation:
• Multiply does just what the name implies: it multiplies the color in the
underlying layers with the color in the top layer.
• Lighten replaces pixels in the underlying layers with those in the top
layer whenever the pixels in the top layer are lighter.
• Overlay multiplies either the colors or the inverse of the colors,
depending on the underlying layers. Patterns or colors overlay the
existing pixels while preserving the highlights and shadows of the
underlying layers.

• Luminosity replaces only the luminance of the underlying colors with
that of the top layer.
• Difference subtracts darker colors from lighter ones.
3 In Explorer (Windows) or the Finder (Mac), navigate to the Lessons folder you
downloaded from the peachpit.com website. Then navigate to the Lesson04 folder.
4 Select Flower2.psd, and drag it from Explorer or the Finder onto your image.
 Tip:
You can drag images from a Bridge window to Photoshop as easily as you
can drag from the Windows or Mac desktop.

The Flower2 layer appears in the Layers panel, directly above the Pineapple copy layer.
Photoshop places the image as a Smart Object, which is a layer you can edit without
making permanent changes. You’ll work more extensively with Smart Objects in Lesson
8.
5 Position the Flower2 layer in the lower left corner of the postcard, so that about
half of the top flower is visible.
6 Click the Commit Transform button ( ) in the options bar to accept the layer.
Adding text
Now you’re ready to create some type using the Horizontal Type tool, which places the
text on its own type layer. You’ll then edit the text and apply a special effect.
1 Make the HAWAII layer visible. You’ll add text just below this layer, and apply
special effects to both layers.
2 Choose Select > Deselect Layers, so that no layers are selected.
3 In the Tools panel, select the Horizontal Type tool ( ). Then, choose Window >
Character to open the Character panel. Do the following in the Character panel:
• Select a serif font (we used Birch Std; if you use a different font, adjust other
settings accordingly).
• Select a font style (we used Regular).
• Select a large font size (we used 36 points).
• Select a large tracking value (
) (we used 250).
• Click the color swatch, select a shade of grassy green in the Color Picker, and
click OK to close the Color Picker.
• Click the Faux Bold button ( ).
• Click the All Caps button (
).
• Select Crisp from the Anti-aliasing menu ( ).

4 Click just below the “H” in the word “HAWAII,” and type Island Paradise. Then
click the Commit Any Current Edits button ( ) in the options bar.
The Layers panel now includes a layer named Island Paradise with a “T” thumbnail,
indicating that it is a type layer. This layer is at the top of the layer stack.
The text appears where you clicked, which probably isn’t exactly where you want it to
be positioned.
 Note:
If you make a mistake when you click to set the type, simply click away
from the type and repeat step 4.
5 Select the Move tool ( ), and drag the “Island Paradise” text so that it is centered
below “HAWAII.”

Applying a gradient to a layer
You can apply a color gradient to all or part of a layer. In this example, you’ll apply a
gradient to the word “HAWAII” to make it more colorful. First you’ll select the letters,
and then you’ll apply the gradient.
1 Select the HAWAII layer in the Layers panel to make it active.
2 Right-click or Control-click the thumbnail in the HAWAII layer, and choose Select
Pixels.
 Note:
Make sure you click the thumbnail, rather than the layer name, or you’ll see
the wrong context menu.
 Note:
Though the layer contains the word “HAWAII,” it is not a type layer. The

text has been rasterized.
Everything on the HAWAII layer (the white lettering) is selected. Now that you’ve
selected the area to fill, you’ll apply a gradient.
3 In the Tools panel, select the Gradient tool (
).
4 Click the Foreground Color swatch in the Tools panel, select a bright shade of
orange in the Color Picker, and click OK. The Background Color should still be
white.
5 In the options bar, make sure that Linear Gradient ( ) is selected.
6 In the options bar, click the arrow next to the Gradient Editor box to open the
Gradient Picker. Select the Foreground To Background swatch (it’s the first one),
and then click anywhere outside the gradient picker to close it.
7 With the selection still active, drag the Gradient tool from the bottom to the top of
the letters. If you want to be sure you drag straight up, press the Shift key as you
drag. When the pointer reaches the top of the letters, release the mouse button.
 Tip:
To list the gradient options by name rather than by sample, click the menu
button in the gradient picker, and choose either Small List or Large List. Or,
hover the pointer over a thumbnail until a tool tip appears, showing the
gradient name.
The gradient extends across the type, starting with orange at the bottom and gradually
blending to white at the top.
8 Choose Select > Deselect to deselect the HAWAII type.
9 Save the work you’ve done so far.

Applying a layer style
You can enhance a layer by adding a shadow, stroke, satin sheen, or other special effect
from a collection of automated and editable layer styles. These styles are easy to apply,
and they link directly to the layer you specify.
Like layers, layer styles can be hidden by clicking eye icons ( ) in the Layers panel.
Layer styles are nondestructive, so you can edit or remove them at any time. You can
apply a copy of a layer style to a different layer by dragging the effect onto the
destination layer.
Earlier, you used a layer style to add a stroke to the beach photo. Now, you’ll add drop
shadows to the text to make it stand out.
1 Select the Island Paradise layer, and then choose Layer > Layer Style > Drop
Shadow.
 Tip:
You can also open the Layer Style dialog box by clicking the Add A Layer
Style button at the bottom of the Layers panel and then choosing a layer
style, such as Bevel And Emboss, from the pop-up menu.
2 In the Layer Style dialog box, make sure that the Preview option is selected, and
then, if necessary, move the dialog box so that you can see the Island Paradise text
in the image window.
3 In the Structure area, select Use Global Light, and then specify the following
settings:
• Blend Mode: Multiply
• Opacity: 75%
• Angle: 78 degrees
• Distance: 5 px
• Spread: 30%
• Size: 10 px

When Use Global Light is selected, one “master” lighting angle is available in all the
layer effects that use shading. If you set a lighting angle in one of these effects, every
other effect with Use Global Light selected inherits the same angle setting.
 Tip:
To change the Global Light settings, choose Layer > Layer Style > Global
Light.
Angle determines the lighting angle at which the effect is applied to the layer. Distance
determines the offset distance for a shadow or satin effect. Spread determines how
gradually the shadow fades toward the edges. Size determines how far the shadow
extends.
Photoshop adds a drop shadow to the “Island Paradise” text in the image.
4 Click OK to accept the settings and close the Layer Style dialog box.
Photoshop nests the layer style in the Island Paradise layer. First it lists Effects, and then
the layer styles applied to the layer. An eye icon ( ) appears next to the effect category
and next to each effect. To turn off an effect, click its eye icon. Click the visibility
column again to restore the effect. To hide all layer styles, click the eye icon next to
Effects. To collapse the list of effects, click the arrow next to the layer.
5 Make sure that eye icons appear for both items nested in the Island Paradise layer.

6 Press Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac), and in the Layers panel, drag the Effects
listing or the fx symbol ( ) for the Island Paradise layer onto the HAWAII layer.
The Drop Shadow layer style is applied to the HAWAII layer, copying the settings you
applied to the Island Paradise layer. Now you’ll add a green stroke around the word
HAWAII.
 Tip:
If you expect to use a layer style frequently in multiple documents, add it to
your Creative Cloud Libraries. Select a layer using the style, then click the
Add Layer Style button at the bottom of the Libraries panel. Now that style
is available to any open Photoshop document.
7 Select the HAWAII layer in the Layers panel, click the Add A Layer Style button (
) at the bottom of the panel, and then choose Stroke from the pop-up menu.
8 In the Structure area of the Layer Styles dialog box, specify the following settings:
• Size: 4 px
• Position: Outside
• Blend Mode: Normal
• Opacity: 100%
• Color: Green (Select a shade that goes well with the one you used for the
“Island Paradise” text.)

9 Click OK to apply the stroke.
Now you’ll add a drop shadow and a satin sheen to the flower.
Tool tips from the Photoshop evangelist
Julieanne Kost is an official Adobe Photoshop evangelist.
Blending effects
Blending layers in a different order or on different groups changes the
effect. You can apply a blending mode to an entire layer group and get a
very different result than if you apply the same blending mode to each of the
layers individually. When a blending mode is applied to a group,
Photoshop treats the group as a single merged object and then applies the

blending mode. Experiment with blending modes to get the effect you want.
10 Select the Flower layer, and choose Layer > Layer Style > Drop Shadow. Then
change the following settings in the Structure area:
• Opacity: 60%
• Distance: 13 px
• Spread: 9%.
• Make sure Use Global Light is selected, and that the Blend Mode is Multiply.
Do not click OK.

11 With the Layer Style dialog box still open, click the word Satin on the left to
select it and display its options. Then make sure Invert is selected, and apply the
following settings:
• Color (next to Blend Mode): Fuchsia (choose a color that complements the
flower color)
• Opacity: 20%
• Distance: 22 px
The Satin layer effect applies interior shading to create a satiny finish. The contour
controls the shape of the effect; Invert flips the contour curve.
 Note:
Be sure to click the word Satin. If you click only the check box, Photoshop
applies the layer style with its default settings, but you won’t see the
options.

12 Click OK to apply both layer styles.
Adding an adjustment layer
Adjustment layers can be added to an image to apply color and tonal adjustments
without permanently changing the pixel values in the image. For example, if you add a
Color Balance adjustment layer to an image, you can experiment with different colors
repeatedly, because the change occurs only on the adjustment layer. If you decide to
return to the original pixel values, you can hide or delete the adjustment layer.
You’ve used adjustment layers in other lessons. Here, you’ll add a Hue/Saturation
adjustment layer to change the color of the purple flower. An adjustment layer affects all
layers below it in the image’s stacking order unless a selection is active when you
create it or you create a clipping mask.
1 Select the Flower2 layer in the Layers panel.
2 Click the Hue/Saturation icon in the Adjustments panel to add a Hue/Saturation
adjustment layer.
3 In the Properties panel, apply the following settings:
• Hue: 43
• Saturation: 19
• Lightness: 0

The changes affect the Flower2, Pineapple Copy, Pineapple, Clouds, and Background
layers. The effect is interesting, but you want to change only the Flower2 layer.
4 Right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac) the layer name on the
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer, and choose Create Clipping Mask.
An arrow appears in the Layers panel, indicating that the adjustment layer applies only
to the Flower2 layer. You’ll learn more about clipping masks in Lessons 6 and 7.
 Note:
Be sure to click the layer name, not the thumbnail, to see the appropriate
context menu.
Extra credit
Using an effect more than once in a layer style
A great way to add visual impact to a design element is to apply multiple
instances of effects such as strokes, glows, or shadows. You don’t have to
duplicate layers to do this, because you can apply multiple instances of an

effect inside the Layer Styles dialog box.
1 Open 04End.psd in your Lesson04 folder.
2 In the Layers panel, double-click the Drop Shadow effect applied to the
HAWAII layer.
3 Click the + button next to the Drop Shadow effect, and select the second
Drop Shadow effect.
Now for the fun part! You can adjust your second drop shadow to change
options such as color, size, and opacity.
4 In the Drop Shadow options, click the color swatch, move the pointer
outside the Layer Style dialog box so that the pointer changes into an
eyedropper, and click the bottom flower to sample its pink color. Then
match the Drop Shadow settings as shown below, and click OK.

5 The new pink drop shadow helps the HAWAII text pop off the page.
Updating layer effects
Layer effects are automatically updated when you make changes to a layer. You can edit
the text and watch how the layer effect tracks the change.
1 Select the Island Paradise layer in the Layers panel.
2 In the Tools panel, select the Horizontal Type tool ( ).
3 In the options bar, set the font size to 32 points, and press Enter or Return.
Although you didn’t select the text by dragging the Type tool (as you would have to do in
a word processing program), “Island Paradise” now appears in 32-point type.
4 Using the Horizontal Type tool, click between “Island” and “Paradise,” and type
of.

As you edit the text, the layer styles are applied to the new text.
5 You don’t actually need the word “of,” so delete it.
6 Select the Move tool ( ), and drag “Island Paradise” to center it beneath the
word “HAWAII.”
 Tip:
You can search for layers in the Layers panel by layer type, layer name,
effect, mode, attribute, and color. You can also display only the selected
layers: choose Select > Isolate Layers, or choose Selected from the Kind
menu in the Layers panel to enter Isolation Mode.
 Note:
You don’t have to click the Commit Any Current Edits button after making
the text edits, because selecting the Move tool has the same effect.
7 Choose File > Save.
Adding a border
The Hawaii postcard is nearly done. The elements are almost all arranged correctly in
the composition. You’ll finish up by positioning the postmark and then adding a white
postcard border.
1 Select the Postage layer, and then use the Move tool ( ) to drag it to the middle
right of the image, as in the illustration.

2 Select the Island Paradise layer in the Layers panel, and then click the Create A
New Layer button ( ) at the bottom of the panel.
3 Choose Select > All.
4 Choose Select > Modify > Border. In the Border Selection dialog box, type 10
pixels for the Width, and click OK.
A 10-pixel border is selected around the entire image. Now, you’ll fill it with white.
5 Select white for the Foreground Color, and then choose Edit > Fill.
6 In the Fill dialog box, choose Foreground Color from the Contents menu, and
click OK.
7 Choose Select > Deselect.
8 Double-click the Layer 1 name in the Layers panel, and rename the layer Border.

Flattening and saving files
When you finish editing all the layers in your image, you can merge or flatten layers to
reduce the file size. Flattening combines all the layers into a single background layer.
However, you cannot edit layers once you’ve flattened them, so you shouldn’t flatten an
image until you are certain that you’re satisfied with all your design decisions. Rather
than flattening your original PSD files, it’s a good idea to save a copy of the file with its
layers intact, in case you need to edit a layer later.
To appreciate what flattening does, notice the two numbers for the file size in the status
bar at the bottom of the image window. The first number represents what the file size
would be if you flattened the image. The second number represents the file size without
flattening. This lesson file, if flattened, would be 2–3MB, but the current file is much
larger. So flattening is well worth it in this case.
 Note:
If the sizes do not appear in the status bar, click the status bar pop-up menu
arrow, and choose Document Sizes.
1 Select any tool but the Type tool ( ), to be sure that you’re not in text-editing
mode. Then choose File > Save (if it is available) to be sure that all your changes
have been saved in the file.
2 Choose Image > Duplicate.
3 In the Duplicate Image dialog box, name the file 04Flat.psd, and click OK.
4 Leave the 04Flat.psd file open, but close the 04Working.psd file.
5 Choose Flatten Image from the Layers panel menu.

Only one layer, named Background, remains in the Layers panel.
6 Choose File > Save. Even though you chose Save rather than Save As, the Save
As dialog box appears.
7 Make sure the location is the Lessons/Lesson04 folder, and then click Save to
accept the default settings and save the flattened file.
You have saved two versions of the file: a one-layer, flattened copy as well as the
original file, in which all the layers remain intact.
You’ve created a colorful, attractive postcard. This lesson only begins to explore the
vast possibilities and the flexibility you gain when you master the art of using Photoshop
layers. You’ll get more experience and try out different techniques for layers in almost
every chapter as you move forward in this book.
About layer comps
The Layer Comps panel (choose Window > Layer Comps) provides one-
click flexibility in switching between different views of a multilayered
image file. A layer comp is simply a definition of the settings in the Layers
panel. You work with them in the Layer Comps panel (choose Window >
Layer Comps). Once you’ve defined a layer comp, you can change as many
settings as you please in the Layers panel and then create another layer
comp to preserve that configuration of layer properties. Then, by switching
from one layer comp to another, you can quickly review the two designs.
The beauty of layer comps becomes apparent when you want to
demonstrate a number of possible design arrangements. When you’ve
created a few layer comps, you can review the design variations without
having to tediously select and deselect eye icons or change settings in the
Layers panel.
Say, for example, that you are designing a brochure, and you’re producing a
version in English as well as in French. You might have the French text on
one layer, and the English text on another in the same image file. To create
two different layer comps, you would simply turn on visibility for the
French layer and turn off visibility for the English layer, and then click the

Create New Layer Comp button in the Layer Comps panel. Then you’d do
the inverse—turn on visibility for the English layer and turn off visibility
for the French layer, and click the Create New Layer Comp button—to
create an English layer comp. To view the different layer comps, click the
Layer Comp box for each comp in the Layer Comps panel in turn.
Layer comps can be an especially valuable feature when the design is in
flux or when you need to create multiple versions of the same image file. If
some aspects need to stay consistent among layer comps, you can change
the visibility, position, or appearance of one layer in a layer comp and then
sync it to see that change reflected in all the other layer comps.
 Tip:
If you want to flatten only some of the layers in a file, click the eye icons to
hide the layers you don’t want to flatten, and then choose Merge Visible
from the Layers panel menu.
Extra credit
Exploring design options with Adobe Stock
Visualizing different ideas for a design project is easier when you can
experiment with images. The Libraries panel in Photoshop gives you direct
access to millions of Adobe Stock images. We’ll add a stock image of a
ukulele to this lesson’s composition.
1 In the Lesson04 folder, open 04End.psd. Save it as 04End_Working.

Adobe Stock search results
2 In the Layers panel, select the Beach layer.
3 In the Libraries panel, make sure the search field is set to Search Adobe
Stock, type ukulele into the field, and locate a vertical image of a
ukulele on a white background with no shadow.
4 Drag the ukulele image into the document. Shift-drag a corner handle to
proportionally scale the image to about 25% of its original size. Apply
the changes to finish importing the image.
Stock image in document
5 Click the  in the search field to close the search results. Notice that the
image was automatically added to the current library.
6 Now remove the background. With the Ukulele layer selected, choose
the Magic Wand tool in the Tools panel, and click anywhere within the
white background. Choose the Rectangular Marquee tool, and Shift-drag
around the numbers in the bottom right corner to include them in the
selection. Alt/Option-click the Add Layer Mask button ( ) at the bottom
of the Layers panel.

7 With the Move tool, drag the Ukulele to the upper left corner so that it
partially overlaps with the small photo of the beach view. You’ve just
added an Adobe Stock photo to your postcard image!
You’ve added a new element to your postcard using Adobe Stock!
Licensing an image
Until it’s licensed, the ukulele image is a low-resolution version with an
Adobe Stock watermark. You don’t have to license the ukulele image used
here, but you must license images used in a final project. To do that, right-
click/Control-click the image in the Libraries panel, choose License Image,
and then follow the prompts. After licensing, the image is automatically
replaced with a high-resolution version without a watermark.

Review questions
1 What is the advantage of using layers?
2 When you create a new layer, where does it appear in the Layers panel stack?
3 How can you make artwork on one layer appear in front of artwork on another
layer?
4 How can you apply a layer style?
5 When you’ve completed your artwork, what can you do to minimize the file size
without changing the quality or dimensions?
Review answers
1 Layers let you move and edit different parts of an image as discrete objects. You
can also hide individual layers as you work on other layers.
2 A new layer always appears immediately above the active layer.
3 You can make artwork on one layer appear in front of artwork on another layer by
dragging layers up or down the stacking order in the Layers panel, or by using the
Layer > Arrange subcommands—Bring To Front, Bring Forward, Send To Back,
and Send Backward. However, you can’t change the layer position of a
background layer.
4 To apply a layer style, select the layer, and then click the Add A Layer Style
button in the Layers panel, or choose Layer > Layer Style > [style].
5 To minimize file size, you can flatten the image, which merges all the layers onto a
single background. It’s a good idea to duplicate image files with layers intact
before you flatten them, in case you have to make changes to a layer later.

5. Quick Fixes
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Remove red eye.
• Brighten an image.
• Adjust the features of a face.
• Combine images to create a panorama.
• Crop and straighten an image and fill in any resulting empty areas.
• Blur the background of an image using Iris Blur.
• Merge two images to extend depth of field.
• Apply optical lens correction to a distorted image.
• Move an object seamlessly.
• Adjust the perspective of an image to match another image.
This lesson will take about an hour to complete. Please log in to your account on
peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” As you work on this lesson, you’ll
preserve the start files. If you need to restore the start files, download them from
your Account page.

Sometimes just one or two clicks in Photoshop can turn an image from so-so
(or worse) to awesome. Quick fixes get you the results you want without a lot
of fuss.
PROJECT: CORRECTING IMAGE DISTORTION
PROJECT: RED EYE REDUCTION
PROJECT: PANORAMA FROM MULTIPLE IMAGES
Getting started
Not every image requires a complicated makeover using advanced features in
Photoshop. In fact, once you’re familiar with Photoshop, you can often improve an
image quickly. The trick is to know what’s possible and how to find what you need.
In this lesson, you’ll make quick fixes to several images using a variety of tools and
techniques. You can use these techniques individually, or team them up when you’re
working with an image that needs just a little more help.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to restore the default preferences. (See “Restoring
Default Preferences” on page 5.)

2 When prompted, click Yes to delete the Adobe Photoshop Settings file.
Improving a snapshot
If you’re sharing a snapshot with family and friends, you may not need it to look
professional. But you probably don’t want glowing eyes, and it would be good if the
picture isn’t too dark to show important detail. Photoshop gives you the tools to make
quick changes to a snapshot.
Correcting red eye
Red eye occurs when the retina of a subject’s eye is reflected by the camera flash. It
commonly occurs in photographs taken in a dark room, because the subject’s irises are
wide open. Fortunately, red eye is easy to fix in Photoshop. In this exercise, you will
remove the red eye from the woman’s eyes in the portrait.
 Note:
If you haven’t installed Bridge, you’ll be prompted to do so when you
choose Browse In Bridge. For more information, see page 3.
You’ll start by viewing the before and after images in Adobe Bridge.
1 Choose File > Browse In Bridge to open Adobe Bridge.
2 In the Favorites panel in Bridge, click the Lessons folder. Then, in the Content
panel, double-click the Lesson05 folder to open it.
3 Adjust the thumbnail slider, if necessary, so that you can see the thumbnail
previews clearly. Then look at the RedEye_Start.jpg and RedEye_end.psd files.
Not only does red eye make an ordinary person or animal appear sinister, but it can
distract from the subject of the image. It’s easy to correct red eye in Photoshop, and
you’ll quickly lighten this image too.
4 Double-click the RedEye_Start.jpg file to open it in Photoshop.

5 Choose File > Save As, choose Photoshop for the Format, name the file
RedEye_Working.psd, and click Save.
6 Select the Zoom tool (
), and then drag to zoom in to see the woman’s eyes. If
Scrubby Zoom isn’t selected, drag a marquee around the eyes to zoom in.
7 Select the Red Eye tool (
), hidden under the Spot Healing Brush tool (
).
8 In the options bar, reduce the Pupil Size to 23% and the Darken Amount to 62%.
The Darken Amount specifies how dark the pupil should be.
9 Click the pupil in the woman’s left eye. The red reflection disappears.
10 Click the pupil in the woman’s right eye to remove the red reflection there, too.
If the red reflection is directly over the pupil, clicking the pupil removes it. However, if
the red reflection is slightly off the pupil, try clicking the highlight in the eye first. You
may need to try a few different spots, but it’s easy to undo and try again.
11 Choose View > Fit On Screen to see the entire image.
12 Choose File > Save.

Brightening an image
The woman’s eyes no longer glow red, but the overall image is a bit dark. You can
brighten an image in several different ways, as you’ve already seen. You can try adding
adjustment layers for Brightness/Contrast, Levels, and Curves depending on the degree
of adjustment you want to make. For a quick fix or a good starting point, try the Auto
button or the presets, which are both available in the Levels or Curves adjustments.
Let’s try a Curves adjustment layer for this image.
1 Click Curves in the Adjustments panel.
2 Click Auto to apply an automatic correction. The image brightens.
3 Choose Lighter from the Preset menu. The curve changes slightly. The difference
between the two curves is that a preset applies the same curve to every image,
while Auto customizes the curve after analyzing an individual image.

4 Click the reset button ( ) at the bottom of the Properties panel to revert back to
the unadjusted image.
5 Select the on-image adjustment tool (
) in the Curves panel, and then click the
center of the forehead and drag upwards. That brightens the image nicely, and also
improves the contrast.
6 Choose Layer > Flatten Image.
 Tip:
If you want to use the Auto button, or the white point or black point
samplers (eyedropper icons) in the Curves or Levels adjustments, use them
before applying manual adjustments. Like presets, adjustments by those

tools replace manual adjustments.
7 Save the file.
 Tip:
To see how much you’ve brightened the image, hide the Curves layer and
then show it again.
Adjusting facial features with Liquify
The Liquify filter is useful when you want to distort only part of an image. It includes
Face-Aware Liquify options that can automatically recognize faces in images, and then
lets you easily adjust facial features such as the eyes, nose, and mouth. For example, you
can adjust the size of or distance between the eyes. Being able to adjust facial features
can be useful for photos used in advertising and fashion, when portraying a certain look
or expression may be more important than faithfully representing a specific person.
1 With RedEye_Working.psd still open, choose Filter > Liquify.
2 In the Properties panel, expand the Face-Aware Liquify options.
 Tip:

When the Face tool (
) is selected in the Liquify toolbar, handles appear
as you hover the pointer over different parts of the face. You can drag those
handles to adjust different parts of the face directly, as an alternative to
dragging the Face-Aware Liquify sliders.
3 Make sure the Eyes section is expanded and that the link icon is selected for both
Eye Size and Eye Height; then enter 32 for Size and 10 for Height.
When the link icon is not selected for an Eyes option, you can set different values for the
left and right eyes.
4 Make sure the Mouth section is expanded, then enter 5 for Smile and 9 for Mouth
Height.
5 Make sure the Face Shape section is expanded, and then enter 40 for Jawline and
50 for Face Width.
6 Deselect and reselect the Preview option to compare the image before and after
your changes.
 Tip:
The Face-Aware Liquify options have a limited range because they’re
designed for subtle, believable distortions. If you want to exaggerate faces
into caricatures or extreme expressions, you may want to use the more
advanced manual tools along the left side of the LIquify dialog box.
Feel free to experiment with any of the Face-Aware Liquify options to get a better sense
of the possibilities for quick, easy alterations.

7 Click OK to exit Liquify. Close the document and save your changes.
The Face-Aware Liquify features are available only when Photoshop recognizes a face
in an image. It may not recognize a face that is turned too far away from the camera, or
when a face is partially covered by hair, sunglasses, or a hat shadow.
Blurring a background
The interactive blurs in the Blur Gallery let you customize a blur as you preview it on
your image. You’ll use an iris blur to blur the background in an image, focusing the
viewer’s attention on the egret. You’ll apply the blur as a Smart Filter so that you can
modify it later if you want to.
You’ll start by looking at the start and end files in Bridge.
1 Choose File > Browse In Bridge to open Adobe Bridge.
2 In the Favorites panel in Bridge, click the Lessons folder. Then, in the Content
panel, double-click the Lesson05 folder to open it.
3 Compare the Egret_Start.jpg and Egret_End.psd thumbnail previews.
In the final image, the egret appears sharper, as its reflection and the grass around it
have been blurred. Iris Blur, one of the interactive blurs in the Blur Gallery, makes the
task an easy one—no masking required.
4 Return to Photoshop, and choose File > Open As Smart Object.
5 Select the Egret_Start.jpg file in the Lesson05 folder, and click OK or Open. If the
New Library from Document dialog box appears, click Cancel.
Photoshop opens the image. There is one layer in the Layers panel, and it’s a Smart
Object, as indicated by the badge on the layer thumbnail icon.

6 Choose File > Save As, choose Photoshop for the Format, name the file
Egret_Working.psd, and click Save. Click OK in the Photoshop Format Options
dialog box.
7 Choose Filter > Blur Gallery > Iris Blur.
A blur ellipse is centered on your image. You can adjust the location and scope of the
blur by moving the center pin, feather handles, and ellipse handles. At the top right
corner of the Blur Gallery task space, you also see the expandable Field Blur, Tilt-Shift
Blur, Path Blur, and Spin Blur panels.
8 Drag the center pin so that it’s at the bottom of the bird’s body.
9 Click the ellipse, and drag inward to tighten the focus around the bird.
A. Center
B. Ellipse
C. Feather handle
D. Focus
10 Press Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) as you click and drag the feather handles to
match those in the first image below. Pressing Alt or Option lets you drag each
handle separately.
11 Click and drag on the focus ring to reduce the amount of blur to 5 px, creating a
gradual but noticeable blur. You can also change the amount of blur by moving the
Blur slider in the Iris Blur area of the Blur Tools panel.
12 Click OK in the options bar to apply the blur.
The blur may be a little too subtle. You’ll edit the blur to increase it slightly.
13 Double-click the Blur Gallery in the Egret layer in the Layers panel to open it

again. Adjust the blur to 6 px, and click OK in the options bar to apply it.
The egret is accentuated by blurring the rest of the image. Because you applied the filter
to a Smart Object, you can hide it or edit the effect without altering the original image.
14 Save the file, and then close it.
Blur Gallery
The Blur Gallery includes five interactive blurs: Field Blur, Iris Blur, Tilt-
Shift, Path Blur, and Spin Blur. Each gives you on-image selective motion
blur tools, with an initial blur pin. You can create additional blur pins by
clicking on the image. You can apply one or a combination of blurs, and
you can create a strobe effect for path and spin blurs.
Field Blur applies a gradient blur to areas of the image, defined by pins
you create and settings you specify for each. When you first apply Field
Blur, a pin is placed in the center of the image. You can adjust the blur
relative to that point by dragging the blur handle or specifying a value in the
Blur Tools panel; you can also drag the pin to a different location.
Tilt-Shift simulates an image taken with a tilt-shift lens. This blur defines
areas of sharpness and then fades to a blur at the edges. You can use this
effect to simulate photos of miniature objects.

Iris Blur simulates a shallow depth-of-field effect, gradually blurring
everything outside the focus ring. Adjust the ellipse handles, feather
handles, and blur amount to customize the iris blur.
Spin Blur is a radial-style blur measured in degrees. You can change the
size and shape of the ellipse, re-center the rotation point by pressing Alt or
Option as you click and drag, and adjust the blur angle. You can also
specify the blur angle in the Blur Tools panel. Multiple spin blurs can
overlap.
Path Blur creates motion blurs along paths you draw. You control the
shape and amount of the blur.
When you first apply a Path Blur, a default path appears. Drag the end point
to reposition it. Click the center point and drag to change the curve. Click
to add additional curve points. The arrow on the path indicates the blur’s

direction.
You can also create a multiple-point path or a shape. Blur shapes describe
the local motion blurs, similar to camera shake (see “Camera Shake
Reduction” on page 138). The Speed slider in the Blur Tools panel
determines the speed for all the path blurs. The Centered Blur option
ensures that the blur shape for any pixel is centered on that pixel, resulting
in more stable-feeling motion blurs; to make the motion appear more fluid,
deselect this option.
In the Effects tab, you specify the bokeh parameters to control the
appearance of blurred areas. Light Bokeh brightens the blurred areas;
Bokeh Color adds more vivid colors to lightened areas that aren’t blown
out to white; Light Range determines the range of tones that the settings
affect.
You can add a strobe effect to spin and path blurs. Select the Motion
Effects tab to bring its panel forward. The Strobe Strength slider
determines how much blur shows between flash exposures (0% gives no
strobe effect; 100% gives full strobe effect with little blur between
exposures). Strobe Flashes determines the number of exposures.
Applying a blur will smooth out visible digital image noise or film grain
that’s in the original image, and this mismatch between the original and
blurred areas can make the blur appear artificial. You can use the Noise tab
to restore noise or grain so that blurred areas match up with unblurred
areas. Start with the Amount slider, and then use the other Noise options to

match the character of the original grain. Increase the Color value if the
original has visible color noise, and lower the Highlights value if you need
to balance the noise level in the highlights compared to the shadows.
Creating a panorama
Sometimes a vista is just too large for a single shot. Photoshop makes it easy to combine
multiple images into a panorama so that your viewers can get the full effect.
Once again, you’ll take a look at the end file first, to see where you’re going.
1 Choose File > Browse In Bridge.
2 Navigate to the Lesson05 folder, if you’re not there already. Then, look at the
Skyline_End.psd thumbnail preview.
Skyline_End.psd
You’ll combine four shots of the Seattle skyline into a single wide panorama image so
that viewers get a sense of the whole scene. Creating a panorama from multiple images
requires only a few clicks. Photoshop does the rest.
3 Return to Photoshop.
4 With no files open in Photoshop, choose File > Automate > Photomerge.
5 In the Source Files area, click Browse, and navigate to the Lesson05/Files For
Panorama folder.
6 Shift-select all the images in the folder, and click OK or Open.
7 In the Layout area of the Photomerge dialog box, select Perspective.
The best option for merging photos isn’t always Perspective; it depends on how the
originals were photographed. If you’re not completely happy with the result of a
particular merge, you can always try again with a different Layout option.
8 At the bottom of the Photomerge dialog box, select Blend Images Together,
Vignette Removal, Geometric Distortion Correction, and Content Aware Fill
Transparent Areas. Then click OK.
 Tip:
You can also open selected images from Bridge directly into Photomerge

by choosing Tools > Photoshop > Photomerge.
 Tip:
It can be hard to remember where to find the Photomerge command. To
quickly find a command, tool, feature, or help topic in Photoshop, click the
Search icon (
) at the top right corner of the application window, and type
what you’re looking for. The default keyboard shortcut for Search is Ctrl+F
(Windows) or Command+F (Mac).
Blend Images Together blends images based on the optimal borders between them,
instead of just creating a simple rectangular blend. Vignette Removal performs exposure
compensation in images with darkened edges. Geometric Distortion Correction
compensates for barrel, pincushion, or fisheye distortion. Content Aware Fill
Transparent Areas automatically patches the empty areas between the merged image
edges and the sides of the canvas.
Photoshop creates the panorama image. It’s a complex process, so you may have to wait

a few moments while Photoshop works. When it’s finished, you’ll see the full vista in
the image window with five layers in the Layers panel. The bottom four layers are the
original four images you selected. Photoshop identified the overlapping areas of the
images and matched them, correcting any angular discrepancies. The top layer,
containing “(merged)” in the layer name, is a single panorama image blended from all of
the images you selected, combined with formerly empty areas filled in by Content
Aware Fill. Those areas are indicated by the selection.
 Note:
Photomerge will require more time when you merge more images, or
images with large pixel dimensions. Photomerge works faster on computers
that are newer or that have more RAM.
 Tip:
If you want to see how the panorama looks without the areas created by
Content Aware Fill, hide the top layer.
Getting the best results with Photomerge
If you know you’re going to create a panorama when you take your shots,
keep the following guidelines in mind to get the best result.
Overlap images approximately 40%. You want enough overlap that
Photomerge can assemble the panorama but not so much that it can’t blend
the images.
Use a consistent focal length. If you use a zoom lens, keep the focal length
the same for all the pictures in the panorama.
Use a tripod if possible. You’ll get the best results if the camera is at the
same level when you take each of the shots. A tripod with a rotating head
makes that easier.
Take the photos from the same position. If you’re not using a tripod with
a rotating head, try to stay in the same position as you take the photos, so

that they are taken from the same viewpoint.
Avoid distortion lenses. They can interfere with Photomerge. (The Auto
option does adjust for images you take with fisheye lenses, though.)
Use the same exposure. The images will blend more gracefully if they all
have the same exposure. For example, either use flash for all the images or
for none of them.
Try different layout options. If you don’t like the results you get when you
create the panorama, try again using a different layout option. Often, Auto
selects the appropriate option, but sometimes you’ll get a better image with
one of the other options.
9 Choose Select > Deselect.
10 Choose Layer > Flatten Image.
11 Choose File > Save As. Choose Photoshop for the Format, and name the file
Skyline_Working.psd. Save the file in the Lesson05 folder. Click Save.
The panorama looks great, but it’s a little dark. You’ll add a Levels adjustment layer to
brighten it a little bit.
12 Click the Levels icon in the Adjustments panel to add a Levels adjustment layer.
13 Select the White Point eyedropper, and then click on a white area of the clouds.

The sky gets bluer, and the entire image brightens.
14 Save your work. Click OK in the Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
It’s that easy to create a panorama!
 Note:
In this case, the Photoshop Format Options alert may appear because a
layer was added. The Photoshop Format Options dialog box usually won’t
appear for Photoshop documents containing only a Background layer.
Filling empty areas when cropping

The panorama image looks great except for two things: The horizon is slightly tilted, and
the lower handrail is incomplete where the rocks on the right descend into the water. If
you were to rotate the image, empty areas might appear at the corners, requiring a tighter
crop and losing parts of the image. Fortunately, the same Content-Aware technology that
filled in empty areas resulting from the panorama merge can also fill in empty areas that
can result from straightening and cropping.
1 Make sure Skyline_Working.psd is open, and make sure the Background layer is
selected in the Layers panel.
2 In the Tools panel, select the Crop tool. The crop rectangle and its handles appear
around the image.
3 In the options bar, select the Straighten button (
), and make sure Content-Aware
is selected.
4 Position the Straighten pointer on the horizon at left edge of the image, and drag to
the right to create a Straighten line that’s aligned with the horizon; release the
mouse button when you reach the end of the horizon at the right edge of the image.
Notice there is now white space that needs to be filled near the corners.

5 With the crop rectangle still active, drag the image down until the incomplete part
of the lower guardrail is outside the crop rectangle.
6 Click the Commit button in the options bar ( ) to apply the current crop settings.
Content-Aware Crop fills in the empty areas at the top and sides of the image.
7 Save your changes, and close the document.
Correcting image distortion
The Lens Correction filter fixes common camera lens flaws, such as barrel and
pincushion distortion, chromatic aberration, and vignetting. Barrel distortion is a lens
defect that causes straight lines to bow out toward the edges of the image. Pincushion
distortion is the opposite effect, causing straight lines to bend inward. Chromatic

aberration appears as a color fringe along the edges of image objects. Vignetting
occurs when the edges of an image, especially the corners, are darker than the center.
Some lenses exhibit these defects depending on the focal length or the f-stop used. The
Lens Correction filter can apply settings based on the camera, lens, and focal length that
were used to make the image. The filter can also rotate an image or fix image
perspective caused by tilting a camera vertically or horizontally. The filter’s image grid
makes it easier and more accurate to make these adjustments than using the Transform
command.
1 Choose File > Browse In Bridge.
2 Navigate to the Lesson05 folder if you’re not already there, and then look at the
Columns_Start.psd and Columns_End.psd thumbnail previews.
In this case, the original image of a Greek temple is distorted, with the columns
appearing to be bowed. This photo was shot at a range that was too close with a wide-
angle lens. You’ll quickly correct the lens barrel distortion.
 Tip:
If the crop rectangle from the previous exercise is still visible and
distracting, switch to a tool such as the Hand tool.
3 Double-click the Columns_Start.psd file to open it in Photoshop.
4 Choose File > Save As. In the Save As dialog box, name the file
Columns_Working.psd, and save it in the Lesson05 folder. Click OK if the
Photoshop Format Options dialog box appears.
5 Choose Filter > Lens Correction. The Lens Correction dialog box opens.

6 Select Show Grid at the bottom of the dialog box, if it’s not already selected.
An alignment grid overlays the image. To the right are options for automatic corrections
based on lens profiles. In the Custom tab are manual controls for correcting distortion,
chromatic aberration, and perspective.

The Lens Correction dialog box includes auto-correction options. You’ll adjust one
setting in the Auto Correction tab and then customize the settings.
7 In the Correction area of the Auto Correction tab, make sure Auto Scale Image is
selected, and that Transparency is selected from the Edge menu.
8 Select the Custom tab.
9 In the Custom tab, drag the Remove Distortion slider to about +52.00 to remove
the barrel distortion in the image. Alternatively, you could select the Remove
Distortion tool (
) and drag in the image preview area until the columns are
straight. The adjustment causes the image borders to bow inward. However,
because you selected Auto Scale Image, the Lens Correction filter automatically
scales the image to adjust the borders.
 Tip:
Watch the alignment grid as you make these changes so that you can see
when the vertical columns are straightened in the image.

10 Click OK to apply your changes and close the Lens Correction dialog box.
The curving distortion caused by the wide-angle lens and low shooting angle is
eliminated.
11 (Optional) To see the effect of your change in the main image window, press
Ctrl+Z (Windows) or Command+Z (Mac) twice to undo and redo the filter.
12 Choose File > Save to save your changes, click OK if the Photoshop Format
Options dialog box appears, and then close the image.
The temple looks much more stable now!

Extending depth of field
When you’re shooting a photo, you often have to choose to focus either the background
or the foreground. If you want the entire image to be in focus, you can take two photos—
one with the background in focus and one with the foreground in focus—and then merge
the two in Photoshop.
Because you’ll need to align the images exactly, it’s helpful to use a tripod to keep the
camera steady. Even with a handheld camera, though, you can get some amazing results.
In this exercise, you’ll add depth of field to an image of a wine glass in front of a beach.
1 Choose File > Browse In Bridge.
2 Navigate to the Lesson05 folder, if you’re not there already, and then look at the
Glass_Start.psd and Glass_End.psd thumbnail previews.
The first image has two layers. Depending on which layer is visible, either the glass in
the foreground or the beach in the background is in focus. You’ll extend the depth of
field to make both clear.
3 Double-click the Glass_Start.psd file to open it.
4 Choose File > Save As. Name the file Glass_Working.psd, and save it in the
Lesson05 folder. Click OK if the Photoshop Format Options dialog box appears.
5 In the Layers panel, hide the Beach layer, so that only the Glass layer is visible.

The glass is in focus, but the background is blurred. Then, show the Beach layer again.
Now the beach is in focus, but the glass is blurred.
You’ll merge the layers, using the part of each layer that is in focus. First, you need to
align the layers.
6 Shift-click to select both of the layers.

7 Choose Edit > Auto-Align Layers.
Because these images were shot from the same angle, Auto will work just fine.
8 Select Auto, if it isn’t already selected. Make sure neither Vignette Removal nor
Geometric Distortion is selected. Then click OK to align the layers.
 Tip:
When aligning layers that are not involved in a panorama, Reposition is
often the best alignment option to use. In this exercise, Reposition is the
projection that the Auto option chose.
Now that the layers are perfectly aligned, you’re ready to blend them.
9 Make sure both layers are still selected in the Layers panel. Then choose Edit >

Auto-Blend Layers.
10 Select Stack Images and Seamless Tones And Colors, if they aren’t already
selected. Make sure Content Aware Fill Transparent Areas is not selected, and
then click OK.
11 Save your work, and close the file.
Both the wine glass and the beach behind it are in focus.
 Tip:
The technique in this exercise, called focus stacking, is useful for macro
photography, where depth of field is typically very shallow. Multiple
images with shallow depth of field are shot at different focus distances, and
then merged.
Moving objects with the Content-Aware Move tool
You’ve used the content-aware features in some pretty impressive ways in earlier
lessons, and to fill in the sky in the panorama project in this lesson. Now you’ll use the
Content-Aware Move tool to move something in an image (in this case, a duck) and have
Photoshop convincingly fill in the area where the item you moved used to be. You can
also use the Content-Aware Move tool to extend a portion of an image, such as a stand
of trees or fence posts, seamlessly.
1 Choose File > Browse In Bridge.
2 Navigate to the Lesson05 folder, if you’re not there already, and then look at the
Ducks_Start.jpg and Ducks_End.psd thumbnail previews.

You’ll use the Content-Aware Move tool to nudge the last duck into a cluster with its
companions.
3 Double-click the Ducks_Start.jpg file to open it in Photoshop.
4 Choose File > Save As, choose Photoshop for the format type, and name the new
file Ducks_Working.psd. Click Save.
5 Select the Content-Aware Move tool (
), which is grouped with the Red Eye
Removal tool (
) and may be hidden behind it.
6 In the options bar, choose Move from the Mode menu, and enter 3 in the Structure
field.
 Tip:
If you have trouble finding the Content-Aware Move tool, click the Search
icon (
) at the top right corner of the Photoshop application window, and
enter the name of the tool.
More on the Content-Aware Move tool
The Content-Aware Move tool is very impressive when you’re working
with some images, and less impressive with others. For best results, use it
when the background is consistent enough that Photoshop will be able to
recognize and replicate a pattern. In the image of ducks, the grass and dirt
are fairly consistent and repetitive. You can also try moving objects with
backgrounds such as meadows, solid-colored walls, sky, wood grains, or
water.
It’s best to extend architectural objects in photos that have been shot on a
parallel plane, rather than at an angle. If you’re working with an image that
has multiple layers, select Sample All Layers in the options bar to include
them all in the selection.

The Structure and Color options define how closely the results reflect the
existing image patterns. In the Structure settings, 1 is the loosest and 5 the
strictest. The Color settings range from 0 (no color adaptation) to 10
(matching the color as closely as possible). Experiment with the options
while the object is still selected to see which give you the best results in a
particular image. You may want to hide the selection edges (choose View >
Show > Selection Edges or View > Extras) to see how the object integrates
into its new position.
7 Draw a selection marquee around the third duck, with a margin large enough to
include the grass and dirt around it.
8 Drag the selection to the left, slightly above the second duck, so that the ducks are
clustered.
When you release the mouse, the dragged duck appears with a transformation rectangle
and handles. These transformation controls give you an opportunity to rotate and scale
the content, but you don’t need to do that in this step.
9 Click the Commit Transform button ( ) in the options bar.
10 Change the Structure setting to 5, which requires stricter adherence to the
pattern, and observe how the image changes. Then change the Structure setting to
1, which results in a much looser adaptation. You can also experiment with
different Color settings, from 0 to 10.
Now that you’ve committed to the move, Photoshop fills in the area the duck left behind.
How it creates the area depends on the Structure and Color settings in the options bar.
You can try different options while the selection remains active.
11 Choose the Structure and Color options you think look best. Then choose Select >
Deselect.
The three ducks are in a tighter formation now, and you can’t tell that the third duck used
to be in a different position.

12 Save your work, and close the file.
Extra credit
Transformations with the Content-Aware Move tool
With the Content-Aware Move tool, you need only a few quick steps to
duplicate a thistle so that it combines seamlessly with the background, and
is also different enough that it doesn’t look like an exact copy of the
original.
1 Open Thistle.psd in your Lesson05/Extra_Credit folder.
2 Select the Content-Aware Move tool (
), which is grouped with the
healing brush tools.
3 In the options bar, choose Extend from the Mode menu. Choosing Extend
duplicates the thistle; if you just want to reposition the single thistle, you
would choose Move.
4 With the Content-Aware Move tool, draw a selection marquee around
the thistle, with a margin large enough to include a little of the grass
around it.
5 Drag the selection to the left, and drop it in the empty area of grass.
6 Right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac) the dragged thistle, and
choose Flip Horizontal.
7 Drag the top left transformation handle to make the thistle smaller. If you
think the copy of the thistle should be farther from the original, position
the pointer inside the transformation rectangle (but not over the anchor
point) and drag the thistle copy slightly to the left.

8 Press Enter or Return to make the transformations permanent, leaving
the content selected so you can adjust the Structure and Color options to
improve how the new thistle blends with the background.
9 Choose Select > Deselect, and save your changes.
Adjusting perspective in an image
The Perspective Warp feature lets you adjust the way objects in your image relate to the
scene. You can correct distortions, change the angle from which an object appears to be
viewed, or shift the perspective of an object so that it merges smoothly with a new
background.
Using the Perspective Warp feature is a two-step process: defining the planes and
adjusting them. You start in Layout mode, drawing quads to define two or more planes;
it’s a good idea to align the edges of the quads so that they are parallel with the lines of
the original object. Then you switch to Warp mode, and manipulate the planes you
defined.
You’ll use Perspective Warp to merge images with different perspectives.
1 Choose File > Browse In Bridge.
2 Navigate to the Lesson05 folder, if you’re not there already, and then look at the
Bridge_Start.psd and Bridge_End.psd thumbnail previews.

In the Bridge_Start.psd file, the image of the train has been combined with the image of
a trestle bridge, but their perspectives don’t match. If you’re illustrating a story about a
flying train that is making a landing on a trestle bridge, this might be perfect. But if you
want a more realistic image, you’ll need to adjust the perspective of the train to put it
firmly on the tracks. You’ll use Perspective Warp to do just that.
3 Double-click the Bridge_Start.psd file to open it in Photoshop. If the New
Document from Library dialog box appears, click Cancel.
4 Choose File > Save As, and rename the file Bridge_Working.psd. Click OK in
the Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
5 Select the Train layer.
The tracks are on the Background layer. The train is on the Train layer. Because the
Train layer is a Smart Object, you can apply Perspective Warp and then modify the
results if you’re not satisfied.
6 Choose Edit > Perspective Warp. This feature requires a fair amount of
processing power. If Perspective Warp is grayed out when you try to select it,
make sure you have a current video card and a minimum of 512 MB VRAM.
A small animated tutorial appears, showing you how to draw a quad, which defines a
plane.
7 Watch the animation, and then close it.

Now you’ll create quads to define the planes of the train image.
8 Draw the quad for the side of the train: Click above the top of the smokestack,
drag down to the railroad tie below the front wheel, and then drag across to the
end of the caboose. The plane is currently a rectangle.
9 Drag a second quad for the front of the train, dragging across the cowcatcher at
the bottom and into the trees at the top. Drag it to the right until it attaches to the
left edge of the first quad.
10 Drag the corners of the planes to match the angles of the train. The bottom line of
the side plane should run along the bottom of the train wheels; the top edge should
border the top of the caboose. The front plane should mirror the lines of the
cowcatcher and the top of the light.
 Tip:
The first time you use Perspective Warp, a tutorial tip may pop up. You may
view it before you continue with the lesson, or you can click Later or
Close.
Now that the quads are drawn, you’re ready for the second step in the process: warping.
11 Click Warp in the options bar. Close the tutorial box that shows you how to warp
the plane.
12 Click the Automatically Straighten Near Vertical Lines button, next to Warp in the
options bar.
This makes the train appear properly vertical, making it easier to adjust the perspective
accurately.
13 Drag the handles to manipulate the planes, moving the back end of the train down
and into perspective with the tracks. Exaggerate the perspective toward the
caboose for a more dramatic result.
14 Warp other parts of the train as needed. You may need to adjust the front of the
train. Pay attention to the wheels; make sure you don’t distort them as you warp the
perspective.

While there are precise ways to adjust perspective, in many cases you may need to trust
your eyes to tell you when it looks right. Remember you can return to tweak it again
later, because you’re applying Perspective Warp as a Smart Filter.
15 When you’re satisfied with the perspective, click the Commit Perspective Warp
button ( ) in the options bar.
16 To compare the changed image with the original, hide the Perspective Warp filter
in the Layers panel. Then show the filter again.
If you want to make further adjustments, double-click the Perspective Warp filter in the
Layers panel. You can continue to adjust the existing planes, or click Layout in the
options bar to reshape them. Remember to click the Commit Perspective Warp button to
apply your changes.
17 Save your work, and close the file.
Changing the perspective of a building
In the exercise, you applied Perspective Warp to one layer to change its
relationship with another. But you can also use Perspective Warp to change
the perspective of an object in relationship to others in the same layer. For
example, you can shift the angle from which you view a building.
In this case, you apply Perspective Warp the same way: In Layout mode,
draw the planes of the object you want to affect. In Warp mode, manipulate
those planes. Of course, because you’re shifting angles within a layer, other
objects on the layer will move, too, so you need to watch for any
irregularities.

In this image, as the perspective of the building shifted, so did the
perspective of the trees surrounding it.
Camera Shake Reduction
Even with a steady hand, unintended camera motion can occur with slow
shutter speeds or long focal lengths. The Camera Shake Reduction filter
reduces the resulting camera shake, giving you a sharper image.

Before applying the Camera Shake Reduction filter
You’ll get the best results if you apply the filter to a particular part of an
image, rather than the entire image. It can be especially useful if text has
become illegible due to camera shake.
To use the Camera Shake Reduction filter, open the image, and choose
Filter > Sharpen > Shake Reduction. The filter automatically analyzes the
image, selects a region of interest, and corrects the blur. Use the Detail
loupe to examine the preview. That may be all you need to do. If so, click
OK to close the Shake Reduction dialog box and apply the filter.
After applying the Camera Shake Reduction filter
You can adjust how Photoshop interprets the Blur Trace, which is the shape and
size of the camera shake that Photoshop identified. You can change the region of
interest or adjust its size, and adjust the Smoothing and Artifact Suppression
values, and more. For full information about the Camera Shake Reduction filter,
see Photoshop Help.
Review questions
1 What is red eye, and how do you correct it in Photoshop?

2 How can you create a panorama from multiple images?
3 Describe how to fix common camera lens flaws in Photoshop. What causes these
defects?
4 What conditions provide the best results when using the Content-Aware Move
tool?
Review answers
1 Red eye occurs when a camera flash is reflected in the retinas of a subject’s eyes.
To correct red eye in Photoshop, zoom in to the subject’s eyes, select the Red Eye
tool, and then click the eye.
2 To blend multiple images into a panorama, choose File > Automate > Photomerge,
select the files you want to combine, and click OK.
3 The Lens Correction filter fixes common camera lens flaws, such as barrel and
pincushion distortion, in which straight lines bow out towards the edges of the
image (barrel) or bend inward (pincushion); chromatic aberration, where a color
fringe appears along the edges of image objects; and vignetting at the edges of an
image, especially corners, that are darker than the center. Defects can occur from
incorrectly setting the lens focal length or f-stop, or by tilting the camera vertically
or horizontally.
4 The Content-Aware Move tool works best in images that have consistent
backgrounds so that Photoshop can seamlessly replicate the patterns.

6. Masks and Channels
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Create a mask to remove a subject from a background.
• Refine a mask to include complex edges.
• Create a quick mask to make changes to a selected area.
• Edit a mask using the Properties panel.
• Manipulate an image using Puppet Warp.
• Save a selection as an alpha channel.
• View a mask using the Channels panel.
• Load a channel as a selection.
This lesson will take about an hour to complete. Please log in to your account on
peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” As you work on this lesson, you’ll
preserve the start files. If you need to restore the start files, download them from
your Account page.

Use masks to isolate and manipulate specific parts of an image. The cutout
portion of a mask can be altered, but the area surrounding the cutout is
protected from change. You can create a temporary mask to use once, or you
can save masks for repeated use.
PROJECT: MAGAZINE COVER IMAGE
Photography © Andrew Faulkner
Working with masks and channels
In Photoshop, masks isolate and protect parts of an image, just as masking tape protects
window panes or trim from paint when a house is painted. When you create a mask
based on a selection, the area you haven’t selected is masked, or protected from editing.
With masks, you can create and save time-consuming selections and then use them again.
In addition, you can use masks for other complex editing tasks—for example, to apply
color changes or filter effects to an image.
In Photoshop, you can make temporary masks, called quick masks, or you can create
permanent masks and store them as special grayscale channels called alpha channels.
Photoshop also uses channels to store an image’s color information. Unlike layers,
channels do not print. You use the Channels panel to view and work with alpha
channels.
A key concept in masking is that black hides and white reveals. As in life, rarely is

anything black and white. Shades of gray partially hide, depending on the gray levels.
Getting started
First, you’ll view the image that you’ll create using masks and channels.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to restore the default preferences. (See “Restoring
Default Preferences” on page 5.)
2 When prompted, click Yes to delete the Adobe Photoshop Settings file.
3 Choose File > Browse In Bridge to open Adobe Bridge.
4 Click the Favorites tab on the left side of the Bridge window. Select the Lessons
folder, and then double-click the Lesson06 folder in the Content panel.
5 Study the 06End.psd file. To enlarge the thumbnail so that you can see it more
clearly, move the thumbnail slider at the bottom of the Bridge window to the right.
In this lesson, you’ll create a magazine cover. The model for the cover was
photographed in front of a different background, and the background isn’t a single color,
so it may be a challenge to mask. You’ll use Select and Mask to quickly isolate the
model over the final background.
6 Double-click the 06Start.psd thumbnail to open it in Photoshop. Click OK if you
see an Embedded Profile Mismatch dialog box.
7 In the Layers panel, make sure both layers are visible.
 Note:
If Bridge isn’t installed, you’ll be prompted to install it when you choose
Browse In Bridge. For more information, see page 3.
About masks and masking
Alpha channels, channel masks, clipping masks, layer masks, vector masks
—what’s the difference? In some cases, they’re interchangeable: A channel
mask can be converted to a layer mask, a layer mask can be converted to a
vector mask, and vice versa.
What they have in common is that they all store selections, and they all let
you edit an image nondestructively, so you can return at any time to your
original. Here’s a brief description to help you keep them all straight.
• An alpha channel—also called a mask or selection—is an extra
channel added to an image; it stores selections as grayscale images. You
can add alpha channels to create and store masks.
• A layer mask is like an alpha channel, but it’s attached to a specific
layer. A layer mask controls which part of a layer is revealed or hidden.
It appears as a blank thumbnail next to the layer thumbnail in the Layers

panel until you add content to it; a black outline indicates that it’s
selected.
• A vector mask is essentially a layer mask made up of vectors, not
pixels. Resolution-independent, vector masks have crisp edges and are
created with the pen or shape tools. They don’t support transparency, so
their edges can’t be feathered. Their thumbnails appear the same as layer
mask thumbnails.
• A clipping mask applies to a layer. It confines the influence of an effect
to specific layers, rather than to everything below the layer in the layer
stack. Using a clipping mask clips layers to a base layer; only that base
layer is affected. Thumbnails of a clipped layer are indented, with a
right-angle arrow pointing to the layer below. The name of the clipped
base layer is underlined.
• A channel mask restricts editing to a specific channel (for example, a
Cyan channel in a CMYK image). Channel masks are useful for making
intricate, fringed, or wispy-edged selections. You can create a channel
mask based on a dominant color in an image or a pronounced contrast in
an isolated channel, for example, between the subject and the
background.
Using Select and Mask
Photoshop provides a set of tools focused on creating and refining masks, collected in a
task space called Select and Mask. Inside Select and Mask, you’ll use the Quick
Selection tool to get a fast head start on the mask that will separate the model from the
background. Then you’ll refine the mask using other Select and Mask tools.
1 Choose File > Save As, rename the file 06Working.psd, and click Save. Click
OK if the Photoshop Format Options dialog box appears.
Saving a working version of the file lets you return to the original if you need it.
 Tip:
The first time you use Select and Mask, a tutorial tip may pop up. You may
view it before you continue with the lesson, or you can click Later or
Close.
2 Choose Select > Select and Mask.
Select and Mask opens with the image. A semitransparent “onion skin” overlay indicates
masked areas, which are represented by a checkerboard pattern. For now, the
checkerboard pattern covers the entire image, because you haven’t yet identified the
areas to unmask.

3 Make sure the Quick Selection tool (
) is selected. In the options bar, set up a
brush with a size of 15 px and hardness of 100%.
 Tip:
For more help making selections, refer to Lesson 3, “Working with
Selections.”
4 Position the Quick Selection tool within the outline of the model, and then drag
while keeping the tool within the hair, face, and shirt areas. Where you drag
teaches Select and Mask which areas should be revealed and not part of the mask.
It’s OK if you release the mouse button and drag more than once.

Getting better and faster results with Select and Mask
When using Select and Mask, it’s important to use different tools for image
areas that should be fully revealed, areas that should be fully masked, and
for partially masked edges (such as fuzzy dog hair). Try these
recommendations:
• The Quick Selection tool is often the fastest way to create a mask. As
you drag it, it uses edge detection technology to find mask edges
automatically. Don’t drag it on or over a mask edge; keep it fully inside
(in Add mode) or outside (in Subtract mode) areas that should be
revealed.
• To paint or draw solid mask edges manually (without using any
automatic edge detection), use the Brush, Lasso, or Polygonal Lasso tool.
These also have an Add mode for marking revealed areas and a Subtract
mode for marking masked areas.
• Instead of having to switch between Add and Subtract modes with the
toolbar, you can leave a tool in Add mode, and when you want to
temporarily use the tool in Subtract mode, hold down the Alt (Windows)
or Option (Mac) key.
• To improve the mask along edges containing complex transitions such as
hair, drag the Refine Edge Brush along those edges. Do not drag the
Refine Edge brush over areas that should be fully revealed or fully
masked.
• You don’t have to do all of your selecting inside Select and Mask. For
example, if you’ve already created a selection with another tool such as
Color Range, leave that selection active, and then click Select > Select
and Mask in the options bar to clean up the mask.

 Tip:
In Select and Mask, the Polygonal Lasso tool is grouped with the Lasso
tool.
As you drag the Quick Selection tool over the model, the onion skin overlay disappears
from the areas that you are marking to be revealed. Don’t worry about total perfection at
this stage.
Do not drag the Quick Selection tool over or past the model’s edge to the background. If
you do, and this adds unwanted areas to the mask, either choose Edit > Undo, or reverse
the edit by painting over it with the Quick Selection tool in Subtract mode. To enable
Subtract Mode for the Quick Selection tool, click the Subtract From Selection icon ( )
in the options bar.
 Tip:
You can adjust the transparency of the onion skin by dragging the Opacity
slider under the View Mode options.
Tip:
When a selection tool is active, you can click the Select and Mask button in
the options bar instead of having to find the command in the menus.
5 Click the View menu in the View Mode section, and choose Overlay. The masked
area is now shown as a semitransparent red color instead of the onion skin
checkerboard.

The different View Modes are provided so that you can see the mask more easily over
different backgrounds. In this case, the red overlay more clearly shows any missed areas
and edges where loose hair isn’t properly masked.
 Tip:
Dragging the Quick Selection tool in Subtract mode tells Photoshop which
areas should be masked and not visible.
6 Look for areas of the model that are within the red mask overlay but that should be
revealed, and drag the Quick Selection tool to include them in revealed areas.
Increase the magnification if it helps you see missed areas more easily.

7 Click the View menu in the View Mode section again, and choose On Layers. This
shows you how the current Select and Mask settings look over any layers that are
behind this layer. In this case, you’re previewing how the current settings will
mask the Model layer over the Magazine Background layer.

Inspect the edges around the model at a high magnification, such as 200%. Some of the
original light background may still show between the model’s edge and the magazine
background, but overall the Quick Selection tool should have created clean edges for the
shirt and face. Don’t worry about edge gaps or imperfect hair edges, because you’ll take
care of those next.
Refining a mask
The mask is pretty good so far, but the Quick Selection tool couldn’t quite capture all of
the model’s hair, such as the strands coming off of the bun on the back of the model’s
head. In Select and Mask, the Refine Edge Brush tool is designed to mask edges with
challenging details.
1 At a magnification of 200% or higher, inspect the hair edges at the back of the
model’s head.

2 Select the Refine Edge Brush tool (
). In the options bar, set up a brush with a
size of 20 px and hardness of 100%.
3 Choose Overlay from the View Mode menu, so that the missing hair is visible.
4 Drag the Refine Edge Brush tool between the hair bun and the ends of the hair,
where the selection needs to be improved. As you drag the Refine Edge Brush tool
over the complex hair edge, you should see that the hair strands falling from the
bun are now included in the visible areas.

5 Scroll down to the loop of hair that falls over the back of the shirt.
The original image background shows inside the loop. That background needs to be
replaced with the magazine background, so you’ll use the Refine Edge Brush to add that
loop interior to the mask.
Tool tips from the Photoshop evangelist
Julieanne Kost is an official Adobe Photoshop evangelist.
Zoom tool shortcuts
Often when editing an image, you’ll need to zoom in to work on a detail
and then zoom out again to see the changes in context. Here are several
keyboard shortcuts that make zooming faster and easier.
• With any tool selected, press Ctrl (Windows) or Command (Mac) with
the plus sign (+) to zoom in, or with the minus sign (−) to zoom out.
• Double-click the Zoom tool in the Tools panel to return the image to
100% view.
• When Scrubby Zoom is selected in the options bar, just drag the Zoom
tool to the left to zoom out or to the right to zoom in.
• Press Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) to change the Zoom In tool to the
Zoom Out tool, and click the area of the image you want to reduce. Each

Alt/Option-click reduces the image by the next preset increment.
6 In the options bar, set up a Refine Edge brush with a size of 15 px, with hardness
at 100%.
7 Drag the Refine Edge Brush tool over any obscured hairs to reveal them. You
should see two things happen: Gaps in the mask within the loop of hair should
become masked, while fine hairs are added to the visible areas.
8 Click the View option, and choose Black & White. This is another good way to
check your mask. Inspect the mask at different magnifications, and when you’re
done, choose View > Fit on Screen.

If you see hairs or other details that are masked but should be revealed, drag the Refine
Edge brush over them. The finer the details you want to mask, the smaller you should set
the Refine Edge brush size. It’s OK if the brush size is slightly larger than the details you
want to mask, and you don’t have to drag the Refine Edge Brush tool precisely.
If you see Refine Edge Brush tool mistakes that need to be erased, such as inner areas
incorrectly added to the mask, drag the Refine Edge Brush tool over the mistakes while
holding down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key.
Adjusting Global Refinements
At this point the mask is in good shape, but needs to be tightened up a little.
You can tune the overall appearance of the mask edge by adjusting the Global
Refinements settings.
1 Click the View menu in the View Mode section, and choose On Layers. This lets
you preview adjustments over the Magazine Background layer, which is behind
the Model layer.
2 In the Global Refinements section, move the sliders to create a smooth,
unfeathered edge along the face. The optimal settings depend on the selection you
created, but they’ll probably be similar to ours. We moved the Smooth slider to 5
to create a smoother outline, Contrast to 20% to make the transitions along the

selection border more abrupt, and Shift Edge to −15% to move the selection
border inward and help remove unwanted background colors from selection
edges. (Adjusting Shift Edge to a positive number would move the border
outward.)
3 Take one more look at this preview of the current mask over the Magazine
Background layer, and make any remaining corrections as needed.
Completing the mask
When you’re satisfied with the mask preview, you can create its final output as a
selection, a layer with transparency, a layer mask, or a new document. For this project,
we want to use this as a layer mask on the Model layer, which was selected when you
entered Select and Mask.

1 If the Output Settings are hidden, click the disclosure icon ( ) to reveal them.
2 Zoom in to 200% or more so that you can more easily see the light fringing around
the face edge that’s due to the Model layer’s original background color seeping in
behind the mask.
3 Select Decontaminate Colors to suppress those color fringes.
4 Choose New Layer With Layer Mask from the Output To menu. Then click OK.

Clicking OK exits Select and Mask. In the Layers panel, the Model Copy layer now has
a layer mask (pixel mask) that was generated by Select and Mask.
The layer was copied because using the Decontaminate Colors option requires that new
pixels be generated. The original Model layer is preserved, and automatically hidden.
If the mask isn’t perfect, you can continue to edit it at any time. When a layer mask
thumbnail is selected in the Layers panel, you can click the Select and Mask button in the
Properties panel, in the options bar (if a selection tool is active), or choose Select >
Select and Mask.
5 Save your work.
 Note:
If you had not selected Decontaminate Colors, it would have been possible
to choose a Layer Mask output option that would have added a layer mask
to the Model layer without copying it.
Creating a quick mask
You’ll create a quick mask to change the color of the glasses frames. First, you’ll clean
up the Layers panel.

1 Hide the Magazine Background layer so you can concentrate on the model.
2 Click the Edit In Quick Mask Mode button in the Tools panel. (By default, you
have been working in Standard mode.)
In Quick Mask mode, a red overlay appears as you make a selection, masking the area
outside the selection the way a rubylith, or red acetate, was used to mask images in
traditional print shops. (This idea is similar to the Overlay view mode you saw in
Select and Mask.) You can apply changes only to the unprotected area that is visible and
selected. Notice that the highlight color for the selected layer in the Layers panel is red,
indicating you’re in Quick Mask mode.
3 In the Tools panel, select the Brush tool (
).
4 In the options bar, make sure that the mode is Normal. Open the Brush pop-up
panel, and select a small brush with a diameter of 13 px and a Hardness of 100%.
Click outside the panel to close it.
5 Paint the earpiece of the glasses frames. The area you paint will appear red,
creating a mask.

6 Continue painting with the Brush tool to mask the earpiece of the frames and the
frame around the lenses. Reduce the brush size to paint around the lenses. You can
stop where the earpiece goes under the hair.
In Quick Mask mode, Photoshop operates in grayscale mask mode, where shades of gray
correspond to degrees of mask transparency. When using a painting or editing tool in
Quick Mask mode, keep these principles in mind:
• Painting with black adds to the mask (the red overlay), subtracting from the
selected area.
• Painting with white erases the mask, adding to the selected area.
• Painting with gray adds a semitransparent areas to the mask, where darker
shades are more transparent (more masked).
7 Click the Edit In Standard Mode button to exit Quick Mask Mode.
The unmasked area is selected. Exiting Quick Mask mode converts the Quick Mask into
a selection.
8 Choose Select > Inverse to select the area you originally masked.
9 Choose Image > Adjustments > Hue/Saturation.
10 In the Hue/Saturation dialog box, change the Hue to +70. The new green color
fills the glasses frame. Click OK.
11 Choose Select > Deselect.
12 Save your work so far.

 Tip:
If you want to keep the selection for future use, save it as an alpha channel
(Select > Save Selection); otherwise it will be lost as soon as the area is
deselected.
Manipulating an image with Puppet Warp
The Puppet Warp feature gives you flexibility in manipulating an image. You can
reposition areas, such as hair or an arm, just as you might pull the strings on a puppet.
Place pins wherever you want to control movement. You’ll use Puppet Warp to tilt the
model’s head back, so she appears to be looking up.
1 Zoom out so you can see the entire model.
2 With the Model Copy layer selected in the Layers panel, choose Edit > Puppet
Warp.
A mesh appears over the visible areas in the layer—in this case, the mesh appears over
the model. You’ll use the mesh to place pins where you want to control movement (or to
ensure there is no movement).
3 Click to add pins around the body and along the base of the head. Each time you
click, Puppet Warp adds a pin. Around ten to twelve pins should work.
The pins you’ve added around the shirt will keep it in place as you tilt the head.
4 Select the pin at the nape of the neck. A white dot appears in the center of the pin
to indicate that it’s selected.

 Note:
Be careful not to Alt-click or Option-click the dot itself, or you’ll delete
the pin.
5 Press Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac). A larger circle appears around the pin and
a curved double arrow appears next to it. Continue pressing Alt or Option as you
drag the pointer to rotate the head backwards. You can see the angle of rotation in
the options bar; you can enter 180 there to rotate the head back.

6 When you’re satisfied with the rotation, click the Commit Puppet Warp button ( )
in the options bar, or press Enter or Return.
7 Save your work so far.
Using an alpha channel to create a shadow
Just as different information in an image is stored on different layers, channels also let
you access specific kinds of information. Alpha channels store selections as grayscale
images. Color information channels store information about each color in an image; for
example, an RGB image automatically has red, green, blue, and composite channels.
To avoid confusing channels and layers, think of channels as containing an image’s color
and selection information; think of layers as containing painting, shapes, text, and other
content.
You’ll use an alpha channel to set up a selection, which you’ll then fill with black on a
layer to create the actual shadow.
You’ve already created a mask of the model. To create a shadow, you want to essentially
duplicate that mask and then shift it. You’ll use an alpha channel to make that possible.
1 In the Layers panel, Ctrl-click (Windows) or Command-click (Mac) the layer icon
in the Model Copy layer. The masked area is selected.
2 Choose Select > Save Selection. In the Save Selection dialog box, make sure
New is chosen in the Channel menu. Then name the channel Model Outline, and
click OK.

Nothing changes in the Layers panel or in the image window. However, a new channel
named Model Outline has been added to the Channels panel.
3 Click the Create A New Layer icon ( ) at the bottom of the Layers panel. Drag the
new layer below the Model Copy layer, so that the shadow will be below the
image of the model. Double-click the new layer’s name, and rename it Shadow.
4 With the Shadow layer selected, choose Select > Select and Mask.
About alpha channels
As you work in Photoshop, you will eventually encounter alpha channels.
It’s a good idea to know a few things about them.
• An image can contain up to 56 channels, including all color and alpha
channels.
• All channels are 8-bit grayscale images, capable of displaying 256
levels of gray.
• You can specify a name, color, mask option, and opacity for each
channel. (The opacity affects the preview of the channel, not the image.)
• All new channels have the same dimensions and number of pixels as the
original image.
• You can edit the mask in an alpha channel using the painting tools,
editing tools, and filters.
• You can convert alpha channels to spot-color channels.
5 Click the View menu in the View Mode section, and choose On Black.
6 In Select and Mask, move the Shift Edge slider to +36%.
7 In Output Settings, make sure Selection is selected in the Output To menu, and then

click OK.
8 Choose Edit > Fill. In the Fill dialog box, choose Black from the Contents menu,
and then click OK.
The Shadow layer displays a filled-in black outline of the model. Shadows aren’t
usually as dark as the person that casts them. You’ll reduce the layer opacity.
9 In the Layers panel, change the layer opacity to 30%.
The shadow is in exactly the same position as the model, where it can’t be seen. You’ll
shift it.
10 Choose Select > Deselect to remove the selection.
11 Choose Edit > Transform > Rotate. Rotate the shadow by hand, or enter −15° in
the Rotate field in the options bar. Then drag the shadow to the left, or enter 545 in

the X field in the options bar. Click the Commit Transform button ( ) in the
options bar, or press Enter or Return, to accept the transformation.
12 Click the eye icon for the Magazine Background layer to make it visible, and
delete the Model layer (the one without the mask).
13 Choose File > Save to save your work so far.
Your magazine cover is ready to go!
Review questions
1 What is the benefit of using a quick mask?
2 When you have a selection created by a quick mask, what happens when you
deselect?

3 When you save a selection as an alpha channel, where is the alpha channel stored?
4 How can you edit a mask in a channel once you’ve saved it?
5 How do channels differ from layers?
Review answers
1 Quick masks are helpful for creating quick, one-time selections. In addition, using
a quick mask is an easy way to edit a selection using the painting tools.
2 As with any other selection, a quick mask selection disappears when you deselect
it.
3 Alpha channels are stored in the Channels panel, along with the visible color
channels.
4 You can paint in an alpha channel using black, white, and shades of gray.
5 Alpha channels are storage areas for saved selections. All layers set to be visible
will be present in printed or exported output. But only the color channels are
visible in printed or exported output; alpha channels are not. Layers contain
information about image content, while alpha channels contain information about
selections and masks.

7. Typographic Design
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Use guides to position text in a composition.
• Make a clipping mask from type.
• Merge type with other layers.
• Preview fonts.
• Format text.
• Distribute text along a path.
• Control type and positioning using advanced features.
This lesson will take less than an hour to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” If you need to restore the start
files, download them from your Account page.

Photoshop provides powerful, flexible text tools so you can add type to your
images with great control and creativity.
PROJECT: MAGAZINE COVER LAYOUT
Photography © Andrew Faulkner
About type
Type in Photoshop consists of mathematically defined shapes that describe the letters,
numbers, and symbols of a typeface. Many typefaces are available in more than one
format, the most common formats being Type 1 or PostScript fonts, TrueType, and
OpenType (see “OpenType in Photoshop” later in this lesson).
When you add type to an image in Photoshop, the characters are composed of pixels and
have the same resolution as the image file—zooming in on characters shows jagged

edges. However, Photoshop preserves the vector-based type outlines and uses them
when you scale or resize type, save a PDF or EPS file, or print the image to a PostScript
printer. As a result, you can produce type with crisp, resolution-independent edges,
apply effects and styles to type, and transform its shape and size.
Getting started
In this lesson, you’ll work on the layout for the cover of a technology magazine. You’ll
start with the artwork you created in Lesson 6: The cover has a model, her shadow, and
the orange background. You’ll add and stylize type for the cover, including warping the
text.
 Note:
If Bridge is not installed, you’ll be prompted to download and install it.
See page 3 for more information.
 Note:
Though this lesson starts where Lesson 6 left off, use the 07Start.psd file.
We’ve included a path and a sticky note in the start file that won’t be in the
06Working.psd file you saved.
You’ll start the lesson by viewing an image of the final composition.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to restore the default preferences. (See “Restoring
Default Preferences” on page 5.)
2 When prompted, click Yes to delete the Adobe Photoshop Settings file.
3 Choose File > Browse In Bridge to open Adobe Bridge.
4 In the Favorites panel on the left side of Bridge, click the Lessons folder, and then
double-click the Lesson07 folder in the Content panel.
5 Select the 07End.psd file. Increase the thumbnail size to see the image clearly by
dragging the thumbnail slider to the right.
You’ll apply the type treatment in Photoshop to finish the magazine cover. All of the type
controls you need are available in Photoshop, so you don’t have to switch to another
application to complete the project.
6 Double-click the 07Start.psd file to open it in Photoshop.
7 Choose File > Save As, rename the file 07Working.psd, and click Save.
8 Click OK in the Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
9 Choose Graphic and Web from the Workspace Switcher in the options bar.

The Graphic and Web workspace displays the Character and Paragraph panels that
you’ll use in this lesson, along with the Glyphs and Layers panels.
Creating a clipping mask from type
A clipping mask is an object or a group of objects whose shape masks other artwork so
that only areas that lie within the clipping mask are visible. In effect, you are clipping
the artwork to conform to the shape of the object (or mask). In Photoshop, you can create
a clipping mask from shapes or letters. In this exercise, you’ll use letters as a clipping
mask to allow an image in another layer to show through the letters.
Adding guides to position type
The 07Working.psd file includes a background layer, which will be the foundation for
your typography. You’ll start by zooming in on the work area and using ruler guides to
help position the type.
1 Choose View > Fit On Screen to see the whole cover clearly.
2 Choose View > Rulers to display rulers along the left and top borders of the
image window.
3 Drag a vertical guide from the left ruler to the center of the cover (4.25").

 Tip:
If you find it difficult to position the vertical ruler guide exactly at 4.25",
holding down Shift will snap the guide to the 4.25" ruler tick mark.
Adding point type
Now you’re ready to add type to the composition. You can create horizontal or vertical
type anywhere in an image. You can enter point type (a single letter, word, or line) or
paragraph type. You will do both in this lesson. First, you’ll create point type.
1 In the Layers panel, select the Background layer.
2 Select the Horizontal Type tool ( ), and, in the options bar, do the following:
• Choose a serif typeface, such as Minion Pro Regular, from the Font Family pop-
up menu.
• Type 144 pt for the Size, and press Enter or Return.
• Click the Center Text button.
3 In the Character panel, change the Tracking value to 100.

The Tracking value specifies the overall space between letters, which affects the density
in a line of text.
Note:
After you type, you must commit your editing in the layer by clicking the
Commit Any Current Edits button or switching to another tool or layer. You
cannot commit to current edits by pressing Enter or Return; doing so merely
creates a new line of type.
4 Click on the center guide you added to set an insertion point, and type DIGITAL
in all capital letters. Then click the Commit Any Current Edits button ( ) in the
options bar.
The word “DIGITAL” is added to the cover, and it appears in the Layers panel as a new
type layer named DIGITAL. You can edit and manage the type layer as you would any
other layer. You can add or change the text, change the orientation of the type, apply anti-
aliasing, apply layer styles and transformations, and create masks. You can move,
restack, and copy a type layer, or edit its layer options, just as you would for any other
layer.
The text is big enough, but not modern enough, for this magazine’s style. You’ll apply a
different font.
5 Select the Horizontal Type tool ( ), and select the “DIGITAL” text.

6 Open the Font Family pop-up menu in the options bar. Move the cursor over the
fonts, either with the mouse or using arrow keys.
When the cursor is over a font name, Photoshop applies that font to the selected text so
you can preview the font in context.
7 Select Myriad Pro Semibold, and then click the Commit Any Current Edits button
( ) in the options bar.
That’s much more appropriate.
8 Select the Move tool, and drag the “DIGITAL” text to move it to the top of the
cover, if it’s not there already.
9 Choose File > Save to save your work so far.
Making a clipping mask and applying a shadow
You added the letters in black, the default text color. However, you want the letters to
appear to be filled with an image of a circuit board, so you’ll use the letters to make a
clipping mask that will allow another image layer to show through.
1 Choose File > Open, and open the circuit_board.tif file, which is in the Lesson07
folder.
2 Choose Window > Arrange > 2-Up Vertical. The circuit_board.tif and
07Working.psd files appear onscreen together. Click the circuit_board.tif file to
ensure that it’s the active window.
3 With the Move tool selected, hold down the Shift key as you drag the Background
layer from the Layers panel in the circuit_board.tif file onto the center of the
07Working.psd file.
Pressing Shift as you drag centers the circuit_board.tif image in the composition.

A new layer—Layer 1—appears in the Layers panel for the 07Working.psd file. This
new layer contains the image of the circuit board, which will show through the type. But
before you make the clipping mask, you’ll resize the circuit board image, as it’s
currently too large for the composition.
4 Close the circuit_board.tif file without saving any changes to it.
5 In the 07Working.psd file, select Layer 1, and then choose Edit > Transform >
Scale.
6 Grab a corner handle on the bounding box for the circuit board. Press Alt+Shift
(Windows) or Option+Shift (Mac) as you resize it to approximately the same
width as the area of text.
Pressing Shift retains the image’s proportions; Alt or Option keeps it centered.
7 Reposition the circuit board so that the image covers the text, and press Enter or
Return to confirm the transformation.
8 Double-click the Layer 1 name, and change it to Circuit Board. Then press Enter
or Return, or click away from the name in the Layers panel, to apply the change.

 Tip:
You can also make a clipping mask by holding down the Alt (Windows) or
Option (Mac) key and clicking between the Circuit Board and DIGITAL
type layers.
9 Select the Circuit Board layer, if it isn’t already selected, and choose Create
Clipping Mask from the Layers panel menu ( ).
The circuit board now shows through the DIGITAL letters. A small arrow in the Circuit
Board layer and the underlined type layer name indicate the clipping mask is applied.
Next, you’ll add an inner shadow to give the letters depth.
10 Select the DIGITAL layer to make it active. Then, click the Add A Layer Style
button ( ) at the bottom of the Layers panel, and choose Inner Shadow from the
pop-up menu.

11 In the Layer Style dialog box, change the Blend Mode to Multiply, Opacity to
48%, Distance to 18, Choke to 0, and Size to 16. Then click OK.
12 Choose File > Save to save your work so far.
Paragraph and Character Styles

If you frequently work with type in Photoshop, or if you need to
consistently format a significant amount of type in an image, paragraph and
character styles can help you work more efficiently. A paragraph style is a
collection of type attributes that you can apply to an entire paragraph with a
single click. A character style is a collection of attributes that you can
apply to individual characters. You can work with these styles by opening
their panels: Choose Window > Paragraph Styles and Window > Character
Styles.
The concept of type styles in Photoshop is similar to that in page layout
applications such as Adobe InDesign and word-processing applications
such as Microsoft Word. However, styles behave a little differently in
Photoshop. For the best results working with styles in Photoshop, keep the
following in mind:
• By default, all text you create in Photoshop has the Basic Paragraph style
applied. The Basic Paragraph style is defined by your text defaults, but
you can change its attributes.
• Deselect all layers before you create a new style.
• If the selected text has been changed from the current paragraph style
(usually the Basic Paragraph style), those changes (considered
overrides) persist even when you apply a new style. To ensure that all
the attributes of a paragraph style are applied to text, apply the style, and
then click the Clear Overrides button in the Paragraph Styles panel.
• You can use the same paragraph and character styles across multiple
files. To save the current styles as defaults for all new documents,
choose Type > Save Default Type Styles. To use your default styles in an
existing document, choose Type > Load Default Type Styles.
Creating type on a path
In Photoshop, you can create type that follows along a path that you create with a pen or
shape tool. The direction the type flows depends on the order in which anchor points
were added to the path. When you use the Horizontal Type tool to add text to a path, the
letters are perpendicular to the baseline of the path. If you change the location or shape
of the path, the type moves with it.
You’ll create type on a path to make it look as if questions are coming from the model’s
mouth. We’ve already created the path for you.
1 In the Layers panel, select the Model layer.
2 Choose Window > Paths to show the Paths panel.
3 In the Paths panel, select the path named Speech Path.
The path appears to be coming out of the model’s mouth.

4 Select the Horizontal Type tool.
5 In the options bar, click the Right Align Text button.
Tool tips from the Photoshop evangelist
Julieanne Kost is an official Adobe Photoshop evangelist.
Type tool tricks
• Shift-click in the image window with the Horizontal Type tool to create
a new type layer—in case you’re close to another block of type and
Photoshop tries to autoselect the existing type layer.
• Double-click the thumbnail icon of any type layer in the Layers panel to
select all of the type on that layer.
• With any text selected, right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac) on
the text to access the context menu. Choose Check Spelling to run a spell
check.
6 In the Character panel, select the following settings:
• Font Family: Myriad Pro Regular
• Font Style: Regular
• Font Siz (
): 14 pt
• Tracking (
): −10
• Color: White
• All Caps (
) 7
7 Move the Type tool over the path. When a small slanted line appears across the I-
bar, click the end of the path closest to the model’s mouth, and type What’s new
with games?

8 Select the word “GAMES?” and change its font style to Bold. Click the Commit
Any Current Edits button ( ) in the options bar.
9 Click the Layers tab to bring it forward. In the Layers panel, select the What’s
new with games? layer, and then choose Duplicate Layer from the Layers panel
menu. Name the new layer What’s new with music?, and click OK.
Photoshop creates a duplicate text layer, hiding the text you typed earlier.
10 With the Type tool, select “GAMES,” and replace it with music. Click the
Commit Any Current Edits button in the options bar.
11 Choose Edit > Free Transform Path. Rotate the left side of the path
approximately 15 degrees, and then shift the path up above the first path, and a
little to the right, as in the image below. Click the Commit Transform button in the
options bar.

12 Repeat steps 9–11, replacing the word “GAMES” with phones. Rotate the left
side of the path approximately −15 degrees, and move it below the original path.
13 Choose File > Save to save your work so far.
Warping point type
The text on a curvy path is more interesting than straight lines would be, but you’ll warp
the text to make it more playful. Warping lets you distort type to conform to a variety of
shapes, such as an arc or a wave. The warp style you select is an attribute of the type
layer—you can change a layer’s warp style at any time to change the overall shape of
the warp. Warping options give you precise control over the orientation and perspective
of the warp effect.
1 If necessary, zoom or scroll to move the visible area of the image window so that
the sentences to the left of the model are in the center of the screen.
2 Right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac) the What’s new with games? layer
in the Layers panel, and choose Warp Text from the context menu.

3 In the Warp Text dialog box, choose Wave from the Style menu, and select the
Horizontal option. Specify the following values: Bend, +33%; Horizontal
Distortion, −23%; and Vertical Distortion, +5%. Then click OK.
The Bend slider specifies how much warp is applied. Horizontal Distortion and Vertical
Distortion determine the perspective of the warp.
The words “What’s new with games?” appear to float like a wave on the cover.
4 Repeat steps 2 and 3 to warp the other two text layers you typed on a path.

5 Save your work.
Designing paragraphs of type
All of the text you’ve written on this cover so far has been a few discrete words or lines
—point type. However, many designs call for full paragraphs of text. You can design
complete paragraphs of type in Photoshop; you can even apply paragraph styles. You
don’t have to switch to a dedicated page layout program for sophisticated paragraph
type controls.
Using guides for positioning
You will add paragraphs to the cover in Photoshop. First, you’ll add some guides to the
work area to help you position the paragraph.
1 Drag a guide from the left vertical ruler, placing it approximately 1/4" from the
right side of the cover.
2 Drag a guide down from the top horizontal ruler, placing it approximately 2" from
the top of the cover.

Adding paragraph type from a sticky note
You’re ready to add the text. In a real design environment, the text might be provided to
you in a word-processing document or the body of an email message, which you could
copy and paste into Photoshop. Or you might have to type it in. Another easy way to add
a bit of text is for the copywriter to attach it to the image file in a sticky note, as we’ve
done for you here.
1 Select the Move tool, and then double-click the yellow sticky note in the lower
right corner of the image window to open it in the Notes panel. Expand the Notes
panel, if necessary, to see all the text.
2 In the Notes panel, select all the text. Press Ctrl+C (Windows) or Command+C
(Mac) to copy the text to the clipboard. Close the Notes panel.
3 Select the Model layer. Then, select the Horizontal Type tool ( ).
 Tip:
Press Shift as you start to drag a text box to ensure that Photoshop creates a
new text layer, instead of selecting an existing text layer.

4 Press Shift as you click where the guidelines intersect, about 1/4" from the right
edge and 2" from the top of the cover. Continue to hold the Shift key as you start to
drag a text box down and to the left. Then release the Shift key, and continue
dragging until the box is about 4 inches wide by 8 inches high, the top and right
edges aligned with the guides you just added.
5 Press Ctrl+V (Windows) or Command+V (Mac) to paste the text. The new text
layer is at the top of the Layers panel, so the text appears in front of the model.
The pasted text is 14 pts, and it’s right-aligned, because those were the latest text
settings you’d used.
6 Select the first three lines (“The Trend Issue”), and then apply the following
settings in the Character panel:
• Font Family: Myriad Pro (or another sans serif font)
• Font Style: Regular
• Font Size (
): 70 pt
• Leading (
): 55 pt
• Tracking (
): 50
• Color: White
 Note:
If the text isn’t visible, make sure the new type layer is above the Model
layer in the Layers panel.
 Note:
Leading determines the vertical space between lines.
7 Select just the word “Trend,” and change the Font Style to Bold.
You’ve formatted the title. Now you’ll format the rest of the text.
8 Select the rest of the text you pasted. In the Character panel, select the following:
• Font Family: Myriad Pro
• Font Style: Regular

• Font Size: 22 pt
• Leading: 28 pt
• Tracking: 0
• Deselect All Caps (
)
The text looks good, but it’s all the same. You’ll make the headlines stand out more.
9 Select the “What’s Hot!” text, and then change the following in the Character
panel:
• Font Style: Bold
• Font Size: 28 pt
10 Repeat step 9 for the “What’s Not!” subhead.
11 Select the word “TREND.” Then, in the Character panel, change the text color to
green.
12 Finally, click the Commit Any Current Edits button in the options bar.
13 Save your changes.
 Tip:
Use the Glyphs panel (Window > Glyphs) to access the full range of
alternate characters in OpenType fonts. When editing text, double-click a
character in the Glyphs panel to add it to the text. If you see a black dot in
the bottom right corner of a character’s box in the Glyphs panel, click it and
hold down the mouse button to see alternate versions of that character, and
then choose one to add it to the text.

OpenType in Photoshop
OpenType is a cross-platform font file format developed jointly by Adobe
and Microsoft. The format uses a single font file for both Mac and
Windows, so you can move files from one platform to another without font
substitution or reflowed text. OpenType offers widely expanded character
sets and layout features, such as swashes and discretionary ligatures, that
aren’t available in traditional PostScript and TrueType fonts. This, in turn,
provides richer linguistic support and advanced typography control. Here
are some highlights of OpenType.
The OpenType menu The Character panel menu includes an OpenType
submenu that displays all available features for a selected OpenType font,
including ligatures, alternates, and fractions. Dimmed features are
unavailable for that typeface; check marks appear next to features that have
been applied.
Discretionary ligatures To add a discretionary ligature to two OpenType
letters, such as to “th” in the Bickham Script Standard typeface, select them
in the file, and choose OpenType > Discretionary Ligatures from the
Character panel menu.
Swashes Adding swashes or alternate characters works the same way as
discretionary ligatures: Select the letter, such as a capital “T” in Bickham
Script, and choose OpenType > Swash to change the ordinary capital into a
dramatically ornate (swash) “T.”
True fractions To create true fractions, type the fraction’s characters—for
example, 1/2. Then, select the characters, and from the Character panel
menu, choose OpenType > Fractions. Photoshop applies the true fraction
(½).
The Glyphs panel The Glyphs panel lists all characters available for a
font, including specialized characters and alternate versions such as
swashes. Above the font name and style menus is a row of recently used
glyphs. It’s blank if you haven’t used any glyphs yet. A menu under the font
name lets you display a writing system such as Arabic, or a category of
characters such as punctuation or currency symbols. A black dot in the
bottom right corner of a character’s box indicates that alternates are
available for that character; click and hold the mouse on the character to
view its alternate glyphs or to choose one to enter into a text layer.
Note that some OpenType fonts have more options than others.

 Tip:
When you see a thick underline beneath a selected text character, moving
the pointer over that character reveals the alternate glyphs available for that
character in the font applied to it. You can select from those glyphs just as
you can in the Glyphs panel, or you can click a triangle to open the Glyphs
panel.
Adding a rounded rectangle
You’re almost done with the text for the magazine cover. All that remains is to add the
volume number in the upper right corner. First, you’ll create a rectangle with rounded
corners to serve as a background for the volume number.
1 Select the Rounded Rectangle tool ( ) in the Tools panel.
2 Draw a rectangle in the space above the letter “L” in the upper right corner of the
cover, placing its right edge along the guide.
3 In the Properties panel, type 67 px for the width, and then make sure the stroke
width is 3 px.
4 Click the fill color swatch in the Properties panel, and select the Pastel Yellow
Orange swatch in the third row.
By default, all the corners in the rectangle have the same radius, but you can adjust the
radius for each corner separately. You can even return to edit the corners later if you
want to. You’ll change the rectangle so that only the lower left corner is rounded,
changing the others to right angles.
5 In the Properties panel, click to deselect the Link Together Corner Radius Values
icon ( ). Then change the bottom left corner to 16 px, and set all the others to 0
px.

6 With the Move tool, drag the rectangle to the top of the image so it hangs down
like a ribbon and its right edge is next to the ruler guide.
7 Select Show Transform Controls in the options bar. Drag the bottom of the
rectangle down so that it’s close to the letter “L.” You want the rectangle to be
long enough to contain the text. Then click the Commit Transform button ( ).
Adding vertical text
You’re ready to add the volume number on top of the ribbon.
1 Choose Select > Deselect Layers. Then select the Vertical Type tool (
), which
is hidden under the Horizontal Type tool.
2 Press the Shift key, and click inside the rectangle you just created.
Pressing the Shift key as you click ensures that you create a new text box instead of
selecting the title.
3 Type VOL 9.
The letters are too large to view. You’ll need to change their size to see them.
4 Choose Select > All, and then, in the Character panel, select the following:
• Font Family: a sans-serif typeface, such as Myriad Pro
• Font Style: a light or narrow style, such as Condensed
• Font size: 15 pt
• Tracking: 10
• Color: Black

5 Click the Commit Any Current Edits button ( ) in the options bar. Your vertical
text now appears as the layer named VOL 9. Use the Move tool ( ) to center it in
the ribbon, if necessary.
 Tip:
Want a design to have a familiar look, but not with the exact font that look
is known for? Try Font Similarity. Choose a font in the Font family drop-
down list in either the Type tool options bar or the Character panel. You’ll
see options at the top of the font list; click the Show Similar Fonts button.
The font list will now show the 20 most similar fonts available on your
system or available from Typekit.
Now, you’ll clean up a bit.
6 Click the note to select it. Then right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac),
and choose Delete Note from the context menu; click Yes to confirm that you want
to delete the note.
7 Hide the guides: Choose the Hand tool (
), and then press Ctrl+; (Windows) or
Command+; (Mac). Then zoom out to get a nice look at your work.
8 Choose File > Save to save your work.
Congratulations! You’ve added and stylized all of the type on the Digital magazine

cover. Now that the magazine cover is ready to go, you’ll flatten it and prepare it for
printing.
9 Choose File > Save As, rename the file 07Working_flattened, and click Save.
Click OK if you see the Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
Keeping a layered version lets you return to the 07Working.psd file in the future to edit
it.
10 Choose Layer > Flatten Image.
11 Choose File > Save, and then close the image window.
 Tip:
When preparing a Photoshop file for high-resolution output, if it contains
vector shapes and text layers, consult with your output service provider
about the best format to use and whether the file should be flattened.
Saving as Photoshop PDF
The type you’ve added consists of vector-based outlines, which remain
crisp and clear as you zoom in or resize them. However, if you save the file
as a JPEG or TIFF image, Photoshop rasterizes the type, so you lose that
flexibility. When you save a Photoshop PDF file, vector type is included.
You can preserve other Photoshop editing capabilities in a Photoshop PDF
file, too. For example, you can retain layers, color information, and even

notes.
To ensure you can edit the file later, select Preserve Photoshop Editing
Capabilities in the Save Adobe PDF dialog box.
To preserve any notes in the file and convert them to Acrobat comments
when you save to PDF, select Notes in the Save area of the Save As dialog
box.
You can open a Photoshop PDF file in Acrobat or Photoshop, place it in
another application, or print it. For more information about saving as
Photoshop PDF, see Photoshop Help.
Extra credit
Using Match Fonts to keep your projects consistent
We want to identify a font that was used in an earlier issue, for text that
says “Premiere Issue” (see the file MatchFont.psd in the Lesson07 folder).
We’d like to use that font for other text inside the magazine. But the only
available file is flattened, so the original type layer is lost. Because no type
layer is available, it’s impossible to select the text to find out which font
was used. Fortunately, you don’t have to guess which font is in the image
because in Photoshop CC, you can let the Match Font feature figure it out
for you. Thanks to the magic of intelligent imaging analysis, using just a
picture of a Latin font, Photoshop CC can use machine learning to detect
which font it is. Match Font then shows you a list of similar fonts. Match
Font is also useful for identifying fonts in photos, such as in the text on a
sign in a street scene.
1 Open MatchFont.psd in the Lesson07 folder.
2 Select the area containing the mystery font. Keep the selection close to
the text.
3 Select Type > Match Font. Photoshop displays a list of fonts similar to
the font in the image, including fonts currently active on your system and

fonts from Typekit.
4 To list only the fonts on your computer, deselect Show Fonts Available
To Sync From Typekit.
5 Select a script font that most closely resembles the font in the image
from the list of fonts that Match Font determined to be similar. Your
Match Font results may look different than ours.
6 Click OK. Photoshop selects the font you clicked, so you can now create
new text with it.
Review questions
1 How does Photoshop treat type?
2 How is a text layer the same as or different from other layers in Photoshop?
3 What is a clipping mask, and how do you make one from type?
Review answers
1 Type in Photoshop consists of mathematically defined shapes that describe the
letters, numbers, and symbols of a typeface. When you add type to an image in
Photoshop, the characters appear on a text layer at the same resolution as the
image file. As long as the type layer exists, Photoshop preserves the vector-based
type outlines so that the text remains sharp when you scale or resize type, save a
PDF or EPS file, or print the image to a high-resolution printer.
2 Type that is added to an image appears in the Layers panel as a text layer that can
be edited and managed in the same way as any other kind of layer. You can add
and edit the text, change the orientation of the type, and apply anti-aliasing as well
as move, restack, copy, and change the options for layers.

3 A clipping mask is an object or group whose shape masks other artwork so that
only areas that lie within the shape are visible. To convert the letters on any text
layer to a clipping mask, make sure the layer you want to reveal is directly above
the text layer, select the layer you want to show through the letters, and choose
Create Clipping Mask from the Layers panel menu.

8. Vector Drawing Techniques
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Differentiate between bitmap and vector graphics.
• Draw straight and curved paths using the Pen tool.
• Save paths.
• Draw and edit shape layers.
• Draw custom shapes.
• Import and edit a Smart Object from Adobe Illustrator.
• Use Smart Guides.
This lesson will take about 90 minutes to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” As you work on this lesson, you’ll
preserve the start files. If you need to restore the start files, download them from
your Account page.

Unlike bitmap images, vector images retain their crisp edges when you enlarge
them to any size. You can draw vector shapes and paths in your Photoshop
images and add vector masks to control what is shown in an image.
PROJECT: COFFEE SHOP SIGN
About bitmap images and vector graphics
Before working with vector shapes and vector paths, it’s important to understand the
basic differences between the two main categories of computer graphics: bitmap images
and vector graphics. You can use Photoshop to work with either type of graphic; in fact,
you can combine both bitmap and vector data in an individual Photoshop image file.
Bitmap images, technically called raster images, are based on a grid of dots known as
pixels. Each pixel is assigned a specific location and color value. In working with
bitmap images, you edit groups of pixels rather than objects or shapes. Because bitmap
graphics can represent subtle gradations of shade and color, they are appropriate for
continuous-tone images such as photographs or artwork created in painting programs. A
disadvantage of bitmap graphics is that they contain a fixed number of pixels. As a
result, they can lose detail and appear jagged when scaled up on screen or printed at a
lower resolution than they were created for.
Vector graphics are made up of lines and curves defined by mathematical objects called

vectors. These graphics retain their crispness whether they are moved, resized, or have
their color changed. Vector graphics are appropriate for illustrations, type, and graphics
such as logos that may be scaled to different sizes.
Logo drawn as vector art
Logo rasterized as bitmap art
About paths and the Pen tool
In Photoshop, the outline of a vector shape is called a path. A path is a curved or
straight line segment you draw using the Pen tool, Freeform Pen tool, or a shape tool.
The Pen tool draws paths with the greatest precision; shape tools draw rectangles,
ellipses, and other shape paths; the Freeform Pen tool draws paths as if you were
drawing with a pencil on paper.
Tool tips from the Photoshop evangelist
Julieanne Kost is an official Adobe Photoshop evangelist.
Accessing tools quickly

Each tool in the Tools panel has a single-letter keyboard shortcut. Type the
letter, get the tool. Press Shift with the shortcut key to cycle through any
nested tools in a group. For example, press P to select the Pen tool, and
press Shift+P to toggle between the Pen and Freeform Pen tools.
Paths can be open or closed. An open path (such as a wavy line) has two distinct
endpoints. A closed path (such as a circle) is continuous. The type of path you draw
affects how it can be selected and adjusted.
Paths that have no fill or stroke do not print when you print your artwork. This is
because paths are vector objects that contain no pixels, unlike the bitmap shapes drawn
by the Pencil tool and other painting tools.
Getting started
In this lesson, you’ll draw a path around a coffee cup in an image, and create another
path inside the handle. You’ll subtract one selection from the other so that a lightning
bolt shape (provided in the Shapes panel) knocks out of the cup shape. Finally, you’ll
import an Illustrator title treatment as a Smart Object and apply a color and emboss
effect.
Before you begin, you’ll view the image you’ll be creating—a sign for a fictitious coffee
shop.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to restore the default preferences. (See “Restoring
Default Preferences” on page 5.)
2 When prompted, click Yes to delete the Adobe Photoshop Settings file.
3 Choose File > Browse In Bridge.
4 In the Favorites panel, click the Lessons folder, and then double-click the
Lesson08 folder in the Content panel.
5 Select the 08End.psd file, and press the spacebar to see it in full-screen view.
To create this sign, you’ll trace the coffee cup in an image, and use that tracing to make a
vector logo. You’ll resize that logo and combine it with an Illustrator typographic logo
imported as a Smart Object. First, you’ll practice making paths and selections using the
Pen tool.
6 When you’ve finished looking at the 08End.psd file, press the spacebar again.
Then double-click the 08Practice_Start.psd file to open it in Photoshop.
7 Choose File > Save As, rename the file 08Practice_Working.psd, and click
Save. If the Photoshop Format Options dialog box appears, click OK.
Drawing with the Pen tool
You’ll use the Pen tool to select the coffee cup. The cup has long, smooth, curved edges
that would be difficult to select using other methods.

The Pen tool works a little differently from most Photoshop tools. We’ve created a
practice file which you can use to get familiar with the Pen tool before making your
Kailua Koffee sign.
Paths include anchor points (smooth and corner) and segments (straight and curved).
You’ll get a feel for the Pen tool by drawing a straight path, a simple curve, and then an
S-curve before you practice tracing the coffee cup.
Creating paths with the Pen tool
You can use the Pen tool to create paths that are straight or curved, open or
closed. If you’re unfamiliar with the Pen tool, it can be confusing to use at
first. Understanding the elements of a path and how to create those elements
with the Pen tool makes paths much easier to draw.
Creating a straight line
To create a straight path, click the mouse button. The first time you click,
you set the starting point. Each time that you click thereafter, a straight line
is drawn between the previous point and the current point. To draw
complex straight-segment paths with the Pen tool, simply continue to add
points.
To create a curved path, click to place an anchor point, drag to create a
direction line for that point, and then click to place the next anchor point.
Each direction line ends in two direction points; the positions of direction
lines and points determine the size and shape of the curved segment.

Moving the direction lines and points reshapes the curves in a path.
Smooth curves are connected by anchor points called smooth points.
Sharply curved paths are connected by corner points. When you move a
direction line on a smooth point, the curved segments on both sides of the
point adjust simultaneously, but when you move a direction line on a corner
point, only the curve on the same side of the point as the direction line is
adjusted.
A. Curved line segment
B. Direction point
C. Direction line
D. Selected anchor point
E. Unselected anchor point
Path segments and anchor points can be moved after they’re drawn, either
individually or as a group. When a path contains more than one segment,
you can drag individual anchor points to adjust individual segments of the
path, or select all of the anchor points in a path to edit the entire path. Use
the Direct Selection tool to select and adjust an anchor point, a path
segment, or an entire path.
Creating a closed path differs from creating an open path in the way that
you end it. To end an open path, press Enter or Return. To create a closed
path, position the Pen tool pointer over the starting point, and click. Closing
a path automatically ends the path. After the path closes, the Pen tool
pointer appears with a small *, indicating that your next click will start a
new path.

Creating a closed path
As you draw paths, a temporary storage area named Work Path appears in the
Paths panel. It’s a good idea to save work paths, and it’s essential if you use
multiple discrete paths in the same image file. If you deselect an existing Work
Path in the Paths panel and then start drawing again, a new work path will replace
the original one, which will be lost. To save a work path, double-click it in the
Paths panel, type a name in the Save Path dialog box, and click OK to rename and
save the path. The path remains selected in the Paths panel.
First, you’ll configure the Pen tool options and the work area.
1 In the Tools panel, select the Pen tool ( ).
2 In the options bar, select or verify the following settings:
• Choose Shape from the Tool Mode pop-up menu.
• In the Pen Options menu, make sure that Rubber Band is not selected.
• Make sure that Auto Add/Delete is selected.
• Choose No Color from the Fill pop-up menu.
• Choose a green color from the Stroke pop-up menu.
• Enter 4 pt for the stroke width.
• In the Stroke Options window, choose Center (the second option) from the
Align menu.

A. Tool Mode menu
B. Stroke Options menu
C. Pen Options menu
Drawing a straight line
You’ll start by drawing a straight line. Anchor points mark the ends of path segments; the
straight line you’ll draw is a single path segment with two anchor points.
1 Click the Paths tab to bring that panel to the front of the Layers panel group.
The Paths panel displays thumbnail previews of the paths you draw. Currently, the panel
is empty, because you haven’t started drawing.
2 If necessary, zoom in so that you can easily see the lettered points and blue dots
on the shape template. Make sure you can see the whole template in the image
window, and be sure to reselect the Pen tool after you zoom.
3 Click point A on the first shape, and release the mouse button. You’ve created an
anchor point.
4 Click point B. You’ve created a straight line with two anchor points.
5 Press Enter or Return to stop drawing.
The path you drew appears in the Paths panel and as a new layer in the Layers panel.

Drawing curves
On curved segments, selecting an anchor point displays two direction lines (smooth
points) or one direction line (corner point). Direction lines end in direction points, and
the positions of the direction lines and direction points determine the size and shape of
the curved segment. You’ll create curved lines, using smooth points.
1 Click A on the semicircle, and release the mouse to create the first anchor point.
2 Click point B, but don’t release the mouse button. Instead, drag the cursor to the
blue dot to the right of point B to create a curved path segment and a smooth
anchor point. Then release the mouse button.
Smooth anchor points have two linked direction lines. When you move one, the curved
segments on both sides of the path adjust simultaneously.
3 Click point C, and drag down to the blue dot below. Then release the mouse
button. You’ve created a second curved path segment and another smooth point.
4 Click point D, and release the mouse to create the final anchor point. Press Enter
or Return to complete the path.
When drawing a freehand path using the Pen tool, use as few points as possible to create
the shape you want. The fewer points you use, the smoother the curves are—and the
more efficient your file is.

Using the same techniques, you’ll draw an S-shaped curve.
5 Click point A, and then click point B; then drag the cursor to the first blue dot.
6 Continue with points C, D, E, and F, in each case clicking the point and then
dragging to the corresponding blue dot.
7 Click point G to create the final anchor point, and then press Enter or Return to
complete the path.
This shape is on its own layer in the Layers panel. Only one path is in the Paths panel
because the work path for the second shape overwrote the work path for the first one.
Drawing a more complex shape
Now that you’ve got the idea, you’ll have a chance to draw a more complex object: the
outline of a coffee cup.
1 Click point A on the shape on the right side to set the first anchor point.
2 Press the Shift key as you click point B. Pressing the Shift key constrains the line
so that it is perfectly straight.
3 Press the Shift key as you click points C, D, and E to create straight path
segments.
4 Click point F, and drag to the blue dot to create a curve. Then release the mouse
button.
5 Click point G, and drag to the blue dot to create another curve. Then release the
mouse button.
6 Click point H. Then press Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) as you click point H
again to create a corner point.
When you move a direction line on a corner point, only the curve on the same side of the
point as the direction line is adjusted, so you can create a sharp transition between two
segments.
7 Click point A to draw the final path segment and close the path. Closing a path
automatically ends the drawing; you don’t need to press Enter or Return.

Tracing a shape from a photo
Now you’re ready to draw a path around the coffee cup in the image. You’ll use the
techniques you’ve practiced to draw a path around the outside of the cup and another
one inside the handle.
1 Open the 08Start.psd file in Photoshop.
The image includes three layers: the background layer and two template layers to guide
you as you draw shapes.
2 Choose File > Save As, rename the file 08Working.psd, and click Save. Click
OK in the Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
3 With the Pen tool selected, click point A. Photoshop creates a new layer for the
shape.
4 Click point B, and drag the cursor to the red dot on the right to create the initial
curve.

5 Click point C, and drag to the red dot to its right.
6 Continue tracing the cup, clicking each point, and dragging the cursor to the
corresponding red dots when you need to create a curve.
7 Close the shape by clicking point A again.
8 Evaluate your path. If you want to adjust any segments, use the Direct Selection
tool to select a point, and then move its direction lines to edit the segment.
9 Press Enter or Return to deselect the path, and save your work so far.
 Tip:
If you’d like to try tracing the cup without using the dots to guide you, hide
the Outside Cup layer in the Layers panel.
Adding a second shape to a path
You’ve drawn a path that outlines the exterior of the cup, but you want the inside of the
handle to be transparent. You’ll draw a shape to isolate the inside of the cup handle.
1 Hide the Outside Cup layer, and make the Inside Handle layer visible.
2 Make sure Shape 1 is selected in the Layers panel, and then, in the Paths panel,
select Shape 1 Shape Path.
3 Make sure the Pen tool is selected, and choose Subtract Front Shape from the Path
Operations pop-up menu in the options bar.

Options in the Path Operations menu determine how multiple shapes interact with each
other in a path. After you draw the cup outline, you’ll subtract the inside of the handle
from it.
4 Click point A to begin drawing. Then click point B, drag to the next red dot, and
release the mouse button.
5 Continue drawing, clicking and dragging as indicated at points C and D.
6 Click point E, and drag slightly down to the red dot, and release. Then, press Alt
(Windows) or Option (Mac) as you click point E to convert the point to a corner
point.
Converting point E to a corner point enables you to draw a straight path segment
between it and point A. If point E remained a smooth point, the path between points E
and A would be slightly curved.
7 Click point A to close the shape and stop drawing.

 Note:
If your green cup outline and Layers panel don’t appear exactly as they do
in the figure at the left, choose Edit > Step Backward until Shape 2
disappears from the Layers panel, press Enter or Return to deselect the
path, and start again at step 2.
Now you’ll save the path to use later.
8 In the Paths panel, double-click Shape 1 Shape Path, type Cup Outline in the
Save Path dialog box, and click OK to save it; then, still in the Paths panel, click
in an empty area to deselect all paths.
You won’t need the Shape 1, Outside Cup, and Inside Handle layers anymore, so you’ll
delete them.
9 In the Layers panel, select the Shape 1 layer and then click the Delete Layer icon (
) at the bottom of the Layers panel. Click Yes if you’re asked to confirm the
deletion. This will also remove the Shape 1 Shape Path from the Paths panel. In
the same way, delete the Inside Handle and Outside Cup layers.
10 Choose File > Save to save your work.
 Tip:
When you want to delete a range of contiguous layers, Shift-click the first
and last layers in the range to select them, and then click the Delete icon in
the Layers panel.
Working with defined custom shapes
Photoshop includes several predefined custom shapes in the Custom Shape Picker, but
you can also create your own.
Converting a path to a shape

You’ll define the cup outline path as a custom shape that you can use for the logo. The
shape will be available in the Custom Shape Picker.
1 Select the Cup Outline path in the Paths panel.
2 Choose Edit > Define Custom Shape.
3 Name the shape Coffee Cup, and click OK.
4 Select the Custom Shape tool (
), hidden beneath the Rectangle tool (
) in the
Tools panel.
5 Open the Custom Shape Picker in the options menu, and scroll to the bottom of the
picker. The shape you added should be the last one displayed. Click to select the
Coffee Cup shape.
6 Position the Custom Shape tool near the top left corner of the document. Hold
down the Shift key to maintain original proportions, and start dragging down and
to the right. When the logo is about 2 inches tall, release the mouse button, and
then release the Shift key.
7 Double-click the Shape 1 layer in the Layers panel, and name it Coffee Cup.
Changing the fill color of a shape layer
You’ve created a custom shape from your path, and you’ve used the Custom Shape tool
to draw the shape on the image. But it’s just an outline. You’ll add a fill.
1 Make sure the Coffee Cup layer is selected in the Layers panel.
2 Select the Pen tool ( ) in the Tools panel.
3 In the options bar, select Black for the Fill color, and No Color for the stroke.

The coffee cup shape is now solid black.
4 Press Enter or Return to deselect the coffee cup path.
Subtracting shapes from a shape layer
After you create a shape layer, you can subtract new shapes from it. You’ll add some
interest to the coffee cup shape by subtracting a lightning bolt shape from it, allowing the
background to show through.
1 In the Tools panel, select the Custom Shape tool.
2 In the Paths panel, select Coffee Cup Shape Path.
3 In the options bar, choose Subtract Front Shape from the Path Operations menu.
The pointer now appears as cross-hairs with a small minus sign (
).
4 Select the lightning bolt from the Custom Shape Picker (it’s in the second row).
Start at the upper left corner of the black coffee cup, and drag down to the bottom
right. Click first, and as you drag diagonally, press the Shift key to keep the
dimensions proportional.
Importing a Smart Object
Smart Objects are layers that you can edit in Photoshop nondestructively; that is,
changes you make to the image remain editable and don’t affect the actual image pixels,
which are preserved. Regardless of how often you scale, rotate, skew, or otherwise
transform a Smart Object, it retains its sharp, precise edges.
You can import vector objects from Adobe Illustrator as Smart Objects. If you edit the

original object in Illustrator, the changes will be reflected in the placed Smart Object in
your Photoshop image file.
When you place a Smart Object, you can link it or embed it. If you link it, Photoshop
retains a link to the original file so that you can easily update it later, and it includes a
preview image of the Smart Object in the Photoshop file. If you embed a Smart Object,
Photoshop includes the entire object in the Photoshop file, but does not retain a link.
However, you can convert an embedded Smart Object to a linked Smart Object if the
original file is still available.
You’ll work with a Smart Object now by placing a Kailua Koffee logotype that was
created in Illustrator.
1 Select the Move tool ( ) in the Tools panel.
2 Select the Coffee Cup layer, and choose File > Place Linked. Select the
Logotype.eps file in the Lesson08 folder, and click Place.
The Kailua Koffee logotype is added to the middle of the composition, inside a
bounding box with adjustable handles. A new layer, Logotype, appears in the Layers
panel.
3 Drag the logotype object to the upper left corner of the sign, just to the right of the
coffee cup logo, and then press Shift and drag a corner to make the text object
proportionally larger—large enough that it fills the top portion of the image, as in
the following illustration. When you’ve finished, either press Enter or Return, or
click the Commit Transform button ( ) in the options bar.
When you commit to the transformation, the layer thumbnail icon changes to show a link
icon, indicating that the title layer is a linked Smart Object.
As with any shape layer or Smart Object, you can continue to edit its size and shape if
you’d like. Simply select the layer, choose Edit > Free Transform to access the control
handles, and drag to adjust them. Or, select the Move tool ( ), and select Show
Transform Controls in the options bar. Then adjust the handles.
Adding color and depth to a shape using layer styles
You created the shape with a black fill. Now you’ll make it snazzier by changing the fill

color and adding a Bevel & Emboss effect.
1 With the Logotype layer selected, choose Color Overlay from the Add A Layer
Style menu ( ) at the bottom of the Layers panel.
2 In the Layer Style dialog box, choose a dark red or burgundy color.
 Note:
Be sure to click the words “Bevel & Emboss.” If you click only the check
box, Photoshop applies the layer style with its default settings, but you
won’t see the options.
3 Click Bevel & Emboss on the left side of the Layer Style dialog box to add
another layer style. Accept the defaults for the Bevel & Emboss layer style, and
click OK.
The Color Overlay and Bevel & Emboss layer styles affect the Logotype layer. You’ll
copy them to the Coffee Cup layer.
4 Press Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) as you drag the layer effects indicator ( )
from the Logotype layer onto the Coffee Cup layer.

5 Clean up the Paths panel by deleting the Cup Outline path.
6 Choose File > Save to save your work. The coffee shop sign is complete.
7 Close the file.
Extra Credit
Using Creative Cloud Libraries with linked Smart Objects
When you organize and share your design assets using Creative Cloud
Libraries, you and your team can use those library items in many Creative
Cloud desktop and mobile apps. Let’s take a look:
1 Open 08End.psd. If the Libraries panel isn’t open, choose Window >
Libraries to open the Libraries panel.
2 In the Libraries panel menu, choose Create New Library, and name it
Kailua Koffee.
3 In the Layers panel, select the Background layer. In the Layers panel
menu, choose Convert to Smart Object. This layer is now named “Layer
0.”
4 Select the Move tool. Drag the layer from the document window (not the
Layers panel) into the Kailua Koffee library.
5 Repeat steps 3 and 4 for the Logotype layer and the Coffee Cup layer.
Now all three elements will appear in Creative Cloud applications and
mobile apps. Because each item is a linked Smart Object, the company can
edit the logo in the Kailua Koffee library and it will update in all
documents that use it. To edit a library item, just double-click it in the
Libraries panel.

Adding colors
1 With the Eyedropper tool, click the red mug in the document window.
Then choose Select > Deselect Layers.
2 At the bottom of the Libraries panel, click the Add Content button ( ),
make sure the Foreground Color swatch is selected, and click Add. That
adds the color you sampled to the current library. Use the same method
to sample a light blue from the sky in the background, and add that color
to your library too.
Collaborating
When you share a Creative Cloud Library, your team always has the current
version of those assets. In the Libraries panel menu, choose Collaborate,
and fill in the Invite Collaborators screen that appears in your web
browser. Collaborators will see the library you shared in their Creative
Cloud applications (to utilize this feature, you must have a Creative Cloud
account and be logged in).
Adding assets to libraries using Adobe mobile apps
Use Adobe mobile apps—such as Adobe Capture CC—to record color
themes, shapes, and brushes from real life and add them to your Creative
Cloud libraries. Library assets you add with mobile apps are automatically
synced to your Creative Cloud account, so you’ll see the new assets in your

Libraries panel when you return to your computer.
Extra credit
Smart Guides
Let’s take this design to the next level. You can use the coffee cup logo to
make a repeated motif at the bottom of the sign. Smart Guides can help you
position the images evenly.
1 Choose View > Show, and make sure Smart Guides are enabled. If
there’s a check mark next to Smart Guides, they’re on. If there isn’t one,
select Smart Guides to enable them.
2 Select the Coffee Cup layer. Then select the Move tool, and press
Alt+Shift (Windows) or Option+Shift (Mac) as you drag the cup logo to
the lower left corner of the sign. The Alt or Option key copies the
selected object; the Shift key constrains its movement. The magenta lines
that appear as you drag the object are Smart Guides.
3 Choose Edit > Free Transform. Then press Shift to maintain the
proportions as you scale the cup to about half its original size. Press
Enter or Return to confirm the transformation.

4 With the Coffee Cup copy layer still selected, press Alt+Shift or
Option+Shift and drag to the right until the measurements displayed in
pink show you that the images are 4.5 inches apart. As you drag, Smart
Guides give you alignment indicators and displays measurements to help
you position objects.
5 Select the second image on the bottom, and repeat step 4. This time,
when you drag the image 4.5 inches, Photoshop displays the distance
between each of the sets of images.
6 Repeat step 5 so you have a total of four equally spaced logos.
Review questions
1 What is the difference between a bitmap image and a vector graphic?
2 How can you create a custom shape?
3 What tool can you use to move and resize paths and shapes?

4 What are vector Smart Objects, and what is the benefit of using them?
Review answers
1 Bitmap, or raster, images are based on a grid of pixels and are appropriate for
continuous-tone images such as photographs or artwork created in painting
programs. Vector graphics are made up of shapes based on mathematical
expressions and are appropriate for illustrations, type, and drawings that require
clear, smooth lines.
2 To create a custom shape, select a path, and then choose Edit > Define Custom
Shape. Name the shape; it will appear in the Custom Shape Picker.
3 You use the Direct Selection tool to move, resize, and edit shapes. You can also
modify and scale a selected shape or path by choosing Edit > Free Transform.
4 Vector Smart Objects are vector objects that you can place and edit in Photoshop
without a loss of quality. Regardless of how often you scale, rotate, skew, or
otherwise transform a vector Smart Object, it retains sharp, precise edges. A great
benefit of using vector Smart Objects is that you can edit the original object in its
original application, such as Illustrator, and the changes will be reflected in the
placed Smart Object in your Photoshop image file.

9. Advanced Compositing
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Apply and edit Smart Filters.
• Use the Liquify filter to distort an image.
• Apply color effects to selected areas of an image.
• Apply filters to create various effects.
• Use the History panel to return to a previous state.
• Upscale a low-resolution image for high-resolution printing.
This lesson will take about an hour to complete. Please log in to your account on
peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” As you work on this lesson, you’ll
preserve the start files. If you need to restore the start files, download them from
your Account page.

Filters can transform ordinary images into extraordinary digital artwork. Smart
Filters let you edit those transformations at any time. The wide variety of
features in Photoshop lets you be as creative as you want to be.
PROJECT: MONSTER MOVIE POSTER DESIGN
Monster makeup imagery courtesy of Russell Brown, with illustration by John Connell
Getting started
In this lesson, you’ll assemble a montage of images for a movie poster as you explore
filters in Photoshop. First, look at the final project to see what you’ll be creating.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to restore the default preferences. (See “Restoring

Default Preferences” on page 5.)
2 When prompted, click Yes to delete the Adobe Photoshop Settings file.
3 Choose File > Browse In Bridge.
4 In Bridge, choose Favorites from the menu on the left, and then click the Lessons
folder. Double-click the Lesson09 folder.
5 View the 09_End.psd thumbnail. Move the slider at the bottom of the Bridge
window if you need to zoom in to see the thumbnail more clearly.
This file is a movie poster that comprises a background, a monster image, and several
smaller images. Each image has had one or more filters or effects applied to it.
The monster is composed of an image of a perfectly normal (though slightly threatening)
guy with several ghoulish images applied. These monstrous additions are courtesy of
Russell Brown, with illustration by John Connell.
6 In Bridge, navigate to the Lesson09/Monster_Makeup folder, and open it.

 Note
If Bridge isn’t installed, you’ll be prompted to install it when you choose
Browse In Bridge. For more information, see page 3.
7 Shift-click to select all the files in the Monster_Makeup folder, and then choose
Tools > Photoshop > Load Files Into Photoshop Layers.

Photoshop imports all the selected files as individual layers in a new Photoshop file.
The designer used a red layer color to indicate components of the monster’s look.
8 In Photoshop, choose File > Save As. Choose Photoshop for the Format, and name
the new file 09Working.psd. Save it in the Lesson09 folder. Click OK in the
Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
Arranging layers
Your image file contains eight layers, imported in alphabetical order. In their current
positions, they don’t make a very convincing monster. You’ll rearrange the layer order
and resize their contents as you start to build your monster.
1 Zoom out or scroll so that you can see all the layers on the artboard.
2 In the Layers panel, drag the Monster_Hair layer to the top of the layer stack.
3 Drag the Franken layer to the bottom of the layer stack.
4 Select the Move tool ( ), and then move the Franken layer (the image of the
person) to the bottom of the page.
5 In the Layers panel, Shift-select every layer except the Franken layer, and choose
Edit > Free Transform.

6 Press the Shift key as you drag down from a corner of the selection to resize all
the selected layers to about 50% of their original size. (Watch the width and height
percentages in the options bar.)
7 With the Free Transform bounding box still active, position the layers over the
head of the Franken layer. Then press Enter or Return to commit the
transformation.
8 Zoom in to see the head area clearly.
9 Hide all layers except the Green_Skin_Texture and Franken layers.
10 Select only the Green_Skin_Texture layer, and use the Move tool to center it over
the face.

 Tip:
If magenta Smart Guides appear, making it difficult to position the
Green_Skin_Texture layer, hold down the Control key to temporarily
disable Smart Guides as you drag. Or permanently disable them by
deselecting the View > Show > Smart Guides command.
11 Choose Edit > Free Transform again to adjust the fit of the texture to the face.
Use the side handles to adjust the width, the bottom and top handles to adjust the
height, and arrow keys to nudge the entire layer into position. Use the eyes and
mouth as a guide. When you’ve positioned the skin texture, press Enter or Return
to commit the transformation.

12 Save your file.
Using Smart Filters
Unlike regular filters, which permanently change an image, Smart Filters are
nondestructive: They can be adjusted, turned off and on, and deleted. However, you can
apply Smart Filters only to a Smart Object.
Applying the Liquify filter
You’ll use the Liquify filter to tighten the eye openings and change the shape of the
monster’s face. Because you want to be able to adjust the filter settings later, you’ll use
the Liquify filter as a Smart Filter. So you’ll first need to convert the
Green_Skin_Texture layer to a Smart Object.
1 Make sure the Green_Skin_Texture layer is selected in the Layers panel, and then
choose Convert To Smart Object from the Layers panel menu.
2 Choose Filter > Liquify.
Photoshop displays the layer in the Liquify dialog box.
3 In the Liquify dialog box, click the disclosure triangle next to Face-Aware Liquify
to close that group of options.
You already explored Face-Aware Liquify in Lesson 5. While Face-Aware Liquify is a
quick and powerful way to modify facial features, the amount of face editing you can do
with those options is limited. In this lesson, you’ll try some of the more manual Liquify
techniques, which you may prefer when you want to create a more expressive face.
Hiding the Face-Aware Liquify options makes it easier to concentrate on the other
options in the Liquify dialog box.
4 Select Show Backdrop, and then choose Behind from the Mode menu. Set the
Opacity to 75.

5 Select the Zoom tool (
) from the Tools panel on the left side of the dialog box,
and zoom in to the eye area.
6 Select the Forward Warp tool (
) (the first tool).
The Forward Warp tool pushes pixels forward as you drag.
7 In the Brush Tool Options area, set the Size to 150 and Pressure to 75.
8 With the Forward Warp tool, pull the right eyebrow down to close the eye
opening. Then pull up from under the eye.

9 Repeat step 8 on the left eyebrow and under-eye area. You might prefer to use the
Forward Warp tool differently for each eye, to create an even scarier face.
10 When you’ve closed the gap around the eyes, click OK.
Because you’ve applied the Liquify filter as a Smart Filter, you’ll be able to return later
to make additional changes to the face.
Positioning other layers
Now that you’ve got the skin texture in place, you’ll move the other layers into position,
working up from the lowest layers in the Layers panel.
1 Make the Green_Nose_Stitches layer visible, and select it in the Layers panel.
 Tip:
As you drag the layer, it may snap to magenta Smart Guides that appear.
They’re intended to help you align the layer to other layers, but if they make
it difficult to position the layer where you want, choose View > Show >
Smart Guides and deselect that command.

2 Choose Edit > Free Transform, and then position the layer over the nose, resizing
it as necessary. Press Enter or Return to commit the transformation.
You’ll repeat the process to position the rest of the layers.
3 Make the Green_Neck_Stitches layer visible, and select it. Then move it over the
neck. If you need to adjust it, choose Edit > Free Transform, resize it, and press
Enter or Return.
4 Make the Green_Ear_Staples layer visible, and select it. Move the staples over
his right ear. Choose Edit > Free Transform, resize and reposition the staples, and
then press Enter or Return.

5 Make the Enhanced_Green_Forehead layer visible, and select it. Move it over the
forehead; it’s probably a bit large. Choose Edit > Free Transform, resize the
forehead to fit the space, and press Enter or Return.
6 Make the Bolts layer visible, and select it. Drag the bolts so they’re positioned on
either side of the neck. Choose Edit > Free Transform, and resize them so that they
fit snugly against the neck. When you have them in position, press Enter or Return
to commit the transformation.

7 Lastly, make the Monster_Hair layer visible, and select it. Move it over the
forehead. Choose Edit > Transform, and then resize the hair so it fits properly
against the forehead. Press Enter or Return to commit the change.
8 Save your work so far.
Editing a Smart Filter
With all the layers in position, you can further refine the eye openings and experiment
with the bulges in the eyebrows. You’ll return to the Liquify filter to make those
adjustments.
1 In the Layers panel, double-click Liquify, listed under Smart Filters in the
Green_Skin_Texture layer.
Photoshop opens the Liquify dialog box again. This time, all the layers are visible in
Photoshop, so when Show Backdrop is selected, you see them all. Sometimes it’s easier
to make changes without a backdrop to distract you. Other times, it’s useful to see your
edits in context.
2 Zoom in to see the eyes more closely.
3 Select the Pucker tool (
) in the Tools panel, and click on the outer corner of
each eye.
The Pucker tool moves pixels towards the center of the brush as you click or drag, for a
puckering effect.

4 Select the Bloat tool (
), and click the outer edge of an eyebrow to expand it; do
the same for the other eyebrow.
The Bloat tool moves pixels away from the center of the brush as you click or drag.
5 Experiment with the Pucker, Bloat, and other tools in the Liquify filter to
customize the monster’s face. Remember that you can change the brush size and
other settings. You can undo individual steps, but if you want to start over, it’s
easiest to click Cancel, and then return to the Liquify dialog box.
6 When you’re happy with the monster’s face, click OK.
 Tip:
The Pucker, Bloat, and other tools on the left side of the Liquify panel
provide more control over Liquify distortions than the Face-Aware Liquify
options, and they work on any part of an image. But Face-Aware Liquify is
easier for quick and subtle adjustments to facial features.
Painting a layer
There are many ways to paint objects and layers in Photoshop. One of the simplest is to
use the Color blending mode and the Brush tool. You’ll use this method to paint the
exposed skin green on your monster.

1 Select the Franken layer in the Layers panel.
2 Click the Create A New Layer button ( ) at the bottom of the Layers panel.
Photoshop creates a new layer, named Layer 1.
3 With Layer 1 selected, choose Color from the Blending Mode menu at the top of
the Layers panel.
The Color blending mode combines the luminance of the base color (the color already
on the layer) with the hue and saturation of the color you’re applying. It’s a good
blending mode to use when you’re coloring monochrome images or tinting color images.
4 In the Tools panel, select the Brush tool (
). In the options bar, select a 60-pixel
brush with a hardness of 0.
5 Press Alt or Option to temporarily switch to the Eyedropper tool. Sample a green
color from the forehead. Then release the Alt or Option key to return to the Brush
tool.

 Tip:
To learn more about blending modes, including a description of each one,
see “Blending modes” in Photoshop Help.
6 Ctrl-click or Command-click the thumbnail in the Franken layer to select its
contents.
Usually, you select an entire layer in the Layers panel. When you do that, the layer is
active, but there isn’t actually an active selection. When you Ctrl-click or Command-
click the thumbnail of the layer, Photoshop selects the contents of the layer, so you have
an active selection. It’s a quick way to select all of the contents of a layer—but only the
contents of that specific layer.
7 Make sure Layer 1 is still selected in the Layers panel, and then use the Brush tool
to paint over the hands and arms. You can paint quickly where the hands are
against transparent areas, because painting outside the selection has no effect.
However, remember that the shirt is part of the selection, so you need to be more
careful as you paint the skin where it abuts the shirt colors.

 Tip:
To change the brush size as you paint, press the bracket keys on your
keyboard. The Left Bracket key ([) decreases the brush size; the Right
Bracket (]) increases it.
8 Paint any areas of the face or neck where the original flesh color shows through
the Green_Skin_Texture layer.
9 When you’re happy with the green skin, choose Select > Deselect. Save your
work.
Adding a background
You’ve got a good-looking monster. Now it’s time to put him in his spooky environment.
To easily move the monster onto a background, you’ll first merge the layers.
1 Make sure all the layers are visible. Then choose Merge Visible from the Layers
panel menu.

Photoshop merges all the layers into one, named Layer 1.
2 Rename Layer 1 Monster.
3 Choose File > Open. Navigate to and open the Backdrop.psd file in the Lesson09
folder.
4 Choose Window > Arrange > 2-Up Vertical to display both the monster and
backdrop files.

5 Click the 09Working.psd file to make it active.
6 Select the Move tool ( ), drag the Monster layer, and then drop it onto the
Backdrop.psd file. Position the monster so his hands are just above the movie
title.
7 Close the 09Working.psd file, saving the changes when prompted.
From now on, you’ll work on the movie poster file itself.
8 Choose File > Save As, and save the file with the name Movie-Poster.psd. Click
OK in the Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
Using the History panel to undo edits
You’ve used the Edit > Undo command to move backward one step. That’s because by
default, you can toggle between undoing and redoing the last step each time you press
the keyboard shortcut for the Undo command (Ctrl+Z or Command+Z). This is a handy
way to see a before/after comparison of your last edit.
You can also undo and redo multiple steps using the Step Backward and Step Forward
commands, which are just below the Undo command on the Edit menu, where you can
also see the keyboard shortcuts for those commands.
Another way to step backward and forward through your changes is to use the History
panel; choose Window > History to see it. The History panel shows you a list of your
changes. To go back to a certain edit (for example, four steps ago), just select it in the

History panel, and continue working from that point.
Applying filters and effects
You’ll add a tombstone to the poster, and you’ll experiment with filters and effects to
see what works, using the History panel to reverse course if necessary.
1 In Photoshop, choose File > Open.
2 Navigate to the Lesson09 folder, and double-click the T1.psd file to open it.
The tombstone image is plain, but you’ll add texture and color to it.
3 In the Tools panel, click the Default Foreground And Background Colors icon ( )
to return the foreground color to black.
You’ll start by adding a little atmosphere to the tombstone.
4 Choose Filter > Render > Difference Clouds.
You’ll leave the top of the tombstone in focus, but blur the rest using an iris blur. The
default blur settings will work fine.
5 Choose Filter > Blur Gallery > Iris Blur.
6 In the image window, drag the Iris Blur ellipse up so that the top of the tombstone
is in focus. Then click OK.

You’ll use adjustment layers to make the image darker and change its color.
7 Click the Brightness/Contrast icon in the Adjustments panel. Then, in the
Properties panel, move the Contrast slider to 70.
8 Click the Channel Mixer icon in the Adjustments panel.
9 In the Properties panel, choose Green from the Output Channel menu, and then
change the Red value to +37 and the Blue value to +108.

The tombstone takes on a green cast. You can use the Channel Mixer adjustment to make
these types of creative color adjustments to an image. The Channel Mixer is also
popular as an alternative to the Black & White adjustment for converting color images to
black and white, and for tinting effects. It’s also useful for some advanced color
correction techniques.
10 Click the Exposure icon in the Adjustments panel. In the Properties panel, move
the Exposure slider to +.90 to brighten the lighter areas of the image.

 Tip:
The Exposure adjustment is primarily intended for correcting HDR images,
but in this lesson it’s used as a creative effect.
Undoing multiple steps
The tombstone certainly looks different than it did when you started, but it doesn’t quite
match the tombstones that are already in the poster. You’ll use the History panel to
revisit the steps you’ve taken.
1 Choose Window > History to open the History panel. Drag the bottom of the panel
down so that you can see everything in it.
The History panel records the recent actions you’ve performed on the image. The
current state is selected.
2 Click the Blur Gallery state in the History panel.
The states below the selected state are dimmed, and the image has changed. The color is
gone, as are the Brightness/Contrast settings. At this point, the Difference Clouds filter
has been run and the iris blur has been applied. Everything else has been removed.
There are no adjustment layers listed in the Layers panel.
3 Click the Modify Channel Mixer Layer state in the History panel.
Many of the states are restored. The color has returned, along with the brightness and
contrast settings. There are two adjustment layers in the Layers panel. However, the
states below the one you selected remain dimmed, and the Exposure adjustment layer is
not listed in the Layers panel.
You’ll return almost to the beginning to apply different effects to the tombstone.
4 Click Difference Clouds in the History panel.

Everything following that state is dimmed.
5 Choose Filter > Noise > Add Noise.
Adding noise will give the tombstone a grainier look.
6 In the Add Noise dialog box, set the Amount to 3%, select Gaussian, and select
Monochromatic. Then click OK.
The states that were dimmed are no longer in the History panel. Instead, the History
panel has added a state for the task you just performed (Add Noise), following the state
you had selected (Difference Clouds). You can click any state to return to that point in
the process, but as soon as you perform a new task, Photoshop deletes all dimmed
states.
Note

The Lighting Effects filter is unavailable if Use Graphics Processor is not
selected in the Performance Preferences dialog box. If your video card
does not support the Use Graphics Processor option, skip steps 7–12.
7 Choose Filter > Render > Lighting Effects.
8 In the options bar, choose Flashlight from the Presets menu.
9 In the Properties panel, click the Color swatch, select a light blue color, and then
click OK.
10 In the image window, drag the light source to the upper third of the tombstone,
centered over the letters “RIP.”
11 In the Properties panel, change the Ambience to 46.
12 Click OK in the options bar to accept the Lighting Effects settings.
The tombstone is ready to join the others in your movie poster.
13 Save the file, then choose Window > Arrange > Tile All Vertically.
14 With the Move tool, drag the tombstone you just created to the Movie-Poster.psd
file. Click OK if you see a color management warning.
15 Drag the tombstone to the bottom left corner, with the top third of it showing.
16 Choose File > Save to save the Movie-Poster.psd file. Then close the T1.psd file
without saving it.

You’ve had a chance to try out some new filters and effects, and to use the History panel
to backtrack. By default, the History panel retains only the last 50 states. You can change
the number of levels in the History panel by choosing Edit > Preferences > Performance
(Windows) or Photoshop CC > Preferences > Performance (Mac), and entering a
different value for History States.
Upscaling a low-resolution image
Low-resolution images are fine—even desirable—for web pages and social media. If
you need to enlarge them, though, they may not contain enough information for high-
quality printing. To scale an image up in size, Photoshop needs to resample it. That is, it
needs to create new pixels where none existed, approximating their values. The
Preserve Details (Enlargement) algorithm in Photoshop gives the best results when you
upscale low-resolution images.
In your movie poster, you want to use a low-resolution image that was posted on a
social media site. You’ll need to resize it without compromising quality for your printed
poster.
1 Choose File > Open, navigate to the Lesson09 folder, and open the Faces.jpg file.
2 Zoom in to 300%, so you can see the pixels.
3 Choose Image > Image Size.
4 Make sure the Resample option is selected.
5 Change the width and height measurements to Percent, and then change their

values to 400%.
The width and height are linked by default, so that images resize proportionally. If you
need to change the width and height separately for a project, click the link icon to unlink
the values.
6 Drag in the preview window to pan so that you can see the glasses.
7 In the Resample menu, choose Bicubic Smoother (Enlargement). The image looks
less rough than it did before.
The Resample menu includes options that control how to adjust the image for
enlargement or reduction. Automatic is the default and it picks a method based on
whether you’re enlarging or reducing, but you may find that another option might look
better depending on the image.
8 With the Resample option still selected, choose Preserve Details (Enlargement)
from the Resample menu.
The Preserve Details option results in a sharper enlargement than Bicubic Smoother, but
it has emphasized the existing noise in the image.
9 Move the Reduce Noise slider to 50% to smooth the image.
10 Click and hold in the preview window to see the original image, so you can
compare it to the current settings. You can also compare the current settings to the
Bicubic Smoother option by switching between them in the Resample menu. The
current settings appear to be the best solution, because for this image, Bicubic
Smoother softens the image too much.
11 Click OK.
Now you’ll paste the image into a feathered selection on the poster.
12 Choose Select > All, and then choose Edit > Copy.
13 Select the Movie-Poster.psd tab to bring it to the front, and then select the
Elliptical Marquee tool (
), hidden beneath the Rectangular Marquee tool (
).

14 In the options bar, enter 50 px for Feather to soften the edge of the pasted image.
15 Draw an oval in the upper right corner of the poster, above the monster’s head.
The oval should overlap the window and fire escape.
16 Choose Edit > Paste Special > Paste Into. Click OK if you see the Paste Profile
Mismatch dialog box.
17 Select the Move tool ( ), and center the pasted image in the feathered area.
18 In the Layers panel, choose Luminosity from the Blending Mode menu, and move
the Opacity slider to 50%.
19 Choose File > Save. Then close the Faces.jpg file without saving it.
Review questions
1 What are the differences between using a Smart Filter and a regular filter to apply
effects to an image?
2 What do the Bloat and Pucker tools in the Liquify filter do?
3 What does the History panel do?
Review answers
1 Smart Filters are nondestructive: They can be adjusted, turned off and on, and
deleted at any time. In contrast, regular filters permanently change an image; once
applied, they cannot be removed. A Smart Filter can be applied only to a Smart
Object layer.
2 The Bloat tool moves pixels away from the center of the brush; the Pucker tool
moves pixels toward the center of the brush.
3 The History panel records recent steps you’ve performed in Photoshop. You can
return to an earlier step by selecting it in the History panel.

10. Painting with the Mixer Brush
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Customize brush settings.
• Clean the brush.
• Mix colors.
• Use an erodible tip.
• Create a custom brush preset.
• Use wet and dry brushes to blend color.
This lesson will take about an hour to complete. Please log in to your account on
peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” If you need to restore the start
files, download them from your Account page.

The Mixer Brush tool gives you flexibility, color-mixing abilities, and brush
strokes as if you were painting on a physical canvas.
PROJECT: DIGITAL PAINTING
About the Mixer Brush
In previous lessons, you’ve used brushes in Photoshop to perform various tasks. The
Mixer Brush is unlike other brushes in that it lets you mix colors with each other. You
can change the wetness of the brush and how it mixes the brush color with the color
already on the canvas.
Photoshop brushes have realistic bristles, so you can add textures that resemble those in
paintings you might create in the physical world. While this is a great feature in general,
it’s particularly useful when you’re using the Mixer Brush. You can also use an erodible
tip to achieve the effects you might get with charcoal pencils and pastels in the physical
world. Combining different bristle settings and brush tips with different wetness, paint-
load, and paint-mixing settings gives you opportunities to create exactly the look you
want.
Getting started
In this lesson, you’ll get acquainted with the Mixer Brush as well as the brush tip and

bristle options available in Photoshop. Start by taking a look at the final projects you’ll
create.
 Note
If Bridge isn’t installed, you’ll be prompted to install it when you choose
Browse In Bridge. For more information, see page 3.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to restore the default preferences. (See “Restoring
Default Preferences” on page 5.)
2 When prompted, click Yes to delete the Adobe Photoshop Settings file.
 Note
If you plan to do a lot of painting in Photoshop, think about using a graphics
tablet with a pressure-sensitive stylus, such as a Wacom Intous. Unlike with
a mouse, Photoshop can sense how you change the pressure, angle, and
rotation as you paint with a stylus.
3 Choose File > Browse In Bridge to open Adobe Bridge.
4 In Bridge, click Lessons in the Favorites panel. Double-click the Lesson10 folder
in the Content panel.
5 Preview the Lesson10 end files.
You’ll use the palette image to explore brush options and learn to mix colors. You’ll
then apply what you’ve learned to transform the landscape image into a watercolor.
6 Double-click 10Palette_Start.psd to open the file in Photoshop.
7 Choose File > Save As, and name the file 10Palette_Working.psd. Click OK if
the Photoshop Format Options dialog box appears.
Selecting brush settings
The image includes a palette and four tubes of color, which you’ll use to sample the

colors you’re working with. You’ll change settings as you paint different colors,
exploring brush tip settings and wetness options.
1 Select the Zoom tool (
), and zoom in to see the tubes of paint.
2 Select the Eyedropper tool (
), and click the red tube to sample its color.
The foreground color changes to red.
3 Select the Mixer Brush tool (
), hidden under the Brush tool (
).
 Note
When you hold down the Eyedropper tool on the image, Photoshop displays
a sampling ring that previews the color you’re selecting. The sampling ring
is available if Photoshop can use the graphics processor on your computer
(see the Performance panel in Photoshop preferences).
4 Choose Window > Brush to open the Brush panel. Select the first brush.
The Brush panel contains brush presets and several options for customizing brushes.

 Note
If the brushes in your Brush panel don’t match the ones shown in this
chapter, click the Brush Presets tab, click the Brush Presets panel menu,
choose Preset Manager, click the gear icon menu, choose Reset Brushes,
and click OK.
Experimenting with wetness options and brushes
The effect of the brush is determined by the Wet, Load, and Mix fields in the options bar.
Wet controls how much paint the brush picks up from the canvas. Load controls how
much paint the brush holds when you begin painting (as with a physical brush, it runs out
of paint as you paint with it). Mix controls the ratio of paint from the canvas and paint
from the brush.
You can change these settings separately. However, it’s faster to select a standard
combination from the pop-up menu.
1 In the options bar, choose Dry from the pop-up menu of blending brush
combinations.
When you select Dry, Wet is set to 0%, Load to 50%, and Mix is not applicable. With
the Dry preset, you paint opaque color; you cannot mix colors on a dry canvas.

2 Paint in the area above the red tube. Solid red appears. As you continue painting
without releasing the mouse, the paint eventually fades and runs out.
 Note
You can also sample paint by Alt-clicking or Option-clicking the Mixer
Brush tool. This samples the area within the brush size as an image, unless
you selected Load Solid Colors Only in the Current Brush Load menu in the
options bar.
3 With the Eyedropper tool, sample the blue color from the blue tube of paint.
4 Select the Mixer Brush, and then in the Brush panel, select the round fan-shaped
brush. Choose Wet from the pop-up menu in the options bar.
5 Paint above the blue tube. The paint mixes with the white background.
6 Choose Dry from the menu in the options bar, and then paint again above the blue
tube. A much darker, more opaque blue appears, and doesn’t mix with the white
background.
The bristles from the fan brush you selected are much more apparent than the bristles
you used originally. Changing bristle qualities makes a big difference in the texture you

paint.
 Note
If you aren’t getting the same results from the brushes, make sure the
Background layer is selected in the Layers panel.
7 In the Brush panel, decrease the number of bristles to 40%. Paint a little more
with the blue brush to see the change in texture. The bristles are much more
obvious in the stroke.
 Tip:
The Live Tip Brush Preview helps you visualize interactive brush
attributes such as the direction of the bristles as you paint, especially when
using a stylus. To show or hide the Live Tip Brush Preview, click the
Toggle The Live Tip Brush Preview button at the bottom of the Brush or
Brush Presets panel.
 Note
The Live Tip Brush Preview is available if Photoshop supports the
graphics processor on your computer (see the Performance panel in
Photoshop preferences).
8 Sample the yellow color from the yellow paint tube. In the Brush panel, select the
flat-point brush with fewer bristles (the one to the right of the fan brush). Choose
Dry from the menu in the options bar, and then paint in the area over the yellow
paint tube.

9 Choose Very Wet from the menu in the options bar, and then paint some more.
Now the yellow mixes with the white background.
Using an erodible tip
When you use an erodible tip, the width of the brush changes as you paint. Erodible tips
are represented in the Brush panel by pencil icons, because in the physical world,
pencils and pastels have erodible tips. You’ll experiment with erodible point and
triangle tips.
1 Sample the green color from the green paint tube, and choose Dry, Heavy Load in
the options bar.
2 Select one of the erodible tips (any tip with a pencil icon), and then choose
Erodible Point from the Shape menu. Change the brush’s Size to 30 px and
Softness to 100%.
The Softness value determines how quickly the tip erodes. A higher value results in
faster erosion.
3 Draw a zigzag line above the green paint tube.
The line gets thicker as the tip erodes.
4 Click Sharpen Tip in the Brush panel, and then draw a line next to the one you just
drew.

The sharper tip draws a much narrower line.
5 Choose Erodible Triangle from the Shape menu in the Brush panel, and draw a
zigzag line with it.
You can choose from several erodible tips, depending on the effect you want.
Mixing colors
You’ve used wet and dry brushes, changed brush settings, and mixed the paint with the
background color. Now, you’ll focus more on mixing colors with each other as you add
paint to the painter’s palette.
1 Zoom out just enough to see the full palette and the paint tubes.
2 Select the Paint mix layer in the Layers panel, so the color you paint won’t blend
with the brown palette on the Background layer.
The Mixer Brush tool mixes colors only on the active layer unless you select Sample All
Layers in the options bar.
3 Use the Eyedropper tool to sample the red color from the red paint tube. Then,
with the Mixer Brush tool selected, select the round blunt brush in the Brush panel
(the fifth brush). Then choose Wet from the pop-up menu in the options bar, and
paint in the top circle on the palette.
 Note
Depending on the complexity of your project and the performance of your
computer, you may need to be patient. Mixing colors can be an intensive
process.

4 Click the Clean The Brush After Each Stroke icon (
) in the options bar to
deselect it.
 Tip:
Use the Eyedropper tool to sample the color, since it’s on a different layer.
You can press I to select the Eyedropper tool.
5 Use the Eyedropper tool to sample the blue color from the blue paint tube, and
then use the Mixer Brush tool to paint in the same circle, mixing the red with the
blue until the color becomes purple.
You can use the Eyedropper tool to sample a color when the layer that contains the color
(in this case, the Background layer) isn’t selected.
6 Paint in the next circle. You’re painting in purple because the paint stays on the
brush until you clean it.
7 In the options bar, choose Clean Brush from the Current Brush Load pop-up menu.
The preview changes to indicate transparency, meaning the brush has no paint
loaded.

To remove the paint load from a brush, you can choose Clean Brush in the options bar.
To replace the paint load in a brush, sample a different color.
If you want Photoshop to clean the brush after each stroke, select the Clean Brush After
Each Stroke icon (
) in the options bar. To load the brush with the foreground color
after each stroke, select the Load Brush After Each Stroke icon (
) in the options bar.
By default, both of these options are selected.
8 Choose Load Brush from the Current Brush Load pop-up menu in the options bar
to load the brush with blue, the current foreground color. Paint blue in half of the
next circle.
9 Sample the yellow color from the yellow paint tube, and paint over the blue with
a wet brush to mix the two colors.
10 Fill the last circle with yellow and red paint, mixing the two with a wet brush to
create an orange color.
11 Hide the Circles layer in the Layers panel to remove the outlines on the palette.

12 Choose File > Save.
Tool tips from the Photoshop evangelist
Julieanne Kost is an official Adobe Photoshop evangelist.
Mixer Brush shortcuts
There are no default keyboard shortcuts for the Mixer Brush tool, but you
can create your own.
To create custom keyboard shortcuts:
1 Choose Edit > Keyboard Shortcuts.
2 Choose Tools from the Shortcuts For menu.
3 Scroll down to the bottom of the list.
4 Select a command, and then enter a custom shortcut. You can create
shortcuts for the following commands:
• Load Mixer Brush
• Clean Mixer Brush
• Toggle Mixer Brush Auto-Load
• Toggle Mixer Brush Auto-Clean
• Toggle Mixer Brush Sample All Layers
• Sharpen Erodible Tips
Creating a custom brush preset
Photoshop includes numerous brush presets, which are very handy. But if you need to
tweak a brush for your project, you might find it easier to create your own preset. You’ll
create a brush preset to use in the following exercise.

 Note
Due to an anomaly, numbers you enter in the Size, Bristles, Thickness, and
Stiffness fields may not appear in the correct order. To avoid the issue,
select only the digits (not the px units or percentage sign) in the field before
entering a new value.
1 In the Brush panel, select the following settings:
• Size: 36 px
• Shape: Round Fan
• Bristles: 35%
• Length: 32%
• Thickness: 2%
• Stiffness: 75%
• Angle: 0°
• Spacing: 2%
2 Choose New Brush Preset from the Brush panel menu.
3 Name the brush Landscape, and click OK.
4 Click Brush Presets in the Brush panel to open the Brush Presets panel.
The Brush Presets panel displays samples of the strokes created by different brushes. If

you know which brush you want to use, it can be easier to find by name. You’ll list them
by name now, so you can find your preset for the next exercise.
5 Choose Large List from the Brush Presets panel menu.
6 Scroll to the bottom of the list. The preset you created, Landscape, is the last
preset in the list.
7 Close the 10Palette_Working.psd file. If asked to save changes, click Save.
Mixing colors with a photograph
Earlier, you mixed colors with a white background and with each other. Now, you’ll use
a photograph as your canvas. You’ll add colors and mix them with each other and with
the background colors to transform a photograph of a landscape into a watercolor.
1 Choose File > Open. Double-click the 10Landscape_Start.jpg file in the Lesson10
folder to open it.
2 Choose File > Save As. Rename the file 10Landscape_Working.jpg, and click
Save. Click OK in the JPEG Options dialog box.

You’ll paint the sky first. Start by setting up the color and selecting the brush.
3 Click the Foreground color swatch in the Tools panel. Select a medium-light blue
color (we chose R=185, G=204, B=228), and then click OK.
4 Select the Mixer Brush tool (
), if it isn’t already selected. Choose Dry from the
pop-up menu in the options bar. Then select the Landscape brush from the Brush
Presets panel.
Presets are saved on your system, so they’re available when you work with any image.
5 Paint over the sky, moving in close to the trees. Because you’re using a dry brush,
the paint isn’t mixing with the colors beneath it.
6 Select a darker blue color (we used R=103, G=151, B=212), and add darker
color at the top of the sky, still using the dry brush.
7 Select a light blue color again, and choose Very Wet, Heavy Mix from the pop-up
menu in the options bar. Use this brush to scrub diagonally across the sky, blending
the two colors in with the background color. Paint in close to the trees, and smooth
out the entire sky.

When you’re satisfied with the sky, move on to the grass and trees.
8 Select a light green (we used R=92, G=157, B=13). Choose Dry from the pop-up
menu in the options bar. Then paint along the top section of the grass to highlight it.
9 Sample a darker green from the grass itself. Choose Very Wet, Heavy Mix in the
options bar. Then paint using diagonal strokes to blend the colors in the grass.
 Tip:
Remember that you can Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) to
sample a color instead of using the Eyedropper tool. To sample only solid
colors using the keyboard shortcut, choose Load Solid Colors Only from
the Current Brush Load pop-up menu in the options bar.
10 Sample a light green, and then use a dry brush to highlight the lighter areas of the
trees and the small tree in the middle of the landscape. Then select a dark green
(we used R=26, G=79, B=34), and choose Very Wet, Heavy Mix in the options
bar. Paint with the wet brush to mix together the colors in the trees.

 Tip:
For different effects, paint in different directions. With the Mixer Brush
tool, you can go wherever your artistic instincts lead you.
So far, so good. The background trees and the brown grasses are all that remain to be
painted.
11 Select a bluer color for the background trees (we used R=65, G=91, B=116).
Paint with a dry brush to add the blue at the top. Then choose Wet in the options
bar, and paint to mix the blue into the trees.
12 Sample a brown color from the tall grasses, and then select Very Wet, Heavy Mix
in the options bar. Paint along the top of the tall grass with up-and-down strokes
for the look of a field. Across the back area, behind the small center tree, paint
back and forth to create smooth strokes.
13 Choose File > Save, and close the document.

Voilá! You’ve created a masterpiece with your paints and brushes, and there’s no mess
to clean up.
Brush variations
You can go beyond the settings in these projects to explore numerous
variations in brush tips and settings. In particular, you may want to play
with Brush Pose and Shape Dynamics options.
Brush Pose settings change the tilt, rotation, and pressure of the brush. In
the Brush panel, select Brush Pose from the list on the left. Move the Tilt X
slider to tilt the brush from left to right. Move the Tilt Y slider to tilt the
brush forward and backward. Change the Rotation value to rotate the
bristles. (Rotation is more obvious when using a flat fan-shaped brush, for
example.) Change the Pressure setting to determine how much effect the
brush has on the artwork.
Shape Dynamics settings affect the steadiness of the stroke. Move the
sliders to the right to increase the variability in the stroke.
If you’re using a supported stylus such as those included with some Wacom
tablets, Photoshop recognizes attributes such as the pressure and angle of
the pen as you paint, and applies them to the brush. Choose Pen Pressure or
Pen Tilt from the Control menu in the Shape Dynamics settings to determine
how the value changes.
There are many more options—some subtle, some not so subtle—to create
variety in brush effects. Which options are available depend on the brush
tip shape you’ve selected. For more information about all the options, see
Photoshop Help.
Another option: the Oil Paint filter
This chapter shows you how to use Photoshop brushes to expressively
apply your own painterly style to a photograph. Another more automated
option is the Oil Paint filter. Choose Filter > Stylize > Oil Paint and
experiment with the settings. The Oil Paint filter is a quick and easy way to
make a photograph look more like a painting when you don’t have time to
manually paint with Photoshop brushes.

The Oil Paint filter is available if Photoshop supports the graphics
processor on your computer (see the Performance panel in Photoshop
preferences).
Painting gallery
The painting tools and brush tips in Photoshop let you create all kinds of
painting effects.
Erodible brush tips give an added realism to your art. The following pages
show examples of art created with the brush tips and tools in Photoshop.


Image © John Derry, www.pixelart.com

Image © Lynette Kent, www.LynetteKent.com
Review questions
1 What does the Mixer Brush do that other brushes don’t?
2 How do you load a mixer brush?
3 How do you clean a brush?
4 How can you display the names of brush presets?
5 What is the Live Tip Brush Preview, and how can you hide it?
6 What is an erodible tip?
Review answers
1 The Mixer Brush mixes the color of the paintbrush with colors on the canvas.
2 You can load a mixer brush by sampling a color, either by using the Eyedropper
tool or keyboard shortcuts (Alt-click or Option-click). Or, you can choose Load
Brush from the pop-up menu in the options bar to load the brush with the
foreground color.
3 To clean a brush, choose Clean Brush from the pop-up menu in the options bar.
4 To display brush presets by name, open the Brush Presets panel, and then choose
Large List (or Small List) from the Brush Presets panel menu.
5 The Live Tip Brush Preview shows you the direction the brush strokes are
moving. To hide or show the Live Tip Brush Preview, click the Toggle The Live
Tip Brush Preview icon at the bottom of the Brush panel or the Brush Presets
panel.
6 An erodible tip erodes, changing thickness, as you paint or draw. It’s similar to
the way a pencil or pastel tip changes shape as it erodes.

11. Editing Video
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Create a video timeline in Photoshop.
• Add media to a video group in the Timeline panel.
• Add motion to still images.
• Animate type and effects using keyframes.
• Add transitions between video clips.
• Include audio in a video file.
• Render a video.
This lesson will take about 90 minutes to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” If you need to restore the start
files, download them from your Account page.
You can edit video files in Photoshop using many of the same effects you use to
edit image files. You can create a movie from video files, still images, Smart
Objects, audio files, and type layers; apply transitions; and animate effects
using keyframes.
PROJECT: FAMILY VIDEO FROM MOBILE PHONE

Getting started
In this lesson, you’ll edit a video that was shot using a smartphone. You’ll create a video
timeline, import clips, add transitions and other video effects, and render the final
video. First, look at the final project to see what you’ll be creating.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to restore the default preferences. (See “Restoring
Default Preferences” on page 5.)
2 When prompted, click Yes to delete the Adobe Photoshop Settings file.
3 Choose File > Browse In Bridge.
4 In Bridge, select the Lessons folder in the Favorites panel. Then, double-click the
Lesson11 folder in the Content panel.
5 Double-click the 11End.mp4 file to open it in QuickTime Player or Windows
Media Player.
Note
If Bridge isn’t installed, you’ll be prompted to install it when you choose
Browse In Bridge. For more information, see page 3.
6 Click the Play button to view the final video.
The short video is a compilation of clips from a day at the beach. It includes transitions,
layer effects, animated text, and a musical track.
7 Close QuickTime Player or Windows Media Player, and return to Bridge.
8 Double-click the 11End.psd file to open it in Photoshop. Click Cancel if the
Create New Library from Document dialog box appears.

About the Timeline panel
If you’ve used a video-editing application such as Adobe Premiere® Pro or Adobe
After Effects®c, the Timeline panel is probably familiar. You use the Timeline panel to
assemble and arrange video clips, images, and audio files for a movie file. You can edit
the duration of each clip, apply filters and effects, animate attributes such as position
and opacity, mute sound, add transitions, and perform other standard video-editing tasks
without ever leaving Photoshop.
1 Choose Window > Timeline to open the Timeline panel.
Each video clip or image included in the project is represented in a box in the Timeline
panel and as a layer in the Layers panel. Video clips have a blue background in the
Timeline panel; image files have a purple background. At the bottom of the Timeline
panel is the audio track.
A. Play button
B. Playhead
C. Audio track
D. Image file
E. Video clip
2 Click Play in the Timeline panel to view the movie.
The playhead moves across the time ruler, displaying each frame of the movie.
3 Press the spacebar to pause playback.
4 Drag the playhead to another point in the time ruler.
The playhead’s location determines what appears in the document window.
On the left side of the Timeline panel are animation keyframe controls. You’ll use these
to animate the position and other attributes of image and video files across time.
When you work with video, Photoshop displays guidelines across the document
window. To minimize the chance that your content will be cut off along the edges of
some televisions, keep important content within the center area marked by the guides.
5 When you’ve finished exploring the end file, close it, but leave Photoshop open.

Don’t save any changes you might have made.
Creating a new video project
Working with video is a little different from working with still images in Photoshop.
You may find it easiest to create the project first, and then import the assets you’ll be
using. You’ll choose the video preset for this project, and then add nine video and image
files to include in your movie.
Creating a new file
Photoshop includes several film and video presets for you to choose from. You’ll create
a new file and select an appropriate preset.
1 In the Start workspace. click the New button, or choose File > New.
2 Name the file 11Start.psd.
3 Choose Film & Video from the Document Type menu.
4 In the Blank Document Presets section, choose HDV/HDTV 720p.
 Note
The video in this lesson was shot using an Apple iPhone, so one of the
HDV presets is appropriate. The 720p preset provides good quality
without providing too much data for easy online streaming.
5 Accept the default settings for the other options, and click Create.
6 Choose File > Save As, and save the file in the Lesson11 folder.

Importing assets
Photoshop provides tools specifically for working with video, such as the Timeline
panel, which may already be open because you previewed the end file. To ensure you
have access to the resources you need, you’ll select the Motion workspace and organize
your panels. Then you’ll import the video clips, images, and audio file you need to
create the movie.
1 Choose Window > Workspace > Motion.
2 Pull the top edge of the Timeline panel up so that the panel occupies the bottom
half of the workspace.
3 Select the Zoom tool (
), and then click Fit Screen in the options bar so that you
can see the entire canvas within the top half of the screen.
4 In the Timeline panel, click Create Video Timeline. Photoshop creates a new
video timeline, including two default tracks: Layer 0 and Audio Track.

5 Click the Video menu in the Layer 0 track, and choose Add Media.
 Note
If the media appear in reverse order, choose Edit > Undo and make sure
you select 1_Family.jpg first and then Shift-select 6_Sunset.jpg.

6 Navigate to the Lesson11 folder.
7 Shift-select the video and photo assets numbered 1–6, and click Open.
Photoshop imports all six of the assets you selected onto the same track, now named
Video Group 1, in the Timeline panel. It displays still images with a purple background
and video clips with a blue background. In the Layers panel, the assets appear as
individual layers within the layer group named Video Group 1. You don’t need the Layer
0 layer, so you’ll delete it.
8 Select Layer 0 in the Layers panel, and click the Delete Layer button at the bottom
of the panel. Click Yes to confirm the deletion.
 Note
When you use the Add Media button with an unspecified canvas size,
Photoshop determines the project size based on the size of the first video
file it finds—or, if you’re importing only images, based on the image size.
Changing the duration and size of clips in the timeline
The clips are of very different lengths, meaning they’d play for different amounts of
time. For this video, you want all the clips to be the same length, so you’ll shorten them
all to 3 seconds. The length of a clip (its duration) is measured in seconds and frames:
03:00 is 3 seconds; 02:25 is 2 seconds and 25 frames.
1 Drag the Control Timeline Magnification slider to the right at the bottom of the
Timeline panel to zoom in on the timeline. You want to be able to see a
thumbxknail of each clip and enough detail in the time ruler that you can accurately
change the duration of each clip.
2 Drag the right edge of the first clip (1_Family) to 03:00 on the time ruler.
Photoshop displays the end point and the duration as you drag so that you can find
the right stopping point.

3 Drag the right edge of the second clip (2_BoatRide) to a duration of 03:00.
Shortening a video clip this way doesn’t change its speed; it removes part of the clip
from the video. In this case, you want to use the first three seconds of each clip. If you
wanted to use a different portion of a video clip, you would shorten the clip from each
end. As you drag the end point of a video clip, Photoshop displays a preview so you can
see which part of the clip is included.
 Note
You’re shortening each clip to the same length here, but you can have clips
of varying lengths, depending on what’s appropriate for the project.
4 Repeat step 3 for each of the remaining clips so that each has a duration of 3
seconds.
The clips are now the right duration, but some of the images are the wrong size for the
canvas. You’ll resize the first image before continuing.
5 Select the 1_Family layer in the Layers panel. The clip is also selected in the
Timeline panel.
6 Click the triangle in the upper right corner of the 1_Family clip in the Timeline
panel to open the Motion panel.
 Tip:
To quickly change the duration of a video clip, click the arrow in the upper
right corner, and then type a new Duration value. This option isn’t
available for still images.
 Tip:

The arrow on the left side of a clip (next to the clip’s thumbnail) reveals
the attributes you can animate using keyframes. The arrow on the right side
of a clip opens the Motion panel.
7 Choose Pan & Zoom from the menu, and make sure Resize To Fill Canvas is
selected. Then click an empty area of the Timeline panel to close the Motion
panel.
The image resizes to fit the canvas, which is what you wanted. However, you don’t
actually want to pan and zoom, so you’ll remove the effect.
8 Open the Motion panel from the 1_Family clip again, and choose No Motion from
the menu. Click an empty area of the Timeline panel to close the Motion panel.
9 Choose File > Save. Click OK in the Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
Animating text with keyframes
Keyframes let you control animation, effects, and other changes that occur over time. A
keyframe marks the point in time where you specify a value, such as a position, size, or
style. To create a change over time, you must have at least two keyframes: one for the
state at the beginning of the change and one for the state at the end. Photoshop
interpolates the values for the positions in between so that the change takes effect
smoothly over the specified time. You’ll use keyframes to animate a movie title (Beach
Day) from left to right over the opening image.
1 Click the Video pop-up menu in the Video Group 1 track, and choose New Video
Group. Photoshop adds Video Group 2 to the Timeline panel.
2 Select the Horizontal Type tool ( ), and then click on the left edge of the image,
about halfway down from the top.

Photoshop creates a new type layer, named Layer 1, in the Video Group 2 track.
3 In the options bar, select a sans serif font such as Myriad Pro, set the type size to
600 pt, and select white for the type color.
4 Type BEACH DAY, and then click the check mark in the options bar ( ) to
commit the new text to the layer.
The text is large enough that it doesn’t all fit on the image. That’s okay; you’ll animate it
to move across the image.
5 In the Layers panel, change the opacity for the BEACH DAY layer to 25%.
6 In the Timeline panel, drag the end point of the type layer to 03:00 so that it has
the same duration as the 1_Family layer.
7 Click the arrow next to the thumbnail in the BEACH DAY clip to display the
clip’s attributes.
8 Make sure the playhead is at the beginning of the time ruler.
9 Click the stopwatch icon ( ) next to the Transform property to set an initial
keyframe for the layer.
The keyframe appears as a yellow diamond in the timeline.
 Tip:

Photoshop displays the playhead’s location in the lower left corner of the
Timeline panel.
10 Select the Move tool ( ), and use it to drag the type layer over the canvas so that
the top of the letters align with the lower of the two top guidelines. Drag it to the
right so that only the left edge of the letter “B” in the word “BEACH” is visible on
the canvas. The keyframe you set in step 9 ensures that the text will be in this
position at the beginning of the movie.
11 Move the playhead to the last frame of the first clip (02:29).
12 Press the Shift key as you drag the type layer to the left over the canvas so that
only the right edge of the “Y” in the word “DAY” is visible. Pressing the Shift key
ensures the type remains level as you move it across.
Because you’ve changed the position, Photoshop creates a new keyframe.
13 Move the playhead across the first three seconds of the time ruler to preview the
animation. The title moves across the image.
14 Click the triangle next to the thumbnail of the text clip to close the clip’s
attributes, and then choose File > Save to save your work so far.
Creating effects
One of the benefits of working with video files in Photoshop is that you can create
effects using adjustment layers, styles, and simple transformations.
Adding adjustment layers to video clips
You’ve used adjustment layers with still images throughout this book. They work just as
well on video clips. When you apply an adjustment layer in a video group, Photoshop
applies it only to the layer immediately below it in the Layers panel.
1 Select the 3_DogAtBeach layer in the Layers panel.
2 In the Timeline panel, move the playhead to the beginning of the 3_DogAtBeach
layer so you can see the effect as you apply it.

3 In the Adjustments panel, click the Black & White button.
4 In the Properties panel, leave the default preset, and select Tint. The default tint
color creates a sepia effect that works well for this clip. You can experiment with
the sliders and the tint color to modify the black-and-white effect to your taste.
5 Move the playhead across the 3_DogAtBeach clip in the Timeline panel to
preview the effect.
 Note
If you had imported the video file using the Place command, so that it was
not in a video group, to limit the adjustment layer to a single video layer
you would have to set up the adjustment layer as a clipping mask, as you
did on page 98.
Animating a zoom effect
Even simple transformations become interesting effects when you animate them. You’ll
use animation to zoom in on the 4_Dogs clip.
1 Move the playhead to the beginning of the 4_Dogs clip in the Timeline panel
(09:00).
2 Click the arrow at the top right corner of the 4_Dogs clip to display the Motion
panel.
3 Choose Zoom from the pop-up menu, and choose Zoom In from the Zoom menu.
On the Zoom From grid, select the upper left corner to zoom in from that point.
Make sure Resize To Fill Canvas is selected, and then click an empty area of the
Timeline panel to close the Motion panel.

4 Drag the playhead across the clip to preview the effect.
You’ll enlarge the image in the last keyframe to make the zoom more dramatic.
5 Click the arrow next to the thumbnail of the 4_Dogs clip to reveal the attributes
for the clip.
There are two keyframes: one for the beginning of the Zoom In effect, and one for the
end.
6 Click the right arrow next to the Transform attribute (under Video Group 1 on the
left side of the Timeline panel) to move the playhead to the last keyframe if it’s not
already there, and choose Edit > Free Transform. Then enter 120% for Width and
Height in the options bar. Click the Commit Transform button ( ) to confirm the
transformation.
 Tip:
You can move to the next keyframe by clicking the right arrow next to the
attribute in the Timeline panel. Click the left arrow to move to the previous
keyframe.
7 Drag the playhead across the 4_Dogs clip in the time ruler to preview the
animation again.
8 Choose File > Save.

Animating an image to create a motion effect
You’ll animate another transformation to create the appearance of motion. You want the
image to begin with the diver’s legs and end with his hands.
1 Move the playhead to the end of the 5_Jumping clip (14:29), and select the clip.
Press Shift while you move the image down in the document window so that the
hands are near the top of the canvas, putting the diver in the final position.
2 Display the attributes for the clip, and click the stopwatch icon for the Position
attribute to add a keyframe.
3 Move the playhead to the beginning of the clip (12:00). Press Shift while you
move the image up so that the feet are near the bottom of the canvas.
Photoshop adds a keyframe.
4 Move the playhead across the time ruler to preview the animation.
5 Close the clip’s attributes. Then choose File > Save to save your work so far.
Adding pan & zoom effects
You can easily add features similar to the pan and zoom effects used in documentaries.
You’ll add them to the sunset to bring the video to a dramatic close.
1 Move the playhead to the beginning of the 6_Sunset clip.
2 Open the Motion panel for the clip. Choose Pan & Zoom from the pop-up menu,
choose Zoom Out from the Zoom menu, and make sure Resize To Fill Canvas is
selected. Then click an empty area of the Timeline panel to close the Motion
panel.

3 Move the playhead across the last clip to preview the effects.
Adding transitions
A transition moves a scene from one shot to the next. Simply drag and drop to add
transitions to clips in Photoshop.
1 Click the Go To First Frame button ( ) in the upper left corner of the Timeline
panel to return the playhead to the beginning of the time ruler.
2 Click the Transition button ( ) in the upper left corner of the Timeline panel.
Select Cross Fade, and change the Duration value to .25 s (for a quarter of a
second).
3 Drag the Cross Fade transition between the 1_Family and 2_BoatRide clips.
Photoshop adjusts the ends of the clips to apply the transition and adds a small white
icon in the lower corner of the second clip.
4 Drag Cross Fade transitions between each of the other clips.
5 Drag a Fade With Black transition onto the end of the final clip.

6 To make the transition smoother, extend the Fade With Black transition by
stretching its left side to about one-third the total length of the clip.
7 Choose File > Save.
Adding audio
You can add a separate audio track to a video file in Photoshop. In fact, the Timeline
panel includes an audio track by default. You’ll add an MP3 file to play as the
soundtrack for this short video.
1 Click the musical-note icon in the Audio Track at the bottom of the Timeline
panel, and choose Add Audio from the pop-up menu.
2 Select the beachsong.mp3 file from the Lesson11 folder, and click Open.
The audio file is added to the timeline, but it’s much longer than the video. You’ll use

the Split At Playhead tool to shorten it.
3 Move the playhead to the end of the 6_Sunset clip. With the audio file still
selected, click the Split At Playhead tool ( ).
The audio file is clipped at that point, becoming two audio clips.
 Tip:
You can also add an audio track by clicking the + sign at the far right end of
the track in the Timeline panel.
4 Select the second audio file segment, the one that begins after the end of the
6_Sunset clip. Press the Delete key on your keyboard to delete the selected clip.
Now the audio file is the same length as the video. You’ll add a fade so that it ends
smoothly.
5 Click the small arrow at the right edge of the audio clip to open the Audio panel.
Then enter 3 seconds for Fade In and 5 seconds for Fade Out.
6 Save your work so far.
Muting unwanted audio
So far, you’ve previewed portions of the video by moving the playhead across the time
ruler. Now you’ll preview the entire video using the Play button in the Timeline panel,
and then mute any extraneous audio from the video clips.
1 Click the Play button ( ) in the upper left corner of the Timeline panel to preview
the video so far.
It’s looking good, but there is some unwanted background noise from the video clips.
You’ll mute that extra sound.

2 Click the small triangle at the right end of the 2_BoatRide clip.
3 Click the Audio tab to see audio options, and then select Mute Audio. Click an
empty area of the Timeline panel to close the Audio/Video panel.
4 Click the small triangle at the right end of the 3_DogAtBeach clip.
5 Click the Audio tab to see audio options, and then select Mute Audio. Click an
empty area of the Timeline panel to close the panel.
6 Save your work.
Rendering video
You’re ready to render your project to video. Photoshop provides several rendering
options. You’ll select options appropriate for streaming video to share on the YouTube
website. For information about other rendering options, see Photoshop Help.
1 Choose File > Export > Render Video, or click the Render Video button ( ) in the
lower left corner of the Timeline panel.
2 Name the file 11Final.mp4.
3 Click Select Folder, and then navigate to the Lesson11 folder, and click OK or
Choose.
4 From the Preset menu, choose YouTube HD 720p 29.97.
5 Click Render.

Photoshop displays a progress bar as it exports the video. Depending on your system,
the rendering process may take several minutes.
6 Save your work.
Depending on your system, this may take a while.
7 Locate the 11Final.mp4 file in the Lesson11 folder in Bridge. Double-click it to
view the video you made.

Review questions
1 What is a keyframe, and how do you create one?
2 How do you add a transition between clips?
3 How do you render a video?
Review answers
1 A keyframe marks the point in time where you specify a value, such as a position,
size, or style. To create a change over time, you must have at least two keyframes:
one for the state at the beginning of the change and one for the state at the end. To
create an initial keyframe, click the stopwatch icon next to the attribute you want
to animate for the layer. Photoshop creates additional keyframes each time you
change the values of that attribute.
2 To add a transition, click the Transition button in the upper left corner of the
Timeline panel, and then drag a transition onto a clip.
3 To render a video, choose File > Export > Render Video, or click the Render
Video button in the lower left corner of the Timeline panel. Then select the video
settings that are appropriate for your intended output.

12. Working with Camera Raw
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Open a proprietary camera raw image in Adobe Camera Raw.
• Adjust tone and color in a raw image.
• Sharpen an image in Camera Raw.
• Synchronize settings for multiple images.
• Open a Camera Raw image as a Smart Object in Photoshop.
• Apply Camera Raw as a filter in Photoshop.
This lesson will take about an hour to complete. Please log in to your account on
peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” As you work on this lesson, you’ll
preserve the start files. If you need to restore the start files, download them from
your Account page.

Raw images give you greater flexibility, especially in setting color and tone.
Camera Raw lets you tap into that potential. It can be a useful tool even when
you’re starting with a JPEG or TIFF image, or when you apply it as a filter in
Photoshop.
PROJECT: ADVANCED PHOTO RETOUCHING
Getting started
In this lesson, you’ll edit several digital images using Photoshop and Adobe Camera
Raw, which comes with Photoshop. You’ll use a variety of techniques to touch up and
improve the appearance of digital photographs. You’ll start by viewing the before and
after images in Adobe Bridge.

 Note
We used Adobe Camera Raw 9.7, which was the current version at the time
of publication. Adobe updates Camera Raw frequently; if you’re using a
later version, some of the steps in this lesson may not match what you see.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to restore the default preferences. (See “Restoring
Default Preferences” on page 5.)
2 When prompted, click Yes to delete the Adobe Photoshop Settings file.
3 Choose File > Browse In Bridge to open Adobe Bridge.
4 In the Favorites panel in Bridge, click the Lessons folder. Then, in the Content
panel, double-click the Lesson12 folder to open it.
5 Adjust the thumbnail slider, if necessary, so that you can see the thumbnail
previews clearly. Then look at the 12A_Start.crw and 12A_End.psd files.
 Note
If you haven’t installed Bridge, you’ll be prompted to do so when you
choose Browse In Bridge. For more information, see page 3.
The original photograph of a Spanish-style church is a camera raw file, so it doesn’t
have the usual .psd or .jpg file extension you’ve worked with so far in this book. It was
shot with a Canon Digital Rebel camera and has the Canon proprietary .crw file
extension. You’ll process this proprietary camera raw image to make it brighter, sharper,
and clearer, and then save it as a JPEG file for the web and as a PSD file so that you

could work on it further in Photoshop.
6 Compare the 12B_Start.nef and 12B_End.psd thumbnail previews.
This time, the start file was taken with a Nikon camera, and the raw image has an .nef
extension. You’ll perform color corrections and image enhancements in Camera Raw
and Photoshop to achieve the end result.
About camera raw files
A camera raw file contains unprocessed picture data from a digital camera’s image
sensor. Raw sensor data has not yet been converted to a standard RGB color image file.
Many digital cameras can save images in camera raw format. The advantage of camera
raw files is that they let the photographer—rather than the camera—interpret the image
data and make adjustments and conversions. (In contrast, shooting JPEG images with
your camera locks the camera’s processing into the image.) Because the camera doesn’t
do any image processing when you shoot a camera raw photo, you can use Adobe
Camera Raw to set the white balance, tonal range, contrast, color saturation, and
sharpening more freely than you can after the raw image is converted to a standard RGB
image. Think of camera raw files as photo film negatives: You can go back and
reprocess the file any time you like to achieve the results you want. To create camera
raw files, set your digital camera to save files in its own, possibly proprietary, raw file
format. When you download the file from your camera, it has a filename extension such
as .nef (from Nikon) or .crw (from Canon). In Bridge or Photoshop, you can process
camera raw files from a myriad of supported digital cameras from Canon, Kodak, Leica,
Nikon, and other makers—and even process multiple images simultaneously. You can
then export the proprietary camera raw files to DNG, JPEG, TIFF, or PSD file format.
 Note

Camera raw files are typically unique to each camera model’s sensor. If
you have CRW files from three different Canon camera models and NEF
files from three Nikon models, chances are those represent six different
formats. If you buy a new camera, you might need an Adobe Camera Raw
update that adds support for its raw format.
You can process camera raw files obtained from supported cameras, but you can also
open TIFF and JPEG images in Camera Raw, which includes some editing features that
aren’t in Photoshop. However, you won’t have the same flexibility with white balance
and other settings if you’re using a TIFF or JPEG image. Although Camera Raw can
open and edit a camera raw image file, it cannot save a camera raw format image back
to a proprietary camera raw format. However, Adobe Camera Raw can save to the open
Adobe DNG camera raw format.
Processing files in Camera Raw
When you make adjustments to an image in Camera Raw, such as straightening or
cropping the image, Photoshop and Bridge preserve the original file data. This way, you
can edit the image as you desire, export the edited image, and keep the original intact for
future use or other adjustments.
Opening images in Camera Raw
You can open Camera Raw from either Bridge or Photoshop, and you can apply the
same edits to multiple files simultaneously. This is especially useful if you’re working
with images that were all shot in the same environment, and which therefore need the
same lighting and other adjustments.
Camera Raw provides extensive controls for adjusting white balance, exposure,
contrast, sharpness, tone curves, and much more. In this exercise, you’ll edit one image
and then apply the settings to similar images.
1 In Bridge, open the Lessons/Lesson12/Mission folder, which contains three shots
of the Spanish church you previewed earlier.
2 Shift-click to select all of the images—Mission01.crw, Mission02.crw, and
Mission03.crw—and then choose File > Open In Camera Raw.

A. Filmstrip
B. Filmstrip divider (drag to adjust)
C. Toolbar
D. RGB values
E. Image adjustment tabs
F. Histogram
G. Camera Raw Settings menu
H. Zoom levels
I. Click to display workflow options
J. Multi-image navigation controls
K. Adjustment sliders

The Camera Raw dialog box displays a large preview of the first image, and a filmstrip
down the left side displays all open images. The histogram in the upper right corner
shows the tonal range of the selected image; the workflow options link below the
preview window displays the selected image’s color space, bit depth, size, and
resolution. Tools along the top of the dialog box let you zoom, pan, straighten, and make
other adjustments to the image. Tabbed panels on the right side of the dialog box give
you more nuanced options for adjusting the image: You can correct the white balance,
adjust the tone, sharpen the image, remove noise, adjust color, and make other changes.
You can also save settings as a preset, and then apply them later.
For the best results using Camera Raw, plan your workflow to move from left to right
and top to bottom. That is, you’ll often want to use the tools across the top first, and then
move through the panels in order, making changes as necessary.
You will explore these controls now as you edit the first image file.
3 Click each thumbnail in the filmstrip to preview all the images before you begin.
Or, you can click the Forward button under the main preview window to cycle
through them. When you’ve seen all three, select the Mission01.crw image again.

Adjusting white balance
An image’s white balance reflects the lighting conditions under which it was captured. A
digital camera records the white balance at the time of exposure; this is the value that
initially appears in the Camera Raw dialog box image preview.
White balance comprises two components. The first is temperature, which is measured
in kelvins and determines the level of “coolness” or “warmness” of the image—that is,

its cool blue-green tones or warm yellow-red tones. The second component is tint,
which compensates for magenta or green color casts in the image.
Depending on the settings you’re using on your camera and the environment in which
you’re shooting (for example, if there’s artificial light or mixed light sources), you may
want to adjust the white balance for the image. If you plan to modify the white balance,
make that the first thing you do, as it will affect all other changes in the image.
1 If the Basic panel isn’t already displayed on the right side of the dialog box, click the
Basic button ( ) to open it.
 Tip:
As long as an image is in raw format, you can adjust settings such as white
balance with a lot of freedom. After a raw image is converted to a standard
format (such as JPEG), its adjustment range is more limited before image
quality starts to break down.
By default, As Shot is selected in the White Balance menu. Camera Raw applies the
white balance settings that were in your camera at the time of exposure. Camera Raw
includes several White Balance presets, which you can use as a starting point to see
different lighting effects.
2 Choose Cloudy from the White Balance menu.
Camera Raw adjusts the temperature and tint for a cloudy day. Sometimes a preset is an
instant fix. In this case, though, there’s still a blue cast to the image. You’ll adjust the
white balance manually.
3 Select the White Balance tool (
) at the top of the Camera Raw dialog box.
To set an accurate white balance, select an object that should be white or gray. Camera
Raw uses that information to determine the color of the light in which the scene was
shot, and then adjusts for scene lighting automatically.

4 Click the white clouds in the image. The lighting of the image changes.
5 Click a different area of the clouds. The lighting shifts.
You can use the White Balance tool to find the best lighting for the scene quickly and
easily. Clicking different areas changes the lighting without making any permanent
changes to the file, so you can experiment freely.
6 Click the clouds directly to the left of the steeple. This selection removes most of
the color casts and results in realistic lighting.
7 Move the Tint slider to −22 to intensify the greens.
 Tip:
To undo the settings, press Ctrl+Z (Windows) or Command+Z (Mac).

8 To see the changes you’ve made, click the preview mode button (
) at the bottom
of the window, and choose Before/After Left/Right from the pop-up menu.
Camera Raw displays the Before image on the left and the After image on the right so
you can see the changes you’ve made.
 Tip:
To expand Camera Raw to fill the screen, click the Toggle Full-Screen
Mode button (
) on the far right side of the toolbar, or press F.

9 To see only the After image again, choose Single View from the preview mode
pop-up menu. If you prefer, you can leave both views visible so you can see how
the image changes as you continue to alter it.
Making tonal adjustments in Camera Raw
The group of sliders in the middle of the Basic panel affects the tonal distribution of the
image. Except for Contrast, moving a slider to the right lightens the affected areas of the
image, and moving it to the left darkens those areas. Exposure sets the overall brightness
of the image. The Whites slider defines the white point, or the lightest point of the
image. Conversely, the Blacks slider sets the black point, or the darkest point in the
image. The Highlights and Shadows sliders increase detail in the highlights and the
shadows, respectively.
 Tip:
For the best effect, increase the Clarity slider until you see halos near the

edge details, and then reduce the setting slightly.
Dragging the Contrast slider to the right moves darker and lighter midtones away from
the midtone; dragging left moves those tones toward the midtone. For more nuanced
contrast adjustments, you can use the Clarity slider, which adds depth to an image by
increasing local contrast, especially around the midtones.
The Saturation slider adjusts the intensity of all colors in the image equally. The
Vibrance slider has a greater effect on undersaturated colors. You can use it to bring life
to a background without oversaturating any skin tones in the image, for example.
You can use the Auto option to let Camera Raw attempt to correct the image tone, or you
can select your own settings.
1 Click Auto in the Basic panel.
Camera Raw increases the exposure and changes several other settings. You could use
this as a starting point. However, in this exercise, you’ll return to the default settings and
adjust them yourself.
2 Click Default in the Basic panel.
3 Change the sliders as follows:
• Exposure: +0.20
• Contrast: +18
• Highlights: +8
• Shadows: +63
• Whites: +12
• Blacks: −14
• Clarity: +3
• Vibrance: +4
• Saturation: +1

These settings help pump up the midtones of the image so that it looks bolder and more
dimensional without being oversaturated.
About the Camera Raw histogram
The histogram in the upper right corner of the Camera Raw dialog box
simultaneously shows the red, green, and blue channels of the selected
image, and updates interactively as you adjust settings. As you move any
tool over the preview image, the RGB values for the area under the pointer
appear below the histogram. Selecting the top left or right square indicates
where on the image current settings are clipping (losing details) in the
shadows or highlights, respectively.
 Tip:
Indications of clipped shadows or highlights don’t always mean you’ve
overcorrected an image. For example, a clipped specular highlight (such as

a reflection of the sun or a studio light on metal) is acceptable because a
specular highlight has no detail to lose.
Applying sharpening
Photoshop offers several sharpening filters, but when an image is in raw format it’s
often a good idea to use the Sharpening controls in Camera Raw. The Sharpening
controls are in the Detail panel. To see the effect of sharpening in the preview panel, you
must view the image at 100% or greater.
1 Double-click the Zoom tool (
) on the left side of the toolbar to zoom in to
100%. Then select the Hand tool (
), and pan the image to see the cross at the top
of the mission tower.
2 Click the Detail button ( ) to open the Detail panel.
The Amount slider determines how much sharpening Camera Raw applies. Typically,
you’ll want to exaggerate the amount of sharpening at first, and then adjust it after you’ve
set the other sliders.
3 Move the Amount slider to 100.
The Radius slider determines the pixel area Camera Raw analyzes as it sharpens the
image. For most images, you’ll get the best results if you keep the radius low, even
below one pixel. A larger radius can begin to cause an unnatural look, almost like a
watercolor.
4 Move the Radius slider to 0.9.
The Detail slider determines how much detail you’ll see. Even when this slider is set to
0, Camera Raw performs some sharpening. Typically, you’ll want to keep the Detail
setting relatively low.
5 Move the Detail slider to 25, if it isn’t already there.
The Masking slider determines which parts of the image Camera Raw sharpens. When
the Masking value is high, Camera Raw sharpens only those parts of the image that have
strong edges.
6 Move the Masking slider to 61.

After you’ve adjusted the Radius, Detail, and Masking sliders, you can lower the
Amount slider to finalize the sharpening.
7 Decrease the Amount slider to 70.
 Tip:
Press Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) as you move the Masking slider to
see what Camera Raw will sharpen.
Sharpening the image gives stronger definition to the details and edges. The Masking
slider lets you target the sharpening effect to edges and lines in the image, so that
artifacts don’t appear in unfocused or solid areas.
When you make adjustments in Camera Raw, the original file data is preserved. Your
adjustment settings for the image are stored either in the Camera Raw database file or in
“sidecar” XMP files that accompany the original image file in the same folder. These
XMP files retain the adjustments you made in Camera Raw when you move the image
file to a storage medium or another computer.
 Tip:
If you have difficulty seeing the effects of sharpening, change the zoom
level to 100%.
Synchronizing settings across images
All three of the mission images were shot at the same time under the same lighting
conditions. Now that you’ve made the first one look stunning, you can automatically
apply the same settings to the other two images. You do this using the Synchronize
command.
1 In the upper left corner of the Camera Raw dialog box, click the Filmstrip menu
button, and choose Select All to select all of the images in the filmstrip.
2 Click the Filmstrip menu button again, and choose Sync Settings.

The Synchronize dialog box appears, listing all the settings you can apply to the images.
By default, all options except Crop, Spot Removal, and Local Adjustments are selected.
You can accept the default for this project, even though you didn’t change all the settings.
3 Click OK in the Synchronize dialog box.
When you synchronize the settings across all of the selected images, the thumbnails
update to reflect the changes you made. To preview the images, click each thumbnail in
the filmstrip.
Saving Camera Raw changes
You can save your changes in different ways for different purposes. First, you’ll save the
images with adjustments as low-resolution JPEG files that you can share on the web.
Then, you’ll save one image, Mission01, as a Photoshop file that you can open as a
Smart Object in Photoshop. When you open an image as a Smart Object in Photoshop,
you can return to Camera Raw at any time to make further adjustments.
 Note
A yellow alert triangle may temporarily appear over an preview or
thumbnail image while Camera Raw is synchronizing settings to that image.
When the triangle goes away, the preview or thumbnail is up to date.
1 In the Camera Raw dialog box, click the Filmstrip menu button, and choose Select
All to select all three images.

2 Click Save Images in the lower left corner.
3 In the Save Options dialog box, do the following:
• Choose Save In Same Location from the Destination menu.
• In the File Naming area, leave “Document Name” in the first box.
• Choose JPEG from the Format menu, and set the Quality level to High (8–9).
• In the Color Space area, choose sRGB IEC61966-2.1 from the Space menu.
• In the Image Sizing area, select Resize To Fit, and then choose Long Side from
the Resize To Fit menu.
• Enter 800 pixels. This will set the long side of an image to 800 pixels whether
it’s a portrait (tall) or landscape (wide) image. When you choose Long Side, the
dimension of the short side will automatically be adjusted proportionally.
• Type 72 pixels/inch for the Resolution value.
These settings will save your corrected images as smaller, downsampled JPEG files,
which you can share with colleagues on the web. They’ll be resized so that most
viewers won’t need to scroll to see the entire image when it opens. Your files will be
named Mission01.jpg, Mission02.jpg, and Mission03.jpg.
4 Click Save.

Bridge returns you to the Camera Raw dialog box, and a readout in the bottom left
corner indicates how many images have been processed until all the images have been
saved. The CRW thumbnails still appear in the Camera Raw dialog box. In Bridge,
however, you now also have JPEG versions as well as the original CRW image files,
which you can continue to edit or leave for another time.
Now, you’ll open a copy of the Mission01 image in Photoshop.
 Note

If you see a message that says “Skip loading optional and third-party plug-
ins?” click No. The message appears if the Shift key is held down when
Photoshop starts up.
5 Select the Mission01.crw image thumbnail in the filmstrip in the Camera Raw
dialog box. Then press the Shift key, and click Open Object at the bottom of the
dialog box.
The Open Object button opens the image as a Smart Object layer in Photoshop; you can
double-click the Smart Object thumbnail in the Layers panel to open Camera Raw and
continue making raw-format-based-adjustments at any time.
If, instead, you had clicked Open Image, the image would open as a standard Photoshop
layer, and no more raw format edits would be possible. The Open Image button changes
into the Open Object button when you Shift-click it.
6 In Photoshop, choose File > Save As. In the Save As dialog box, choose
Photoshop for the format, rename the file Mission_Final.psd, navigate to the
Lesson12 folder, and click Save. Click OK if the Photoshop Format Options

dialog box appears. Then close the file.
 Tip:
To make the Open Object button the default, click the underlined workflow
options link at the bottom of the Camera Raw dialog box, select Open In
Photoshop As Smart Objects, and click OK.
About saving files in Camera Raw
Every camera model saves raw images in a unique format, but Adobe
Camera Raw can process many raw file formats. Camera Raw processes
the raw files with default image settings based on built-in camera profiles
for supported cameras and on the EXIF (Exchangeable Image File format)
data recorded by digital cameras. EXIF data can include exposure and lens
information.
You can save the proprietary files in DNG format (the format saved by
Adobe Camera Raw), JPEG, TIFF, and PSD. All of these formats can be
used to save RGB and CMYK continuous-tone, bitmapped images, and all
of them except DNG are also available in the Photoshop Save and Save As
dialog boxes.
• The DNG (Adobe Digital Negative) format contains raw image data
from a digital camera and metadata that defines what the image data
means. DNG is meant to be an industry-wide standard format for raw
image data, helping photographers manage the variety of proprietary raw
formats and providing a compatible archival format. (You can save this
format only from the Camera Raw dialog box.)
• The JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group) file format is
commonly used to display photographs and other continuous-tone RGB
images on the web. Higher-resolution JPEG compresses file size by
selectively discarding data, starting with the visual information that our
eyes are least likely to notice. The greater the compression, the lower the
image quality.
• TIFF (Tagged Image File Format) is a flexible format supported by
virtually all paint, image-editing, and page layout applications. It can
save Photoshop layers. TIFF images can also be produced by most
applications that control image capture hardware such as scanners.
• PSD format is the Photoshop native file format. Because of the tight
integration between Adobe products, other Adobe applications such as
Adobe Illustrator and Adobe InDesign can directly import PSD files and
preserve many Photoshop features.
Once you open a file in Photoshop, you can save it in many different
formats, including Large Document Format (PSB), Cineon, Photoshop Raw,

or PNG. Not to be confused with camera raw file formats, the Photoshop
Raw format (RAW) is a file format for transferring images between
applications and computer platforms.
For more information about file formats in Camera Raw and Photoshop,
see Photoshop Help.
Applying advanced color correction
You’ll use Levels, the Healing Brush tool, and other Photoshop features to enhance the
image of this model.
Adjust the white balance in Camera Raw
The original image of the bride has a slight color cast. You’ll start your color
corrections in Camera Raw, setting the white balance and adjusting the overall tone of
the image.
1 In Bridge, navigate to the Lesson12 folder. Select the 12B_Start.nef file, and
choose File > Open In Camera Raw.
2 In Camera Raw, select the White Balance tool (
), and then click a white area in
the model’s dress to adjust the temperature and remove a green color cast.
3 Adjust other sliders in the Basic panel to brighten and intensify the image:
• Increase Exposure to +0.30.
• Increase Contrast to +15.
• Increase Clarity to +8.

4 Press the Shift key, and click Open Object.
The image opens in Photoshop as a Smart Object.
 Note
Your Temperature and Tint values may vary slightly from what is shown in
the figure for step 3, because the exact values depend on where you
clicked.
Adjusting levels
The tonal range of an image represents the amount of contrast, or detail, in the image and
is determined by the image’s distribution of pixels, ranging from the darkest pixels
(black) to the lightest pixels (white). You’ll use a Levels adjustment layer to fine-tune
the tonal range in this image.
1 In Photoshop, choose File > Save As. Name the file Model_final.psd, and click
Save. Click OK if you see the Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
2 Click the Levels button in the Adjustments panel.

Photoshop adds a Levels adjustment layer to the Layers panel. The Levels controls and a
histogram appear in the Properties panel. The histogram displays the range of dark and
light values in the image. The left (black) triangle represents the shadows; the right
(white) triangle represents the highlights; and the middle (gray) triangle represents the
midtones, or gamma. Unless you’re aiming for a special effect, the ideal histogram has
its black point at the beginning of the data and its white point at the end of the data, and
the middle portion has fairly uniform peaks and valleys, representing adequate pixel
data in the midtones.
3 Click the Calculate A More Accurate Histogram button (
) on the left side of the
histogram. Photoshop replaces the histogram.
There is a small bump on the far right side of the histogram, representing the current
white point, but the bulk of the data ends further to the left. You want to set the white
point closer to where most of the data ends.
Pro photo workflow

A photographer for more than 25 years, Jay Graham began his career
designing and building custom homes. Today, Graham has clients in the
advertising, architectural, editorial, and travel industries.
See Jay Graham’s portfolio on the web at jaygraham.com.
Good habits make all the difference
A sensible workflow and good work habits will keep you enthused about
digital photography, help your images shine—and save you from the night
terrors of losing work you never backed up. Here’s an outline of the basic
workflow for digital images from a professional photographer with more
than 25 years’ experience. To help you get the most from the images you
shoot, Jay Graham offers guidelines for setting up your camera, creating a
basic color workflow, selecting file formats, organizing images, and
showing off your work.
Graham uses Adobe Photoshop Lightroom® to organize thousands of images.
“The biggest complaint from people is they’ve lost their image. Where
is it? What does it look like?” says Graham. “So naming is important.”
Start out right by setting up your camera preferences
If your camera has the option, it’s generally best to shoot in its camera raw
file format, which captures all the image information you need. With one
camera raw photo, says Graham, “you can go from daylight to an indoor
tungsten image without degradation” when it’s reproduced. If it makes more
sense to shoot in JPEG for your project, use fine compression and high

resolution.
Start with the best material
Get all the data when you capture—at fine compression and high
resolution. You can’t go back later.
Organize your files
Name and catalogue your images as soon after downloading them as
possible. “If the camera names files, eventually it resets and produces
multiple files with the same name,” says Graham. Use Adobe Photoshop
Lightroom to rename, rank, and add metadata to the photos you plan to
keep; cull those you don’t.
Graham names his files by date (and possibly subject). He would store a
series of photos taken Dec. 12, 2013 at Stinson Beach in a folder named
“20131212_Stinson_01”; within the folder, he names each image
incrementally, and each image has a unique filename. “That way, it lines up
on the hard drive real easily,” he says. Follow Windows naming
conventions to keep filenames usable on non-Macintosh platforms (32
characters maximum; only numbers, letters, underscores, and hyphens).
Convert raw images to DNG
It may be best to convert all your camera raw images to the DNG format.
Unlike many cameras’ proprietary raw formats, the specifications for this
format are publicly available so that software developers and device
makers can more easily support it.
Keep a master image
Save your master in PSD, TIFF, or DNG format, not JPEG. Each time a
JPEG is re-edited and saved, compression is reapplied, and the image
quality degrades.
Show off to clients and friends
When you prepare your work for delivery, choose the appropriate color
file for the destination. Convert the image to that profile, rather than
assigning the profile. sRGB is generally best for viewing electronically or
for printing from most online printing services. Adobe 1998 or Colormatch
are the best profiles to use for RGB images destined for traditionally
printed materials such as brochures. Adobe 1998 or ProPhoto RGB are
best for printing with inkjet printers. Use 72 dpi for electronic viewing and
180 dpi or higher for printing.
Back up your images
You’ve devoted a lot of time and effort to your images: don’t lose them.
Because the lifespan of CDs and DVDs is uncertain, it’s best to back up to
an external hard drive (or drives!), ideally set to back up automatically.
“The question is not if your [internal] hard drive is going to crash,” says

Graham, reciting a common adage. “It’s when.”
4 Drag the right (white) triangle toward the left to the point where the histogram
indicates the lightest colors begin.
As you drag, the third Input Levels value (beneath the histogram graph) changes, and so
does the image itself.
5 Pull the middle (gray) triangle a little bit to the right to slightly darken the
midtones. We moved it to a value of .90.
 Tip:
As you drag the white Input Levels triangle to the left, watch carefully to
make sure highlight detail is not lost. If you’re wondering which highlights
on the image are being clipped by the white triangle, hold down the
Alt/Option key as you drag it. This tip also works with the black Input
Levels triangle.
Editing the saturation in Camera Raw
The Levels adjustments helped significantly, but our bride looks a little sunburned.
You’ll adjust the saturation in Camera Raw to even out her skin tone.
 Tip:
Here you’re opening Camera Raw in Photoshop, while earlier you opened
Camera Raw in Bridge. It’s even possible to have Camera Raw open in
both Photoshop and Bridge at the same time, working on different raw
images in each.
1 Double-click the 12B_Start layer thumbnail to open the Smart Object in Camera

Raw.
2 Click the HSL/Grayscale button ( ) to display that panel.
3 Click the Saturation tab.
4 Move the following sliders to reduce the amount of red in the skin:
• Reduce Reds to −2.
• Reduce Oranges to −10.
• Reduce Magentas to −3.
5 Click OK to return to Photoshop.
Using the healing brush tools to remove blemishes
Now you’re ready to give the model’s face some focused attention. You’ll use the
Healing Brush and Spot Healing Brush tools to heal blemishes, smooth the skin, remove
red veins from the eyes, and even hide the nose jewelry.

1 In the Layers panel, select the 12B_Start layer. Then, choose Duplicate Layer
from the Layers panel menu.
2 Name the new layer Corrections, and click OK.
Working on a duplicate layer preserves the original pixels so you can make changes
later. You can’t make changes using the healing brush tools on a Smart Object, so first
you’ll rasterize the layer.
3 Choose Layer > Smart Objects > Rasterize.
4 Zoom in on the model’s face so that you can see it clearly.
5 Select the Spot Healing Brush tool (
).
6 In the options bar, select the following settings:
• Brush size: 35 px
• Mode: Normal
• Type: Content-Aware
7 With the Spot Healing Brush tool, brush out the nose jewelry. A single click may
be enough.
Because you’ve selected Content-Aware in the options bar, the Spot Healing Brush tool
replaces the nose stud with skin that is similar to that around it.

8 Paint over fine lines around the eyes and mouth. You can also brush away freckles
and moles on her face, neck, arms, and chest. Experiment with simply clicking,
using very short strokes, and creating longer brush strokes. You can also
experiment with different settings. For example, to soften the lines around the
mouth, we selected Proximity Match in the options bar and the Lighten blending
mode. Remove obtrusive or distracting lines and blemishes, but leave enough that
the face retains its character.
The Healing Brush tool may be a better option for larger blemishes. With the Healing
Brush tool, you have more control over the pixels Photoshop samples.
9 Select the Healing Brush tool (
), hidden under the Spot Healing Brush tool (
).
Select a brush with a size of 45 pixels and a hardness of 100%.
10 Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) an area on her cheek to create the
sampling source.
11 Brush over the large mole on her cheek to replace it with the color you sampled.
You’ll smooth out the texture later.
12 Use the Healing Brush tool to heal any larger blemishes that remain.
13 Choose File > Save to save your work so far.
Enhancing an image using the Dodge and Sponge tools
You’ll use the Sponge and Dodge tools to brighten the eyes and lips.
1 Select the Sponge tool (
), hidden under the Dodge tool ( ). In the options bar,
make sure Vibrance is selected, and then select the following settings:
• Brush size: 35 px
• Brush hardness: 0%
• Mode: Saturate

• Flow: 50%
2 Drag the Sponge tool over the irises in the eyes to increase their saturation.
3 Change the brush size to 70 px and the flow to 10%. Then brush the Sponge tool
over the lips to saturate them.
You can use the Sponge tool to desaturate color, too. You’ll reduce the red in the corner
of the eye.
4 Change the brush size to 45 px, and the flow to 50%. Then choose Desaturate
from the Mode menu in the options bar.
5 Brush over the corner of the eye to reduce the red.
6 Select the Dodge tool ( ), hidden beneath the Sponge tool.
7 In the options bar, change the brush size to 60 px and the Exposure to 10%.
Choose Highlights from the Range menu.
8 Brush the Dodge tool over the eyes—the whites and the irises—to brighten them.
9 With the Dodge tool still selected, select Shadows from the Range menu in the
options bar.
10 Use the Dodge tool to lighten the shadow area above the eyes and the areas
around the irises to bring out the color.

Adjusting skin tones
In Photoshop, you can select a color range that targets skin tones so that it’s easier to
adjust the levels and color tone of skin without affecting the entire image. The skin tone
color range selects other areas of the image with a similar color, but if you’re making
slight adjustments, this is usually acceptable.
1 Choose Select > Color Range.
2 In the Color Range dialog box, choose Skin Tones from the Select menu.
The preview shows that much of the image has been selected.
3 Select Detect Faces.
The preview in the selection changes. Now the face, hair highlights, and lighter areas of
the dress are selected.
4 Decrease the Fuzziness slider to 10 to refine the selection. Then click OK.
The selection appears on the image itself as animated dotted lines (sometimes called
marching ants). You’ll apply a Curves adjustment layer to the selection to reduce the
overall red in the skin tone of the image.
5 Click the Curves icon in the Adjustments panel.

Photoshop adds a Curves adjustment layer above the Corrections layer.
6 Choose Red from the color channel menu in the Properties panel. Then click in the
middle of the graph, and pull the curve down very slightly. The selected areas
become less red. Be careful not to pull the curve down too far, or a green cast will
appear. You can see the difference you’ve made by clicking the Toggle Layer
Visibility button.
Because you selected the skin tones before applying the Curves adjustment layer, the
skin color shifts but the background is unchanged. The adjustment affects slightly more
of the image than the skin itself, but the effect blends well and is subtle.
Applying surface blur
You’re almost done with the model. As a finishing touch, you’ll apply the Surface Blur
filter to give her a smooth appearance.
1 Select the Corrections layer, and choose Layer > Duplicate Layer. Name the layer

Surface Blur, and click OK in the Duplicate Layer dialog box.
2 With the Surface Blur layer selected, choose Filter > Blur > Surface Blur.
3 In the Surface Blur dialog box, leave the Radius at 5 pixels, and move the
Threshold to 10 levels. Then click OK.
The Surface Blur filter has left the model looking a little glassy. You’ll reduce its effect
by reducing the opacity of the blur.
4 With the Surface Blur layer selected, change the Opacity to 40% in the Layers
panel.
She looks more realistic now, but you can target the surface blur more precisely using
the Eraser tool.
5 Select the Eraser tool ( ). In the options bar, select a brush between 10 and 50
pixels, with 10% hardness. Set the opacity to 90%.
6 Brush over the eyes, eyebrows, the defining lines of the nose, and the detail in the

dress. You’re erasing part of the blurred layer to let the sharper layer below show
through in these areas.
7 Zoom out so you can see the entire image.
8 Save your work.
9 Choose Layer > Flatten Image to flatten the layers and reduce the image size.
10 Save the image again, and then close it.
You’ve taken advantage of features in both Camera Raw and Photoshop to help this
bride look her best. As you’ve seen, you can move between Photoshop and Camera Raw
to perform different tasks as you enhance and improve an image.
About HDR and panoramas in Camera Raw
When you select more than one image in Camera Raw, you can choose
Merge to HDR or Merge to Panorama from the Filmstrip menu. HDR (high
dynamic range) requires darker and lighter exposures of the same
composition, while a panorama requires multiple exposures that make up a
larger scene. Photoshop also has HDR or panorama features, but the newer
process in Camera Raw is simpler, provides a preview, can process in the
background, and produces a DNG file that you can edit in Camera Raw
with the flexibility of a raw format image.

Extra credit
Painting with Light: Using Camera Raw as a Filter
In addition to opening files in Camera Raw to start the editing process, you
can apply Camera Raw settings as a filter to any file in Photoshop. You’ll
use Camera Raw as a filter to make adjustments to this still-life image.
First, you’ll convert the image to a Smart Object so you can use Camera
Raw as a Smart Filter, applying changes without affecting the original file.
1 In Photoshop, choose File > Open. Navigate to the Lessons/Lesson12
folder, and double-click the Fruit.jpg file to open it.
2 Choose Filter > Convert for Smart Filters. Click OK in the
informational dialog box.
3 Choose Filter > Camera Raw Filter. The image opens in Camera Raw.
You converted the image to a Smart Object so you can apply Camera Raw
as a Smart Filter. You can also apply Camera Raw as a standard filter, but
then you can’t return to adjust your settings or hide the adjustments in your
image file.
4 Select the Adjustment Brush in the toolbar.

With the Adjustment Brush tool in Camera Raw, you can apply Exposure,
Brightness, Clarity, and other adjustments to specific areas of a photo by painting
them directly onto those areas. The Graduated Filter tool is similar, but it applies
the same types of adjustments gradually across a region of the photo that you
define.
5 In the Adjustment Brush panel, change Exposure to +1.50. Then, at the
bottom of the panel, change Size to 8 and Feather to 85.
6 Brush the fruit where you want to increase the exposure, which reveals
more of the color. Continue brushing until the fruit is too bright.

7 Once you’ve brushed all the fruit, reduce the Exposure setting in the
Adjustment Brush panel so the image looks more realistic.
8 To see how your changes have affected the image in Camera Raw, click
the Before/After Views button at the bottom of the image window, and
choose Before/After Left/Right from the pop-up menu.
9 When you’re satisfied with the changes, click OK.
Photoshop displays the image. In the Layers panel, the Camera Raw filter is
listed beneath the layer name. You can toggle the visibility icon for the
Camera Raw filter to see the image before and after the adjustment. To edit
the Camera Raw smart filter adjustment, double-click Camera Raw Filter
in the Layers panel.
Review questions
1 What happens to camera raw images when you edit them in Camera Raw?
2 What is the advantage of the Adobe Digital Negative (DNG) file format?
3 How can you apply the same settings to multiple images in Camera Raw?
4 How can you apply Camera Raw as a filter?
Review answers
1 A camera raw file contains unprocessed picture data from a digital camera’s
image sensor. Camera raw files give photographers control over interpreting the
image data, rather than letting the camera make the adjustments and conversions.
When you edit the image in Camera Raw, it preserves the original raw file data.

This way, you can edit the image as you desire, export it, and keep the original
intact for future use or other adjustments.
2 The Adobe Digital Negative (DNG) file format contains the raw image data from
a digital camera as well as metadata that defines what the image data means. DNG
is an industry-wide standard for camera raw image data that helps photographers
manage proprietary camera raw file formats and provides a compatible archival
format.
3 To apply the same settings to multiple images in Camera Raw, select the images in
the filmstrip, click the Filmstrip menu button, and choose Sync Settings. Then
select the settings you want to apply, and click OK.
4 To apply Camera Raw as a filter, choose Filter > Camera Raw Filter in
Photoshop. Make the changes you want to make in Camera Raw, and then click
OK. If you want to be able to edit the changes later, apply Camera Raw as a Smart
Filter.

13. Preparing Files for the Web
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Create and stylize a button for a website.
• Use layer groups and artboards.
• Optimize design assets for the web.
• Record an action to automate a series of steps.
• Play an action to affect multiple images.
• Save entire layouts and individual assets using Export As.
• Design for multiple screen sizes with multiple artboards and test them with
the Adobe Preview CC mobile application.
This lesson will take about an hour to complete. Please log in to your account on
peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” As you work on this lesson, you’ll
preserve the start files. If you need to restore the start files, download them from
your Account page.

It’s often necessary to create separate images for buttons or other objects in a
website. The Export As workflow makes it easy to save layers, layer groups,
and artboards as separate image files.
PROJECT: MUSEUM WEBSITE

Getting started
In this lesson, you will build buttons for the home page of a Spanish art museum’s
website, and then generate appropriate graphics files for each button. You’ll use layer
groups to assemble the buttons, and then create actions to prepare a set of images for use
as a second group of buttons. First, you’ll view the final web design.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to restore the default preferences. (See “Restoring
Default Preferences” on page 5.)
2 When prompted, click Yes to delete the Adobe Photoshop Settings file.
3 Choose File > Browse In Bridge.
4 In Bridge, click Lessons in the Favorites panel. Double-click the Lesson13 folder
in the Content panel.
5 View the 13End.psd file in Bridge.
There are eight buttons at the bottom of the page, arranged in two rows. You’ll transform
images into buttons for the top row, and use an action to prepare the buttons for the
second row.
6 Double-click the 13Start.psd thumbnail to open the file in Photoshop. Click OK if
you see the Missing Profile dialog box, and click Cancel if the Create New
Library from Document dialog box appears.
 Note
If Bridge isn’t installed, you’ll be prompted to install it when you choose
Browse In Bridge. For more information, see page 3.
7 Choose File > Save As, rename the file 13Working.psd, and click Save. Click

OK in the Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
Using layer groups to create button graphics
Layer groups make it easier to organize and work with layers in complex images,
especially when there are sets of layers that work together. You’ll use layer groups to
assemble the layers that make up each button, and they’ll come in handy when you export
assets later.
Four images have been arranged in the start file to serve as the basis for buttons. You’ll
add a label to each, identifying the gallery it represents, and then add a drop shadow and
a stroke.
Creating the first button
You’ll design the first button, and then duplicate layers and edit them to quickly apply
the same treatment to the other three. First, you’ll change the units of measurement to
pixels.
1 Choose Edit > Preferences > Units & Rulers (Windows) or Photoshop CC >
Preferences > Units & Rulers (Mac). In the Units area of the dialog box, choose
Pixels from the Rulers menu, and then click OK.
2 Choose View > Snap and make sure it’s disabled. (A check mark appears next to
Snap when it’s enabled.)
3 Choose Window > Info to open the Info panel.
The Info panel displays information dynamically as you move the pointer or make
selections. Which information it displays depends on the tool that is selected. You’ll use
it to determine the position of the ruler guide (based on the Y coordinate) and the size of
an area you select (based on the width and height). It’s also very handy for seeing the
values of colors under the pointer.
 Tip:
To customize the Info panel display of the color values under the pointer,
click either of the eyedropper icons in the Info panel, and choose the
display option you want.

 Tip:
If you have trouble positioning the horizontal ruler guide precisely, zoom
in.
4 Choose View > Rulers. Then position the pointer over the horizontal ruler, and
drag a ruler guide down until the Y value in the Info panel is 795 pixels.
You’ll use this guide to draw a band across the bottom of the image for the label.
5 Zoom in on the first square image, the image of the man on the beach. Then select
Image 1 in the Layers panel.
You’ll use this image to design the first button.
6 Click the New Layer button ( ) at the bottom of the Layers panel. The new layer
is named Layer 13 and appears directly above the Image 1 layer. Rename it band.
7 Select the Rectangular Marquee tool (
) in the Tools panel. Then, drag a
selection across the bottom of the image, as indicated by the guides. The selection
should be 180 pixels wide and 33 pixels high.
8 Choose Edit > Fill. In the Fill dialog box, choose Color from the Contents menu,

and then, in the Color Picker, select a dark blue (R=25, G=72, B=121). Click OK
to close the Color Picker, and then click OK to close the Fill dialog box and apply
the fill.
A dark blue band appears at the bottom of the image, where you made your selection.
You’ll add text to it next.
9 Choose Select > Deselect.
10 Select the Horizontal Type tool, and select the following settings in the options
bar:
• Font Family: Myriad Pro
• Font Style: Regular
• Font Size: 18 pt
• Anti-aliasing: Strong
• Alignment: Center
• Color: White
11 Click in the center of the blue band, and type GALLERY ONE. Use the Move
tool to adjust the position of the type layer if necessary.

 Note
When using the Move tool, if the Auto-Select option is selected in the
options bar, deselect it for this lesson.
The label is in place. Now you’ll add a drop shadow and stroke to improve the
appearance of the button.
12 Select the Image 1 layer in the Layers panel. Then, click the Add Layer Style
button ( ) at the bottom of the Layers panel, and choose Drop Shadow.
13 In the Layer Style dialog box, change the following settings in the Structure area:
• Opacity: 27%
• Distance: 9 px
• Spread: 19%
• Size: 18 px

14 With the Layer Style dialog box still open, select Stroke on the left, making sure
that it’s enabled, and apply the following settings:
• Size: 1 px
• Position: Inside
• Color: Click the color swatch to open the Color Picker. Then click the blue
band to sample its color, and click OK to select it.
 Note
Be sure to click the word Stroke. If you click only the check box,
Photoshop applies the layer style with its default settings, but you won’t see
the options.
15 Click OK to apply both layer styles.

The button looks good. Now you’ll assemble all of its layers into a single group.
16 Select the GALLERY ONE, band, and Image 1 layers in the Layers panel, and
choose Layer > Group Layers.
Photoshop creates a group named Group 1.
17 Double-click the Group 1 layer group, and rename it Gallery 1. Then expand the
group. The layers you selected are indented, indicating they’re part of that group.

18 Choose File > Save.
Duplicating buttons
You’ve designed the initial button. You could go through all those steps again to create
each of the other buttons, but it will be faster to duplicate layers or even layer groups,
and then edit them as necessary.
1 Click the Create A New Group button ( ) at the bottom of the Layers panel. Name
the group Gallery 2.
2 Drag Image 2 into the Gallery 2 layer group, and then press Alt or Option as you
drag the Effects line or the fxsymbol from Image 1 to Image 2.
The drop shadow and stroke you applied to Image 1 are applied to both images now.
3 Select the band layer, and choose Duplicate Layer from the Layers panel menu.
Name the duplicate band 2, click OK, and drag it into the Gallery 2 layer group
above the Image 2 layer.
 Tip:
You can also duplicate layers by dragging a layer down to the New Layer
icon in the Layers panel.
4 Select the Move tool, and then, in the image window, drag the duplicate band
layer from the first image to the second one.
5 Select the GALLERY ONE layer, and choose Duplicate Layer from the Layers
panel menu. Name the duplicate layer GALLERY TWO, click OK, and drag it
into the Gallery 2 layer group above the band 2 layer.
6 Use the Move tool to drag the duplicate type from the first image to the band on
the second image. Then select the Horizontal Type tool, and edit the type to say
GALLERY TWO.

 Tip:
To drag the type layer in a straight line, press the Shift key as you move the
type.
The second button is done. You’ll create the third button by duplicating the entire layer
group and making the necessary changes.
7 Select the Gallery 2 layer group, and choose Duplicate Group from the Layers
panel menu. Rename the group Gallery 3, and click OK.
8 Delete the Image 2 layer in the Gallery 3 layer group, and then drag Image 3 into
the group, below the band 2 layer.
9 Press Alt or Option as you drag the layer effects from the Image 2 layer (in the
Gallery 2 group) onto the Image 3 layer to copy them.
10 In the Gallery 3 group, rename the band 2 layer band 3, and select it. Then, in the
image window, use the Move tool to drag the blue band from the second image to
the third image.
11 Rename the type layer in the Gallery 3 group GALLERY THREE. Then select
the layer, and drag the duplicate type from the second image to the blue band on
the third image. Finally, select the Horizontal Type tool, and change the type to
GALLERY THREE.
12 Repeat steps 1–6 or steps 7–11 to copy the design elements for the fourth button.
This time, change the numbers to “4” and “FOUR” throughout.
13 Save the file, and then close it.
Automating a multistep task

An action is a set of one or more commands that you record and then play back to apply
to a single file or a batch of files. In this exercise, you’ll create an action to prepare a
set of images to serve as buttons for additional galleries on the web page you’re
designing.
Recording an action
You’ll start by recording an action that resizes an image, changes its canvas size, and
adds layer styles, so that the additional buttons match the ones you’ve already created.
You use the Actions panel to record, play, edit, and delete individual actions. You also
use the Actions panel to save and load action files.
 Tip:
You can create conditional actions that change their behavior based on
criteria you define.
There are four images in the Buttons folder that will serve as the basis for new gallery
buttons on your website. The images are large, so the first thing you’ll need to do is
resize them to match the existing buttons. You’ll perform each of the steps on the
Gallery5.jpg file as you record the action. You’ll then play the action to make the same
changes on the other images in the folder automatically.
1 Choose File > Open, and navigate to the Lesson13/Buttons folder. Double-click
the Gallery5.jpg file to open it in Photoshop.
2 Choose Window > Actions to open the Actions panel. Close the Default Actions
folder to keep the Actions panel tidy.
3 Click the Create New Set button ( ) at the bottom of the Actions panel. In the
New Set dialog box, name the set Buttons, and click OK.
Photoshop comes with several prerecorded actions, all in the Default Actions set. You
can use action sets to organize your actions so that it’s easier to find the one you want.
4 Click the Create New Action button ( ) at the bottom of the Actions panel. Name
the action Resizing and Styling Images, and click Record.

It’s a good idea to name actions in a way that makes it clear what the actions do so you
can find them easily later.
Don’t let the fact that you’re recording rush you. Take all the time you need to do the
procedure accurately. Actions don’t record in real time; they only record steps and then
play back the steps as quickly as possible.
You’ll start by resizing and sharpening the image.
5 Choose Image > Image Size. Choose Pixels from the Units menu for the Width,
and then change the Width to 180. By default, the Width and Height values are
linked. Confirm that the Height changes to 180 pixels, too. Then click OK.
6 Choose Filter > Sharpen > Smart Sharpen, apply the following settings, and click
OK:
• Amount: 100%
• Radius: 1.0 px

You need to make some additional changes to the image that you can’t make as long as
the Background layer is locked. You’ll convert it to a regular layer.
7 Double-click the Background layer name in the Layers panel. In the New Layer
dialog box, name the layer Button, and click OK.
When you rename a Background layer, you’re converting it to a regular layer, so
Photoshop displays the New Layer dialog box. But the new layer replaces the
Background layer; Photoshop doesn’t add a layer to the image.
Now that you’ve converted the Background layer, you can change the canvas size and
add layer styles.
8 Choose Image > Canvas Size, and do the following:
• Make sure the unit of measure is set to Pixels.
• Change the Width to 220 pixels and the Height to 220 pixels.
• Click the center square in the anchor area to ensure the canvas is extended
evenly on all sides.
• Click OK.

9 Choose Layer > Layer Style > Drop Shadow.
10 In the Layer Style dialog box, apply the following settings:
• Opacity: 27%
• Angle: 120°
• Distance: 9 px
• Spread: 19%
• Size: 18 px
11 With the Layer Style dialog box still open, select Stroke on the left, and apply the
following settings:

• Size: 1 px
• Position: Inside
• Color: Click the color swatch to open the Color Picker. Then click the blue
band to sample its color, and click OK to select it.
12 Click OK to apply both layer styles.
13 Choose File > Save As, choose Photoshop for the Format, and click Save. Click
OK if the Photoshop Format Options dialog box appears.
14 Close the file. The Start workspace appears, so click the workspace button in the
top right corner of the application frame, and choose Essentials, so that you can
see the Actions panel again.
 Note
Be sure to click the word Stroke. If you click only the check box,
Photoshop applies the layer style with its default settings, but you won’t see
the options.
15 Click the Stop Recording button at the bottom of the Actions panel.

The action you just recorded (Resizing and Styling Images) is now saved in the Buttons
set in the Actions panel. Click the arrows to expand different sets of steps. You can
examine each recorded step and the specific selections you made. But the final step,
switching the workspace, isn’t needed for the action.
16 In the Actions panel, select the last recorded step (Select Workspace
“Essentials”), and click the Delete icon at the bottom of the Actions panel.
Batch-playing an action
Applying actions is a timesaving process for performing routine tasks on files, but you
can streamline your work even further by applying actions to multiple files at once.
You’ll apply the action you’ve created to the three remaining images.
1 Choose File > Open, and navigate to the Lesson13/Buttons folder. Shift-select the
Gallery6.jpg, Gallery7.jpg, and Gallery8.jpg files, and click Open.
2 Choose File > Automate > Batch.
3 In the Batch dialog box, do the following:
• Confirm that Buttons is chosen in the Set menu and Resizing and Styling Images
—the action you just created—is chosen in the Action menu.
• Choose Opened Files from the Source menu.
• Make sure None is chosen for the Destination.
• Click OK.
Photoshop plays the action, applying its steps to all the files that are open. You can also
apply an action to an entire folder of images without opening them.

Because you saved the file and closed it while you were recording the action, Photoshop
saves each of the images as a PSD file in its original folder, and then closes the file.
Placing files in Photoshop
The four additional button images are ready to be placed into the design. You probably
noticed that each already has a blue band with its gallery name included in the image, so
you don’t need to perform those steps. They’re ready to go.
1 If the file 13Working.psd is in the Recent Files list in the Start workspace, click
its name to reopen it. If not, choose File > Open to open it. If the New Library
from File dialog box appears, click Cancel to close it.
2 In the Layers panel, select a layer group name or the logo layer. New layers are
added above the selected layer; don’t add them to the Gallery 4 layer group.
3 Choose File > Place Embedded.
You’ll place these files as embedded Smart Objects. Because they’re embedded, the
entire image is included in the Photoshop file.
4 In the Place Embedded dialog box, navigate to the Lesson13/Buttons folder, and
double-click the Gallery5.psd file.
Photoshop places the Gallery5.psd file in the center of the 13Working.psd file. But that’s
not where you want it to go. You’ll move it.
5 Drag the image into position below the Gallery One button. Use the guides to
align the image with the one above. When it’s in position, press Enter or Return to
commit the change.
6 Repeat steps 2–4 to place the Gallery6.psd, Gallery7.psd, and Gallery8.psd files
so that they line up below the Gallery Two, Gallery Three, and Gallery Four
buttons.

7 Close the file and save your work.
 Tip:
You can also place embedded files by dragging them into the Photoshop
document from the desktop or from other applications. You can also select
multiple images to place at once.
Designing with artboards
When you’re designing websites or user interfaces for mobile devices, you may need to
create separate image files for buttons and other content. In Photoshop, you can use the
Export As feature to export an entire document or individual layers to web- and mobile-
friendly formats including PNG, JPEG, GIF, or SVG. In addition to being able to export
multiple layers to individual files at once, Export As makes it possible to export to
multiple sizes at once if you need to produce sets of images for low- and high-resolution
displays.
 Tip:
If you need advanced control over how layers are exported for web and
mobile user interfaces, you may be interested in Adobe Generator. When
Adobe Generator is on, Photoshop automatically exports and optimizes
layers based on how the layers are named.
 Tip:
You may notice or have been taught to use the older Save for Web command
in Photoshop. Although that command is still available under File > Export
> Save for Web (Legacy), Save for Web can’t export multiple layers,
artboards, or resolutions, while Export As can.
You may need to coordinate different ideas for a single design, or design variations for

different display sizes. This is easier when you use artboards, which are like multiple
canvases in a single Photoshop document. You can also use Export As to export entire
artboards.
With Export As, you control what gets exported by selecting artboards or layers in the
Layers panel.
Duplicating an artboard
You’ll use artboards to adapt the design of the museum website for a different screen
size. Later, you’ll export both designs at once.
1 In the Photoshop Start workspace, click Open. Navigate to the Lesson13 folder,
and open the file 13Museo.psd. If the New Library from Document dialog box
appears, click Cancel.
2 Choose File > Save As, rename the file 13Museo_working.psd, and click Save.
Click OK in the Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
This is a web page that’s being adapted for a responsive web design so that it will work
well on display sizes from desktops to smartphones.

3 Choose Select > All Layers.
4 Choose Layer > New > Artboard From Layers, name the new artboard Desktop,
and click OK. The artboard name appears above the new artboard, and also on its
new artboard group in the Layers panel.

5 Make sure the Artboard tool (
) is selected; it’s grouped with the Move tool in
the Tools panel. Then Alt/Option-click the Add Artboard button to the right of the
artboard to duplicate both the Desktop artboard and its contents.
 Tip:
You can also choose artboard presets from the Size menu in the options bar
when the Artboard tool is selected.
6 In the Layers panel, double-click the name of the Desktop Copy duplicate
artboard, and name it iPhone6.
7 In the Properties panel, click the Set Artboard to Preset menu, and choose iPhone

6. That artboard preset applies the pixel dimensions of an iPhone 6 (750 pixels
wide by 1334 pixels tall). Now you can develop a design for the iPhone 6 starting
with the elements used in the Desktop design. It will also be easier to maintain
design consistency, since both the desktop and mobile designs are in the same
document.
8 Save your work.
Creating a design variation with artboards
You now have different artboards for desktop and smartphone display sizes; the next
thing to do is fit the desktop-sized objects within the width of the smartphone display’s
pixel dimensions.
1 In the Layers panel, expand the iPhone6 artboard, and Shift-select the first and last
layers in that artboard only. Don’t select the artboard name itself.
2 Choose Edit > Free Transform.
3 In the options bar, do the following:
• Select the top left corner of the transformation proxy icon.
• Click to select the Maintain Aspect Ratio (link) button.
• Enter 726px for Width.
4 Press Enter or Return to apply the new settings.
Those settings proportionally scale the selected layers to 726 pixels wide, from the top
left corner of the selection, to better fit the artboard.
5 Position the pointer inside the Free Transform dialog box, and then Shift-drag the
selected layers down until you can see the entire Museo Arts logo at the top of the

page.
6 Press Enter or Return to exit Free Transform mode, and choose Select > Deselect
Layers.
7 In the Layers panel, select the Logo layer, and choose Edit > Free Transform.
8 Shift-drag the bottom right handle on the Free Transform bounding box until the
logo is 672 pixels wide, matching the width of the other elements. Then press
Enter or Return. This width makes the logo more readable on a smartphone screen.
9 In the Layers panel, select the Banner Art, Left Column, and Right Column layers.
10 With the Move tool, Shift-drag the selected layers down until the top is even with
the top of the blue button stack on the left.

Now you’ll take the two-column layout and make each column fill the width of the
artboard. But first you’ll need to accommodate them by making the artboard taller.
11 Select the iPhone6 artboard in the Layers panel, and then, with the Artboard tool,
drag the bottom handle of the iPhone6 artboard until it’s 2800 px tall. Zoom out if
necessary.

12 Select the Right Column layer group in the Layers panel, and then choose Edit >
Free Transform.
 Tip:
You can also change the height of an artboard by entering a new Height in
the options bar when an artboard is selected.
 Note
Once you start using artboards, resize them only using the Artboard tool.
The Image > Image Size and Canvas > Canvas Size commands work best
with a Photoshop document that doesn’t use artboards.
13 In the options bar, select the top left corner of the transformation proxy icon, turn
on the Maintain Aspect Ratio (link) button, and enter 672px for Width. Press Enter
or Return to apply the new width, and then press Enter or Return again to commit
and exit the transformation.

14 Select the Left Column layer group in the Layers panel, and then choose Edit >
Free Transform.
15 In the options bar, select the top left corner of the transformation proxy icon, click
to select the Maintain Aspect Ratio (link) button, enter 672px for Width, and then
press Enter or Return to apply the new settings.
16 Select the Right Column layer group in the Layers panel, and then choose Edit >
Free Transform.

17 In the options bar, select the top right corner of the transformation proxy icon,
click to select the Maintain Aspect Ratio (link) button, enter 672px for Width, and
then press Enter or Return to apply the new settings.
18 Press Enter or Return to apply the new settings.
19 Choose View > Fit on Screen to see both artboards at once, and then save your
work.

You’ve adapted a desktop-sized multi-column web page layout for a single-column
smartphone-sized layout, and both layouts exist on two artboard in one Photoshop
document.
Exporting artboards with Export As
When it’s time to have a client review your designs, you can easily use the Export As
command to export any artboard, layer, or layer group into its own file. You’ll export the
complete desktop and smartphone artboards, and then you’ll export the layers of each
artboard to their own folder.
1 Choose File > Export > Export As. This command exports each whole artboard,
so you see each artboard in the list on the left side of the Export As dialog box.
You can preview the exported dimensions and file size of each item; those values are
determined by the settings on the right side of the Export As dialog box.

2 Set the Export As options to the following:
• In the Scale All section, make sure Size is set to 1x and the Suffix field is set to
None.
• In the File Settings section, choose JPG from the Format menu, and enter 85%
for Quality.
• In the Color Space section, select Convert to sRGB.
Other settings can be left at defaults. You can click the image names in the list on the left
to preview how each exported artboard will look.
3 Click Export All, navigate to the Lesson13 folder, double-click the Assets folder,
and then click Export.
4 Switch to the desktop, and open the Assets folder in the Lesson13 folder to see the
Desktop.jpg and iPhone6.jpg files representing each artboard. The filenames are
based on the artboard names. You can send those files off for client review.
 Tip:
If you frequently use the Export As command with the same settings, choose
File > Export > Export Preferences, and specify the settings you use the
most. Now you can export to those settings in one step by choosing File >
Export > Quick Export As, or choosing Quick Export As from the Layers
panel menu.
Exporting layers as assets with Export As

If the client approves the design, you can then use Export As to create assets for each
layer on each artboard, such as images or buttons. Those assets can be used by a web or
application developer who executes the design in code.
 Tip:
The File > Export > Export As command exports entire artboards. If you
want to export specific layers, select them in the Layers panel and choose
Export As from the Layers panel menu, not the File menu. Exporting
selected layers is useful for updating parts of a design.
1 In the Layers panel, Shift-select all layers of the Desktop artboard.
2 In the Layers panel menu, choose Export As. (Do not choose File > Export As.)
3 In the Export As dialog box, use the same settings as you did in step 2 of the
previous section (on page 330).
4 Click Export All, navigate to the Assets_Desktop folder in the Lesson13 folder,
and click Export.
You have exported all assets for the Desktop artboard into a single folder.
5 Repeat steps 1–3 for the iPhone6 artboard.
6 Click Export All, navigate to the Assets_iPhone6 folder in the Lesson13 folder,
and click Export.
7 In Photoshop, choose File > Browse in Bridge.
8 Navigate to the Assets_Desktop folder in the Lesson13 folder, and inspect the
images by browsing each folder with the Preview panel open. If you want, you can
also inspect the assets you exported to the Assets_iPhone6 folder.

Each layer you exported is in its own file. Just by using the Export As command, you’ve
created JPG images of complete artboards for two different display sizes, as well as
assets for the individual layers of each artboard.
 Tip:
If a developer asks for assets at multiple scale factors (for Retina/HiDPI
display resolutions), in the Export As dialog box click the plus button in the
Scale All section to add and specify additional scale factors (Size) such as
2x or 3x. Those will be exported at the same time. Be sure to specify the
filename Suffix for each scale factor.
Extra credit
Testing artboard designs with Adobe Preview CC
Now we’ll use Adobe Preview CC to see how the new design looks on a
real device. Make sure your device is either connected to your computer
with a USB cable or connected to the same wireless network as the
computer running Photoshop.
1 In the Lesson13 folder, open the Extra Credit folder, and then open the
file ExtraCreditEnd.psd.
2 Choose Window > Device Preview. If you don’t already have Adobe
Preview CC installed on your device, click the Get The App link, and
install it.
3 On your device, open the Adobe Preview CC app. If necessary, sign in
to your Creative Cloud account in the app.

4 The Photoshop document should appear automatically in Preview CC on
your device. Choose an artboard to preview by choosing it from the
menu at the top of the app. If you don’t see the menu, tap the device’s
screen.
5 In Photoshop, edit the layers in the artboard you’re previewing. For
example, hide or move a layer. You’ll see that your changes appear
quickly on the device.

Review questions
1 What is a layer group?

2 What is an action? How do you create one?
3 How can you create assets from layers and layer groups in Photoshop?
Review answers
1 A layer group is a group of layers. Layer groups make it easier to organize and
work with layers in complex images, especially when there are sets of layers that
work together.
2 An action is a set of one or more commands that you record and then play back to
apply to a single file or a batch of files. To create one, click the Create New
Action button in the Actions panel, name the action, and click Record. Then
perform the tasks you want to include in your action. When you’ve finished, click
the Stop Recording button at the bottom of the Actions panel.
3 Use the Export As command to create assets from layers and layer groups in
Photoshop. Create images of each whole artboard by choosing File > Export As,
or, to create assets from selected layers and layer groups, choose Export As from
the Layers panel menu.

14. Producing and Printing Consistent Color
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Define RGB, grayscale, and CMYK color spaces for displaying, editing, and
printing images.
• Prepare an image for printing on a PostScript CMYK printer.
• Proof an image for printing.
• Save an image as a CMYK EPS file.
• Create and print a four-color separation.
• Understand how images are prepared for printing on presses.
This lesson will take less than an hour to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” If you need to restore the start
files, download them from your Account page.

To produce consistent color, you define the color space in which to edit and
display RGB images, and the color space in which to edit, display, and proof
CMYK images. This helps ensure a close match between onscreen and printed
colors.
PROJECT: TRAVEL POSTER
Preparing files for printing
After you’ve edited an image to get the effect you want, you probably want to share or
publish it in some way. Ideally, you’ve been editing with the final output in mind, and
you’ve managed file resolution, colors, file size, and other aspects of the image
accordingly. But as you prepare to output the file, you have another opportunity to make

sure your image will look its best.
 Note
One exercise in this lesson requires that your computer be connected to a
printer that supports Adobe PostScript. If you don’t have access to one, you
can do most, but not all, of the exercises.
If you plan to print the image—whether you’ll print it to your own inkjet printer or send
it to a service provider for professional printing—you should perform the following
tasks for the best results. (Many of these tasks are described in greater detail later in this
lesson.)
• Determine the final destination. Whether you’re printing the file yourself or sending
it away, identify whether it will be printed to a PostScript desktop printer or
platesetter, an inkjet printer, an offset press, or some other device. If you’re working
with a service provider, ask what format they prefer. In many cases, they may
request a file saved to a specific PDF standard.
• Verify that the image resolution is appropriate. For professional printing, 300 ppi is
a good starting point. To determine the best print resolution for your project, consult
your production team or your printer’s user manual, because the optimal resolution
can depend on factors such as the halftone screen of a press or the grade of paper.
• Do a “zoom test:” Take a close look at the image. Zoom in to check and correct
sharpness, color correction, noise, and other issues that can affect the final printed
image quality.
• Allow for bleeds if you’re sending an image for professional printing: If any color
runs to the edge of the image, extend the canvas by 1/4 inch on all sides to ensure
that the color is properly printed even if the trim line is not exact. Your service
provider can help you determine whether you have bleeds and how to prepare your
file to ensure it prints correctly.
• Keep the image in its original color space until your service provider instructs you
to convert it. Today, many prepress workflows keep content in its original color
space throughout editing to preserve color flexibility as long as possible, and
convert images and documents to CMYK only at final output time.
• Consider flattening large documents, but always consult with your production team
first. Some workflows may depend on other applications, such as Adobe InDesign,
which can control Photoshop layers from within their own documents. These
workflows may require preserving, not flattening, Photoshop layers.
• Soft-proof the image to simulate how the colors will print.
Getting started
You’ll prepare an 11"×17" travel poster for printing on a CMYK press. The Photoshop
file is quite large, because it contains several layers and has a resolution of 300 dpi,
which is necessary for high-quality printing.

First, start Photoshop, and restore its default preferences.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to restore the default preferences. (See “Restoring
Default Preferences” on page 5.)
2 When prompted, click Yes to delete the Adobe Photoshop Settings file.
3 Choose File > Open, navigate to the Lesson14 folder, and double-click the
14Start.psd file. Because the file is large, it may open slowly, depending on your
system.
4 Choose File > Save As, navigate to the Lesson14 folder, and save the file as
14Working.psd. Click OK if the Photoshop Format Options dialog box appears.

Performing a “zoom test”
When you’ve finished editing your image, take a few minutes to make sure everything is
appropriate for your output device and that you haven’t overlooked any potentially
problematic details. Start with the image resolution.
1 Choose Image > Image Size.

2 Verify that the width and height are the final output size and that the resolution is
appropriate. For most printing, 300 ppi produces good results.
This image has a width of 11" and a height of 17', which is the final size of the poster. Its
resolution is 300 ppi. The size and resolution are appropriate.
3 Click OK to close the dialog box.
Next, you’ll look closely at the image and correct any problems. When you prepare your
own images for printing, zoom in and scroll to view the entire image closely.
4 Select the Zoom tool in the Tools panel, and zoom in on the photos in the lower
third of the poster.
The photo of tourists is flat and a little muddy-looking.
5 Select the Tourists layer in the Layers panel, and then click the Curves icon in the
Adjustments panel to add a Curves adjustment layer.

6 Click the Clip To Layer button (
) at the bottom of the Properties panel to create
a clipping mask.
The clipping mask ensures that the adjustment layer affects only the layer directly below
it in the Layers panel.
7 In the Properties panel, select the White Point eyedropper tool, and then click the
light area of the building behind the tourists to brighten and correct the color in the
image.
The image of tourists looks better. But the image of the statue appears flat and lacks
contrast. You’ll fix that with a Levels adjustment layer.
8 Select the Statue layer in the Layers panel, and then click the Levels icon in the
Adjustments panel to add a Levels adjustment layer.

9 Click the Clip To Layer button at the bottom of the Properties panel to create a
clipping mask, so that the adjustment layer affects only the Statue layer.
10 In the Properties panel, click the Calculate A More Accurate Histogram icon to
refresh the histogram display.
Cached histogram data displays more quickly, but is often less accurate. It’s a good idea
to refresh the histogram before you make edits based on information in it.
11 Move the input level sliders to punch up the image. We used the values 31, 1.60,
235.

12 Save the file.
RGB model
A large percentage of the visible spectrum can be represented by mixing
red, green, and blue (RGB) colored light in various proportions and
intensities. Where the colors overlap, they create cyan, magenta, yellow,
and white.
Because the RGB colors combine to create white, they are also called
additive colors. Adding all colors together creates white—that is, all light
is transmitted back to the eye. Additive colors are used for lighting, video,
and monitors. Your monitor, for example, creates color by emitting light
through red, green, and blue phosphors.
CMYK model
The CMYK model is based on the light-absorbing quality of ink printed on
paper. As white light strikes translucent inks, part of the spectrum is
absorbed, while other parts are reflected back to your eyes.
In theory, pure cyan (C), magenta (M), and yellow (Y) pigments should
combine to absorb all color and produce black. For this reason, these
colors are called subtractive colors. But because all printing inks contain
some impurities, these three inks actually produce a muddy brown, and
must be combined with black (K) ink to produce a true black. (K is used
instead of B to avoid confusion with blue.) Combining these inks to
reproduce color is called four-color process printing.
Identifying out-of-gamut colors
Colors on a monitor are displayed using combinations of red, green, and blue light
(called RGB), while printed colors are typically created using a combination of four ink
colors—cyan, magenta, yellow, and black (called CMYK). These four inks are called
process colors because they are the standard inks used in the four-color printing
process.

Many colors inside images from digital cameras and scanners are within the CMYK
gamut, so changing an image to CMYK mode converts all the colors with relatively little
substitution. But there are often colors in those same images that are outside the CMYK
gamut, such as for example, neon-colored logos and lights.
Before you convert an image from RGB to CMYK, you can preview the CMYK color
values while still in RGB mode.
1 Choose View > Fit On Screen.
2 Choose View > Gamut Warning to see out-of-gamut colors. Photoshop builds a
color-conversion table, and displays a neutral gray in the image window where
the colors are out of gamut.
Because the gray can be hard to spot in the image, you’ll convert it to a more visible
color.
3 Choose Edit > Preferences > Transparency & Gamut (Windows) or Photoshop CC
> Preferences > Transparency & Gamut (Mac).
4 Click the color sample in the Gamut Warning area at the bottom of the dialog box.
Select a vivid color, such as purple or bright green, and click OK.
5 Click OK to close the Preferences dialog box.
The bright new color you chose appears instead of the neutral gray as the gamut warning
color.
6 Choose View > Gamut Warning to turn off the preview of out-of-gamut colors.
Photoshop will automatically correct these out-of-gamut colors when you save the file in
Photoshop EPS format later in this lesson. Photoshop EPS format changes the RGB
image to CMYK, adjusting the RGB colors as needed to bring them into the CMYK
color gamut.
 Tip:
If your gamut warning area looks different, you may be using different
settings in the View > Proof Setup > Custom dialog box (see page 349).

Adjusting an image
The next step in preparing an image for output is to make any necessary color and tonal
adjustments. In this exercise, you’ll add some tonal and color adjustments to correct an
off-color scan of the original poster.
So that you can compare the image before and after making corrections, you’ll start by
making a copy.
1 Choose Image > Duplicate, and click OK to duplicate the image.
2 Choose Window > Arrange > 2 Up Vertical so you can compare the images as you
work.
You’ll adjust the hue and saturation of the image to move all colors into gamut.
3 Select 14Working.psd (the original image) to make it active, and then select the
Visit Paris layer in the Layers panel.
4 Choose Select > Color Range.
5 In the Color Range dialog box, choose Out Of Gamut from the Select menu, and
then click OK.
The areas that were marked as out of gamut earlier are now selected, so you can make

changes that affect only those areas.
6 Choose View > Extras to hide the selection while you work with it.
The selection border can be distracting. When you hide extras, you no longer see the
selection, but it’s still in effect.
7 Click the Hue/Saturation button in the Adjustments panel to create a
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer. (Choose Window > Adjustments if the panel isn’t
open.) The Hue/Saturation adjustment layer includes a layer mask, created from
your selection.
8 In the Properties panel, do the following:
• Leave the Hue setting at the default value.
• Drag the Saturation slider until the intensity of the colors looks more realistic
(we used −14).
• Drag the Lightness to the left to darken (we used −2).
9 Choose View > Gamut Warning. You have removed most of the out-of-gamut
colors from the image. Choose View > Gamut Warning again to deselect it.
10 Close the duplicate image file without saving it.
Converting an image to CMYK
It’s generally a good idea to work in RGB mode as long as possible. Converting
between modes causes color values to be rounded—and therefore less accurate if you
convert multiple times. Once you’ve made any last-minute corrections, you’re ready to
convert the image to CMYK. If you think you may want to output the image to an inkjet
printer or distribute it digitally later, save a copy in RGB mode before converting to
CMYK mode.

1 Click the Channels tab to bring the Channels panel to the front.
The image is currently in RGB mode, so there are three channels listed: red, green, and
blue. The RGB channel is not actually a channel, but a composite of all three.
2 Choose Image > Mode > CMYK Color.
3 Click Merge in the message that warns you that you might lose some adjustment
layers.
Adjustment layers are lost when you convert the color mode from RGB to CMYK.
Merging the layers ensures the adjustments you made are preserved.
4 Click OK in the message about the color profile used in the conversion.
You’ll learn more about color profiles when you work with color management.
The Channels panel now displays four channels: cyan, magenta, yellow, and black.
Additionally, it lists the CMYK composite. The layers were merged during conversion,
so there is only one layer in the Layers panel.
About color management
Because the RGB and CMYK color models use different methods to display colors,
each reproduces a different gamut, or range, of colors. For example, RGB uses light to
produce color, so its gamut includes neon colors, such as those you’d see in a neon sign.
In contrast, printing inks excel at reproducing certain colors that can lie outside the RGB
gamut, such as some pastels and pure black.
A. Natural color gamut
B. RGB color gamut
C. CMYK color gamut

But not all RGB and CMYK gamuts are alike. Each monitor and printer model differs,
and so each displays a slightly different gamut. For example, one brand of monitor may
produce slightly brighter blues than another. The color space for a device is defined by
the gamut it can reproduce.
The color management system in Photoshop uses International Color Consortium (ICC)-
compliant color profiles to convert colors from one color space into another. A color
profile is a description of a device’s color space, such as the CMYK color space of a
particular printer. You specify which profiles to use to accurately proof and print your
images. Once you’ve selected the profiles, Photoshop can embed them into your image
files, so that Photoshop and other applications can accurately manage color for the
image.
For information on embedding color profiles, see Photoshop Help.
Before you begin working with color management, you should calibrate your monitor. If
your monitor doesn’t display colors accurately, color adjustments you make based on the
image you see on your monitor may not be accurate. For information about calibrating
your monitor, see Photoshop Help.
Specifying color-management settings
In order to accurately preview your colors onscreen, you need to set up color
management in Photoshop. Most of the color-management controls you need are in the
Color Settings dialog box.
By default, Photoshop is set up for RGB as part of a digital workflow. If you are
preparing artwork for print production, however, you’ll want to change the settings to be
more appropriate for images that will be printed on paper rather than displayed on a
screen.
You’ll create customized color settings.
1 Choose Edit > Color Settings to open the Color Settings dialog box.
The bottom of the dialog box interactively describes each option.
2 Move the pointer over each part of the dialog box, including the names of sections
(such as Working Spaces), the menu names, and the menu options. As you move
the pointer, Photoshop displays information about each item. When you’ve
finished, return the options to their defaults.
Now, you’ll choose a set of options designed for a print workflow, rather than an online
workflow.
3 Choose North America Prepress 2 from the Settings menu. The working spaces
and color-management policy options change for a prepress workflow. Then click
OK.

Proofing an image on screen
You’ll select a proof profile so that you can view a close onscreen representation of
what an image will look like when printed. An accurate proof profile lets you proof on
the screen (soft-proof) for printed output.
A proof profile (also called a proof setup) defines how the document is going to be
printed, and adjusts the onscreen appearance accordingly. Photoshop provides a variety
of settings that can help you proof images for different uses, including print and display
on the web. For this lesson, you’ll create a custom proof setup. You can then save the
settings for use on other images that will be output the same way.
1 Choose View > Proof Setup > Custom. The Customize Proof Condition dialog box
opens. Make sure Preview is selected.

2 From the Device To Simulate menu, choose a profile that represents the final
output device, such as that for the printer you’ll use to print the image. If you don’t
have a specific printer, the profile Working CMYK–U.S. Web Coated (SWOP) v2,
the current default, is generally a good choice.
3 If you’ve chosen a different profile, make sure Preserve Numbers is not selected.
The Preserve CMYK Numbers option simulates how colors will appear if they’re not
converted to the output device color space.
4 Make sure Relative Colorimetric is selected for the Rendering Intent.
A rendering intent determines how the color is converted from one color space to
another. Relative Colorimetric, which preserves color relationships without sacrificing
color accuracy, is the standard rendering intent for printing in North America and
Europe.
 Tip:
A printer profile represents not only the output device, but also a specific
combination of settings, ink, and paper. Changing any of those components
can change the color gamut being simulated by the onscreen proof, so
choose a profile that’s as close as possible to the final printing conditions.
Tip:
To display the document with and without the proof settings, toggle View >
Proof Colors.
5 If it’s available for the profile you chose, select Simulate Black Ink. Then deselect
it, and select Simulate Paper Color; notice that selecting this option automatically
selects Simulate Black Ink.
Notice that the image appears to lose contrast. Paper Color simulates the dingy white of
real paper, according to the proof profile. Black Ink simulates the dark gray that actually

prints to most printers, instead of solid black. Not all profiles support these options.
6 Toggle the Preview option to see the difference between the image as it is
displayed on screen and as it will print, based on the profile you selected. Then
click OK.
Saving the image as a CMYK EPS file
Some professional printers request that Photoshop images be submitted in EPS format.
You’ll save this image as an EPS file in CMYK mode.
1 Choose File > Save As.
2 In the Save As dialog box, do the following, and then click Save:
• Choose Photoshop EPS from the Format menu.
• Under Color, select Use Proof Setup. Don’t worry about the warning icon;
you’ll save a copy.
• Accept the filename 14Working.eps.

3 Click OK in the EPS Options dialog box that appears.
4 Save and then close the 14Working.psd file.
5 Choose File > Open, navigate to the Lessons/Lesson14 folder, and double-click
the 14Working.eps file.
Printing to a desktop inkjet printer
Many color inkjet printers do a good job printing photographs and other
image files. The precise settings available vary from printer to printer, but
when you’re printing images from Photoshop to a desktop inkjet printer,
you’ll get the best results if you do the following:
• Make sure the appropriate printer driver is installed, and that you’ve
selected it.
• Use the appropriate paper for your intended use. Special photographic
and coated papers are a good choice when you’re printing photos for
framing.
• Select the correct paper source and media setting in the printer settings.
The printer varies how it lays down ink on different types of paper. For
example, if you’re using photo-quality paper, make sure it’s selected in
the printer settings.
• Select the image quality in the printer settings. Higher print quality is

better when viewing is critical, such as for color proofing or framed
prints. Lower print quality is useful for speedier printing and to use less
ink.
• Don’t convert an RGB image to CMYK just to print on a desktop inkjet
printer, because most are designed to receive the larger color space of
RGB images. You might need to convert images to CMYK only for
specialized printing like simulating separations on a desktop printer
equipped with Adobe PostScript.
Printing a CMYK image from Photoshop
You can proof your image by printing a color composite, often called a color comp. A
color composite is a single print that combines the red, green, and blue channels of an
RGB image (or the cyan, magenta, yellow, and black channels of a CMYK image). This
indicates what the final printed image will look like.
 Tip:
Printing color separations on your desktop printer can help verify that
colors will appear on the correct plate. But separations from a desktop
printer won’t match the precision of an actual platesetter. Proofs you create
for jobs intended for a press are more accurate on a desktop printer with an
Adobe PostScript RIP (raster image processor).
If you’re printing color separations of an image directly from Photoshop, you will
typically use the following workflow:
• Set the parameters for the halftone screen. Consult with your print service provider
for recommended settings.
• Print test separations to make sure objects appear on the correct separation.
• Print the final separations to plate or film. This is typically performed by your print
service provider.
When you print color separations, Photoshop prints a separate sheet, or plate, for each
ink. For a CMYK image, it prints four plates, one for each process color. In this
exercise, you’ll print color separations.
1 With the 14Working.eps image open from the previous exercise, choose File >
Print.
By default, Photoshop prints any document as a composite image. To print this file as
separations, you need to explicitly instruct Photoshop in the Print dialog box.
2 In the Photoshop Print Settings dialog box, do the following:
• In the Printer Setup section, make sure the selected Printer is the one you want
to use.
• In the Color Management area, choose Separations from the Color Handling

menu.
• In the Position and Size section, verify that the settings are correct. This
11"×17" document may be too large for many desktop printers to print at actual
size; consider selecting Scale to Fit Media for basic proofing.
• Click Print. (If you don’t actually want to print color separations, click Cancel
or Done; the difference is that Done saves the current print settings.)
This lesson has provided an introduction to printing and producing consistent color from
Photoshop. If you’re printing on a desktop printer, you can experiment with different
settings to find the best color and print settings for your system. If you’re preparing
images for professional printing, consult with your print service provider to determine
the best settings to use. For more information about color management, printing options,
and color separations, see Photoshop Help.
 Tip:
In the Print dialog box, if the Separations option is not available in the
Color Handling menu, click Done, and make sure the document is in
CMYK mode (Image > Mode > CMYK Color).
Extra Credit
Sharing your work on Adobe Portfolio
Integrated into Adobe Creative Cloud is Adobe Portfolio, which you can
use to quickly create a well-designed and functional website that
showcases your creations, with one-click connections to your social media

presence (such as your Instagram, Facebook, and Twitter feeds), and a pre-
built contact form that makes it easy for potential clients and customers to
get in touch with you. To test it out, you’ll first prepare this lesson’s image
for viewing in a web browser:
1 Open the 14Start.psd file in Photoshop, if it isn’t already open. Click
OK if the Embedded Profile Mismatch dialog box appears.
As the original RGB version of the image in this chapter, 14Start.psd
contains a wider color gamut than the later version that was converted
to CMYK for prepress.
2 Choose File > Export > Export As to prepare the image for display on a
website. It’s a large, print-resolution image, so it may take a while to
display in the Export As dialog box.
3 Choose JPG from the Format menu, and set Quality to 90%.
4 In the Image Size section, enter 18% for Scale. This will proportionally
resize the image to 918 pixels high, so that the entire image can be seen
at 100% magnification on many displays.
5 In the Color Space section, select Convert to sRGB and Embed Color
Profile to help ensure consistent color in Web browsers.
6 Click Export All. Navigate to the Lesson14 folder, and click Export or
Save.
Now you can start your online portfolio. The Portfolio user interface you
see may vary as Adobe updates the service.

1 In a web browser, go to myportfolio.com, the web address for Adobe
Portfolio.
2 At the top of the Adobe Portfolio home page, click Sign In, enter your
Adobe ID email address and password, and click Sign In.
3 Click Get Started, scroll to preview the layouts you can use, and then
choose Use This Layout. We picked Lina. If an “Edit Your Portfolio”
button appears, click it.
4 Click Add Project. Enter Visit Paris, and then click Create Project. If a
Continue button appears, click it.
5 Now add your work. Click Upload Files, navigate to the Lesson14
folder, select 14Start.jpg, and then click Choose or Open (the button
name depends on the web browser you use). Adobe Portfolio processes
the image and adds it to the project.

6 In the floating editing remote, click the Continue button; the Project
Cover Image editor appears. Use the controls to compose the Visit Paris
image as a horizontal cover image for the project, and then Click Crop &

Continue. We decided to focus on the Paris text and the Eiffel Tower.
If you had added multiple images to the project, you would have been
able to choose among them at the bottom of the Project Cover Image
dialog box.
7 In the Project Info dialog box, enter Visit Paris for the Project Title,
Travel Poster for the project description, and Graphic Design for
Creative Fields. For Keywords enter Paris, poster, collage, travel
(with a comma after every term). Then click Next.
The Next button becomes available after the Project Title and Creative
Fields are filled in.
8 In the Publish to Behance dialog box, deselect “Also publish this to your
Behance profile?” for this lesson project. For your own projects, you
may want to select that option if you want your project to be seen on the
public Behance social network of creative professionals, also part of
Adobe Creative Cloud.
9 Click Create Project, and if a Return to Home button appears, click it.
10 In the floating remote, click Preview to see how your work would look
on your Adobe Portfolio website. Use the buttons at the bottom of
Preview mode to see how your current Adobe Portfolio design settings
appear on devices with different screen sizes, including computer
displays as well as horizontal and vertical smartphones and tablets.

11 Click Back to Edit. From here, use the floating remote control and the
buttons along the left side to customize how your Adobe Portfolio
website looks before you publish it for the world to see.

You can change many design options for your Adobe Portfolio site, such as
the fonts, font sizes, background colors, and spacing. You can also change
the overall layout at any time. If you have your own Internet domain name,
you can easily connect it to Adobe Portfolio so that your website’s address
is fully consistent with your brand. If your site looks good, click Publish
Site.
Review questions
1 What steps should you follow to reproduce color accurately?
2 What is a gamut?
3 What is a color profile?
4 What are color separations?
Review answers
1 To reproduce color accurately, first calibrate your monitor, and then use the Color
Settings dialog box to specify which color spaces to use. For example, you can
specify which RGB color space to use for online images, and which CMYK color
space to use for images that will be printed. You can then proof the image, check
for out-of-gamut colors, and adjust colors as needed.
2 A gamut is the range of colors that can be reproduced by a color model or device.
For example, the RGB and CMYK color models have different gamuts. Within

each color model, various printers, printing standards, and device displays
reproduce different gamuts.
3 A color profile is a description of a device’s color space, such as the CMYK
color space of a particular printer. Applications such as Photoshop can interpret
color profiles in an image to maintain consistent color across different
applications, platforms, and devices.
4 Color separations are separate plates for each ink used in a document being
reproduced on press. Your print service provider will produce color separations
of your files for the cyan, magenta, yellow, and black (CMYK) inks.

15. Printing 3D Files
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to do the following:
• Create a simple 3D object using a mesh preset.
• Use 3D tools in Photoshop.
• Manipulate 3D objects.
• Adjust the camera view.
• Prepare 3D files for printing.
• Export a file for remote printing.
This lesson will take about 30 minutes to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the Getting
Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.” As you work on this lesson, you’ll
preserve the start files. If you need to restore the start files, download them from
your Account page.
You can print 3D objects directly from Photoshop. If you have a 3D printer on

site, you can print locally. Otherwise, you can export your file for printing by
an online vendor.
PROJECT: 3D LUGGAGE TAG
Getting started
This lesson explores 3D features, which are available only if your video card has at
least 512MB of dedicated VRAM and supports OpenGL 2.0, and if OpenGL 2.0 is
enabled on your computer. To learn about your video card, choose Edit > Preferences >
Performance (Windows) or Photoshop CC > Preferences > Performance (Mac).
Information about your video card is in the Graphics Processor Settings area of the
dialog box.
In this lesson, you’ll create a three-dimensional luggage tag. First, you’ll view the
finished tag.
1 Start Photoshop, and then immediately hold down Ctrl+Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Command+Option+Shift (Mac) to restore the default preferences. (See “Restoring
Default Preferences” on page 5.)
2 When prompted, click Yes to delete the Adobe Photoshop Settings file.
3 Choose File > Browse In Bridge to open Adobe Bridge.
4 In Bridge, click Lessons in the Favorites panel. Double-click the Lesson15 folder
in the Content panel.
5 View the 15End.psd file in Bridge.
The 15End.psd file contains a 3D rendering of a luggage tag. In this lesson, you’ll
combine elements to create the luggage tag, and then prepare it for printing. If you want
to, you can print it locally to a 3D printer or export it to an online vendor for printing.
(You’ll see estimated costs before placing the order.)
Before you create the luggage tag, you’ll play with the 3D tools to become familiar with
the 3D environment.
6 Return to Photoshop.

 Note
Photoshop 3D features have system requirements beyond those of Adobe
Photoshop CC 2017 in general (see
https://helpx.adobe.com/photoshop/system-requirements.html). Photoshop
3D features require at least 512MB of VRAM (graphics memory), and in
Windows a 64-bit operating system is required.
Understanding the 3D environment
The advantage to working with 3D objects is, obviously, that you can work with them in
three dimensions. You can also return to a 3D layer at any time to change lighting, color,
material, or position without having to re-create a lot of the art. Photoshop includes
several basic tools that make it easy to rotate, resize, and position 3D objects. The 3D
tools in the options bar manipulate the object itself. The Camera widget in the lower left
corner of the application window manipulates the camera so you can view a 3D scene
from different angles.
You can use the 3D tools whenever a 3D layer is selected in the Layers panel. A 3D
layer behaves like any other layer—you can apply layer styles, mask it, and so on.
However, a 3D layer can be quite complex.
Unlike a regular layer, a 3D layer contains one or more meshes. A mesh defines the 3D
object. For example, in the following exercise, the mesh is a cone shape. Each mesh, in
turn, includes one or more materials—the appearance of a part or all of the mesh. Each
material includes one or more maps, which are the components of the appearance. There
are nine typical maps, and there can be only one of each kind; however, you can also use
custom maps. Each map contains one texture—the image that defines what the maps and
materials look like. The texture may be a simple bitmap graphic or a set of layers. The
same texture might be used by many different maps and materials.
In addition to meshes, a 3D layer also includes one or more lights, which affect the
appearance of 3D objects and remain in a fixed position as you spin or move the object.
A 3D layer also includes cameras, which are saved views with the objects in a
particular position. The shader creates the final appearance based on the materials,
object properties, and renderer.
That may all sound complicated, but the most important thing to remember is that the 3D
tools in the options bar move an object in 3D space and the Camera widget moves the
cameras that view the object.
You’ll start by creating a simple 3D object from a plain colored layer.
1 In Photoshop, choose File > New. Click Create to accept the default values.
2 Choose Select > All to select the entire background layer.
3 Choose Edit > Fill. In the Fill dialog box, choose Color from the Contents menu,
and then select a vivid blue color in the Color Picker. Click OK to close the Color
Picker, and click OK again to close the Fill dialog box.
4 Choose Select > Deselect.

5 Choose 3D > New Mesh From Layer > Mesh Preset > Cone. If you see a message
asking whether you want to switch to the 3D workspace, click Yes.
 Tip:
If you see an Embedded Profile Mismatch message, click OK.
Your blue layer becomes a blue cone. Photoshop displays a grid, a Secondary View
window, a Camera widget, and other 3D resources. Now that you have a 3D object, you
can use the 3D tools.
6 In the Tools panel, select the Move tool (
).
All the 3D capabilities are embedded into the Move tool, which recognizes when a 3D
layer is selected and enables the 3D tools.
7 In the options bar, select the Pan the 3D Camera mode (
).

When no 3D object is selected, the 3D Mode affects how the Move tool changes the
camera; when a 3D object is selected, the 3D Mode affects how the Move tool
transforms an object.
8 Click the edge of the cone or just outside it (but not the cone itself), and drag to
move it from side to side or up and down. Return the cone to the center.
 Tip:
When using the Move tool in any 3D Camera mode, it’s important to drag
outside any objects. If you click an object, the object will become selected,
so the Move tool will edit the object instead of the camera.
9 Select the Orbit the 3D Camera tool (
) in the options bar, and then click and
drag the cone to rotate the view. Experiment with the other tools to see how they
affect the view of the object.
10 With the Move tool, click the cone to select it.
When you select a 3D object, Photoshop displays the 3D Axis widget inside the object.
You can use that widget to manipulate a selected 3D object. The three colors of the
widget represent different 3D axes: Red represents the x axis, green represents the y
axis, and blue represents the z axis. Hover the pointer over different parts of the 3D
Axis widget to highlight different controls:
• To scale the selected 3D object uniformly, position the pointer over the box at the
center of the 3D Axis widget until it turns yellow, and then drag the box.
• To move a selected 3D object along one axis, position the pointer over the arrow at
the end of one of the axes on the 3D Axis widget, and drag the arrow.

• To rotate a selected 3D object on one axis, position the pointer over the curved
handle just before the arrow at the end of one of the 3D widget axes, and drag the
curved handle.
 Tip:
Can’t remember which 3D Axis widget color controls which axis? The
order of the RGB widget colors corresponds to the order of the XYZ axes:
Red controls X, Green controls Y, and Blue controls Z.
11 Rotate, scale, and move the cone using the widget.
12 Right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac) the Camera widget in the lower
left corner of the application window (it has two axes visible), and choose Top.
A. Z axis
B. Y axis
C. X axis
D. Scale along X axis
E. Rotate around Y axis
F. Move on X axis
G. Scale uniformly
 Tip:
Be aware that the 3D Axis moves with an object, so if you can’t see the
part of the 3D Axis widget that you want to manipulate, it may be at a hard-
to see angle or hidden by part of the widget. Try rotating the 3D view
slightly to better see parts of the widget.

Options in the Camera menu determine the angle from which you see the object. The
camera angle changes, but the object itself does not. Don’t be fooled by its relationship
to the background; the background is not 3D, so it remains in place when Photoshop
moves the camera for the 3D object.
13 Choose other camera views to see how they affect the perspective.
14 When you’re done experimenting, close the file. You can save your creation if you
want to, or close without saving.
Positioning 3D elements
Now that you’ve gotten a feel for the 3D tools, you’ll use them to position the text on a
luggage tag.
1 Choose File > Open, navigate to the Lesson15 folder, and double-click the
15Start.psd file.

The file contains two 3D elements: the text and the tag itself. Currently, the text is in an
awkward position, overlapping the tag. You’ll start by centering it.
2 Make sure the Move tool is selected in the Tools panel.
3 Position the pointer over the “Visit Paris” text, and when its bounding box
appears, click to select it and activate its 3D widget.
4 Hover the cursor over the tip of the green arrow until the Move On Y Axis tool tip
appears.
5 Click the tip of the green arrow, and drag the type down until it’s centered
vertically on the red tag.
 Tip:
If you see an Embedded Profile Mismatch message, click OK.

 Tip:
If you have trouble selecting a 3D object, as you position the Move tool,
don’t click until the object’s 3D bounding box appears around it. A 3D
object becomes selected only when you click a solid part of that object, not
the spaces around or within it.
6 Click the tip of the red arrow, and drag the type to the right so that it’s horizontally
centered on the red tag.
Your tag is ready to print!
7 Choose File > Save As. Navigate to the Lesson15 folder, and save the file as
15Working.psd. Click OK in the Photoshop Format Options dialog box.
Printing a 3D file
When you think of printing, you usually think of producing a flat page of two-
dimensional text and images. They may be high-quality, amazing images, but you can’t
see them from different angles, and what you hold in your hand remains a piece of paper
or other relatively simple media.
3D printers open up a whole new world of printing opportunities. Instead of printing an
image of a thing, you can print the thing itself. The possibilities are endless, including
medical uses, prototyping, and creative enterprises such as making jewelry and one-of-
a-kind souvenirs.
3D printers were once the province of well-funded labs, but have recently become much
more accessible. In many cities, you can use one at a “maker” or do-it-yourself (DIY)
space, a shared workshop area where, for a fee, you can use many advanced resources.
If you don’t have a 3D printer yourself or easy access to one, you can also send your 3D
creations to online vendors, who will print them using the material you specify and mail
them to you.
You can create 3D objects in Photoshop—or import 3D objects that have been created
elsewhere—and print them directly from Photoshop.
Specifying 3D print settings
You don’t use the standard Print dialog box to print 3D objects from Photoshop. And

before you print, you need to make sure the settings are appropriate.
1 Choose 3D > 3D Print Settings.
The Properties panel displays the 3D print settings, and the image window shows a
preview of your 3D object. The preview shows you how it will look when printed,
based on the printer you select.
2 Choose Shapeways from the Print To menu in the Properties panel.
Shapeways is an online vendor that prints 3D objects and mails them to you for a fee.
There are other online vendors, but Shapeways is easy to use because you can choose its
printers directly within Photoshop. If you use another vendor, ask them for instructions
for printing from Photoshop.
If you own a 3D printer, choose Local from the Print To menu, and then choose your
printer from the Printer menu. If your printer isn’t listed in the menu, choose Get Latest
Printers from the Print To menu, and then download the profiles for all supported
printers.
3 Choose Plastic - Alumide from the Printer menu. Plastic alumide is a plastic that
simulates metal.
When you choose Shapeways from the Print To menu, the Printer menu lists dozens of
material options. The material you select affects the appearance and cost of the object
you print.
The preview of the 3D object changes in the image window to reflect the choices you’ve
made. When you choose Plastic - Alumide, the preview shows a silver-gray tag with
extruded text.
 Tip:

You can learn more about the materials available through Shapeways, and
compare costs of various options, by visiting
http://www.shapeways.com/materials.
4 Make sure Inches is selected in the Printer Units menu to specify how printer
volume should be measured.
3D printers have different capacities, and it’s important to consider whether your object
will fit within the printer’s volume. The Printer Units values are dimmed, because you
can’t change them; they describe the volume for the printer you’ve chosen. The Scene
Volume values reflect the size of your 3D scene (in this case, a single object). If the
Show option is selected, the preview shows a cube outline to represent the printer
volume that the scene lies within.
If the scene volume is larger than the printer volume, click Scale To Print Volume in the
Properties panel to reduce its size so that your printer can print it. In this case, the scene
volume is comfortably smaller than the printer volume.
5 Choose Medium from the Detail Level menu. This option determines how detailed
the preview image is.
The Surface Detail options preserve bump maps and other texture and opacity settings
when you print. You can leave those options selected, though there are no bump maps or
opacity settings in this object.
You’re ready to print.
Exporting a 3D object
Printing a 3D object is a little more complicated than printing a two-dimensional image.
It’s not that much more challenging for the person doing the printing, but Photoshop has
to do a lot of behind-the-scenes calculations.
3D printers build objects from the bottom. If you’re printing a cube, for example, or
another object with a significant base, the printer can create it without further support.
However, many 3D objects are irregularly shaped, and the bottom of the object may
actually be a set of disconnected surfaces. For example, think of a model of an animal.
The bottom of the animal is composed of the four separate feet. In order to print such an
object, the printer requires a support structure. That structure typically includes a raft,
which provides a base to print from, and scaffolding, which supports portions of the

object so they don’t collapse while the rest of the object is being printed.
When you choose 3D Print, Photoshop prepares the object for printing, and calculates
any necessary raft and scaffolding as well.
1 Choose 3D > 3D Print, or click the Start Print icon ( ) at the bottom of the
Properties panel.
Photoshop displays a progress bar as it prepares the print job. This may take some time,
depending on the speed of your computer.
2 Click OK in the dialog box that informs you that the estimated price may differ
from the final purchase price.
3 In the Photoshop 3D Print Settings dialog box, review the estimated price and
print size.
Click options in the Preview area of the dialog box to see the size, shadows, raft,
scaffolding, and other aspects of the job. This object requires no raft or scaffolding, so
those options are dimmed.
Use the 3D tools at the top of the dialog box to see your object from different angles.
Printing prices vary dramatically depending on the material you choose. You can click
Cancel, choose a different printer, and then let Photoshop calculate the price again.
You’ve made no commitments at this point in the process.
4 Click Export.
5 Click Save in the Save dialog box.
Photoshop exports the 3D print file information to the file 15Working.stl.
6 When you’re prompted to upload your exported file to the Shapeways site for

printing, click Yes to continue to the site, or click No to stop the process.
7 If you continue to the Shapeways site, sign in if you have an account, or create one
if you don’t. (Creating an account is free.)
8 On the Shapeways website, click Upload. When prompted, select the file you just
saved, and click Choose. It will be in the Lesson15 folder, called
15Working.stl.zip. Then click Upload.
Shapeways uploads and unzips the file. It displays the object and lists possible
materials and their prices, along with a 3D preview you can rotate by dragging.

 Note
You are not committed to a purchase until you check out and pay for the
object.
9 If you want to pay to have the object printed, click Add To Cart next to the
material you want to print, and then follow the onscreen instructions to place your
order. The printed object will be shipped to you.
If you don’t want to have Shapeways print the object, you can optionally sign out of the

Shapeways site, and close the web page.
Review questions
1 How does a 3D layer differ from other layers in Photoshop?
2 How can you change the camera view?
3 Which color represents each axis on the 3D Axis widget?
4 How do you print a 3D object?
Review answers
1 A 3D layer behaves like any other layer—you can apply layer styles, mask it, and
so on. However, unlike a regular layer, a 3D layer also contains one or more
meshes, which define 3D objects. You can work with meshes and the materials,
maps, and textures they contain. You can also adjust the lighting for a 3D layer.
2 To change the camera view, you can move the Camera widget, or right-click
(Windows) or Control-click (Mac) the widget to choose a camera view preset.
3 In the 3D Axis widget, the red arrow represents the X axis, the green arrow
represents the Y axis, and the blue arrow represents the Z axis.
4 To print a 3D object from Photoshop, first choose 3D > 3D Print Settings, and set
up your printer options. Then choose 3D > 3D Print, or click the Start Print icon at
the bottom of the Properties panel.

Appendix: Tools panel overview
Photoshop CC 2017 Tools Panel





Appendix: Keyboard shortcuts
Learning the shortcuts for tools and commands you use most often can save you time.
Want to customize them? Choose Edit > Keyboard Shortcuts. While there, click
Summarize to export a list updated with your own shortcuts.
Tools Each group of tools in the Tools panel shares a shortcut. Press Shift+ the letter
key repeatedly to cycle through hidden tools.


Application menus These shortcuts are for Windows. For Mac, substitute Command
for Ctrl and Option for Alt.




Index
Symbols
3D Axis widget 363
3D features 360–371
3D layers 361
3D print settings 366
3D scenes
positioning elements in 364
printing 365
3D tools 361
A
actions
batch-playing 320
playing 320
recording 315–320
stopping recording 320
action sets 316
Actions panel 315
Add Artboard button 324
Add Audio option 265
Add Layer Mask button 104
Add Media button 256
Add Noise filter 225
Adjustment Brush tool (Camera Raw) 303
adjustment layers 97–98
Black & White 50, 261
Brightness/Contrast 223
Channel Mixer 223
Curves 17, 110–111, 300
defined 17
Exposure 224
Hue/Saturation 97
Levels 120, 290
using in video 260
Adobe Bridge
adding favorites 37

Favorites panel 37
installing 3
opening files in Camera Raw from 274
opening files in Photoshop from 36
Adobe Camera Raw
adjusting white balance in 277
Adjustment Brush tool 303
Basic panel 280
Detail panel 282
opening images in 274
Open Object button 287
saving files in 288
synchronizing settings across images 283
using as a filter 303–304
version 272
workflow 275
workspace 275
Adobe Capture CC 203
Adobe Creative Cloud
desktop application 3
mobile apps 203, 332
portfolio online 354
Adobe Generator 322
Adobe Illustrator
importing Smart Objects from 200
importing text from 200–201
Adobe Photoshop CC
installing 3
new features 2
resetting the default preferences for 10
starting 3, 10
work area 10–31
Adobe Photoshop CC Classroom in a Book (2017 release)
about 1
lesson files and Web Edition 4
prerequisites 2
Adobe Photoshop Lightroom 292–293
Adobe Portfolio 354
Adobe Preview CC 332
Adobe Stock

designing with 104
Libraries panel import 86
licensing 104
Search Adobe Stock command 78
in Start workspace 11
Aligned option 47
alpha channels 142, 157
about 143, 159
anchor points 191, 194
animating
position 262
text 258
anti-aliasing 62
application frame, Mac 12
Apply Layer Comp box 103
arrow keys, nudging with 59–60
artboards 322
adding 324
Artboard tool 324
duplicating 322
exporting 330
mobile devices and 325
presets for sizes 324
resizing 327
Artboard tool 324, 327
audio
adding to a video timeline 265
fading 266
muting 266–267
shortening clips 265
Audio track 265
Auto-Align Layers 129
Auto Enhance option 56
automating tasks 315–322
axes, 3D 363
B
background layer
about 74
converting to a regular layer 76, 318

erasing 79
overview 76
barrel distortion, correcting 124
Basic panel (in Camera Raw) 280
batch-playing actions 320
Bevel & Emboss effect 201
bitmap images
overview 10, 188
vector graphics vs. 188–189
black and white, converting color images in Photoshop 50
black point 280
Black & White adjustment layer 50, 261
blemishes, removing 44
Blend Images Together option 119
blending colors with a photograph 242
blending modes
achieving different effects with 95
applying to layers 83
Luminosity 228
Multiply 83
Overlay 83
overview 82
Bloat tool in the Liquify filter 217
blur
caused by camera motion, removing 138
Field Blur 116
Iris Blur 114–115, 116, 222
Path Blur 116, 117
restore noise 117
Spin Blur 116
surface blur 301–302
Tilt-Shift 116
Blur Effects panel 117
Blur Gallery 114–117
borders
adding 79, 100
discarding 39
Bridge. See Adobe Bridge
brightening an image 110–111, 120
Brightness/Contrast adjustment layer 223

bristle tips 232
Browse In Bridge command 36
brushes
loading with color 239
presets 240
settings 233
Shape Dynamics options 245
Brush panel 233
Brush Pose settings 245
Brush Presets panel 241
Brush tool 20
setting options 154
buttons
creating in Photoshop 309–315
duplicating 314
C
calibration, monitor 347
Camera Raw. See Adobe Camera Raw
camera raw images
cameras supported by Adobe Camera Raw 273
creating 273
file formats for saving 288
histogram 282
opening 274–275
overview 273
proprietary 272
saving 285–286
sharpening 282
white balance and exposure adjustment 277–278
Camera Shake Reduction filter 138
cameras, in 3D layers 361
changing the angle of 364
camera views 364
Camera widget 363
canvas 318
Canvas Size 318
center point, selecting from 66
channel masks 143
Channel Mixer adjustment layer 223

channels
alpha channels 157, 159
overview 142, 157
Channels panel 142
Character panel 89
checkerboard transparency indicator 79
chromatic aberration 124
Classroom in a Book 1
Clean Brush After Every Stroke icon 238
clean brush (Mixer Brush tool) 238
clipping masks
about 143, 165
creating 168–170, 339
indicator 170
in placed video assets 261
shortcut 170
closed paths 189, 191
closing a Photoshop file 12
Clouds filter 86
CMYK color mode, converting to 342
CMYK color model 342
defined 347
gamut 347
collaborating with libraries 203
color
additive 342
adjusting overall 40
changing foreground 18
converting to black and white 50
default foreground and background 222
default text 168
managed workflow 348–349
mixing with the Mixer Brush 237
out-of-gamut 342
previewing CMYK values in RGB mode 343
sampling 18, 233
selecting by 54
selecting using the Swatches panel 24–25
softening edge transitions 62
Color blending mode 218

color casts, removing 40
color comp 352
color management 347, 348
Color Overlay 201
Color panel 28
color profiles 347
Color Range, Skin Tones option 299
Color Settings dialog box 348–349
color settings, saving and restoring 5
color space 347
combining images 77–80, 80–82
in a panorama 118–121
with different perspectives 134–138
commands, keyboard shortcuts for 377
Commit Any Current Edits button 100
Commit Transform button 201
Content-Aware Crop 122
content-aware fill
with panoramas 118
Content-Aware Move tool 130, 131
Content-Aware Patch tool 45
Content panel, in Bridge 37
context menus 19
annotations 182
type 172, 175
Contrast slider in Camera Raw 280
Control Timeline Magnification slider 257
Convert for Smart Filters 303
converting images to black and white 50
copying
and anti-aliasing 62
commands 69
images 102, 344
images, and centering 77
layers 77–79
selections 68, 69
settings in Camera Raw 283
Copy Merged command 69
corner points 191
creases, repairing 44

Create Video Timeline 255
Creative Cloud. See Adobe Creative Cloud
Crop and Straighten Photos command 39
cropping images 38–39, 69–70
Content-Aware Crop 122
cropping shield 38
Crop tool 38
Cross Fade transition 264
curved paths 191
Curves adjustment layers 17–18, 110, 300
customizing the user interface 30
cutouts 200–201
D
Default Foreground And Background Colors 222
defaults, resetting 5, 10
Delete Cropped Pixels option 38
depth of field, extending 127
deselecting selections 57
Detail panel in Camera Raw 282
Difference Clouds filter 222
Direct Selection tool 191
discretionary ligatures 179
distortions, correcting 134
DNG file format 288
docking panels 27
document size, displaying 102
Dodge tool 297–298
drag-and-drop importing 86
Drop Shadow layer style 312, 318
drop shadows 92–93, 94
duplicating
areas of a scene 130
images 344
layers 314
duration of video clips, changing 257
Dust & Scratches filter 48
E
editing

shapes 200
Smart Filters 217
text 173
Edit In Quick Mask Mode button 154
Elliptical Marquee tool 54, 228
centering selection 66
circular selections with 58
EPS file format 351
erodible tip 236
Export As command
exporting artboards 330
exporting layers 331
exporting
3D objects for printing 367
image files from layers 322, 331
video 267
web graphics 330
Exposure adjustment layer 224
Eyedropper tool 18, 233
eye icon, in the Layers panel 75
F
Face-Aware Liquify 112
Fade With Black transitions 264
fading audio 266
Favorites panel, in Bridge 37
Feather command 62
feathering 62
Field Blur 116
file formats
from Camera Raw 288
transferring images between applications and platforms 288
type 179
files, saving 18, 102–105
fills
color 361
foreground color 101
gradient 91
film. See video
filters

adding clouds with 85
Add Noise 225
Camera Raw Filter 303
Camera Shake Reduction 138
Difference Clouds 222
Dust & Scratches 48
Lighting Effects 226
Liquify 212–213
Smart Sharpen 48, 317
Find. See Search icon
Fit On Screen command 67
Flatten Image command. See flattening
flattening 41, 102, 182, 336
focus, adjusting 127
fonts
alternates 179
changing in the options bar 23
OpenType 179
previewing in context 167
selecting 166
Foreground color swatch 24, 86
four-color printing 342
fractions 179
Freeform Pen tool 189
freehand selections 63–64
Free Transform 204, 210, 212
G
gamut 347
colors outside of 342–343
Gamut Warning 343–344
Generator. See Adobe Generator
Geometric Distortion Correction option 119
Go To First Frame button 264
Gradient Picker 91
gradients, listing by name 91
Gradient tool 91
graphics processor 360
guides
adding 165

ruler 310
Smart Guides 204
H
Hand tool 65
HDR in Camera Raw 302
Healing Brush tool 44, 295
Help, Photoshop 6
hiding
layers 78
selection edges 60
HiDPI
graphics export 331
resolution 35
high-resolution images 35
histogram
Camera Raw 275, 282
Levels adjustment layer 41, 291, 341
History panel 221–227
Horizontal Type tool 22, 89, 166, 167
hue, adjusting for printing 344
Hue/Saturation adjustment layers 17, 155
I
Illustrator. See Adobe Illustrator
images
centering and copying 168
copying 102
duplicating 344
fitting onscreen 65
flattening 102–104
resolution 35–36
sharpening 282
size and resolution 35–36
image window 14, 14–15
fitting image to 67
scrolling 16
importing
embedded Smart Objects 321
multiple files from Bridge 209

video assets 255
InDesign. See Adobe InDesign
Info panel 309
inkjet printers 352
Inner Shadow layer style 170
interface. See user interface
iPhone, designing for 324
Iris Blur 114–115, 116, 222
J
JPEG file format
camera raw images and 273, 277, 285
compared to other formats 288
Export As and 330
image degradation and 293
K
keyboard shortcuts
customizing 240
duplicating 68
list of 376–377
Move tool 59
keyframes
appearance of 259
moving to the next or previous 262
using to animate text 258
L
Lasso tools 54, 63–64
layer comps 103
layer effects
adding 92
updating 100
layer groups 309
layer masks 143
layers
about 74
adding 85–86
Background 76
blending modes 82–83

converting Background to regular 318
converting to Background 76
copying 77–79
copying and centering 77, 81
copying and merging 69
duplicating 82, 314
effects 90–93, 92–95
erasing 79–81
exporting individually 331
flattening 102, 103
generating images from 322
hiding and showing 75, 78, 79
linking 84–86
locking 75
merging visible 102
opacity 82
overview 74
painting 218
rearranging 80–82
removing pixels from 79–81
renaming 77
resizing 84–86
rotating 84
selecting 18
showing and hiding 78
thumbnail icons 75, 201
transforming 84
transparency 82–83
type 89
Layers panel
overview 75–76
Quick Mask mode indicator 154
layer styles
adding to type 170
applying 90–93, 92–95
Bevel & Emboss 201
Color Overlay 201
in Creative Cloud Libraries 93
Drop Shadow 92, 96, 312, 318
multiple instances of effects 99

overview 90, 92
Satin 96
Stroke 94, 312
learning resources for Adobe Photoshop CC 6
length of video clips, changing 257
Lens Correction filter 124–126
lens flaws, correcting 124–126
lesson files, accessing 3
Levels adjustment layers 40–41, 120, 290
Libraries, Creative Cloud
Adobe Stock 86
color swatches 86
images 86
layer styles 93
linked Smart Objects 203
mobile apps 203
New Library from Document dialog box 11
Start workspace 11
Libraries panel 104
licensing, Adobe Stock 104
lightening an image 110–111, 120
Lighting Effects filter 226
Lightroom. See Adobe Photoshop Lightroom
lights, in 3D layers 361
linear gradients 85–87
Liquify, Face-Aware 112
Liquify filter 212–213
Live Tip Brush Preview 235
Load Files Into Photoshop Layers command 209
loading brushes with color 239
low resolution images 35
upscaling 227
Luminosity blending mode 228
M
Mac, differences in work area 12
Magic Wand tool 54, 60–61
Magnetic Lasso tool 54, 65–66
magnification 13–16, 59. See also Zoom tool
Timeline panel 257

magnifying glass. See Zoom tool
marquee tools 54
masks
color values for editing 142
creating 143–146
inverting 155
overview 142
refining 147–153
terminology 143
materials, in 3D layers 361
megapixels 35
Merge Visible command 103
merging
images 127
images with different perspectives 134–138
layers 102
multiple Photoshop files 209
meshes, in 3D layers 361
mistakes, correcting 25–31
Mixer Brush tool
about 232
cleaning the brush 238
mixing colors 237
with a photograph 242
mobile devices
designing for, with artboards 325
testing designs with Adobe Preview CC 332
using with libraries 203
monitor calibration 347
motion blurs 117
Motion dialog box 258, 261
Motion workspace 255
Move tool 26
moving selections 57
Pan the 3D Object mode 362
scissors icon 67
moving
3D objects 363
objects in an image 130
panels 27

selections 56–57
Multiply blending mode 83
muting audio 266–267
N
navigating
using Scrubby Zoom 15
using the Navigator panel 16
with the Zoom tool 13–14
Navigator panel 16
New Library from Document dialog box 11
noise, reducing 48
nondestructive filters 212
Notes panel 177
nudging selections 59
O
Oil Paint filter 245
on-image adjustment tool. See targeted adjustment tool
opacity, changing 82–83
opening images in Camera Raw 274
Open Object button (in Camera Raw) 287
open paths 189, 191
OpenType file format 164, 179
options bar 19
compared to panels 29–30
overview 22–23
proxy icon 325
setting type options in 23
organizing photos 292–293
out-of-gamut color 342–343
output resolution, determining 35
Overlay blending mode 83
P
painting
layers 218
wetness options 234
with an erodible tip 236
with the Mixer Brush tool 230–245

pan and zoom effects, adding to video 263–264
panel dock 27
panels
Brush panel 233
compared to options bar 29
docking 27
expanding and collapsing 28–29
moving to another group 27
overview 27–28
resizing 28
undocking 27
working with 24–26
panning with the Navigator panel 16
panorama 118–121
getting the best results 120
in Adobe Camera Raw 302
Pan the 3D Object mode 362
Pan & Zoom option 258, 263
Paper Color option 350
paper, simulating white 350
Paragraph panel 28
paragraph type 166
Paste in Place command 69
Paste Into command 69, 228
Paste Outside command 69
Patch tool 45
Path Blur 116–117, 117
paths 189, 189–190, 190–198
adding type to 172–173
closing 191
drawing curved 191
drawing straight 191
guidelines for drawing 194
saving 191, 198
segments 191
Paths panel 191, 192
vector mask 200
PDF. See Photoshop PDF
Pencil tool 189
Pen tool

as selection tool 190
drawing paths 190–194
keyboard shortcut 189
overview 189–190, 191
setting options 192–193
Perspective Warp 134
Photomerge 118–121
photo restoration, manual 42–43
Photoshop EPS file format 343
Photoshop PDF file format 183
pincushion distortion 124
pixel dimensions 35
pixels
compared to vector graphics 188
defined 10
resolution and 35
pixels per inch 35
Place Embedded 321, 322
Place Linked 201
planes, Perspective Warp 135
playhead, in the Timeline panel 260
plug-ins 10
point type 166
distorting 175–176
paragraphs vs. 176
Polygonal Lasso tool 21, 54
Polygon tool 200
position, animating in video 262
PostScript fonts 164, 179
ppi (pixels per inch) 35
preferences
Export 330
gamut-warning color 343
History States 227
restoring defaults 5, 10
Units & Rulers 309
Use Graphics Processor 226
user interface lightness 30
video card 360
Preserve Details (Enlargement) option 227

Preserve Numbers option 349
presets
artboard 324
brush 240
Curves 110
film and video document 254
Lighting Effects 226
in Start workspace 11
White Balance (Camera Raw) 277
previewing. See also Adobe Preview
brush tips 235
colors for printing 349
fonts in context 167
on mobile devices 332
Print dialog box 353
printers, inkjet 352
printing 335–357
3D files 365
CMYK model and 347–348
guidelines 352
identifying out-of-gamut color 342–343
preparing images for 336
proofing images onscreen 349–352
saving image as separations 351
printing inks, simulating 350
process colors 34, 342
profile, color 347
Proof Colors command 350
proofing images 349–352
Properties panel
artboard editing 324
Brightness and Contrast adjustment 17
clipping masks 339
Curves adjustment 40
Levels adjustment 291
shape layers 180
targeted adjustment tool 50
proxy icon 325
PSD (Photoshop) format 273, 288
Pucker tool in the Liquify filter 217

Puppet Warp 156
Q
Quick Mask mode 142, 154, 155
Quick Selection tool 54, 55–56, 144
R
raster images, overview 188
recording actions 315–320
rectangles, rounded 180
Rectangular Marquee tool 19, 54, 61, 310
red eye, correcting 108–110
Red Eye tool 109–110
Refine Edge 62. See Select and Mask
rendering video 267
repositioning selections 58
Resize To Fill Canvas option 258
resizing
layers 84
panels 28
video assets 258
resolution 35–36
responsive design 323
Retina graphics export 331
Retina resolution 35
retouching/repairing 34
removing blemishes 44–45
with the Healing Brush tool 295
with the Spot Healing Brush tool 44, 295–297
RGB color mode, converting to CMYK 343
RGB color model 342, 342–344
about 342
gamut 347
right-click menus 19
Roll The 3D Object tool 363
rotating
3D objects 363
brush 245
images 124
layers 84

paths 174
in Puppet Warp 157
selections 64
stylus 232
Rounded Rectangle tool 180–181
ruler guides 165, 310
rulers 166
S
sampling colors 18, 233
Satin layer style 96
saturation, adjusting in Photoshop 297–298
Saturation slider (in Camera Raw) 280
saving. See also exporting
as Photoshop format 18
as Photoshop PDF 183
as separations 351
scale factors, exporting for Retina/HiDPI 331
scaling 169
3D objects 363
images up 227
scrubbing numeric values 23
Scrubby Zoom 15
Search icon 12, 118, 130
Select and Mask 158
selecting 54. See also selections
from center point 66–67
high-contrast edges 65–66
layers 18
skin tones 299
text 100
selections
by color 54
circular 66
copying 69
duplicating 68
elliptical 57–65
feathering 62
freehand 54
geometric 54

hiding edges of 60
inverting 155
moving 56–57, 59, 67–68, 68
rotating 64–65
showing edges of 60
softening 62
subtracting from 61, 61–62
selection tools 54–55
separations
printing 352–354
saving image as 351
sepia effect, creating 261
shaders, in 3D layers 361
shadows, creating 157
Shape Dynamics options, for brushes 245
shape layers 200–201
shapes, custom 198–201
Shapeways online 3D print vendor 366
sharpening images
in Camera Raw 282–283
in Photoshop 48–49
shortcut menus 19
shortcuts. See keyboard shortcuts
shortening video clips 257
Show/Hide Visibility column 79
Show Transform Controls option 201
side by side documents 77
sidecar XMP files 283
Single Column Marquee tool 54
Single Row Marquee tool 54
skewing an object 160
skin tones, selecting 299
Smart Filters 114, 212–215, 217
Smart Guides 204
Smart Objects 200
automatic update on editing 200
converting layers to 212
embedded 321
layer thumbnail 201
linked 201, 203

Smart Filters and 212
Smart Sharpen filter 48, 317
smooth points 191
snapping 309
soft-proofing 349–352
spell checking 172
Spin Blur 116
Split at Playhead button 265
Sponge tool 297–298
Spot Healing Brush tool 44–45, 295–297
stacking order, changing 80–82
Standard mode 154
starting Photoshop 10
status bar 14
sticky notes 177
Stop Recording button 320
stopwatch icon in the Timeline panel 259
Straighten button 38, 122
strobe effect 117
Stroke layer style 94, 312
Subtract From Selection button 61
Surface Blur filter 301
swashes 179
Swatches panel 24–25, 25
swatches, selecting 24
synchronizing settings in Camera Raw 283
T
targeted adjustment tool 50
temperature, image color 277
text. See also type
adding 166
animating 258
creating 22, 89–90
default color 168
moving 90
selecting 100
textures, in 3D layers 361
thumbnail icons, layer 75, 201
TIFF (Tagged Image File Format)

camera raw images and 273–274, 288
compared to other formats 183, 288, 293
Tilt-Shift 116
timeline, creating 255
Timeline panel
changing the magnification 257
returning to the first frame 264
tints
defined 277
in Black & White adjustment 
layers 261
Tolerance option for the Magic Wand 
tool 60
tone, adjusting 40–41
tools
Brush tool 20
Content-Aware Move 130, 131
Crop tool 38
Elliptical Marquee 228
Eyedropper 18, 233
Healing Brush tool 44
Horizontal Type tool 22
keyboard shortcuts for 189, 376
Lasso tool 63
Magic Wand tool 60
Magnetic Lasso tool 63, 65
Move tool 26
Patch tool 45
Polygonal Lasso tool 21, 63
Quick Selection tool 55, 144
Rectangular Marquee tool 19, 310
Rounded Rectangle tool 180–181
selecting hidden 21–22
selection 54–55
Spot Healing Brush tool 44
using 13–19
Tools panel
compared to other panels 29–30
double-column view 13
selecting and using tools from 13–19

tool tips, displaying 14
tracks, in a timeline 255
transforming
layers 84
Smart Objects 201
transitions
adding to video 264
changing the length of 265
transparency
adjusting 82–83
recognizing (checkerboard) 79
Transparency And Gamut preference 343
trimming an image 39
TrueType fonts 179
type. See also text
aligning 166
clipping mask 165, 168–170
creating 166–167
on a path 172–173
overview 164
resizing 164
resolution-independent 164
setting options 166
swashes 179
tricks 172
true fractions 179
vertical 181–182
warping 175–176
typefaces. See fonts
formats 164
selecting 166
type layers 89
creating new 172
selecting contents 172
Type tool 22–23
U
undocking panels 27
Undo command 26
undoing actions 25–26

with the History panel 221–227
Units & Rulers preferences 309
upscaling images 227
user interface 10–12
Adobe Camera Raw 275
changing settings for 30
V
vector graphics
bitmap images vs. 188
defined 10
overview 188
vector masks 143
Vertical Type tool 181
video
adding audio to 265
adding pan and zoom effects 263–264
adding transitions 264–265
exporting 267
groups 256
importing assets for 255
Motion workspace 255
overview 254
rendering 267
resizing assets for 258
using adjustment layers in 260
video card. See graphics processor
vignetting 124
W
Wacom tablets 245
warping
images with the Liquify filter 212
perspective 134–138
Puppet Warp 156–157
type 175–183
watermark, Adobe Stock 104
web design 306
HiDPI 331
responsive 323

Retina 331
wetness options, in painting 234
White Balance tool (in Camera Raw) 277–279
white point 280
White Point eyedropper tool 340
widgets, 3D 363
Windows, differences in work area 12
work area 10–31
workflow options (Camera Raw) 275
workflows
color-managed 348–350
prepress 336, 348
professional photographer 292–293
retouching 34
video 250
web design 307
work path 191
workspaces
default 12
Motion 255
Start 11
X
x axis 363
XMP files 283
Y
y axis 363
Z
z axis 363
Zoom option in video 261
zoom test, before printing 338
Zoom tool 13–16. See also magnification
Scrubby Zoom 15
shortcuts 149

Production Notes
Adobe Photoshop CC Classroom in a Book (2017 release) was created electronically
using Adobe InDesign CC. Art was produced using Adobe InDesign, Adobe Illustrator,
and Adobe Photoshop. The Myriad Pro 
and Warnock Pro OpenType families of typefaces were used throughout this book. For
information about OpenType and Adobe fonts, visit www.adobe.com/type/opentype/.
References to company names in the lessons are for demonstration purposes only and
are not intended 
to refer to any actual organization or person.
Images
Photographic images and illustrations are intended for use with the tutorials.
Lesson 4 pineapple and flower photography © Image Source, www.imagesource.com;
ukulele image from Adobe Stock, stock.adobe.com
Team credits
The following individuals contributed to the development of Adobe Photoshop CC
Classroom in a Book (2017 release):
Project Manager: Denise Thompson
Writer: Conrad Chavez
Illustrator and Compositor: David Van Ness
Copyeditor and Proofreader: Wendy Katz
Indexer: Conrad Chavez
Technical Reviewer: David Van Ness
Keystroker: Karyn Johnson
Cover design: Eddie Yuen
Interior design: Mimi Heft
Art Director: Andrew Faulkner
Designers: Amanda McMillan and Camilla Golestaneh
Adobe Press Executive Editor: Nancy Davis
Adobe Press Project Editor: Tracey Croom
Adobe Press Production Editor: Tracey Croom
Contributors
Jay Graham began his career designing and building custom homes. He has been a
professional photographer for more than 25 years, with clients in the advertising,
architectural, editorial, and travel industries. He contributed the “Pro Photo Workflow”

tips in Lesson 5. www.jaygraham.com
Lisa Farrer is a photographer based in Marin County, CA. She contributed photography
for Lesson 5. www.lisafarrerphoto.com
Gawain Weaver has conserved and restored original works by artists ranging from
Eadward Muybridge to Man Ray, and from Ansel Adams to Cindy Sherman. He
contributed to “Real World Photo Restoration” in Lesson 2. www.gawainweaver.com
Special Thanks
We offer our sincere thanks to Jeff Tranberry, Pete Falco, Stephen Nielson, Russell
Brown, and Zorana Gee for their support and help with this project. We couldn’t have
done it without you!

Table of Contents
About This E-Book
2
Title Page
3
Copyright Page
4
Where are the Lesson Files?
6
Contents
8
Getting Started
12
About Classroom in a Book
12
What’s new in this edition
12
Prerequisites
12
Installing Adobe Photoshop and Adobe Bridge
13
Starting Adobe Photoshop
13
Online content
13
Restoring default preferences
14
Additional resources
15
Adobe Authorized Training Centers
16
1. Getting To Know The Work Area
17
Starting to work in Adobe Photoshop
18
Using the tools
22
Sampling a color
28
Working with tools and tool properties
29
Undoing actions in Photoshop
35
More about panels and panel locations
37
Finding resources for using Photoshop
39
2. Basic Photo Corrections
43
Strategy for retouching
44
Resolution and image size
45
Opening a file with Adobe Bridge
47
Straightening and cropping the image in Photoshop
49
Adjusting the color and tone
51
Using the Spot Healing Brush tool
56
Applying a content-aware patch
57
Repairing areas with the Clone Stamp tool
58
Sharpening the image
60
3. Working With Selections
65

About selecting and selection tools
66
Getting started
67
Using the Quick Selection tool
68
Moving a selected area
69
Manipulating selections
70
Using the Magic Wand tool
73
Selecting with the lasso tools
76
Rotating a selection
77
Selecting with the Magnetic Lasso tool
78
Selecting from a center point
80
Resizing and copying a selection
81
Cropping an image
83
4. Layer Basics
86
About layers
87
Getting started
88
Using the Layers panel
88
Rearranging layers
95
Applying a gradient to a layer
106
Applying a layer style
108
Adding an adjustment layer
114
Updating layer effects
117
Adding a border
118
Flattening and saving files
120
5. Quick Fixes
126
Getting started
127
Improving a snapshot
128
Adjusting facial features with Liquify
132
Blurring a background
134
Creating a panorama
139
Filling empty areas when cropping
143
Correcting image distortion
145
Extending depth of field
150
Moving objects with the Content-Aware Move tool
153
Adjusting perspective in an image
157
6. Masks And Channels
164
Working with masks and channels
165
Getting started
166

Using Select and Mask
167
Creating a quick mask
180
Manipulating an image with Puppet Warp
183
Using an alpha channel to create a shadow
185
7. Typographic Design
190
About type
191
Getting started
192
Creating a clipping mask from type
193
Creating type on a path
200
Warping point type
203
Designing paragraphs of type
205
Adding a rounded rectangle
210
Adding vertical text
211
8. Vector Drawing Techniques
217
About bitmap images and vector graphics
218
About paths and the Pen tool
219
Getting started
220
Drawing with the Pen tool
220
Working with defined custom shapes
230
Importing a Smart Object
232
Adding color and depth to a shape using layer styles
233
9. Advanced Compositing
240
Getting started
241
Arranging layers
244
Using Smart Filters
247
Painting a layer
253
Adding a background
256
Using the History panel to undo edits
258
Upscaling a low-resolution image
265
10. Painting With The Mixer Brush
268
About the Mixer Brush
269
Getting started
269
Selecting brush settings
270
Mixing colors
276
Creating a custom brush preset
279
Mixing colors with a photograph
281
11. Editing Video
290

Getting started
291
About the Timeline panel
292
Creating a new video project
293
Animating text with keyframes
298
Creating effects
300
Adding transitions
304
Adding audio
305
Muting unwanted audio
306
Rendering video
307
12. Working With Camera Raw
310
Getting started
311
About camera raw files
313
Processing files in Camera Raw
314
Applying advanced color correction
331
13. Preparing Files For The Web
349
Getting started
351
Using layer groups to create button graphics
352
Automating a multistep task
359
Designing with artboards
367
14. Producing And Printing Consistent Color
384
Preparing files for printing
385
Getting started
386
Performing a “zoom test”
388
Identifying out-of-gamut colors
392
Adjusting an image
394
Converting an image to CMYK
395
About color management
396
Specifying color-management settings
397
Proofing an image on screen
398
Saving the image as a CMYK EPS file
400
Printing a CMYK image from Photoshop
402
15. Printing 3D Files
411
Getting started
412
Understanding the 3D environment
413
Positioning 3D elements
417
Printing a 3D file
419

Appendices
426
Index
437

