

Adobe® Creative Cloud® All-in-One For Dummies®, 2nd Edition
Published by: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ
07030-5774, www.wiley.com
Copyright © 2018 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey

Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under
Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the
prior written permission of the Publisher. Requests to the Publisher for
permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax
(201) 748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Trademarks: Wiley, For Dummies, the Dummies Man logo, Dummies.com,
Making Everything Easier, and related trade dress are trademarks or
registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and may not be used
without written permission. Adobe and Creative Cloud are trademarks or
registered trademarks of Adobe Systems Incorporated. All other trademarks
are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is not
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
LIMIT OF LIABILITY/DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY: THE
PUBLISHER AND THE AUTHOR MAKE NO REPRESENTATIONS OR
WARRANTIES WITH RESPECT TO THE ACCURACY OR
COMPLETENESS OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS WORK AND
SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, INCLUDING
WITHOUT LIMITATION WARRANTIES OF FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO WARRANTY MAY BE CREATED OR
EXTENDED BY SALES OR PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS. THE
ADVICE AND STRATEGIES CONTAINED HEREIN MAY NOT BE
SUITABLE FOR EVERY SITUATION. THIS WORK IS SOLD WITH
THE UNDERSTANDING THAT THE PUBLISHER IS NOT ENGAGED
IN RENDERING LEGAL, ACCOUNTING, OR OTHER PROFESSIONAL
SERVICES. IF PROFESSIONAL ASSISTANCE IS REQUIRED, THE
SERVICES OF A COMPETENT PROFESSIONAL PERSON SHOULD BE
SOUGHT. NEITHER THE PUBLISHER NOR THE AUTHOR SHALL BE
LIABLE FOR DAMAGES ARISING HEREFROM. THE FACT THAT AN
ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE IS REFERRED TO IN THIS WORK AS
A CITATION AND/OR A POTENTIAL SOURCE OF FURTHER
INFORMATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT THE AUTHOR OR THE
PUBLISHER ENDORSES THE INFORMATION THE ORGANIZATION

OR WEBSITE MAY PROVIDE OR RECOMMENDATIONS IT MAY
MAKE. FURTHER, READERS SHOULD BE AWARE THAT INTERNET
WEBSITES LISTED IN THIS WORK MAY HAVE CHANGED OR
DISAPPEARED BETWEEN WHEN THIS WORK WAS WRITTEN AND
WHEN IT IS READ.
For general information on our other products and services, please contact
our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the
U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002. For technical support, please
visit https://hub.wiley.com/community/support/dummies.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-
demand. Some material included with standard print versions of this book
may not be included in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to
media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version you
purchased, you may download this material at
http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more information about Wiley
products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017956631
ISBN 978-1-119-42040-8 (pbk); ISBN 978-1-119-42041-5 (ebk); ISBN 978-
1-119-42042-2 (ebk)

Adobe® Creative Cloud® All-in-One
For Dummies®
To view this book's Cheat Sheet, simply go to
www.dummies.com and search for “Adobe Creative
Cloud All-in-One For Dummies Cheat Sheet” in the
Search box.
Table of Contents
Cover
Introduction
Why Is It Important?
About This Book
Foolish Assumptions
Icons Used in This Book
Beyond the Book
Book 1: Overview of the Creative Cloud Suite
Chapter 1: Getting Started with the Creative Cloud
Suite
Applications Covered in This Book
Chapter 2: Creative Cloud Application
Management
Downloading Your First App
Chapter 3: Creative Cloud Extras for You
Launching the Creative Cloud App
Adding Work to Behance
Creating a Cover
Bonus! Adobe Portfolio
It’s Not Just Apps!

Chapter 4: Using Common Menus and Commands
Discovering Common Menus
Using Dialog Boxes
Encountering Alerts
Getting to Know Common Menu Options
About Contextual Menus
Using Common Keyboard Shortcuts
Changing Your Preferences
Chapter 5: Exploring Common Panels
Understanding the Synchronized Workspace
Using Panels in the Workspace
Book 2: Adobe Bridge
Chapter 1: Organizing and Managing Your Files
with Adobe Bridge
Getting to Know the Adobe Bridge Workspace
Chapter 2: Taking Advantage of Metadata in Adobe
Bridge
Locating Your Files
Using Keywords
Creating a Metadata Template
Searching for Files Using Adobe Bridge
Saving a Collection
Chapter 3: Using Automation Tools in Adobe
Bridge
Getting Files from Your Camera
Automation Tools in Adobe Bridge
Book 3: Photoshop CC
Chapter 1: Getting into Photoshop CC Basics
The Start Screen
The New Document Window
Sample Images Can Help You Investigate More Features
Opening an Image
Getting to Know the Tools

Navigating the Work Area
Choosing Your Screen Mode
Getting Started with Basic Tasks in Photoshop CC
Chapter 2: Messing with Mode Matters
Working with Bitmap Images
Choosing the Correct Photoshop Mode
Chapter 3: Making Selective Changes
Getting to Know the Selection Tools
Manipulating Selections with Refine Selection
Saving Selections
Preserving Corrective Perspective with the Vanishing Point
Feature
Chapter 4: Using the Photoshop Pen Tool
Selecting the Right Pen Tool for the Task
Using a Path as a Selection
Creating Curved Paths
Clipping Paths
Using Shape Layers
Chapter 5: Creating Images in the Right Resolution
for Print and the Web
Creating Images for Print
Determining the Resolution for Web Images
Applying the Unsharp Mask Filter to an Image
Chapter 6: Creating a Good Image
Reading a Histogram
Creating a Good Tone Curve
Editing an Adjustment Layer
Testing a Printer
Chapter 7: Working with Painting and Retouching
Tools
Using the Swatches Panel
Choosing Foreground and Background Colors
The Painting and Retouching Tools
Blending Modes

Saving Presets
Chapter 8: Using Layers
Creating and Working with Layers
Creating a Text Layer
Using Layer Masks
Organizing Your Layers
Using Layer Styles
Smart, Really Smart! Smart Objects
Working with Artboards in Photoshop
Experimenting with 3D Files
Filter Capabilities in the Layers Panel
Merging and Flattening the Image
Chapter 9: Saving Photoshop Images for Print and
the Web
Backing Up with a Save
Choosing a File Format for Saving
Saving Images for the Web
Saving Settings
Book 4: InDesign CC
Chapter 1: Introducing InDesign CC
Getting Started with InDesign CC
Touring the Workspace
Setting Up the Workspace
Working with Documents
Chapter 2: Working with Text and Text Frames
Understanding Text, Font, and Frames
Creating and Using Text Frames
Adding Text to Your Publication
Looking at Text Frame Options
Modifying and Connecting Text Frames on a Page
Understanding Paragraph Settings
Editing Stories
Using Tables

Looking at Text on a Path
Chapter 3: Understanding Page Layout
Importing Images
Linking and Embedding Images
Setting Image Quality and Display
Selecting Images
Manipulating Text and Graphics in a Layout
Merging Text and Graphics
Working with Pages and the Pages Panel
Using Master Spreads in Page Layout
Chapter 4: Drawing in InDesign
Getting Started with Drawing
Getting to Know the Tools of the Trade
Drawing Shapes
Editing Basic Shapes
Drawing Freeform Paths
Editing Freeform Paths
Modifying Frame Corners
Using Fills
Adding Layers
Creating QR Codes
Chapter 5: Understanding Color
Selecting Color with Color Controls
Understanding Color Models
Using Color Swatches and Libraries
Chapter 6: Clipping Paths, Alignment, and Object
Transformation
Working with Transformations
Understanding Clipping Paths
Arranging Objects on the Page
Chapter 7: Exporting to PDF and Printing
Preflight: Preparing Your Documents for Printing
Packaging Your Documents

Understanding File Formats
Exporting Publications
Printing Your Work
Chapter 8: Creating Digital Documents Using
EPUB
Adapting Content for Digital Distribution
Creating Digital Documents
Exporting EPUB
Book 5: Illustrator CC
Chapter 1: Discovering Illustrator CC
Deciding When to Use Illustrator CC
Creating a New Document
Try a Template
Opening an Existing Document
Taking a Look at the Document Window
Taking Advantage of Artboards
Becoming Familiar with the Tools
Checking Out the Panels
Changing Views
Navigating the Work Area with Zoom Controls
Chapter 2: Using the Selection Tools
Getting to Know the Selection Tools
Working with Selections
Grouping and Ungrouping
Manipulating Selected Objects
Chapter 3: Creating Basic Shapes
The Basic Shape Tools
Resizing Shapes
Tips for Creating Shapes
Chapter 4: Using the Pen Tool and Placing Images
Pen Tool Fundamentals
The Hidden Pen Tools
Tracing Artwork

Other Details You Should Know about Placing Images
Using Photoshop Layer Comps
Chapter 5: Using Type in Illustrator
Working with Type
Assigning Font Styles
Using the Character Panel
Using the Control Panel
Using the Paragraph Panel
Text Utilities: Your Key to Efficiency
Chapter 6: Organizing Your Illustrations
Setting Ruler Increments
Using Guides
Using the Transform Panel for Placement
Changing the Ruler Origin
Thinking about Object Arrangement
Hiding Objects
Locking Objects
Creating a Clipping Mask
Creating a Clipping Path Using the Draw Inside Button
Chapter 7: Using Layers
Creating New Layers
Using Layers for Selections
Changing the Layer Stacking Order
Moving and Cloning Objects
Hiding Layers
Locking Layers
Chapter 8: Livening Up Illustrations with Color
Choosing a Document Profile
Using the Swatches Panel
Applying Color to the Fill and Stroke
Changing the Width and Type of a Stroke
Using the Color Panel
Saving Colors
Editing Colors

Building and Editing Patterns
Advanced Pattern Editing
Working with Gradients
Copying Color Attributes
Painting Made Easy: The Live Paint Feature
Chapter 9: Using the Transform and Distortion
Tools
Working with Transformations
Creating Distortions
Chapter 10: Working with Transparency and
Special Effects Tools
The Mesh Tool
The Blend Tool
The Symbol Sprayer Tool
Transparency
Chapter 11: Using Filters and Effects
Working with Effects
Saving Graphic Styles
Creating 3D Artwork
Adding Multiple Fills and Strokes
Using the Perspective Grid
Chapter 12: Using Your Illustrator Images
Saving and Exporting Illustrator Files
Saving Your Artwork for the Web
Saving Multiple Assets out of Illustrator
Flattening Transparency
Printing from Illustrator
Book 6: Acrobat
Chapter 1: Discovering Essential Acrobat
Information
Working with PDF Files
Knowing When to Use Adobe PDF Files
Introducing the Adobe Acrobat Workspace and Tools

Chapter 2: Creating PDF Files
Creating PDF Files from Microsoft Office
Creating PDF Files from Adobe Creative Cloud Applications
Converting Other Electronic Documents to PDF
Creating PDF Files from Paper Documents and the Web
Chapter 3: Adding Interactivity to PDF Files
Adding Bookmarks to Create Easy PDF Navigation
Adding Interactive Links
Adding Buttons to Simplify Your PDF Files
Chapter 4: Editing and Extracting Text and
Graphics
Editing Text
Exporting Text and Graphics
Chapter 5: Using Commenting and Annotation
Tools
Creating Comments with the Comment Panel
Managing Comments
Reviewing PDF Documents
Chapter 6: Securing Your PDF Files
Understanding Password Security
Applying Password Security to Your PDF Documents
Limiting Editing and Printing
Removing Sensitive Data
Book 7: Adobe XD
Chapter 1: Introducing the Experience Design
Workspace
Understanding the Modern User Interface
Relating Objects to the Property Inspector
A Little Bit about Artboards
Keyboard Shortcuts for Navigating the Workspace
Design View versus Prototype Mode
Chapter 2: Working with Artboards
Starting Your Document and Adding an Artboard

Creating New Artboards
Resizing an Artboard
Adding a New Artboard
Using the Layers Panel
Duplicating an Artboard
Arranging Artboards in Your Pasteboard Area
Aligning and Distributing Your Artboards
Adding Scrolling Capability to an Artboard
Chapter 3: Adding Shapes, Paths, and Custom
Shapes
It All Starts with a Shape
Creating a Button
Creating a Border
Using the Pen Tool
Creating Custom Shapes with the Path Tools
Chapter 4: Working with Objects
Getting a Leg Up on Layers
Transforming Objects
Aligning and Distributing
Chapter 5: Importing and Exporting from XD
Adding Imagery to Your Prototype
Working with Images in XD
Importing Vector Images into XD
Exporting Your Artwork from XD
Chapter 6: Adding Text to Your XD Project
Adding Text Right in Adobe XD
Adjusting Text Properties
Importing Text
Using the Repeat Grid Feature
Chapter 7: Taking Advantage of Symbols and UI
Kits
Using Symbols
Taking Advantage of UI Kits

Chapter 8: Creating Interactivity in Adobe XD
Entering Prototype Mode
Previewing Your Artwork
Chapter 9: Sharing Your XD Project
Viewing Your App/Website on Your Desktop
Creating a Movie for Your User Story
Using the Device Preview Feature
Sharing Your XD File with Others
About the Author
Advertisement Page
Connect with Dummies
End User License Agreement

Introduction
Adobe software has always been highly respected for creative design and
development. Adobe creates tools that allow you to produce amazing designs
and creations with ease. The Adobe Creative Cloud is the company’s latest
release of sophisticated and professional-level software that bundles many
separate programs as a suite. Each program in the Creative Cloud works
individually, or you can integrate the programs by using Adobe Bridge, an
independent program that helps you control file management with
thumbnails, metadata, and other organizational tools.
With Adobe Creative Cloud, a simple monthly membership gives you the
entire collection of Adobe tools and more. Love print? Interested in websites
and iPad apps? Ready to edit video? You can do it all. Plus, Creative Cloud
members automatically get access to new products and exclusive updates as
soon as they’re released. And, with cloud storage and the ability to sync to
any device, your files are always right where you need them. Creative Cloud
is available for individuals or teams.
The first is Creative Services, which are hosted services that you can use in
your production work, in the delivery of your content. This includes a font
service like Typekit, which enables the use and delivery of a broad foundry of
cloud fonts across all of your work. A second area is Digital Publishing,
which enables publishing rich media to tablets via the cloud. And the third
category is Business Catalyst, which supports designing and operating
websites for small businesses, with prebuilt services for things like handling
e-commerce, doing customer relationship management, and integrating with
social networks.
The second pillar is Creative Community, which is the community of creative
people (like you!) around the world and which enables you to connect more
easily with other creative people — it’s a place to share, to communicate, and
to inspire each other with your work. The community is a critical part of our
whole ecosystem, and it’s a critical part of the cloud. At the center of this is
the web presence of the Creative Cloud, which is creative.adobe.com. And
one of the great things there is it will understand all the formats you’re using
in your creative work — PSD files, InDesign files, and Illustrator files.
Where other cloud services might show you an icon describing the file type,

this shows you the actual content, and you can interact with it in a context-
sensitive way. It’s a much deeper understanding of creative content.
And lastly, the third pillar is Creative Applications — and these are enabling
you to create not only on personal computers, but also wherever you are with
mobile devices, all connected through the Creative Cloud. This includes a
whole new collection of Adobe touch apps to run on tablets and other mobile
devices. In addition, membership also includes access to all Adobe creative
desktop products you know and love, including Photoshop, Illustrator,
Dreamweaver and Premiere and InDesign, Adobe XD, and more. You can
download and install any of these applications you choose as part of your
membership, and these are all connected to Creative Cloud via desktop sync.
They also interact with the touch apps, and you can move files between
desktop and touch as you’re working.
Why Is It Important?
You can use the Adobe Creative Cloud programs to create a wide range of
products, from illustrations, page layouts, websites, photographic
compositions, video, and 3D images. Integrating the CC programs extends
the possibilities for you as a designer. Don’t worry about the programs being
too difficult to figure out — just come up with your ideas and start creating!
About This Book
Adobe Creative Cloud All-in-One For Dummies is written in a thorough and
fun way to show you the basic steps of how to use each program included in
the Creative Cloud package. You find out how to use each program
individually and how to work with the programs together, extending your
projects even further. You find out just how easy it is to use the programs by
following simple steps so that you can discover the power of the Adobe
software. You’ll be up and running in no time!
Here are some things you can do with this book:
Create page layouts with text, drawings, and images in InDesign.
Make illustrations using drawing tools with Illustrator.

Manipulate photographs by using filters and drawing or color correction
tools with Photoshop.
Create PDF (Portable Document Format) documents with Adobe Acrobat
or other programs.
Create web pages and put them online with Dreamweaver.
Create animations and videos with Flash.
Create web images, rollovers, image maps, and slices with Fireworks.
You discover the basics of how to create all these different kinds of things
throughout the chapters in this book in fun, hands-on examples and clear
explanations, getting you up to speed quickly!
Adobe Creative Cloud works for both Windows and the Macintosh. We cover
both platforms in this book. When the keys you need to press or the menu
choices you need to make differ between Windows and the Mac, we let you
know by including instructions for both platforms. For example:
Press the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key.
Choose Edit⇒  Preferences⇒  General (Windows) or InDesign⇒  
Preferences⇒  General (Mac).
The programs in Creative Cloud often require you to press and hold down a
key (or keys) on the keyboard and then click or drag with the mouse. For
brevity’s sake, we shorten this action by naming the key you need to hold
down and adding a click or drag, like this:
Shift-click to select multiple files.
Move the object by Ctrl-dragging (Windows) or ⌘  -dragging (Mac).
This book is pretty thick; you may wonder whether you have to read it from
cover to cover. You don’t have to read every page of this book to discover
how to use the programs in the Creative Cloud. Luckily, you can choose bits
and pieces that mean the most to you and will help you finish a project.
Icons supplement the material in each chapter with additional information
that may interest or help you with your work. The Technical Stuff icons are
helpful if you want to find out a bit more about technical aspects of using a

program or your computer, but don’t feel that you need to read these icon
paragraphs if technicalities don’t interest you.
Foolish Assumptions
You don’t need to know much before picking up this book and getting started
with Creative Cloud. All you have to know is how to use a computer in a very
basic way. If you can turn on the computer and use a mouse, you’re ready for
this book. A bit of knowledge about basic computer operations and using
software helps, but it isn’t necessary. We show you how to open, save, create,
and manipulate files using the CC programs so that you can start working
with the programs quickly. The most important ingredient to have is your
imagination and creativity — we show you how to get started with the rest.
Icons Used in This Book
What’s a For Dummies book without icons pointing you in the direction of
truly helpful information that’s sure to speed you along your way? Here we
briefly describe each icon we use in this book.
 The Tip icon points out helpful information that’s likely to make your
job easier.
 This icon marks a generally interesting and useful fact — something
you may want to remember for later use.
 The Warning icon highlights lurking danger. When we use this icon,
we’re telling you to pay attention and proceed with caution.

 When you see this icon, you know that there’s techie-type material
nearby. If you’re not feeling technical-minded, you can skip this
information.
Beyond the Book
Adobe Creative Cloud All-in-One For Dummies is designed so that you can
read a chapter or section out of order, depending on what subjects you’re
most interested in. Where you go from here is entirely up to you!
Book 1 is a great place to start reading if you’ve never used Adobe products
or if you’re new to design-based software. Discovering the common
terminology, menus, and panels can be quite helpful for later chapters that use
the terms and commands regularly!
You can find tips and tricks and more files for you to experiment with and
investigate at www.agitraining.com/dummies.
Occasionally, we have updates to our technology books. If this book has any
technical updates, they’ll be posted at www.dummies.com.

Book 1
Overview of the Creative Cloud
Suite

Contents at a Glance
Chapter 1: Getting Started with the Creative Cloud Suite
Applications Covered in This Book
Chapter 2: Creative Cloud Application Management
Downloading Your First App
Chapter 3: Creative Cloud Extras for You
Launching the Creative Cloud App
Adding Work to Behance
Creating a Cover
Bonus! Adobe Portfolio
It’s Not Just Apps!
Chapter 4: Using Common Menus and Commands
Discovering Common Menus
Using Dialog Boxes
Encountering Alerts
Getting to Know Common Menu Options
About Contextual Menus
Using Common Keyboard Shortcuts
Changing Your Preferences
Chapter 5: Exploring Common Panels
Understanding the Synchronized Workspace
Using Panels in the Workspace

Chapter 1
Getting Started with the Creative
Cloud Suite
IN THIS CHAPTER
 What is the Creative Cloud?
 What applications are included in the Creative Cloud?
 What applications are covered in this book?
The Adobe Creative Cloud is a subscription-based service that includes a
wide array of applications used in the communication, design, development,
and marketing industries.
Over the last several versions, the Creative Cloud has increased in
capabilities and application tools. Using the Creative Cloud you can build
print, web, video, 3D, and application designs, in addition to building
interactive designs that can be used for many purposes. In this book, the focus
is mainly on design tools that are used for the creation of printed material, as
well as on the designs for websites, mobile apps, and other interactive
presentations.
To help you understand the breadth of capabilities, Table 1-1 lists the
applications included in your Creative Cloud subscription at the time that this
book was written. The bolded applications are covered in detail in this book.
TABLE 1-1 Creative Cloud Applications
Application
Description
Creative Cloud
Quick desktop access to Creative Cloud apps and services
Photoshop
Image editing and compositing
Illustrator
Vector graphics and illustration
InDesign
Page design and layout for print and digital publishing

Acrobat Pro
Create, edit, and sign PDF documents and forms
Bridge
Centralize your creative assets
Experience Design
(Beta)
Design and prototype user experiences for web and mobile
Lightroom
Digital photo processing and editing
Adobe Premiere Pro
Video production and editing
After Effects
Cinematic visual effects and motion graphics
Project Felix
Easy 2D and 3D compositing for photo-realistic images
Dreamweaver
Design and develop modern, responsive websites
Animate
Flash Professional is now Adobe Animate CC. Interactive animations for multiple
platforms.
Adobe Audition
Audio recording, mixing, and restoration
Character Animator
Animate your 2D characters in real time
Media Encoder
Quickly output video files for virtually any screen
Fuse
Create custom 3D characters for Photoshop projects
Flash Builder
IDE for coding Flash apps and mobile device packaging
InCopy
Collaborate with copywriters and editors
Prelude
Metadata ingest, logging, and rough cuts
Spark
Easily create and share impactful visual stories — in minutes
Scout
Profile Flash games on web and devices
SpeedGrade
Film finishing and color grading
Story Plus
Collaborative screenwriting, reporting, and scheduling tools
PhoneGap Build
Package mobile apps in the cloud
Gaming SDK
Create ActionScript
Applications Covered in This Book
If you are a designer of print, web, or mobile content, you will need to know
the core applications included in the Creative Cloud. This book is focused on
the main design tools, Photoshop, InDesign, Illustrator, Acrobat DC, Adobe
Bridge, and Experience Design. You can read on for a brief introduction to
each of these applications.
Crossing the Adobe Bridge
Adobe Bridge is truly an incredible application, especially within the Creative
Cloud release, because the processing speed is greatly improved and new

features are available.
Even though Adobe Bridge is part of the Creative Cloud, it does not install
automatically with your other applications. The first time that you choose
File  ⇒   Browse in Bridge from your other Creative Cloud applications, you
will be directed to the Creative Cloud app, where you can choose to
download it on to your system. You can find out more about Adobe Bridge in
Book 2.
Getting started with Photoshop CC
Photoshop is the industry standard software for web designers, video
professionals, and photographers who need to manipulate bitmap images.
Using Photoshop, you can manage and edit images by correcting color,
editing photos by hand, and even combining several photos to create
interesting and unique effects. Alternatively, you can use Photoshop as a
painting program, where you can artistically create images and graphics.
Photoshop enables you to create complex text layouts by placing text along a
path or within shapes. You can edit the text after it has been placed along a
path; you can even edit the text in other programs, such as Illustrator Cc, and
join text and images into unique designs or page layouts.
Sharing images from Photoshop is easy to do. You can share multiple images
in a PDF file, or upload images to an online photo service. You can even set
up Photoshop to automatically export multiple assets for interactive apps or
websites in one click.
It’s hard to believe that Photoshop can be improved on, but Adobe has done it
again in Adobe Photoshop CC. Book 3 shows you the diverse capabilities of
Photoshop. From drawing and painting to image color correction, Photoshop
has many uses for print and interactive design alike.
Introducing InDesign CC
InDesign is a diverse and feature-rich page layout program. With InDesign,
you can create beautifully laid-out page designs. You can also execute
complete control over your images and export them to interactive documents,
such as Acrobat PDF. You can use InDesign to
Use images, text, and even rich media to create unique layouts and
designs.

Import native files from Photoshop and Illustrator to help build rich
layouts in InDesign that take advantage of transparency and blending
modes.
Export your work as an entire book, including chapters, sections,
automatically numbered pages, and more.
Create interactive PDF documents that can be used for website or
application prototypes or wireframes.
InDesign caters to the layout professional, but it’s easy enough for even
beginners to use. You can import text from word processing programs (such
as Microsoft Word, Notepad, or Adobe InCopy) as well as tables (say, from
Microsoft Excel) into your documents and place them alongside existing
artwork and images to create a layout. In a nutshell, importing, arranging, and
exporting work are common processes when working with InDesign.
Throughout the entire process, you have a large amount of control over your
work, whether you’re working on a simple one-page brochure or an entire
book of 800-plus pages. Find out how you can take advantage of this feature-
rich application in Book 4.
Using Illustrator CC
Adobe Illustrator is the industry’s leading vector-based graphics software.
Aimed at everyone from graphics professionals to interactive designers,
Illustrator enables you to design layouts, logos for print, or vector-based
images that can be imported into other programs, such as Photoshop,
InDesign, or even Experience Design. Adobe also enables you to easily and
quickly create files by saving Illustrator documents as templates (so that you
can efficiently reuse designs) and using a predefined library and document
size.
Illustrator also integrates with the other products in the Adobe Creative Cloud
by enabling you to create PDF documents easily within Illustrator. In
addition, you can use Illustrator files in Photoshop, InDesign, and the Adobe
special effects program, After Effects. Illustrator enables you to beef up your
rich interactive documents by introducing Flash features that give you the
tools you need to build exciting interactive designs in Animate (formerly
Flash).
Here are some of the things you can create and do in Illustrator:

Create technical drawings (floor plans or architectural sketches, for
example), logos, illustrations, posters, packaging, and web graphics.
Create multiple screens for websites or mobile design.
Align text along a path so that it bends in an interesting way.
Lay out text into multicolumn brochures — text automatically flows from
one column to the next.
Create charts and graphs using graphing tools.
Create gradients that can be imported and edited into other programs,
such as Experience Design.
Create documents quickly and easily using existing templates and
included stock graphics in Illustrator.
Save a drawing in almost any graphic format, including the Adobe PDF,
PSD, EPS, TIFF, GIF, JPEG, and SVG formats.
Save your Illustrator files for the web by using the Asset Export panel, or
Export  ⇒  Export As menu item.
Illustrator has new features for you to investigate, many of them integrated in
the chapters in Book 5. Find out about new tools, including features to help
you use patterns.
Working with Acrobat DC
Acrobat DC is aimed at both business and creative professionals and provides
an incredibly useful way of sharing, securing, and reviewing the documents
you create in your Creative Cloud applications.
Portable Document Format (PDF) is the file format used by Adobe Acrobat.
It’s used primarily as an independent method for sharing files. This format
enables users who create files on either Macintosh or PC systems to share
files with each other and with users of handheld devices or UNIX computers.
PDF files generally start out as other documents — whether from a word
processor or a sophisticated page layout and design program.
Although PDF files can be read on many different computer systems using
the free Adobe Reader, users with the DC version of Adobe Acrobat can do
much more with PDF files. With your version of Acrobat, you can create PDF
documents, add security to them, use review and commenting tools, edit

documents, and build PDF forms.
Use Acrobat to perform any of the following tasks:
Create interactive forms that can be filled out online.
Allow users to embed comments within the PDF files to provide
feedback. Comments can then be compiled from multiple reviewers and
viewed in a single summary.
Create PDF files that can include MP3 audio, video, SWF, and even 3D
files.
Combine multiple files into a single PDF and include headers and footers
as well as watermarks.
Create secure documents with encryption.
Combine multiple files into a searchable, sortable PDF package that
maintains the individual security settings and digital signatures of each
included PDF document.
Use auto-recognize to automatically locate form fields in static PDF
documents and convert them to interactive fields that can be filled
electronically by anyone using Adobe Reader software.
Manage shared reviews — without IT assistance — to allow review
participants to see one another’s comments and track the status of the
review.
Enable advanced features in Adobe Reader to enable anyone using free
Adobe Reader software to participate in document reviews, fill and save
electronic forms offline, and digitally sign documents.
Permanently remove metadata, hidden layers, and other concealed
information and use redaction tools to permanently delete sensitive text,
illustrations, or other content.
Save your PDF to Microsoft Word. You can take advantage of improved
functionality for saving Adobe PDF files as Microsoft Word documents,
retaining the layout, fonts, formatting, and tables.
Enjoy improved performance and support for AutoCAD. Using
AutoCAD, you can now more rapidly convert AutoCAD drawing files
into compact, accurate PDF documents, without the need for the native

desktop application.
Want to discover other great Acrobat improvements? Read Book 6 to find out
all about Acrobat and PDF creation.
Prototyping your apps with Experience Design
By designing or importing your art into Adobe XD artboards, you can go
from idea to prototype quickly without building an actual app with code. XD
lets you do what you do best … design! Take your touchable, interactive
design and share it with others for feedback or user testing. Find out more
about Adobe XD in Book 7.
Some of the things that you can do in Adobe XD include:
Build clickable prototypes using multiple artboards as screens.
Share your clickable application on mobile devices or on the web.
Draw with vector tools.
Copy and paste vector images and other assets from other Adobe
applications.
Import SVG and edit them directly in XD.
Build lists of imagery and data quickly.
Take advantage of layers and symbols.
Integrating software
With so many great pieces of software in a single package, it’s only natural
that you’ll want to start using the programs together to build exciting projects.
You may want to design a book using InDesign (with photos edited in
Photoshop and drawings created in Illustrator) and then design a website or
mobile app using Adobe Illustrator and then making an interactive prototype
using Adobe XD. Similarly, you may want to take a complex PDF file and
make it into something that everyone can view online. All tools in the Adobe
Creative Cloud are built to work together, and achieving these tasks suddenly
becomes much easier to do because the products are integrated.
Integrating software is typically advantageous to anyone. Integration enables
you to streamline the workflow among programs and sometimes team

members. Tools exist that let you drop native images into Photoshop,
InDesign, Illustrator, and XD. With Adobe Bridge, you can view files and
investigate specific information about them, such as color mode and file size,
before selecting them for placement.
Acquiring assets for this book
Many of the files that are referenced in this book are available right in the
application sample folders that come with Creative Cloud. The path locations
are defined when they are referenced, making it easy to find and use them in
the provided step-by-step examples. In addition to these sample files, you can
find tips and tricks and more files for you to experiment with and investigate
at www.agitraining.com/dummies.

Chapter 2
Creative Cloud Application
Management
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Downloading your apps
 Adding and updating additional apps
 Using CC libraries
 Creative Cloud extras
Before we introduce the Creative Cloud suite, you should understand that the
applications in the Creative Cloud do not run “in the cloud.” The applications
covered in this book are rich desktop applications that reside on your
computer but are simply downloaded from the cloud.
Downloading Your First App
If you are new to the Creative Cloud and are just getting started, you can go
to www.adobe.com/creativecloud/catalog/desktop.html and choose the
app that you wish to download first. If you do not have an Adobe ID, you will
need to set one up at this point.
Click Download to install the app you want. If you are not signed in, you are
asked to sign in with your Adobe ID and password. Follow any onscreen
instructions that are provided to you. Your app will then begin to download.
At this time the Creative Cloud desktop app appears, as shown in Figure 2-1.
The Creative Cloud app manages the rest of the installation process; you can
check your download progress in the status bar next to the app’s name.

FIGURE 2-1: The Creative Cloud is not just the name of the suite of tools; it’s also an application.
The Creative Cloud app is a desktop application that allows you to manage
downloads and updates of your Creative Cloud applications. It also lets you
take advantage of other cloud-based services, such as storage and stock
photos, and allows you to view work by you and others in the design
community.
Note: If you are downloading a free trial subscription to Creative Cloud, you
will be provided a different set of instructions that you should follow.
When you are done, you can launch your app by finding the application’s
icon in the Apps panel and clicking Open, or you can launch your new app
the same way you normally launch any app on your computer. Your new app
is installed in the same location where your applications are normally
installed, such as the Program Files folder (Windows) or the Applications
folder (Mac OS).
Downloading more apps
Now that you downloaded your first app, you can use the Creative Cloud
desktop app to easily browse, install, launch, and manage any Creative Cloud

app. If you don’t see the Creative Cloud icon, you may have quit the
application. You can relaunch it by using one of the paths listed below:
Windows: Choose Start  ⇒  Programs  ⇒  Adobe Creative Cloud.
Mac OS: Choose Go  ⇒  Applications  ⇒  Adobe Creative Cloud  ⇒  Adobe
Creative Cloud.
Checking for updates
The Creative Cloud desktop app indicates when updates are available for
your installed apps. You can check for updates manually by following these
steps:
1. Open the Creative Cloud desktop app and click the gear icon in the
top-right corner.
2. Choose Check for App Updates from the drop-down menu. You can
also press Ctrl+Alt+R (PC) or Command+Option+R (Mac) to refresh
the Creative Cloud desktop app and check for updates.
The Apps panel is updated to show all available updates.
Keep in mind that the Creative Cloud applications are updated on a regular
basis; to check your account to make sure you are set up to receive regular
updates, choose Preferences from the Gear drop-down menu in the Creative
Cloud app, as shown in Figure 2-2.

FIGURE 2-2: Check your Creative Cloud Preferences right in the application.
Getting started
After your applications are installed and up-to-date, you can dive into the
next chapter of this book and start bringing your ideas to reality. Remember
that you can work anywhere while using your downloaded applications. Once

in a while, Adobe checks your license to make sure it is valid and current.
Count on this happening about once every 30 days, but don’t expect it to
cause any problems for you.

Chapter 3
Creative Cloud Extras for You
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Other hidden gems in the Creative Cloud
 Finding assets such as artwork through the CC Market
 Taking advantage of additional fonts and managing them
 Sharing and syncing your work using libraries
 Promote yourself with Behance and Adobe Portfolio
Creative Cloud includes more than just applications. It includes extras that
help you keep in touch with changes in your subscription and with recent
downloads. It also includes free assets for subscribers such as typefaces, cool
images, and illustrations, as well as access to stock photos and prebuilt site
management tools to help you connect with the creative community. You can
also take advantage of the Creative Cloud to store, sync, and share important
files, making collaboration easy.
Launching the Creative Cloud App
If you launch the Creative Cloud app, an application pane appears that
includes a button bar across the top, as shown in Figure 3-1. The choices are
Home, Apps, Assets, Stock, and Community. Launching the Creative Cloud
app is one way to access many of the additional extras that come with your
subscription, but there are other ways discussed in this chapter that you can
access these extras right from the applications themselves.

FIGURE 3-1: You can find many extras right in the Creative Cloud pane.
Home
Click the Home button to see important announcements from Adobe. The
Home section also includes new app availability, updates, and installation
status.

Apps
Find the status of the Creative Cloud applications in the Apps tab. Here you
see the apps you have presently installed, represented by an Open button to
the right. You can also find the apps that are not yet installed, represented by
an Install button (or an Update button, if your installed version isn’t current).
In Figure 3-2, you see that one application, Camera Raw, needs to be updated,
and the rest of the listed applications are up to date.

FIGURE 3-2: Keep track of the status of your applications and updates to software in the Apps
section.
You can also access helpful tutorials right from the Apps section of the
Creative Cloud app. Simply click on the View Tutorials text below any of the
listed applications.

Assets
The Creative Cloud Assets tab allows you to access and reuse your desktop-
synced files, libraries, projects, and royalty-free assets available from the
Creative Cloud Market. When you click Assets, you find three additional
tabs, Files, Fonts, and Market, within this section.
A place to store your stuff
When you select the Files tab, you are provided with the Open Folder option,
which opens a Creative Cloud folder in your computer, or the View on Web
option, which opens the location in the cloud designated to store your items.
The items in the Creative Cloud folder on your computer are synced with the
items in the cloud. You can use this available space in many ways: for
storage, storing libraries, syncing with other computers, or sharing with other
people on your team. See the next section, “Using the Creative Cloud for
storage,” to learn more about this feature.
Note: You can also log in to the Adobe.com website and access your assets
from your account.
Keep in mind that you can use the Creative Cloud Files folder not only for
storage but also as a key integration tool for you and your team by taking
advantage of the CC Libraries integrated into the applications. See more
about using libraries in the following section.
Using the Creative Cloud for storage
If you are looking for space to store files, look no further than your Creative
Cloud Files folder. Follow these steps in order to store files in the Creative
Cloud:
1. Open your Creative Cloud Files folder on your computer.
If you are not sure where it is located, click the Open Folder button when
you launch the Creative Cloud app and then choose Assets  ⇒  Files. Click
the button that states Open Folder, as shown in Figure 3-3.
2. When the folder appears, drag and drop any files you want to save
into the Creative Cloud Files folder.
This folder acts like any other folder on your computer. You can open
your files, edit them, save them back to the same folder or another, and
delete them. The main difference with the contents in this folder is that

you can also access the files via the web.
3. To access your files via the web, launch the Creative Cloud
application and click View on Web.
You can also point your browser to https://assets.adobe.com. If you
logged in using your Adobe ID, the files appear in the browser, as shown
in Figure 3-4.

FIGURE 3-3: Locate your Creative Cloud folder by accessing it in the Creative Cloud application.
Sharing your files
Not only can you access your own files anywhere by signing into the Creative
Cloud on any computer, you can also share them with others. You can either
do this directly in the Creative Cloud Files folder or on the web. The

following directions tell you how.
To share from the Creative Cloud Files folder:
1. Right-click (Ctrl+Click if you do not have a right-clicking mouse) to
see the contextual menu.
2. Choose the Creative Cloud menu item and Send Link from the sub-
menu. On the Mac OS, choose Share Link from the contextual menu.
3. If you have not previously shared the selected file, you first need to
make it a public link. When the dialog box appears indicating that
your link is private, click the Create Public Link button.
4. Copy and paste the provided link into your correspondence with the
people to whom you want to give access to your file or project.
To share from the web:
1. Click the arrow icon in the lower-right corner of a file’s thumbnail.
2. Choose Send Link from the menu that appears, as shown in Figure 3-
4.
3. If you have not previously shared the selected file, you first need to
make it a public link. When the dialog box appears indicating that
your link is private, click the Create Public Link button.
4. Copy and paste the provided link into your correspondence with the
people to whom you want to give access to your file or project.

FIGURE 3-4: Choose to send a link to your project file right from the web.
Using libraries
As you start to work on projects, you may want to store or share items that
you use on a regular basis. This is where the Creative Cloud libraries come in
handy. By using the Creative Cloud Library feature, you can save and share
colors, character styles, imagery, and more. You can share them with just
yourself, as you move from one computer to another, between applications, or
with others on your team. Look for the CC Libraries, and the Libraries panels
in your Creative Cloud applications, typically in the Window menu. You can
add assets in this panel that you can then open in other applications or
computers, as shown in Figure 3-5.

FIGURE 3-5: Look for the Libraries panels in the individual Creative Cloud applications.
Libraries are covered throughout this book as they relate to the application
being discussed. However, use the following steps for a quick introduction to
how they might work in a typical workflow. You need to have Adobe
Photoshop and Adobe InDesign installed and open in order to complete these

steps. You also need any image file.
1. Choose File  ⇒  Open and then open any image file in Adobe
Photoshop.
If you like, you can access sample images files at
www.adobetraining.com/dummies. The one in this example is named
Paris_Street.jpg.
Perhaps this is an image that you want to use on a regular basis in
multiple projects, and even share it with others on your team. This can be
done easily by using the Libraries panel.
2. Choose Window  ⇒  Libraries.
The Libraries panel appears. If you have not created a custom library, you
will do that now.
3. Select the panel menu in the upper-right corner and select Create
New Library. In the example shown in Figure 3-6, the new library is
named MyBrand, but you can call your library whatever you like.
4. After your library is created, either drag the item or click the Plus (+)
sign in the lower-left corner of the Libraries panel, as shown in
Figure 3-7. For this example, click the Plus (+) sign. When the dialog
box appears, leave the Graphic and Foreground color checked and
click Add.
Your image has now been added to the library.
After an item like this photo is added to a library, you can access it on any
other computer or you can choose to share it. In this example, you access
this library from InDesign and drag the image out to your page layout.
5. If InDesign is not launched, open it now. Choose File  ⇒  New  ⇒  
Document and create a new document. In the New Document
window, you can use any size for this example.
6. From the Window menu, choose CC Libraries. From the drop-down
menu, choose your named library.
You should see your saved foreground color and the image that you added
in Adobe Photoshop.
7. Click the image and drag it out to your page, and then click once on
your page to release the image and place it. After it is placed, note

that the image displays a little cloud icon in the upper-left corner
indicating that it is from the cloud, as shown in Figure 3-8.
8. Close the InDesign and Photoshop documents without saving.
FIGURE 3-6: You can create your own library to store art, styles, colors, and more.

FIGURE 3-7: Add an item to your library.
FIGURE 3-8: The cloud icon indicates that this item is located in the cloud.
Opening up your design opportunities with new fonts
Using fonts in the past was rather cumbersome. You had to purchase a license
for a typeface or family, and then make sure that it was loaded correctly. The
purchase of these fonts often limited your opportunity to try new typefaces.
Then there was the issue with using typefaces for the web. Even though you
might have licensed a font, it did not mean that the end user had access to that
font. Frequently this led to unexpected display results in various browsers.

This is where TypeKit comes to the rescue.
TypeKit allows you to easily access new and interesting fonts created by
leading type foundries. By using TypeKit you do not have to worry about
licensing, and you can use fonts from TypeKit on the web or in desktop
applications. Look for new fonts to use in your web or print design by
clicking on the Fonts submenu in the Assets tab of the Creative Cloud App.
You can sync your fonts with those available in TypeKit or manage your
existing font selections.
In this following steps, you have the opportunity to add a font using TypeKit.
1. In the Creative Cloud application, click Assets and then Fonts.
2. Click the Sync Fonts from TypeKit button.
3. A browser window appears displaying font options, as shown in
Figure 3-9. In this window, you can filter by serif or sans serif; choose
different properties, such as x-height, width, or weight; and even
select the language. You can also choose between two recommended
categories: headings and paragraphs.
4. After you have decided on a typeface, click on it to enter the details
page. On the details page, press the Sync button to the right of the
font family to add it to your list of available fonts.
5. If you are looking for a font to use on the web, click the Add to Kit
button at the top of the details page. As you see in Figure 3-10, you
are provided with code that you can copy and insert into your
webpage in order to embed the font.

FIGURE 3-9: Access a huge trove of fonts by using TypeKit.
FIGURE 3-10: You can also find the code that enables you to embed your font into a web page.
If you need some great patterns, images, or inspiration, select the Assets tab
and then click Market to see featured artwork as well as artwork that can be
used specifically for placement, UI, vectors, icons, patterns, and brushes, as
shown in Figure 3-11.

FIGURE 3-11: Access art from the CC Market.
 To find an item in the market, scroll through one of the categories or
press the search icon.
To select an item from the market, you need to have a library created to which

the file can be downloaded. You can then access the file using the CC
Libraries or the Libraries panels in your individual applications.
Stock
Adobe makes it easy for you to find a varied source of images, graphics, and
videos. Simply click on the Stock tab at the top of the Creative Suite
application. Keep in mind that even though you can receive an introductory
offer of ten images, this is a paid service that is not included with your
subscription. Pricing can be considerable for those who have not used a stock
service in the past, but there are many benefits to using Adobe Stock:
Adobe Stock is easy to locate. It is right there in your Creative Cloud app.
You can choose File  ⇒  Search Adobe Stock from almost every application
in Creative Cloud.
You can search Adobe Stock right in the CC Libraries panel in InDesign,
as shown in Figure 3-12. Just drag and drop the image that you want to
use as a preview. If you decide to license it, just click the shopping cart
icon in the upper-left of the image in the Libraries panel.
Adobe Stock is searchable right from Adobe Bridge. You can type your
search criteria right in the Search box of Adobe Bridge, as shown in
Figure 3-13, and generate search results from Adobe Stock.
You can easily download previews for your images until you are sure that
you want to make a purchase.

FIGURE 3-12: Search and use Adobe Stock right in the Libraries panels.

FIGURE 3-13: You can search right in the Adobe Bridge application.
Community
Stay in touch with the creative community by selecting the Community tab in
the Creative Cloud application. When you select Community from the
Creative Cloud application, you are provided with the option of seeing what
others like you are creating, as well as posting and sharing work of your own,
as shown in Figure 3-14.

FIGURE 3-14: See work that others have posted or work on your own.
Adding Work to Behance
If you are promoting yourself, you should consider posting work on Behance.
Behance is an online platform that allows users to showcase and discover

creative work. Behance is used by creative professionals to find work and by
those hiring in the creative field to discover creative professionals that fit
their needs.
To create a portfolio, follow these simple steps:
1. First of all, go to www.behance.net and sign up! Look for the Log-in
button in the top right and enter your Adobe ID and password.
This connects your Creative Cloud applications with Behance, as shown
in Figure 3-15. By doing this, you can actually choose to save your
projects to Behance right from your many, but not all, the Creative Cloud
applications. This is usually done by choosing File  ⇒  Share on Behance in
your Adobe Creative Cloud applications.
If you have not used Behance before, the first screen that appears asks
you to choose two categories of creative work from various options.
These are categories that you will follow. Notable artwork within these
categories will appear under the Community tab in the Creative Cloud
application.
2. Click two categories and then press the See My Custom Feed button
in the lower right of the screen, as shown in Figure 3-16.
Next, you set up to share your work.
3. Select the Add Work Create a Project button at the top of the screen.
A project editor loads with buttons in the main screen, as shown in Figure
3-17.
4. You can now follow the buttons in the middle of the screen. Start by
clicking Files and then loading any files that you want to share with
others. You can load PNG, JPG, or GIF files as content. Keep in mind
that your selected content displays at a maximum of 1400 px unless a
viewer clicks on it, in which case it will expand.
5. Click the File button in the middle of the screen and select an image
using the file browser window that appears.
6. After you select an image, it is added to the screen. You can click the
Pencil icon, as seen in Figure 3-18, to edit the image, or click above it
to add other elements to the image, such as text or a link.
Note: In order to add an element, such as text, you must click the related

icon in the Tools panel that appears above your image.
7. After you have completed your entry, click Save.
8. You can continue adding more images by selecting Upload Files from
the menu on the left, or you can move on to creating a cover for your
project by clicking Continue in the upper-right side of the screen.
FIGURE 3-15: Start sharing your work by going to Behance.net and logging in.

FIGURE 3-16: Select the type of creative work you want to see in your feed.
FIGURE 3-17: Start sharing your artwork by clicking on the Files button.
FIGURE 3-18: Add text or edit your image.
Creating a Cover
A cover image is a key part of the Behance browsing experience. By creating
a relevant cover, you allow viewers to quickly get an idea of what your
project is about. You create a cover by entering a project name and cropping
your first image in your project gallery, as shown in Figure 3-19. This will be
used as the thumbnail for your project that appears when viewers are
browsing in Behance. Keep in mind that the cover image displays at 202 x
158 px, but you must upload an image that is at least 404 x 316 px so that

your thumbnail will look great on both regular and high resolution devices.
FIGURE 3-19: Create a cover for your image.
If you don’t like your first image, simply press the plus sign (+) icon
underneath the cover preview and select another.
When you are finished with setting up the cover, you can click the Crop and
Continue button to enter the Project Settings dialog box. The information that
you enter in this window is what allows you to be found by others. Be careful
to select appropriate categories and enter other information about your project
accurately. When you are done with this step, click Save to continue working
or click Publish to post your project in the Behance website.
Bonus! Adobe Portfolio
In addition to sharing your work on Behance, you can take advantage of
Adobe Portfolio. Adobe Portfolio offers you the opportunity to easily build a
beautiful visual resume. You can customize layouts and segment your own

categories in extensive galleries of work. One of its greatest features is its
compatibility with Behance. Build once in Behance, and your project
automatically appears in your portfolio and vice versa.
Follow these steps to open and explore Adobe Portfolio:
1. In the Creative Cloud application, click Community and then click
Profile.
This opens a browser window with information about you. This is also the
location in which you can launch Adobe Portfolio.
2. Click View Adobe Portfolio in the upper right of the screen.
3. If you have an Adobe ID, you have access to Adobe Portfolio and you
can get started by clicking the Layouts button at the top of the screen,
as shown in Figure 3-20.
4. Click any layout you are interested in. The rest is easy: Simply follow
the instructions provided directly to you on the screen.
5. As with Behance, you can choose to save your project when you are
done or publish to the Adobe Portfolio site.
FIGURE 3-20: Choose from a selection of different layouts to start your portfolio.

It’s Not Just Apps!
Wow … and you thought the Creative Cloud was just a collection of
applications! As you can see, there is so much more to take advantage of
when you have a subscription to the Creative Cloud. You find out how to use
the applications that you need to bring your designs to reality in the following
minibooks.

Chapter 4
Using Common Menus and
Commands
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Discovering common menus and dialog boxes
 Addressing Creative Cloud alerts
 Working with common menu options
 Understanding contextual menus
 Speeding up your workflow with shortcuts
 Changing preferences
When you work in Adobe CC, you may notice that many menus, commands,
and keyboard shortcuts are similar across many of the applications. These
similarities can help you migrate more easily from one application to another.
This chapter provides an overview of some of the common menus, dialog
boxes, options, shortcuts, and preferences that exist in most or all of the
applications in Adobe Creative Cloud.
Discovering Common Menus
When you work with applications in Adobe Creative Cloud, you may notice
that many of the menus on the main menu bar are the same. Similar
functionality makes finding important features easy, even when you’re
completely new to the software.
Menu items contain features that control much of the functionality in each
application. A menu item may also contain features that are related to a
particular task. For example, you might save from the File menu, or change
your text in the Type menu. Some of the menu items that commonly appear in

the Creative Cloud applications include the following:
File: Contains many features that control the overall document, such as
creating, opening, saving, printing, and setting general properties for the
document. The File menu may also include options for importing or
exporting data into or from the current document.
Edit: Contains options and commands for editing the current document.
Commands include copying, pasting, and selecting as well as options for
opening preferences and setting dialog boxes that are used to control parts
of the document. Commands for spell-checking are also common parts of
the Edit menu.
Type: Contains options related to type and typesetting, such as font
selection, size, leading, and more.
View: Contains options for changing the level of magnification of the
document. The View menu also sometimes includes options for viewing
the workspace in different ways; showing rules, grids, or guides; and
turning alignment snapping on and off. Snapping helps with precise
placement of selection edges, cropping marquees, slices, shapes, and
paths.
Window: Contains options primarily used to open or close whatever
panels are available in the application. You can also choose how to view
the workspace and save a favorite arrangement of the workspace.
Help: Contains the option to open the Help documentation that’s included
with the application. This menu may also include information about
updating the software, registration, and tutorials.
Figure 4-1 shows a list of items that appear under the File menu in
Photoshop.

FIGURE 4-1: Menus in Photoshop let you choose and control different options.
Each application has additional application-specific menus determined by the
needs of the software. For example, you can use the Photoshop Image menu
to resize the image or document, rotate the canvas, and duplicate the image,
among other functions. InDesign has a Layout menu you can use to navigate
the document, edit page numbering, and access controls for creating and
editing the document’s table of contents; we discuss these menus where
appropriate throughout this book.
Using Dialog Boxes
A dialog box is a window that appears when certain menu items are selected.
It offers additional options in the form of drop-down lists, panes, text fields,
option buttons, checkboxes, and buttons that enable you to change settings
and enter information or data as necessary. You use dialog boxes to control

the software or your document in various ways. For example, when you open
a new file, you typically use the Open dialog box to select a file to open.
When you save a file, you use the Save As dialog box to select a location for
saving the file, to name the file, and to execute the Save command.
Some dialog boxes also include tabs. These dialog boxes may contain many
settings of different types that are organized into several sections by using
tabs. A dialog box typically has a button that executes the particular
command and one that cancels and closes the dialog box without doing
anything. Figure 4-2 shows a common dialog box.
FIGURE 4-2: Using a dialog box to change filter settings.
A dialog box in Windows offers the same functionality as a dialog box on the
Mac. Dialog boxes perform similar tasks and include the same elements to
enter or select information. For example, here are some tasks you perform by
using dialog boxes:

Save a new version of a file
Specify printing or page-setup options
Set up preferences for the software you’re using
Check the spelling of text in a document
Open a new document
 You cannot use the application you’re working in until the dialog box
is closed. Make sure to close the dialog box after you are finished
making your changes. Close the dialog box by clicking a button (such as
Save or OK) when you’re finished or by clicking the Cancel button to
close it without making any changes.
Encountering Alerts
Alerts, which are common on any operating system and in most applications,
are similar to dialog boxes in that they’re small windows that contain
information. However, alerts are different from dialog boxes because you
can’t edit the information in them. Alerts are designed simply to tell you
something and give you one or more options that you select by clicking a
button. For example, an alert may indicate that you can’t select a particular
option. Usually you see an OK button to click to acknowledge and close the
alert. You may see other buttons on the alert, such as a button to cancel what
you were doing or one that opens a dialog box. Figure 4-3 shows a typical
alert.

FIGURE 4-3: A simple choice: OK or cancel.
 You can sometimes use an alert to confirm an action before executing
it. Sometimes an alert window also offers the option (typically in the
form of a checkbox) of not showing the alert or warning again. You may
want to select this option if you repeatedly perform an action that shows
the warning and you don’t need to see the warning every time.
Getting to Know Common Menu
Options
Various menu options are typically available in each of the Creative Cloud
applications. However, within each of these menus, several other options are
available. Some of them open dialog boxes — this type of option is typically
indicated by an ellipsis that follows the menu option, as shown in Figure 4-4.

FIGURE 4-4: Choosing a menu option with an ellipsis opens a submenu.
The following menu options are found in several Creative Cloud applications,
and these commands either perform similar (or the same) functions or they
open similar dialog boxes:
New: Creates a brand-new document in the native file format. For
example, in InDesign, a new INDD (the extension for InDesign
documents) file is created by choosing File  ⇒  New  ⇒  Document. You can
sometimes choose the type of new file you want to create.

Open: Opens a dialog box where you can choose a (supported) file to
open on your hard drive or a disc.
Close: Closes the current document. If it has unsaved changes, you’re
prompted to save those changes first.
Save: Saves the changes you’ve made to the current document.
Save As: Saves a new copy of the current document using a different
name.
Import: Imports a file, such as an image or sound file, into the current
document.
Export: Exports the current data to a specified file format. You can
sometimes select several kinds of file formats to save the current data in.
Copy: Copies the selected data to the computer’s Clipboard.
Paste: Pastes the data from the Clipboard into the current document.
Undo: Undoes the most recent task you performed in the application. For
example, if you just created a rectangle, the rectangle is removed from the
document.
Redo: Repeats the steps you applied the Undo command to. For example,
if you removed that rectangle you created, the Redo command adds it
back to the document.
Zoom In: Magnifies the document so that you can view and edit its
contents closely.
Zoom Out: Scales the view smaller so that you can see more of the
document at a time.
Help: Opens the Help documentation for the current application.
About Contextual Menus
A contextual menu is similar to the menu types we describe in the previous
sections; however, it’s context-sensitive and opens when you right-click
(Windows) or Control-click (Mac) something in the application. Contextual
means that which options appear on the menu depend on which object or item
you right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac).

For example, if you open a contextual menu when the cursor is over an
image, commands involving the image are listed on the menu. However, if
you right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac) the document’s
background, you typically see options that affect the entire document instead
of just a particular element within it. You can therefore select common
commands specifically for the item you’ve selected. Figure 4-5 shows a
contextual menu that appears when you right-click (Windows) or Control-
click (Mac) an object in Photoshop.
FIGURE 4-5: Open a contextual menu in Windows by right-clicking an image or object.

 The tool you select in the Tools panel may affect which contextual
menus you can access in a document. You may have to select the
Selection tool first to access certain menus. If you want to open a
contextual menu for a particular item in the document, make sure that
the object is selected before you right-click (Windows) or Control-click
(Mac).
 If you’re using a Mac, you can right-click to open a contextual menu
if you have a two-button mouse hooked up to your Mac. Otherwise, you
press Control-click to open a contextual menu.
Using Common Keyboard Shortcuts
Shortcuts are key combinations that enable you to quickly and efficiently
execute commands, such as save or open files or copy and paste objects.
Many of these shortcuts are listed on the menus discussed in previous
sections. If the menu option has a key combination listed next to it, you can
press that combination to access the command rather than use the menu to
select it. Figure 4-6 shows shortcuts associated with a menu item in InDesign.

FIGURE 4-6: Shortcuts are shown next to their associated commands.
For example, if you open the File menu, next to the Save option is Ctrl+S
(Windows) or ⌘  +S (Mac). Rather than choose File  ⇒  Save, you can press
the shortcut keys to save your file. It’s a quick way to execute a particular
command.

 Some commonly used shortcuts in the Adobe Creative Cloud
applications are listed in Table 4-1.
TABLE 4-1 Common Keyboard Shortcuts
Command
Windows Shortcut
Mac Shortcut
New
Ctrl+N
⌘  +N
Open
Ctrl+O
⌘  +O
Save
Ctrl+S
⌘  +S
Undo
Ctrl+Z
⌘  +Z
Redo
Shift+Ctrl+Z
Shift+⌘  +Z
Copy
Ctrl+C
⌘  +C
Paste
Ctrl+V
⌘  +V
Print
Ctrl+P
⌘  +P
Preferences (General) Ctrl+K
⌘  +K
Help
F1 or sometimes Ctrl+? F1 or sometimes ⌘  +?
Many additional shortcuts are available in each application in the Creative
Cloud applications, and not all are listed on menus. You can find these
shortcuts throughout the documentation provided with each application.
Memorizing the shortcuts can take some time, but the time you save in the
long run is worth it.
Changing Your Preferences
Setting your preferences is important when you’re working with new
software. Understanding what your preferences can do for you gives you a
good idea about what the software does. All applications in the Creative
Cloud have different preferences; however, the way the Preferences dialog
box works in each application is the same.
You can open the Preferences dialog box in each application by choosing
Edit  ⇒  Preferences (Windows) or Application Name  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  General
(Mac). The Preferences dialog box opens, as shown in Figure 4-7. Click an
item in the list on the left side of the dialog box to navigate from one topic to

the next.
FIGURE 4-7: Click an item on the left to navigate among topics.
The Preferences dialog box contains a great number of settings you can
control by entering values into text fields using drop-down lists, buttons,
checkboxes, sliders, and other, similar controls. Preferences can be quite
detailed. However, you don’t have to know what each preference does or
even change any of them: Most dialog boxes containing preferences are quite
detailed in outlining which features the preferences control and are therefore
intuitive to use. Adobe also sometimes includes a Description area near the
bottom of the dialog box. When you hover the mouse over a particular
control, a description of that control appears in the Description area.
In some Preferences dialog boxes, a list box on the left side of the dialog box
contains the categories of preferences you can change. When you finish
changing the settings in that topic, select a new topic from the list and change
the settings for another topic.
In some applications, not all settings you can modify are in the Preferences
dialog box. For example, in Illustrator, you can change the color settings by
choosing Edit  ⇒  Color Settings to open the Color Settings dialog box. When
you hover the mouse pointer over a particular drop-down list or button, a
description of that control appears at the bottom of this extremely useful

dialog box.
 By launching Adobe Bridge (described in Book 2) and choosing Edit  
⇒  Color Settings, you can change your color preferences across all
Creative Cloud applications at one time, as shown in Figure 4-8.
FIGURE 4-8: Change all color settings at one time using Adobe Bridge.

Chapter 5
Exploring Common Panels
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Exploring the synchronized workspace
 Manipulating panels in the workspace
 Discovering different kinds of panels
 Getting to know the common panels in Adobe Creative Cloud
The panel is an integral part of working with most of the programs in Adobe
Creative Cloud because they contain many of the important features that you
need in order to edit your documents.
The basic functionality of panels is quite similar across the programs in
Adobe Creative Cloud, and the purpose of all panels is generally the same.
Panels offer a great deal of flexibility in how you organize the workspace and
the parts of it you use. The task you use each program for and the level of
expertise you have may affect which panels you have open at a given
moment. This chapter gives you an overview of how to work with the panels
you find in most of the Adobe Creative Cloud applications.
Understanding the Synchronized
Workspace
One thing you immediately notice when opening applications in the Creative
Cloud is the synchronized workspace. Most of the applications look similar
and have the same set of features to help you organize your workspace.
The tools in InDesign, Illustrator, and Photoshop appear on a space-saving,
single-column toolbar, and panels (described in detail in the next section) are
arranged in convenient, self-adjusting docks that you can widen to full size or
narrow so that the panels are collapsed to icons.

Here are some pointers to help you navigate the workspace in the Creative
Cloud applications:
To expand tools to two columns, click the right-facing double arrows on
the gray bar at the top of the Tools panel, as you see in Figure 5-1.
To collapse tools to a single column, click the left-facing double arrows
on the gray bar at the top of the Tools panel.
To expand a docked panel, simply click the icon in the docking area, as
shown in Figure 5-2. The panel you selected expands but goes away when
you select a different panel.
If you have difficulty identifying the panel, you can choose the panel you
want from the Window menu.
To expand all docked panels, click the left-facing double-arrow icon at
the top of the docking area; put away the panels by clicking the right-
facing double-arrow icon in the gray bar above them.
To undock a panel, simply click the tab (where the panel name is
located) and drag it out of the docking area. You can re-dock the panel by
dragging the panel back into the docking area.
FIGURE 5-1: Click the arrows at the top of the Tools panel to show tools in two columns or one
column.

FIGURE 5-2: Click an icon to collapse or expand the panel.
Using Panels in the Workspace
Panels are small windows in a program that contain controls, such as sliders,
menus, buttons, and text fields, that you can use to change the settings or
attributes of a selection or an entire document. Panels may also include
information about a section or about the document itself. You can use this
information or change the settings in a panel to modify the selected object or
the document you’re working on.
Whether you’re working on a Windows machine or on a Mac, panels are
similar in the way they look and work. Here are the basic instructions for
working with panels:
Open a panel: Open a panel in a Creative Cloud program by using the
Window menu: Choose Window and then select the name of a panel. For

example, to open the Swatches panel (which is similar in many programs
in the Creative Cloud), choose Window  ⇒  Swatches.
Close a panel: If you need to open or close a panel’s tab or panel
altogether, just choose Window  ⇒  Panel’s Tab Name. Sometimes a panel
contains a close button (an X button in Windows or the red button on a
Mac), which you can click to close the panel.
Organize the workspace: All Creative Cloud programs now offer
options for workspace organization. You can return to the default
workspace, which restores panels to their original locations, by choosing
Window  ⇒  Workspace  ⇒  Default. You can also open frequently used
panels, position them where you want, and save a customized workspace
by choosing Window  ⇒  Workspace  ⇒  Save (or New) Workspace. Name
the workspace and click OK; the saved workspace is now a menu item
that you can open by choosing Window  ⇒  Workspace  ⇒  Your Saved
Workspace’s Name.
 You can also choose from a wide range of included presets
designed for a variety of specialized tasks.
Access the panel menu: Panels have a panel menu, which opens when
you click the arrow in the upper-right corner of the panel, as shown in
Figure 5-3. The panel menu contains a bunch of options you can select
that relate to the selected tab when you click the panel menu. When you
select an option from the panel menu, it may execute an action or open a
dialog box. Sometimes a panel menu has just a few options, but particular
panels may have a bunch of related functionality and therefore have many
options on the panel menu.
Minimize/maximize: All you need to do to minimize a selected panel is
click the Collapse to Icons double-arrow button on the title bar of the
panel (if it’s available). If the panel is undocked, you can also double-
click the tab itself in the panel. This action either partially or fully
minimizes the panel. If it only partially minimizes, double-clicking the
tab again fully minimizes it. Double-clicking the active tab when it’s
minimized maximizes the panel again.
Panels that partially minimize give you the opportunity to work with

panels that have differing amounts of information, which simplifies the
workspace while maximizing your screen real estate.
FIGURE 5-3: Displaying the panel menu.
Most panels contain tabs, which help you organize information and controls
in a program into groupings. Panel tabs contain a particular kind of
information about a part of the program; a single panel may contain several
tabs. The name on the tab usually gives you a hint about the type of function
it controls or displays information about, and it’s located at the top of the
panel. Inactive tabs are dimmed.
Moving panels
You can move panels all around the workspace, and you can add or remove
single tabs from a panel. Each panel snaps to other panels, which makes it
easier to arrange panels alongside each other. Panels can overlap each other
as well. To snap panels to each other, drag the panel to a new location
onscreen, as shown in Figure 5-4; you see the top bar of the panel become
shaded, indicating that it’s becoming part of another panel’s group.

FIGURE 5-4: To move a panel, drag it by its tab.
 Group similar tabs by moving them into a single grouped panel.
Accessing different functions in your document becomes a lot easier
because then you have less searching to do to find related functions for a
task. If you want to return to the original workspace, you can choose
Reset Workspace from the Window menu in the Workspace category.
 You can hide all panels by pressing the Tab key. Press it again to
reveal all panels you’ve hidden.
Looking at common panels
Many panels are similar across programs in the Creative Cloud. Although not
every panel has exactly the same content in every program it’s in, many have
extremely similar content. You use these panels in similar ways, no matter
which program or operating system you’re using.
 Acrobat doesn’t contain numerous panels, like other programs in the
Creative Cloud. Instead, Acrobat relies mainly (but not entirely) on a
system of menus and toolbars filled with buttons and drop-down lists. In
Acrobat, you can open dialog boxes that contain a bunch of settings you
can enter for your documents.

The following panels are available in most, but not all, Creative Cloud
programs. This list describes what you can do with each one:
Color: Select or mix colors for use in the document you’re working on.
You can use different color modes and several ways of mixing or
choosing colors in the Colors panel.
Info: See information about the document itself or a particular selection
you’ve made. The Info panel includes information on the size,
positioning, and rotation of selected objects. You can’t enter data into the
Info panel: It only displays information without accepting it, so you have
to use the Transform panel (described in this list) to make these
modifications, if necessary.
Swatches: Create a swatch library, which can be saved and imported into
other documents or other programs. You can store on the Swatches panel
any colors and gradients you use repeatedly.
Tools: You use this important panel, sometimes called the toolbox (and
not available in all Creative Cloud programs), to select tools — such as
the Pencil, Brush, or Pen — to use in creating objects in a document.
Layers: Display and select layers, change the layer order, and select items
on a particular layer.
Align: Align selected objects to each other or align them in relation to the
document itself so that you can arrange objects precisely.
Stroke: Select strokes and change their attributes, such as color,
width/weight, style, and cap. The program you’re using determines which
attributes you can change.
Transform: Display and change the shear (skew), rotation, position, and
size of a selected object in the document. You can enter new values for
each transformation.
Character: Select fonts, font size, character spacing, and other settings
related to using type in your documents.

Book 2
Adobe Bridge

Contents at a Glance
Chapter 1: Organizing and Managing Your Files with Adobe
Bridge
Getting to Know the Adobe Bridge Workspace
Chapter 2: Taking Advantage of Metadata in Adobe Bridge
Locating Your Files
Using Keywords
Creating a Metadata Template
Searching for Files Using Adobe Bridge
Saving a Collection
Chapter 3: Using Automation Tools in Adobe Bridge
Getting Files from Your Camera
Automation Tools in Adobe Bridge

Chapter 1
Organizing and Managing Your
Files with Adobe Bridge
IN THIS CHAPTER
 What is Adobe Bridge?
 The Adobe Bridge workspace
 Changing the view
 Changing the workspace
 Using folders in Adobe Bridge
 Making a favorite
 Creating and locating metadata
Adobe Bridge is an application included in the Creative Cloud collection of
tools. Using Adobe Bridge, you can also organize and manage images,
videos, and audio files, as well as preview, search, and sort your files without
opening them in their native applications.
With Bridge, you can easily locate files using the Filters panel and import
images from your digital camera right into a viewing area that allows you to
quickly rename and preview your files. Adobe Bridge will save you time and
frustration when looking for files you have worked on in the past; read this
chapter to find out how to take advantage of its simple yet useful features.
Getting to Know the Adobe Bridge
Workspace
Before you start, locate and launch Adobe Bridge. In the next few steps you
will be taken through the steps to install Adobe Bridge, using the Creative

Cloud app, and then shown how to launch the application.
If you open your Programs folder (PC) or Application folder (Mac), you will
see a folder named Adobe. If you do not see this folder, you will want to
review Book 1, “Overview of the Creative Suite,” in order to find out how to
download and install your Creative Cloud applications. This folder contains
the applications that you downloaded and installed from the Creative Cloud
app. If you do not see Adobe Bridge listed, follow these steps:
1. Locate your Creative Cloud application in either your Programs (PC)
or Applications (Mac) folder and double-click it to launch it.
2. In the Creative Cloud app, click the Apps tab, scroll down until you
see the Adobe Bridge app, and then click the Install button to the
right. Follow the directions provided in order to install the
application.
3. After Bridge is installed, you can press the Open button on the right
to launch it, or you can find the application in your Program or
Application folder.
Now that you have launched Adobe Bridge, you might be wondering where
to start. In this chapter, we introduce the file management features Adobe
Bridge offers in the panels and other menu items shown in Figure 1-1.

FIGURE 1-1: The Adobe Bridge workspace.
Here are some additional details about these components:
Application bar: The Application bar provides buttons for essential
tasks, such as navigating the folder hierarchy, switching workspaces, and
searching for files. The Application bar is discussed in detail later in this
chapter.
Path bar: The Path bar shows the path for the folder you’re viewing and
allows you to navigate the directory by clicking on the path locations.
Favorites panel: The Favorites bar provides quick access to frequently
browsed folders. Essentially these work the same as shortcuts.
Folders panel: The Folders panel shows the folder hierarchy. You can

use it to navigate folders.
Filter panel: The Filter panel lets you sort and filter files that appear in
the Content panel. You can use this panel to easily find files of the same
type, files created on the same date, and more.
Collections panel: The Collections panel offers you the opportunity to
use shortcuts to create collections of files that you can easily locate
without moving in your directory.
Content panel: The Content panel displays files specified by the
navigational menu buttons, Path bar, Favorites panel, Folders panel, or
Collections panel. Basically, these include thumbnails of your files within
your selected folder.
Publish panel: The Publish panel lets you upload photos to Adobe Stock
from within the Bridge app. This might be used if you are a photographer
who wants to submit images to Adobe Stock.
Preview panel: The Preview panel displays a preview of the selected file
or files. You can reduce or enlarge the preview by resizing the panel.
Metadata panel: The Metadata panel includes metadata information for
the selected file. If multiple files are selected, shared data (such as
keywords, date created, and exposure setting) is listed.
Keywords panel: The Keywords panel helps you organize your images
by attaching keywords to them.
Practice makes perfect
Bridge offers an intuitive approach to using your system file directory. Keep
in mind that Adobe Bridge is really just a visual method of accessing your
files. It may help to dive right in and try out some of Adobe Bridge’s features
to understand its benefits. Some step-by-step lessons are included in this
minibook; if you would like to follow along with them, you can download
work files at www.agitraining.com/dummies.
1. Go to https://www.agitraining.com/dummies.
2. Click the DummiesCCFiles folder to download the compressed folder.
3. After the folder is downloaded, either right-click (PC) or Ctrl+Click
(Mac) to access the contextual menu. Choose Extract All and locate

an easy-to-find location, perhaps the desktop.
Finding and using your folders within Adobe Bridge
Let’s say that you want to locate a picture in a folder of images that are
named using numbers instead of descriptive names. By opening that folder in
Adobe Bridge, you can see thumbnails for each image and even locate
important information about each file’s site, resolution, and more. To do so,
follow the steps with your own files or download the DummiesCCfiles folder
as instructed earlier:
1. Select the Essentials workspace in Adobe Bridge.
2. Click the Folders tab to make sure it is brought forward.
If you have files located on your hard drive, you can navigate to them
using the named folders icons in the Folders panel.
3. Click on Documents in the Folders panel to see saved documents that
are stored in that folder. If you saved your DummiesCCFiles on the
desktop, click on Desktop to see the files in the center Content pane,
which you have sitting on the desktop.
4. In the Content pane, double-click the DummiesCCFiles folder to open
the contents.
You see additional folders that contain files that will be referenced
throughout the book.
5. Double-click the folder named Book02_Bridge to see the images
within that folder, as well as a subfolder, as shown in Figure 1-2.
6. Now, double-click the Hockey folder. This folder contains images that
were named automatically with a digital camera, as shown in Figure
1-3.
Finding the right file to open is much easier when you can see thumbnails
of the images instead of just the name.
7. Double-click the image to have it launch Adobe Photoshop.
 Photoshop is typically the default destination for image files such
as the JPGs in this folder, but you can change file associations by

choosing Edit  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  File Type Associations (PC) or Adobe
Bridge  ⇒  Edit  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  File Type Associations (Windows).
8. Choose File  ⇒  Close in Adobe Photoshop and return to Adobe Bridge.
FIGURE 1-2: You can visually see the contents of a folder using Adobe Bridge.
FIGURE 1-3: A visual display of images in a folder.

 From most Creative Cloud applications, you can choose File  ⇒  
Browse in Bridge to pop back into the Bridge application.
The default workspace
As a default, Bridge is opened in the default Essentials workspace. In this
view, you have three columns that you can resize by clicking and dragging
the columns. This view also provides you with a Content pane that displays
thumbnails of items that are contained in an open folder.
In addition to the Essentials workspace, there are several other preconfigured
workspaces that you can access from the Application bar, as shown in Figure
1-4. Depending upon the information you want to showcase, you might want
to switch from one workspace to another. Switching workspaces does not
change the locations of your files and folders, but it presents information
about the items in a different manner.
FIGURE 1-4: Change your workspace in the Application bar.
Experiment with these to see which works best for you.
Here are explanations of the preconfigured workspaces:

Metadata: Displays the Content panel in List view, along with the
Favorites, Metadata, and Filter panels.
Essentials: Displays the Favorites, Folders, Filter, Collections, Content,
Preview, Metadata, and Keywords panels.
Filmstrip: Displays thumbnails in a scrolling horizontal row along with a
preview of the selected item. This workspace also displays the Favorites,
Folders, Filter, and Collections panels.
Keywords: Displays the Content panel in Details view, as well as the
Favorites, Keywords, and Filter panels.
Looking for a better view
You may want to resize your thumbnails in the Content pane, especially if
you have many files. You can easily do this by using the Thumbnail slider in
the lower portion of the Bridge workspace.
You can also change the presentation of the content by using the View options
in the lower-right corner, as shown in Figure 1-5. Your choices are
Click to lock to thumbnail grid
View content as thumbnails
View content as details
View content as list

FIGURE 1-5: Change your view to bring out additional details.
Creating a new folder
Perhaps you want to create a new folder. Whether you create a new folder in
your system File directory or in the Finder for the Mac, it will be recognized
by Bridge. In this next example, you navigate back using the Path bar, and
create a new folder in the Book02_Bridge folder:
1. Make sure that you are still in the Hockey folder and note the
information that appears in the Path bar, as shown in Figure 1-6.
This is the directory path to the folder that you have active and open at
this time.
2. Click on Book02_Bridge in the Path bar to ensure that you navigate
back to that folder.
3. To create a new folder inside this folder, click the Create New Folder
button in the upper right, as shown in Figure 1-7, or right-click
(PC)/Ctrl+click (Mac) and select New Folder from the contextual
menu that appears.
A new folder appears, ready to be renamed.
4. Name the file Rockets.

FIGURE 1-6: Use the Path bar to navigate back through your folders.
FIGURE 1-7: You can create new folders right in Adobe Bridge.
Moving a file to another folder
Next you select and move some files into your newly created folder:
1. Click on one of the Rocket images and then, holding down the Ctrl
key (PC) or Command key (Mac), click on the other rocket image.
Using the Ctrl or Command key allows you to select multiple files.
2. With both rocket images selected, click and drag them over to your
new Rockets folder, as shown in Figure 1-8. Release your mouse when
the files are on top of the folder to move them into that folder.
 You can also move and copy files using the contextual menu.
Right-click (PC) or Ctrl+click (Mac) on any image file to see the
contextual menu that appears with options that include moving and
copying the selected file.

FIGURE 1-8: Move images from one folder to another in Adobe Bridge.
Making a favorite
When working in the Creative Cloud, you may return to certain folders over
and over again. In that situation, it would help to have some Favorite folders
established and saved in the Favorites panel. When your most popular folders
are saved as favorites, accessing them requires only one click.
Follow these steps in order to save your own favorite. In the following steps,
the files from the DummiesCCFile are used. You can follow along with your
own files and folders if you like.
1. Using the Folders panel, navigate your file directory system until you
locate the DummiesCCFile folder.
In the example shown in Figure 1-9, the folder is located on the desktop.
2. Make sure that the Favorites panel is forward. Check this by clicking
on the tab that says Favorites.
3. Click on the DummiesCCFiles folder and drag it to the Favorites
panel. Release the mouse when you see a line that indicates where the
favorite will appear in the present list, as shown in Figure 1-10.

FIGURE 1-9: Locate the folder that you wish to save as a favorite.
FIGURE 1-10: Click and drag a folder into the Favorites panel.
Now that you have saved the DummiesCCFiles as a favorite, you can access
the folder anytime you like simply by clicking on the folder name in the
Favorites panel.
Investigating the Application bar

Now that you have spent a little bit of time working in Bridge, the
Application bar and its tools will make more sense to you. The Application
bar runs along the top of the Bridge workspace. The tools and features are
shown in Figure 1-11.
FIGURE 1-11: The Application bar.
There are many features included in the Application bar that help you with
navigating, acquiring, and organizing your files. Some important features
include Get Photos from Camera, which is covered in Chapter 3 of this
minibook, and Sort Criteria, which is covered in Chapter 2.
Developing a Bridge habit
Now that you have experienced using Adobe Bridge, try making it a habit.
Instead of selecting File  ⇒  Open, choose File  ⇒  Browse in Bridge and start
recognizing the time savings.

Chapter 2
Taking Advantage of Metadata in
Adobe Bridge
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Creating and locating metadata
 Creating a metadata template
 Searching for files using Adobe Bridge
 Searching by name or keyword
 Using the Filter panel
 Saving a collection
Metadata is information that can be stored with images. This information
travels with the file and makes it easy to search for and identify the file. Use
metadata features and templates to help you save and find your files more
easily.
You find out how to attach metadata to your images by following some step-
by-step lessons included in this chapter. If you would like to follow along
with them, you can download work files at
https://www.agitraining.com/dummies.
Locating Your Files
You can follow these steps with your own files, or you can download the
DummiesCCfiles folder, as instructed in Chapter 1 of this minibook.
1. Select the Essentials workspace in Adobe Bridge.
2. Click the Folders tab to make sure it is brought forward.
If you have files located on your hard drive, you can navigate to them

using the named folders icons in the Folders panel.
3. Click Documents in the Folders panel to see saved documents that are
stored in that folder. If you saved your DummiesCCFiles on the
desktop, click Desktop to see in the center Content pane the files you
have sitting on the desktop.
4. In the Content pane, double-click the DummiesCCFiles folder to open
the contents.
You see additional folders that contain files that will be referenced
throughout the book.
5. Double-click the folder named Book02_Bridge to see the images
within that folder, as well as a subfolder, as shown in Figure 2-1.
6. Double-click on the folder named Hockey to see the images displayed.
7. Choose Window  ⇒  Workspace  ⇒  Reset Standard Workspaces. This
ensures that you are in the Essentials view and that all the default
panels for Adobe Bridge are visible. Alternatively, click Essentials in
the Application bar at the top-right of the Bridge workspace. You
might need to maximize your Bridge window after you reset the
workspace.
8. Click once on IMG_4088.JPG, and look for the Metadata and
Keywords panels in the lower-right area of the Adobe Bridge
workspace.
9. If the Metadata panel is not visible, click the Metadata panel tab. In
this panel, as shown in Figure 2-2, you see the image data that is
stored with the file. Take a few moments to scroll through the data
and view the information that was imported from the digital camera
that was used to take the photo.
10. If necessary, click the arrow to the left of IPTC Core to reveal its
contents.
IPTC Core is the schema for XMP that provides a smooth and explicit
transfer of metadata. Adobe’s Extensible Metadata Platform (XMP) is a
labeling technology that allows you to embed data about a file, known as
metadata, into the file itself. With XMP, desktop applications and back-
end publishing systems gain a common method for capturing and sharing
valuable metadata.

11. On the right side of this list, notice a series of pencil icons. These
icons indicate that you can enter information in these fields. Some of
the information about the creator has already been included, such as
the creator’s name and his location. Now you’ll add additional
information.
Note: If you are not able to edit or add metadata information to a file, it
could be locked. You can check by right-clicking on the file directly in
Bridge and selecting Reveal in Explorer (Windows) or Reveal in Finder
(Mac OS). In Windows, right-click the file, choose Properties, and
uncheck Read-only; in Mac OS, right-click the file, choose Get Info, then
change the Ownership (Sharing) and Permissions to Read and Write.
12. Scroll down until you can see Description Writer and click the pencil
next to it. All editable fields are highlighted, and a cursor appears in
the Description Writer field.
13. Type your name, or type Picture-by-me.
14. Scroll up to locate the Description text field. Click the Pencil icon to
the right and type Goalie in net to add a description for the image, as
shown in Figure 2-3.
15. 
 Click the Apply button, located in the bottom-right corner of
the Metadata panel, to apply your changes.
You have now edited metadata that is attached to the image; this
information will appear whenever someone opens your image in Bridge
or views the image information in Adobe Photoshop using File  ⇒  File
Info.

FIGURE 2-1: The contents of the Book02_Bridge folder.

FIGURE 2-2: Scroll through the Metadata panel on the right side of the Bridge workspace.

FIGURE 2-3: Reveal the IPTC contents and enter metadata information.
Using Keywords
Using keywords — logical words to help you locate images more quickly —
can reduce the amount of time it takes to find an image on a computer. Here’s

how:
1. Click the Keywords tab, which appears behind the Metadata panel.
A list of commonly used keywords appears.
2. Click the New Keyword button at the bottom of the Keywords panel,
as shown in Figure 2-4. Type Goalie into the active text field, and then
press Enter (Windows) or Return (Mac).
3. Select the empty checkbox to the left of the Goalie keyword. This
adds the Goalie keyword to the selected image.
4. 
 With the Goalie keyword still selected, click the New Sub
Keyword button. Type Boy into the active text field, then press Enter
(Windows) or Return (Mac).
5. Select the empty checkbox to the left of the Boy keyword.
You have now assigned a keyword and a sub keyword to the
IMG_4088.JPG image. Now you will add a second keyword.
6. Select the Goalie keyword, and then click the New Keyword button at
the bottom of the Keywords panel; a blank text field appears. Type
Peewee and press Enter (Windows) or Return (Mac). Then, select the
checkbox next to Peewee to assign the keyword to this image.
7. Right-click (Windows) or Ctrl+click (Mac) on the Peewee keyword,
and choose the option Rename. When the text field becomes
highlighted, type Youth, press Enter (Windows) or Return (Mac).
Make sure the Youth checkbox remains selected.
 You can also enter information directly into the image by opening
the image in Adobe Photoshop, and then choosing File  ⇒  File Info. The
categories that appear on the top include Description, Camera Data, IPTC,
and IPTC Extension, among others. After it is entered in the File Info
dialog box, the information is visible in Adobe Bridge.

FIGURE 2-4: Click on the New Keyword button (circled) to add your own unique keyword to the
file.
Creating a Metadata Template
After you have added metadata to an image, you can easily apply it to more

images by creating a metadata template. In this exercise, you apply the
metadata template from the IMG_4088.JPG image to other images in the
same folder:
1. Make sure that IMG_4088.JPG is selected in Adobe Bridge.
2. Choose Tools  ⇒  Create Metadata Template.
The Create Metadata Template window appears.
3. In the Template Name text field (at the top), type Game Photos.
In the Create Metadata Template window, you can choose the information
that you want to build into a template. In this exercise, we choose
information that already exists in the selected file, but if you wanted to,
you could add or edit information at this point.
4. Select the checkboxes to the left of the following categories: Creator,
Creator, Description, Keywords, and Date Created, then click Save,
as shown in Figure 2-5.
You have just saved a template. Next, you apply it to the other two
hockey images in this folder.
5. Select the IMG_4087.JPG image, press and hold the Ctrl (Windows)
or Command (Mac) key, and select the IMG_4083.JPG image.
Both images are selected.
6. Choose Tools  ⇒  Append Metadata and select Game Photos, as shown
in Figure 2-6. Note that you can also choose Replace Metadata if you
want to eliminate existing metadata.
The same metadata has now been applied to all the images at once.

FIGURE 2-5: Select a file and check the information you want to save into a metadata template.
FIGURE 2-6: Choose the metadata template you want to use to add metadata to an image or
images.

Searching for Files Using Adobe
Bridge
Find the files that you want quickly and easily by using the Search tools built
directly into Adobe Bridge and by taking advantage of the Filter panel.
In this example, you have a limited number of files to search within, but even
so, you can still see how helpful these search features can be.
Searching by name or keyword
The benefit of adding metadata to your images is that you can use it to find
your files later. Using the Find dialog box in Adobe Bridge, you can narrow
your criteria down to make it easy to find your files when needed. Here’s
how:
1. Make sure that you are still viewing the content in the Hockey folder.
2. Choose Edit  ⇒  Find, or use the keyboard shortcut Ctrl+F (Windows)
or Command+F (Mac OS).
The Find dialog box appears.
3. Select Keywords from the Criteria drop-down menu, and type Goalie
into the third text field (replacing Enter Text), as shown in Figure 2-7.
Then press Enter (Windows) or Return (Mac).
Because you are looking within the active folder only, you get a result
immediately. The image files that you tagged with the Goalie keyword are
visible.
4. Clear the search by clicking the X icon to the right of the New Search
icon at the top of the results pane, as shown in Figure 2-8.

FIGURE 2-7: Search your folders using the tools built right into Adobe Bridge.
FIGURE 2-8: Cancel the search results by clicking on the X (circled) in the Content pane.
Using the Filter panel
You can use the Filter panel to locate files whose location you can’t
remember. With the Filter panel, you can look at attributes such as file type,
keywords, and date created or modified to narrow down the files that appear
in the content window of Adobe Bridge. The following steps show you how:
1. Make sure that you are still viewing the content of the Hockey folder.
Notice that the Filter panel collects the information from the active
folder, indicating the keywords that are being used, as well as
modification dates and more.
2. Click to turn down the arrow next to Keywords in the Filter panel,
and select Goalie from the list; notice that only images with the
Goalie keyword applied are visible. Click Goalie again to deselect it
and view all the images.
Find files quickly by selecting different criteria in the Filters panel.
3. Click the Clear Filter button in the lower right of the Filter panel to

turn off any filters.
4. Experiment with investigating file types as well. Only file types that
exist in the selected folder appear in the list. If you are looking for an
Adobe Illustrator file, you might see that there are none located in
this folder, but you will see a QuickTime video file that you can select
and preview right in Adobe Bridge, as shown in Figure 2-9.
5. Again, click the Clear Filter button in the lower-right area of the
Filter panel to turn off any filters.
FIGURE 2-9: You can select File Types from the Filter panel to locate them easily.
Saving a Collection
If you like using favorites, you’ll love using collections. A collection allows
you to take images from multiple locations and access them in one central
location. Understand that when you use a collection, Adobe Bridge
essentially creates a shortcut, or alias, to your files and does not physically
relocate them or copy them to a different location.
1. If your Collections tab is not visible, choose Window   ⇒  Collections
Panel or click the tab next to Filter.

The Collections panel comes forward.
2. Click the gray area in the Content pane to make sure that nothing is
selected, and then click the New Collection button in the lower-right
area of the Collections panel. Type Pictures of hockey into the new
collection text field, as shown in Figure 2-10. Press Return or Enter to
confirm your new collection.
3. Navigate back to the Bridge02-Folder, and then take two random
images and drag them to the Pictures of hockey collection.
4. Click the Pictures of hockey collection folder; notice that even though
you can easily access the files you added to the collection, the files
remain intact in their original location.

FIGURE 2-10: Create a collection to keep selected Pictures easily accessible.

Chapter 3
Using Automation Tools in Adobe
Bridge
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Getting files from your camera
 Batch renaming your files
 Importing files as layers
You have already discovered how Adobe Bridge can save you time by
helping you organize and more easily find your images. In this chapter, you
find out how to use automated features that cut out redundant tasks and save
even more time.
Getting Files from Your Camera
 With the Get Photos from Camera feature, you can connect your
camera, card reader, or mobile device to the computer using a supported
cable. If you want to give this feature a try, follow these steps:
1. Simply attach your phone via USB, insert a card into your card
reader, or connect your camera via cable.
2. Launch Bridge.
3. Click the Get Photos from Camera button. The Adobe Bridge CC –
Photo Downloader dialog box appears, as shown in Figure 3-1.
4. Click open the Get Photos From drop-down menu and select your
device.
Note: If Bridge does not recognize your device, make sure that you have
the latest version installed by launching your Creative Cloud App. Look

in the Apps section to see if an update is available. You can also try
connecting your device when Bridge is not open and launching it after the
device is connected.
In the Create Subfolders drop-down menu, you can use a standard format
for naming your folders or choose Custom to create your own naming
convention.
5. If you choose to have the Adobe Downloader rename your files, you
can choose a standard naming convention using the date, or choose
Custom name and create your own custom name.
6. The options at the bottom offer you the opportunity to see the files in
Bridge, convert the files to DNG (Digital Negative Files), delete the
files off the device, and save them to another location.
7. Click the triangle to the left of Advanced Options to see a more
detailed preview of your files. In this more detailed view, you can
individually select and deselect files to be downloaded, as shown in
Figure 3-2.

FIGURE 3-1: Download your photos quickly using the Photo Downloader available in Adobe
Bridge.

FIGURE 3-2: The Advanced view allows you to select your images.
Automation Tools in Adobe Bridge
Adobe Bridge provides many tools to help you automate tasks. In this
section, you discover how to use a few helpful features that will save you
from repeating redundant tasks.
Batch renaming your files
You might have noticed that in the Book 2-Bridge  ⇒  Hockey folder, many
files contain generic filenames. These images were downloaded from a
digital camera, and instead of changing the names immediately, we opted to
change them simultaneously using the batch rename feature in Adobe Bridge.
To do so, follow these steps:
1. Choose Edit  ⇒  Select All, or press Ctrl+A (Windows) or ⌘+A (Mac
OS).

All the images are selected. Don’t worry if the Graphics folder is selected;
the files inside will not be affected.
2. Choose Tools  ⇒  Batch Rename.
The Batch Rename dialog box appears.
In this instance, we want a simple, uncomplicated name. If you look in
the Preview section at the bottom of the Batch Rename dialog box, you
can see that the Current and New filenames are long strings of text and
numbers. You can simplify this by eliminating some of text from the
filenames.
3. In the New File names section, type Hockey in the Text field.
4. In the Sequence Number row, verify that it is set to Two Digits.
5. Confirm that the sequence number is starting at 1. You can start it
anywhere if you are adding additional images to a folder later.
6. If there is any other criteria, click the Minus sign button (remove this
text from the filenames) to remove them. The New filename in the
Preview section becomes significantly shorter.
If you look in the Preview section at the bottom of the dialog box, you
can see that the new filename is a very simple Hockey01.jpg now.
7. Click the Rename button.
All the selected filenames are automatically changed. See Figure 3-3.

FIGURE 3-3: You can change multiple files names simultaneously in Adobe Bridge.
Loading files as layers
Adobe Bridge comes with a variety of Photoshop tools that you can use in
Bridge as well. In this example, you select three images that you want to
incorporate into one composited image. Instead of opening all three images
and cutting and pasting or dragging them into one file, you use the Load Files
into Photoshop Layers feature.
Make sure that you are still in the Hockey folder. Hold down your Ctrl
(Windows) or ⌘ (Mac) key and Click on any three images. All three images
are selected.
Select Tools  ⇒  Photoshop. Note that there are many tools that you can use in
this menu item; for this example, select the Load Files into Photoshop Layers
option. A script immediately launches Photoshop (if it is not already open)
and a new layered file is created from the selected images.
You should ensure that your selected images are approximately the same
pixel dimensions before running this script; otherwise, you might have to
make some transformation adjustments in Photoshop. In this example, the
images are approximately the same size.

Building a contact sheet
If you come from the traditional photography world, you may be familiar
with contact sheets. Before digital photography, contact sheets were
thumbnail images created from film negatives and were used to help identify
which images should be processed. Even though a film negative environment
isn’t common anymore, contact sheets can be very useful when trying to
identify which images you choose to save or edit.
Fortunately there is a contact feature built right into the Adobe Bridge tools.
Follow these steps to create your own using your own images, or any of our
sample images:
1. Open a folder of images and either Ctrl/⌘-click on the images you
want to include in a contact sheet or press Ctrl+A (Windows)/⌘+A
(Mac) to select all the images.
2. Choose Tools  ⇒  Photoshop  ⇒  Contact Sheet II.
Photoshop is launched and you see the Contact Sheet II dialog box that
appears in Figure 3-4.
3. Choose your paper size and resolution. The default is 8 inches x 10
inches and 300 dpi, which works fine for reliable results.
Choose how many thumbnails you want across and down using the rows
and columns. The fewer rows and columns, the larger the thumbnail
images will be.
Check Use Filename as Caption if you want to see the filename listed
underneath the thumbnail.
4. Press OK to see the final Contact Sheet created, as shown in Figure 3-
5.

FIGURE 3-4: The Contact Sheet II dialog box offers size and resolution options.

FIGURE 3-5: The resulting contact sheet.

Book 3
Photoshop CC

Contents at a Glance
Chapter 1: Getting into Photoshop CC Basics
The Start Screen
The New Document Window
Sample Images Can Help You Investigate More Features
Opening an Image
Getting to Know the Tools
Navigating the Work Area
Choosing Your Screen Mode
Getting Started with Basic Tasks in Photoshop CC
Chapter 2: Messing with Mode Matters
Working with Bitmap Images
Choosing the Correct Photoshop Mode
Chapter 3: Making Selective Changes
Getting to Know the Selection Tools
Manipulating Selections with Refine Selection
Saving Selections
Preserving Corrective Perspective with the Vanishing Point Feature
Chapter 4: Using the Photoshop Pen Tool
Selecting the Right Pen Tool for the Task
Using a Path as a Selection
Creating Curved Paths
Clipping Paths
Using Shape Layers
Chapter 5: Creating Images in the Right Resolution for Print
and the Web
Creating Images for Print
Determining the Resolution for Web Images
Applying the Unsharp Mask Filter to an Image
Chapter 6: Creating a Good Image
Reading a Histogram

Creating a Good Tone Curve
Editing an Adjustment Layer
Testing a Printer
Chapter 7: Working with Painting and Retouching Tools
Using the Swatches Panel
Choosing Foreground and Background Colors
The Painting and Retouching Tools
Blending Modes
Saving Presets
Chapter 8: Using Layers
Creating and Working with Layers
Creating a Text Layer
Using Layer Masks
Organizing Your Layers
Using Layer Styles
Smart, Really Smart! Smart Objects
Working with Artboards in Photoshop
Experimenting with 3D Files
Filter Capabilities in the Layers Panel
Merging and Flattening the Image
Chapter 9: Saving Photoshop Images for Print and the Web
Backing Up with a Save
Choosing a File Format for Saving
Saving Images for the Web
Saving Settings

Chapter 1
Getting into Photoshop CC
Basics
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Discovering the Photoshop tools Navigating your work area 
Changing screen modes in Adobe Photoshop CC
In this chapter, you are introduced to the Photoshop CC work area and tools.
You’ll also find out how to neatly organize and hide panels. In this chapter,
you will also find out how to do basic tasks, such as open an image, crop it to
a different size, and then resave it.
The Start Screen
When Photoshop is first launched, or until you change your preferences, you
will see a start screen, as shown in Figure 1-1. This start screen can making it
easier for you to find files that you have recently worked on or jump right
into a new document.

FIGURE 1-1: The Start screen in Adobe Photoshop appears as a default.
If you would rather not have this screen every time you launch Photoshop,
you can choose Edit  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  General and uncheck Show Start
Workspace When No Documents Are Open. On the Mac you would choose
Photoshop  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  General and uncheck Show Start Workspace
When No Documents Are Open.
The New Document Window
If you are still using Photoshop at its default settings, you can click on the
New button in the start screen, or choose File  ⇒  New. The initial New
Document dialog window appears. Just like the start screen, the default New
Document window may be more than you have asked for, but it is meant to
offer you more control and options when creating new files. Note in Figure 1-
2 that you can choose the type of document that you are working on, such as
Photo, Print, Art & Illustration, Web, Mobile, Film and Video.

FIGURE 1-2: The updated New Document dialog box has many options from which to choose.
Each one of these selections offers standard size and resolution defaults for
the medium selected in addition to templates that you are able to open and
customize for your own needs.
If this is a little much for you and you want the standard, smaller, more
compact New Document dialog box, choose the Close button in this window
and then select Edit  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  General and check Use Legacy “New
Document” Interface. (On the Mac, choose Photoshop  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  
General and check Use Legacy “New Document” Interface.)
Sample Images Can Help You
Investigate More Features
Of course it helps to have an image open while exploring Adobe Photoshop.
You are free to use your own or use the samples image files located here:
https://www.agitraining.com/dummies. This downloadable file includes
files that can be used throughout the entire Adobe Creative Cloud All-in-One
For Dummies book.
1. Go to https://www.agitraining.com/dummies.

2. Click on the DummiesCCFiles folder to download the compressed
folder.
3. After the folder is downloaded, right-click (PC) to access the
contextual menu and choose Extract All and locate an easy-to-find
location or Ctrl+Click (Mac) and choose Open.
Inside the DummiesCCFiles folder, you find separate folders for each
minibook. Images are available for you to use in the Book03_Photoshop
folder.
Opening an Image
You can open an existing Photoshop image in one of several ways:
If you see the start screen, you can click on the Open button and navigate
to the folder that contains the image you would like to open.
Choose File  ⇒  Open, select the file in the Open dialog box and then click
the Open button.
Choose File  ⇒  Browse in Bridge. By selecting Browse in Bridge instead
of Open, you launch the Adobe Bridge application. Read more about
Adobe Bridge later in this section and also in Book 2.
 Photoshop can open a multitude of file formats, even if the image
was created in another application, such as Illustrator or another image-
editing program. However, you have to open the image in Photoshop by
choosing File  ⇒  Open or, using Adobe Bridge, by selecting an image and
dragging it to the Photoshop icon on the taskbar (Windows) or Dock
(Mac). If you double-click an image file (one that wasn’t originally
created in Photoshop, or from different versions) in a folder, the image
may open only in a preview application.
If you’re opening a folder of images that you want to investigate first, choose
File  ⇒  Browse in Bridge to open Adobe Bridge, the control center for Adobe
Creative Cloud. You can use Adobe Bridge to organize, browse, and locate
the assets you need to create your content. Adobe Bridge keeps available, for

easy access, native AI, INDD, PSD, and Adobe PDF files as well as other
Adobe and non-Adobe application files. Adobe Bridge does not install by
default with Adobe Photoshop. If you do not have it loaded you can read
through the directions and highlights of using Adobe Bridge in Book 2,
“Adobe Bridge.”
Getting to Know the Tools
You use tools to create, select, and manipulate objects in Photoshop CC.
When you have Photoshop open, the Tools panel appears along the left side
of the workspace (see Figure 1-3), and panels appear on the right side of the
screen. (We discuss panels in the later section “Navigating the Work Area.”)
FIGURE 1-3: The Photoshop CC workspace includes the Tools panel.
 In the Tools panel, look for a tooltip when you hover the cursor over
any one of the tools. Following the tool name is a letter in parentheses,
which is the keyboard shortcut you can use to access that tool. Simply

press the Shift key along with the key command you see to access any
hidden tools. In other words, pressing P activates the Pen tool, and
pressing Shift+P rotates through the hidden tools under the Pen tool.
When you see a small triangle in the lower-right corner of the tool icon,
you know that the tool contains hidden tools.
Table 1-1 lists the Photoshop tools, describes what each one is used for, and
specifies in which chapter you can find more information about each one.
TABLE 1-1 Photoshop CC Tools
Button
Tool
What You Can Do with It
See This Chapter in Book 3
Move (V)
Move selections or layers
3
Marquee (M)
Select the image area
3
Lasso (L)
Make freehand selections
3
Quick Selection (W)
Select similar pixels
3
Crop (C)
Crop an image
1
Eyedropper (I)
Eyedropper
7
Spot Healing Brush (J)
Retouch flaws
7
Brush (B)
Paint the foreground color
7
Clone Stamp (S)
Copy pixel data
7
History Brush (Y)
Paint from the selected state
7

Eraser (E)
Erase pixels
7
Gradient (G)
Create a gradient
7
Blur
Blur pixels
7
Toning (O)
Dodge, burn, saturate
N/A
Pen (P)
Create paths
4
Type (T)
Create text
8
Path Selection (A)
Select paths
4
Hidden Direct Selection
(A)
Select individual anchor points on
paths
4
Vector Shape (U)
Create vector shapes
8
Hand (H)
Navigate page
8
Zoom (Z)
Increase or decrease the view
1
 Looking for the Magic Wand tool, shown in Figure 1-4? Click and
hold the Quick Selection tool in the Tools panel to access it.

FIGURE 1-4: Some popular tools may be hidden; click and hold on the arrow in the lower right of
the tool to see additional tools.
Navigating the Work Area
Navigating in Photoshop isn’t much different than getting around in other
Adobe applications. Most Creative Cloud applications make extensive use of
panels. In the following sections, you have an opportunity to experience the
Photoshop workspace and configure those panels.
As a default, you are in the Essentials workspace, as shown in Figure 1-5. If
you are happy with the panels that appear while in that workspace there is no
reason to change your workspace at this time.

FIGURE 1-5: As a default, you are in the Essentials workspace.
Resetting your workspace
Even though you may be happy with the panels that appear as a default, you
might end up moving, closing, or inadvertently collapsing important panels.
When working in any workspace, including Essentials, you can easily reset
the panel configuration by selecting Windows  ⇒  Workspace  ⇒  Reset
Essentials (or the workspace name). Read the following section to discover
how to create and save your own Workspace in Photoshop.
Docking and saving panels
Panels, panels everywhere — do you really need them all? Maybe not just
yet, but as you increase your skill level, you’ll start to take advantage of more
of those Photoshop panels. Panels give you easy access to important
functions. In this chapter we touch on panel organization, but if you want
more details about using panels there is a fast read in Book 1, Chapter 5,
“Exploring Common Panels.”

 When you work in Photoshop, keep in mind these two keyboard
shortcuts can help temporarily clear up distractive tools and panels while
you are working:
Press Tab to switch between hiding and showing the tools and panels.
Press Shift+Tab to hide the panels, leaving only the Tools panel visible.
Press Shift+Tab to show them again.
If you find that you are frequently using the same panels, close the less used
panels that you don’t need and arrange the others onscreen where you want
them.
Follow one of these three methods to close a panel:
Choose Window  ⇒  Panel’s Tab Name. If the panel name is checked, it is
open; selecting the panel name in the list closes the panel.
Click on the panel menu in the upper right of the panel and choose
Close, as you see in Figure 1-6.
Click and drag on a panel name to undock it. When undocked, the
panel displays a close button (an X button in Windows or the red button
on a Mac) that you can click to close the panel.

FIGURE 1-6: Closing a panel that you do not use frequently.
To open and relocate panels that you frequently use, choose Window  ⇒  
Panel’s Tab Name.
Saving your workspace
After you have displayed and arranged the panels you frequently use, follow
these steps to save the configuration:
1. Choose Window  ⇒  Workspace  ⇒  New Workspace.
The New Workspace dialog box appears.
2. Name your workspace and click Save.
3. Any time you want the panels to return to your saved locations,
choose Window  ⇒  Workspace  ⇒  Name of Workspace.
Name of Workspace is the name you supplied in Step 2.
Taking advantage of workspace features
In addition to the Essentials workspace, Photoshop has workspaces you can
take advantage of to open the panels you need for specific tasks. You can use

some of these workspaces for photography, painting, or design, for example.
Increase your work area by turning panels into icons, as shown in Figure 1-7.
Do so either by right-clicking the tab of a panel and selecting Collapse to
Icons or by clicking the double arrows.
FIGURE 1-7: Turn panels into icons.
Zooming in to get a better look

Images that look fine at one zoom level may look extremely bad at another.
You’ll zoom in and out quite often while working on images in Photoshop.
You can find menu choices for zooming on the View menu, but a quicker way
to zoom is to use the keyboard commands listed in Table 1-2.
TABLE 1-2 Zooming and Navigation Keyboard Shortcuts
Command
Windows Shortcut
Mac Shortcut
Actual size
Ctrl+1
⌘  +1
Fit in window Ctrl+0 (zero)
⌘  +0 (zero)
Zoom in
Ctrl++ (plus sign) or Ctrl+spacebar ⌘  ++ (plus sign) or ⌘  +spacebar
Zoom out
Ctrl+– (minus) or Alt+spacebar
⌘  +– (minus) or Option+spacebar
Hand tool
Spacebar
Spacebar
This list describes a few advantages of working with the Zoom tool to get a
better look at your work:
100 percent view: Double-clicking the Zoom tool in the Tools panel
gives you a 100 percent view. Do it before using filters to see a more
realistic result of making changes.
Zoom marquee: Drag from the upper-left corner to the lower-right
corner of the area you want to zoom to. While you drag, a marquee
appears; when you release the mouse button, the marqueed area zooms to
fill the image window. The Zoom marquee gives you much more control
than just clicking the image with the Zoom tool. Zoom out again to see
the entire image by pressing Ctrl+0 (Windows) or ⌘  +0 (Mac). Doing so
fits the entire image in the viewing area.
 Keyboard shortcuts: If a dialog box is open and you need to
reposition or zoom to a new location on an image, you can use the
keyboard commands without closing the dialog box.
A new window for a different look: Choose Window  ⇒  Arrange  ⇒  New
Window to create an additional window for the frontmost image. This
technique is helpful when you want to view the entire image (say, at
actual size) to see the results as a whole yet zoom in to focus on a small

area of the image to do some fine-tuning. The new window is linked
dynamically to the original window so that when you make changes, the
original and any other new windows created from the original are
immediately updated.
Cycle through images: Press Ctrl+Tab (Windows) or ⌘  +~ (tilde) (Mac)
to cycle through open images.
Choosing Your Screen Mode
You have a choice of three screen modes in which to work. Most users start
and stay in the default (standard screen) mode until they inadvertently end up
in another. The following modes are accessible by clicking and holding
Screen Mode, located at the bottom of the Tools panel, as shown in Figure 1-
8:
Standard Screen Mode: In this typical view, an image window is open,
but you can see your desktop and other images open behind it.
Full Screen Mode with Menu Bar: In this view, the image is surrounded
to the edge of the work area with neutral gray. Working in this mode
prevents you not only from accidentally clicking out of an image and
leaving Photoshop, but also from seeing other images behind the working
image.
Full Screen Mode: A maximized document window fills all available
space between docks and resizes when dock widths change.

FIGURE 1-8: Change your screen mode.
Getting Started with Basic Tasks in
Photoshop CC
Unless you use Photoshop as a blank canvas for painting, you may rarely
create a new file in Photoshop. This is because you typically have a source
image you start with that may have been generated by a digital camera, stock
image library, or scanner.
The following sections show you how to open an existing image file in
Photoshop, create a new image (if you want to use Photoshop to paint, for
example), crop an image, and save an edited image.
DISCOVER CAMERA RAW
If you haven’t discovered the Camera Raw capabilities in Adobe Photoshop, you’ll want to
give them a try. The Camera Raw format is available for image capture in many cameras.
Simply choose the format in your camera’s settings as Raw instead of JPEG or TIFF. These
Raw files are a bit larger than standard JPEG files, but you capture an enormous amount of
data with the image that you can retrieve after opening. (See www.adobe.com for a complete list
of cameras that support Camera Raw.) A Camera Raw file contains unprocessed picture data
from a digital camera’s image sensor, along with information about how the image was
captured, such as camera and lens type, exposure settings, and white balance setting. When
you open the file in Adobe Photoshop CC, the built-in Camera Raw plug-in interprets the Raw
file on your computer, making adjustments for image color and tonal scale.
When you shoot JPEG images with your camera, you’re locked into the processing done by

your camera, but working with Camera Raw files gives you maximum control over images,
such as controlling their white balance, tonal range, contrast, color saturation, and image
sharpening. Cameras that can shoot in Raw format have a setting on the camera that
changes its capture mode to Raw. Rather than write a final JPEG file, a Raw data file is
written, which consists of black-and-white brightness levels from each of the several million
pixel sites on the imaging sensor. The actual image hasn’t yet been produced, and unless you
have specific software, such as the plug-in built in to Adobe Photoshop, opening the file can
be difficult, if not impossible.
To open a Camera Raw file, simply choose File  ⇒  Browse in Bridge. Adobe Bridge opens, and
you see several panels, including the Folders, Content, Preview, and Metadata panels. In the
Folders panel, navigate to the location on your computer where you’ve saved Camera Raw
images; thumbnail previews appear in the Content panel. Think of Camera Raw files as photo
negatives. You can reprocess them at any time to achieve the results you want.
Right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac) a JPEG or TIFF file and choose Open in Camera
Raw from the contextual menu. This is a great way to experiment with all the cool features
available with this plug-in, but your results aren’t as good as if you used an actual Raw file.
If Adobe Photoshop CC doesn’t open your Raw file, you may need to update the Raw plug-in.
(See www.adobe.com for the latest plug-in.) The plug-in should be downloaded and placed in
this location in Windows: C:\Program Files\Common Files\Adobe\Plug-Ins\CS7\File Formats.
On the Macintosh, place the plug-in here: Library\Application Support\Adobe\Plug-
Ins\CS7\File Formats.
Cropping an image
A simple but essential task is to crop an image. Cropping means to eliminate
all parts of the image that aren’t relevant to create a dynamic composition.
Cropping is especially important in Photoshop. Each pixel, no matter what
color, takes up the same amount of information, so cropping eliminates
unneeded pixels and reduces file size and processing time. For that reason,
you should crop images before you start working on them.
You can crop an image in Photoshop CC in two ways:
 Use the Crop tool.
Select an area with the Marquee tool and choose Image  ⇒  Crop.
To crop an image by using the Crop tool, follow these steps:
1. Press C to access the Crop tool.
Make sure that the preset (in the upper-left corner of the control panel) is

set to Ratio, or, if you wish, to a specific preset size in the Presets drop-
down list, as shown in Figure 1-9.
2. Click and drag over the area of the image you want to keep.
3. If you need to adjust the crop area, drag the handles in the crop-
bounding area.
4. When you’re satisfied with the crop-bounding area, double-click in
the center of the crop area or press the Return or Enter key to crop
the image.
5. If you want to cancel the crop, press the Esc key.
FIGURE 1-9 Select the Crop tool preset before you click and drag.

 Ever scan in an image that ends up crooked? When using the Crop
tool, if you position the cursor outside any handle, a rotate symbol
appears. Drag the crop-bounding area to rotate it and line it up the way
you want it cropped. When you press Return or Enter, the image
straightens out.
Using grids as you crop
As a default, a three-row and three-column grid appears after you click and
drag over an area with your Crop tool. This grid can be used as a guide to
help you create more dynamically cropped images. Images whose points of
interest appear on the intersections of this grid, or that can be divided into the
sections of the grid, are generally considered to be more interesting. (This is
the called the Rule of Thirds.) See how the image in Figure 1-10 fills the
bottom one-third of the image with water, and the upper two-thirds with sky.

FIGURE 1-10: Use of the Rule of Thirds overlay in the Crop tool.
If you prefer to change or turn off the overlay, select the Never Show Overlay
option from the Set the Overlay Options drop-down list, as shown in Figure
1-11. Keep in mind that you must have already clicked and dragged out your
crop area before you can make changes to the overlay.

FIGURE 1-11: Select from a multitude of overlays to use as guides, or turn the overlay off.
Saving images
Save an image file by choosing File  ⇒  Save. If you’re saving the file for the
first time, the Save As dialog box appears. Notice in the Format drop-down
list that you have plenty of choices for file formats. (File formats are
discussed in more detail in Chapter 9 of this minibook.) You can always play
it safe by choosing the native Photoshop (PSD) file format, which supports all
Photoshop features, such as channels, layers, text, and other vector objects
that are discussed throughout this minibook. Choosing certain other formats
may eliminate layers, channels, and other special features.
Many users choose to save a native Photoshop file as a backup to any other
file format. Be sure to have a backup or an original file saved as a native
Photoshop (PSD) file when you start taking advantage of layers and other
outstanding Photoshop elements. As a Creative Cloud user, keep in mind that

you can use the native file format for Photoshop in all other Creative Cloud
applications.

Chapter 2
Messing with Mode Matters
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Editing pixels in bitmap images
 Understanding Photoshop image modes
 Working in black and white, RGB, or CMYK
Before taking on working with any imagery in Photoshop, you should
understand color modes and the importance of setting up the most optimum
color settings. A strong foundation in the use of color plays into the
production and editing of all imagery, grayscale, color image, content for
websites, movies, and more. Read through this chapter to help you to feel
confident in the choices you make.
Working with Bitmap Images
You may wonder how images in Photoshop show subtle changes in color
values. To create those smooth gradations from one color to the next,
Photoshop takes advantage of pixels and anti-aliasing. Bitmap images (or
raster images) are based on a grid of pixels, as shown in Figure 2-1. The grid
is smaller or larger depending on the resolution of your image. The number of
pixels along the height and width of a bitmap image are the pixel dimensions
of an image, measured in pixels per inch (ppi). The more pixels per inch, the
more detail in the image.

FIGURE 2-1: You can see the grid that makes up the pixel resolution of an image when you zoom
in.
Unlike vector graphics (mathematically created paths), bitmap images can’t
be scaled without losing detail. (See Figure 2-2 for an example of a bitmap
image and a vector graphic.) Generally, you should use bitmap images at or
close to the size you need. If you resize a bitmap image, it can become jagged
on the edges of sharp objects. On the other hand, you can scale vector
graphics and edit them without degrading sharp edges.
FIGURE 2-2: Bitmap versus vector.
Photoshop can work on both bitmap and vector art. (In the path line around
the vector shape layer, notice that the path isn’t pixelated or broken down into
a step pattern created by the pixels.) Combining the two technologies gives

you, as a designer, incredible opportunities.
 For information on changing and adjusting image resolution, see
Chapter 6 of this minibook.
Choosing the Correct Photoshop Mode
Choose Image  ⇒  Mode to view the available image mode choices. Selecting
the right mode for an image is important because each one offers different
capabilities and results. For example, if you choose Bitmap mode, you can
work only in black and white. That’s it — no shades of color, not even gray.
Most features are disabled in Bitmap mode, which is fine if you’re working
on art for a black-and-white logo, but not for most images. If, instead, you
work in RGB (Red, Green, Blue) mode, you have full access to Photoshop’s
capabilities.
Read on to see which image mode is best for your needs. When you’re ready
to make your mode selection, open a file and choose Image  ⇒  Mode to make
a selection. You can read descriptions of each image mode in the following
sections.
Keep in mind, if you are not sure which mode will work best, stay in the
RGB mode. The RGB mode offers access to most all of Photoshop’s features
and can easily be changed to a different mode later.
 A channel simply contains the color information in an image. The
number of default color channels in an image depends on its color mode.
For example, a CMYK image has at least four channels — one each for
cyan, magenta, yellow, and black information. Grayscale has one
channel. If you understand the printing process, think of each channel
representing a plate (color) that, when combined, creates the final image.
Bitmap
Bitmap mode offers little more than the capability to work in black and white.

Many tools are unusable, and most menu options are grayed out in this mode.
If you’re converting an image to bitmap, you must convert it to grayscale
first.
Grayscale
Use Grayscale mode, shown in Figure 2-3, if you’re creating black-and-white
images with tonal values specifically for printing to one color. Grayscale
mode supports 256 shades of gray in 8-bit color mode. Photoshop can work
with grayscale in 16-bit mode, which provides more information but may
limit your capabilities when working in Photoshop.
FIGURE 2-3: Grayscale supports 256 shades of gray.
When you choose Image  ⇒  Mode  ⇒  Grayscale to convert to Grayscale mode,
a warning message asks you to confirm that you want to discard all color
information. If you don’t want to see this warning every time you convert an

image to grayscale, select the option not to show the dialog box again before
you click Discard.
 Using the Black & White adjustment is the best way to create a good
grayscale image. Simply click and hold the Create New Fill or
Adjustment Layer button at the bottom of the Layers panel and choose
Black & White. Set the sliders to achieve the best black-and-white
image. After you have adjusted the colors using the Black & White
adjustment, choose Image  ⇒  Mode  ⇒  Grayscale.
Duotone
Use Duotone mode when you’re creating a one- to four-color image created
from spot colors (solid ink, such as Pantone colors). You can also use
Duotone mode to create monotones, tritones, and quadtones. If you’re
producing a two-color job, duotones create a beautiful alternative to full
color.
 The Pantone Matching System (PMS) helps keep printing inks
consistent from one job to the next. By assigning a numbered Pantone
color, such as 485 for red, you eliminate the risk of one vendor (printer)
using fire engine red and the next using orange-red for your company
logo.
To create a duotone, follow these steps:
1. Choose Image  ⇒  Mode  ⇒  Grayscale.
2. Choose Image  ⇒  Mode  ⇒  Duotone.
3. In the Duotone dialog box, select Duotone from the Type drop-down
list.
Your choices range from monotone (one-color) up to quadtone (four-
color). Black is assigned automatically as the first ink, but you can change
it, if you like.
4. To assign a second ink color, click the white swatch immediately

under the black swatch.
The Color Picker appears, as shown in Figure 2-4.
5. Click the Color Libraries button, and then select Pantone Solid
Coated as the library.
6. Now comes the fun part: Type (quickly!) the Pantone or PMS number
you want to access, and then click OK. If you type too slowly, the
incorrect number will appear.
There’s no text field for you to enter the number, so don’t look for one.
Just type the number while the Color Libraries dialog box is open.
Try entering 300 to select PMS 300. You can already see that you’ve
created a tone curve.
7. Click the Curve button to the left of the ink color to further tweak the
colors.
8. Click and drag the curve to adjust the black in the shadow areas,
perhaps to bring down the color overall. Then experiment with the
results.
9. (Optional) If you like your duotone settings, store them by clicking
the small Preset Options button to the right of the Preset drop-down
list, as shown in Figure 2-5. Type a name into the Name text box,
browse to a location on your computer, and then click Save.
 You can also use one of the presets that Adobe provides. Do this
by selecting an option from the Presets drop-down menu at the top of the
Duotone dialog box.
Click the Preset Options button to find your saved presets.
Duotone images must be saved in the Photoshop Encapsulated PostScript
(EPS) format in order to support the spot colors. If you choose another
format, you risk the possibility of converting colors into a build of CMYK
(Cyan, Magenta, Yellow, and Black).
10. Click OK when you’re finished.

FIGURE 2-4: Click the white swatch to open the Color Picker dialog box.
FIGURE 2-5: Save your duotone by clicking the Preset Options button.
Index color
Typically you don’t edit your images in the Index color mode, but you
probably have saved a file in this mode. If you have ever saved a GIF file out
of Photoshop, you have experienced working with Indexed color firsthand.
Indexed Color mode (see Figure 2-6) uses a color lookup table (CLUT) to
create the image from a limited palette of colors.

FIGURE 2-6: Index color uses a limited number of colors to create an image.
A CLUT contains all colors that make up an image, like a box of crayons
used to create artwork. If you have a box of only eight crayons that are used
to color an image, you have a CLUT of only eight colors. Of course, your
image would look much better if you used the 64-count box of crayons with
the sharpener on the back, but those additional colors also increase the size of
the CLUT and the file size.
The highest number of colors that can be in Indexed Color mode is 256.
When saving web images, you often have to define a color table in order to
keep a file size small. We discuss saving files for the web in Chapter 9 of this
minibook.

 Choose Image  ⇒  Mode  ⇒  Color Table to see the color table making
up an image.
RGB
RGB (Red, Green, Blue) mode, shown in Figure 2-7, is the standard format
you work in if you import images from a digital camera or import images
from a copier or scanner. For complete access to Photoshop’s features, RGB
is the best color mode to work in. If you’re working on images for use on the
web, color copiers, desktop color printers, or onscreen presentations, stay in
RGB mode.
FIGURE 2-7: RGB creates the image from red, green, and blue.
 If you’re having an image printed on a press (for example, if you’re
having it professionally printed), it must be separated. Don’t convert

images to CMYK mode until you’ve finished the color correction and
you know that your color settings are accurate. A good print service may
want the RGB file so that it can complete an accurate conversion.
CMYK
CMYK (Cyan, Magenta, Yellow, Black) mode is used for final separations
for the press. Use a good magnifying glass to look closely at anything printed
in color, and you may see the CMYK colors that created it. A typical four-
color printing press has a plate for each color and runs the colors in the order
of cyan, magenta, yellow, and then black.
 Don’t take lightly the task of converting an image into this mode.
You need to make decisions when you convert an image to CMYK, such
as where to print the file and on which paper stock, so that the resulting
image is the best it can be. Talk to your print provider for specifications
that are important when converting to CMYK mode.
LAB color
The LAB (Lightness, A channel, and B channel) color mode is used by many
high-end color professionals because of its wide color range. Using LAB, you
can make adjustments to luminosity (lightness) without affecting color. In this
mode, you can select and change an L (lightness or luminosity) channel
without affecting the A channel (green and red) and the B channel (blue and
yellow).
LAB mode is also good to use if you’re in a color-managed environment and
want to easily move from one color system to another with no loss of color.
 Some professionals prefer to sharpen images in LAB mode because
they can select just the Lightness channel and choose Filter  ⇒  Sharpen  
⇒  Unsharp Mask to sharpen only the gray matter of the image, leaving
the color noise-free.
Multichannel

Multichannel is used for many things; you can end up in this mode and not
know how you got there. Deleting a channel from an RGB, a CMYK, or a
LAB image automatically converts the image to Multichannel mode. This
mode supports multiple spot colors.
Bit depth
You have more functionality in 16-bit and even 32-bit mode. Depending on
your needs, however, you may spend most of your time in 8-bit mode, which
is more than likely all you need.
Bit depth, or pixel depth or color depth, measures how much color
information is available to display or print each pixel in an image. Greater bit
depth means more available colors and more accurate color representation in
the digital image. In Photoshop, this increase in accuracy also limits some
available features, so don’t use it unless you have a specific request or need
for it.
To use 16-bit or 32-bit color mode, you also must have a source to provide
you with that information, such as a scanner or camera that offers a choice to
scan in either mode.

Chapter 3
Making Selective Changes
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Discovering the selection tools
 Painting selections the easy way
 Refining your selections
 Keeping selections for later use
 Using the Vanishing Point feature
Photoshop is well known for its capability to create compositions and for its
retouching capabilities. What you don’t want to see in a finished product is
obvious retouching or compositions that look contrived. (The exception is if
you intend an image to be humorous, such as putting baby Joey’s head on
Daddy’s body.)
This is when a solid knowledge of the selection tools pays off. In this chapter,
you try out several selection methods and see how to use the available tools
to make images look as though you haven’t retouched or edited them. Even if
you’re an experienced Photoshop user, this chapter provides a plethora of tips
and tricks that can save you time and help make your images look absolutely
convincing.
Getting to Know the Selection Tools
You create selections by using selection tools. Think of selections as windows
in which you can make changes to pixels. Areas not selected are masked,
which means that they’re unaffected by changes, much like when you tape
window and door frames before painting the walls. In this section, we briefly
describe the selection tools and show you how to use them. You must be
familiar with these tools in order to do anything in Photoshop.

 As with all Photoshop tools, the Options bar (viewed across the top
of the Photoshop window) changes when you choose different selection
tools. The keyboard commands you read about in this section exist on
the tool Options bar and appear as buttons across the top.
 If you move a selection with the Move tool, pixels move as you drag,
leaving a blank spot in the image. To clone a selection (to copy and move the
selection at the same time), Alt+drag (Windows) or Option+drag (Mac) the
selection with the Move tool.
The Marquee tool
 The Marquee tool is the main selection tool; by that, we mean that
you use it most often for creating selections. The exception, of course, is
when a special situation calls for a special tool — the Lasso, Magic Wand,
Quick Selection, or Refine Radius tool (located in the Refine Edge dialog
box). Throughout this section, we describe creating (and then deselecting) an
active selection area; we also provide you with tips for working with
selections.
The Marquee tool includes the Rectangular Marquee (for creating rectangular
selections), Elliptical Marquee (for creating round or elliptical selections),
and Single Row Marquee or Single Column Marquee tools (for creating a
selection of a single row or column of pixels). You can access these other
Marquee tools by holding down the default Rectangle Marquee tool in the
Tools panel.
To create a selection, select one of the Marquee tools (remember that you can
press M to do this), and then drag anywhere on your image. When you
release the mouse button, you create an active selection area. When you’re
working on an active selection area, whichever effects you choose are applied
to the whole selection.
To deselect an area, you have three choices:
Choose Select  ⇒  Deselect.

Press Ctrl+D (Windows) or ⌘  +D (Mac).
While using a selection tool, click outside the selection area.
Creating rectangular and elliptical selections
How you make a selection is important because it determines how realistic
your edits appear on the image. You can use the following tips and tricks
when creating both rectangular and elliptical selections:
Add to a selection by holding down the Shift key; drag to create a second
selection that intersects the original selection (see the left image in Figure
3-1). The two selections become one big selection.
Delete from an existing selection by holding down the Alt (Windows) or
Option (Mac) key, and then dragging to create a second selection that
intersects the original selection where you want to take away from the
original selection (shown on the right in Figure 3-1).
Constrain a rectangle or an ellipse to a square or circle by Shift+dragging;
make sure that you release the mouse button before you release the Shift
key. Holding down the Shift key makes a square or circle only when there
are no other selections. (Otherwise, it adds to the selection.)
Make the selection from the center by Alt+dragging (Windows) or
Option+dragging (Mac); make sure that you release the mouse button
before releasing the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key.
Create a square or circle from the center outward by Alt+Shift+dragging
(Windows) or Option+Shift+dragging (Mac). Again, make sure that you
always release the mouse button before releasing the modifier keys.
When making a selection, hold down the spacebar before releasing the
mouse button to drag the selection to another location.

FIGURE 3-1: You can add to a selection by holding down the Shift key.
Setting a fixed size
If you’ve created an effect that you particularly like — say, changing a block
of color in your image — and you want to apply it multiple times throughout,
you can do so. To make the same selection multiple times, follow these steps:
1. With the Marquee tool selected, select Fixed Size from the Style drop-
down list on the Options bar.
You can also select Fixed Ratio from the Style drop-down list to create a
proportionally correct selection not fixed to an exact size.
2. On the Options bar, type the Width and Height values into the
appropriate text fields.
You can change ruler increments by choosing Edit  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  Units
& Rulers (Windows) or Photoshop  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  Units & Rulers
(Mac).
3. Click the image.
A selection sized to your values appears.
4. With the selection tool, drag the selection to the location you want
selected.
 Shift+drag a selection to keep it aligned to a 45-degree or 90-degree
angle.
Making floating and nonfloating selections
When you’re using a selection tool, such as the Marquee tool, your selections
are floating by default, which means that you can drag them to another
location without affecting the underlying pixels. You know that your selection
is floating by the little rectangle that appears on the cursor. (See the left image
in Figure 3-2.)

FIGURE 3-2: The Float icon is used on the left, and the Move icon is used on the right.
If you want to, however, you can move the underlying pixels. Using the
selection tool of your choice, just hold down the Ctrl (Windows) or ⌘   (Mac)
key to temporarily access the Move tool; the cursor changes to a pointer with
scissors, denoting that your selection is nonfloating. Now, when you drag, the
pixel data comes with the selection (as shown on the right in Figure 3-2).
 Hold down Alt+Ctrl (Windows) or Option+⌘   (Mac) while using a
selection tool and drag to clone (copy) pixels from one location to
another. Add the Shift key, and the cloned copy is constrained to a
straight, 45-degree, or 90-degree angle.
The Lasso tool
 Use the Lasso tool for freeform selections (selections of an irregular
shape). To use the Lasso tool, click and drag to create a path surrounding the
area that you want to select. Be careful! If you don’t return to the starting
point to close the selection before you release the mouse button, Photoshop
completes the path by finding the most direct route back to your starting
point.
 As with the Marquee tool, you can press the Shift key to add to a

lasso selection and press the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key to
delete from a lasso selection.
Hold down the Lasso tool to show the hidden Lasso tools:
Polygonal Lasso tool: Click a starting point, and then click and release
from point to point until you come back to close the selection.
Magnetic Lasso tool: Click to create a starting point, and then hover the
cursor near an edge in your image. The Magnetic Lasso tool is
magnetically attracted to edges; as you move the cursor near an edge, the
Magnetic Lasso tool creates a selection along that edge. Click to manually
set points in the selection; when you return to the starting point, click to
close the selection.
You may find that the Polygonal Lasso and the Magnetic Lasso tools make
less-than-ideal selections. Take a look at the later section “Painting a selection
with the Quick Mask tool” for tips on making finer selections.
The Quick Selection tool
 The Quick Selection tool lets you quickly “paint” a selection with a
round brush tip of adjustable size. Click and drag, and then watch as the
selection expands outward and automatically follows defined edges in the
image. A Refine Edge command lets you improve the quality of the selection
edges and visualize the selection in different ways for easy editing.
Follow these steps to find out how you can take advantage of this tool:
1. Open a file that requires a selection.
If you downloaded the DummiesCCFiles, as noted in Chapter 1 of this
minibook, you can use the file named Model01 in the Book03_Photoshop
folder.
2. Select the Quick Selection tool.
3. Position the cursor over the area you want to select. Notice the brush
size displayed with the cursor; click and drag to start painting the
selection.

 You can adjust the size of the painting selection by pressing the
left bracket key ([) to make the brush size smaller or the right bracket key
(]) to make the brush size larger.
By using the Add to Selection or Subtract from Selection buttons on the
Options bar, you can paint more of the selection or deselect active areas.
(See Figure 3-3.)
FIGURE 3-3: Use the Quick Selection tool to paint your selection.
If you would rather use keyboard shortcuts to add or delete to the selection,
you can hold down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key to delete from a
selection. As a default, you do not have to hold down any key to add to a
selection. If adding to the selection is not working, your default Add to
Selection tool might have been switched, as pointed out in Figure 3-4. Click
on the Center selection button in order to turn Add to Selection back on, or
simply hold down the Shift key and paint to add additional content to your
selection.

FIGURE 3-4: When the Quick Selection tool is active, you have additional selection options
available in the control panel.
The Quick Selection tool does not make a perfect selection, but it provides a
great start for even the most difficult selections. Keep reading to see how you
can take your selection even further with the Select and Mask feature in
Photoshop.
The Magic Wand tool
 The Magic Wand tool is particularly helpful when you’re working on
an image of high contrast or with a limited number of colors. This tool selects
individual pixels of similar shades and colors. Select the Magic Wand tool,
click anywhere on an image, and hope for the best — the Magic Wand tool
isn’t magic. You decide how successful this tool is. What we mean is that you
control how closely matched each pixel must be in order for the Magic Wand
tool to include it in the selection. You do so by setting the tolerance level on
the Options bar.
When you select the Magic Wand tool, a Tolerance text field appears on the
Options bar. As a default, the tolerance is set to 32. When you click with a
setting of 32, the Magic Wand tool selects all pixels within 32 shades (steps)
of the color you clicked. If it didn’t select as much as you want, increase the
value in the Tolerance text field (all the way up to 255). The number you
enter varies with each individual selection. If you’re selecting white napkins
on an off-white tablecloth, for example, you can set the number as low as 5 so
that the selection doesn’t leak into other areas. For colored fabric with lots of
tonal values, on the other hand, you might increase the tolerance to 150.
 Don’t fret if you miss the entire selection when using the Magic
Wand tool. Hold down the Shift key and click in the missed areas. If the

tool selects too much, choose Edit  ⇒  Undo (step backward) or press
Ctrl+Z (Windows) or ⌘  +Z (Mac), reduce the value in the Tolerance
text field, and try again.
Painting a selection with the Quick Mask tool
If you have fuzzy selections (fur, hair, or leaves, for example) or you’re
having difficulty using the selection tools, the Quick Mask tool can be a huge
help because it enables you to paint your selection uniformly in one fell
swoop. If you want to follow along in this section, you can open the image
named duck that is located in the Book03_Photoshop folder in the sample
files that have been provided for you.
 To enter Quick Mask mode, create a selection, and then press Q.
(Pressing Q again exits you from Quick Mask mode.) You can also click the
Quick Mask button at the bottom of the Tools panel. If you have a printing
background, you’ll notice that the Quick Mask mode, set at its default color
(red), resembles something that you may want to forget: rubylith and
amberlith. (Remember slicing up those lovely films with X-Acto blades
before computer masking came along?) In Quick Mask mode, Photoshop
shows your image as it appears through the mask. The clear part is selected;
what’s covered in the mask isn’t selected.
 Change the default red color of the mask by double-clicking the Edit
in Quick Mask Mode button (at the bottom of the Tools panel). The
tooltip says Edit in Standard Mode if you’re already in Quick Mask
mode. This opens the Quick Mask Options dialog box, shown in Figure
3-5.

FIGURE 3-5: Change the color of the Quick Mask.
To create and implement a quick mask, follow these steps:
1. Use the Quick Selection tool or another selection tool to create a
selection before you enter the Quick Mask mode. This gives you a
kickstart into making a much better mask.
In the example of the duck image, the Quick Selection tool was selected
and the duck was painted with the tool. The result is shown in Figure 3-6.
2. Press Q to enter Quick Mask mode.
3. Press D to change the foreground and background color boxes to the
default colors of black and white.
4. 
 Select the Brush tool and start painting with black in the clear
area of the image in Quick Mask mode, as shown in Figure 3-6.
It doesn’t have to be pretty; just get a stroke or two in there.
5. Press Q to return to Selection mode.
You’re now out of Quick Mask mode. Notice that where you painted with
black (it turned red in Quick Mask mode), the pixels are no longer
selected, as shown in Figure 3-7.

6. Press Q again to reenter Quick Mask mode, and then press X.
Pressing X switches the foreground and background colors, giving you
white in the foreground and black in the background.
7. With the Brush tool, paint several white strokes in the red mask area.
If you are working on the duck image, paint over your red lines that
you created, and paint over the red eye to make sure that it is
selected.
The white strokes turn clear in Quick Mask mode.
8. Press Q to return to Selection mode.
The area you painted white in Quick Mask mode is now selected.
FIGURE 3-6: Start with a selection and then press Q.

FIGURE 3-7: Painting with black in the Quick Mask mode masks out the area and deselects it.
When you’re in Quick Mask mode, you can paint white over areas you want
selected and black over areas you don’t want selected. When painting in
Quick Mask mode, increase the brush size by pressing the ] key. Decrease the
brush size by pressing the [ key.
In Selection mode, your selection seems to have a hard edge; you can soften
those hard edges by using a softer brush in Quick Mask mode. To make a
brush softer, press Shift+[. To make a brush harder, press Shift+].
Because Quick Mask mode makes selections based on the mask’s values, you
can create a mask by selecting the Gradient tool and dragging it across the
image in Quick Mask mode. When you exit Quick Mask mode, it looks as
though there’s a straight-line selection, but the selection transitions the same
as your gradient did. Choose any filter from the Filters menu and notice how
the filter transitions into the untouched part of the image to which you applied
the gradient.
If you’re working in Quick Mask mode, choose Window  ⇒  Channels to see
that what you’re working on is a temporary alpha channel. See the later
section “Saving Selections” for more about alpha channels.

Manipulating Selections with Refine
Selection
After you master creating selections, you’ll find that working with the
selections — painting, transforming, and feathering them — can be easy and
fun.
Transforming selections
Don’t deselect and start over again if you can just nudge or resize a selection.
You can scale, rotate, and even distort an existing selection. You can try this
feature with the image named flatpanel that is located in the
Book03_Photoshop folder.
Follow these steps to transform a selection:
1. Create a selection, and then choose Select  ⇒  Transform Selection.
You can use the bounding box to resize and rotate your selection:
Drag the handles to make the selection larger or smaller. Drag a
corner handle to adjust width and height simultaneously.
Shift+drag a corner handle to size proportionally.
Position the cursor outside the bounding box to see the Rotate
icon; drag when it appears to rotate the selection. Shift+drag to
constrain to straight, 45-degree, or 90-degree angles.
Ctrl+drag (Windows) or ⌘  +drag (Mac) a corner point to distort
the selection, as shown in Figure 3-8.
2. Press Enter or Return or double-click in the center of the selection
area to confirm the transformation; press Esc to release the
transformation and return to the original selection.

FIGURE 3-8: Distort, resize, and rotate a selection with the Transform Selection feature.
Feathering
Knowing how to retouch an image means little if you don’t know how to
make the retouching discreet. If you boost the color using curves to the
CEO’s face, do you want it to look like a pancake has been attached to his
cheek? Of course not — that isn’t discreet (or wise). If you feather a selection
(blur its edges) instead, you create a natural-looking transition between the
selection and the background of the image, as you see in Figure 3-9.

FIGURE 3-9: No feathering applied to the selection (top); feathering applied to the selection
(bottom).
To feather a selection, follow these steps:
1. Create a selection.

Use any selection technique that you like. You could make a quick
selection with the Rectangular or Elliptical Marquee tools, or create a
custom selection with the Lasso or Quick Selection tool.
2. When you have any selection tool active, the Select and Mask button
becomes available in the Options across the top of the Photoshop
work area. Click the Select and Mask button.
You are then entered into the Select and Mask workspace. This dialog box
on the right provides you with a selection preview option and with many
settings that can improve your selection; for right now, however, just
focus on feathering.
3. In the Properties panel, click on the View option and change it to
View on Layers, as shown in Figure 3-10.
This allows you to see the image and any transparency that will be
applied when you confirm the mask that you are refining.
4. In the Global Refinements section of the Properties panel, click and
drag the slider for Feather to the right until you see the right amount
of feathering, or vignetting, for your image, as in Figure 3-11.
 The results of the feathering depend on the resolution of the
image. A feather of 20 pixels in a 72 ppi (pixels per inch) image is a much
larger area than a feather of 20 pixels in a 300 ppi image. Typical amounts
for a nice vignette on an edge of an image are 20 to 50 pixels. Experiment
with images to find what works best for you.
5. There are actually two directions that you can go after you have
determined the right amount of feathering:
Leave the rest of the settings at their default and click OK. This
enables you to use the feathered selection to apply subtle changes
in the image, such as a curve change to lighten or darken an image,
as you see in Figure 3-12.
This feathering effect creates a nice, soft edge to your image, but
it’s also useful when retouching images. If you want to try the
change shown in Figure 3-12, follow these steps: a.) Make sure
that your feathered selection is still active; if it isn’t, try Select  ⇒  

Reselect; b.) choose Image  ⇒  Adjustments  ⇒  Curves; c.) click in
the center of the curve to add an anchor point and drag up to
lighten the image; this lightens the midtones of the image.
Notice how the lightening fades out so that the correction has no
definite edge. You can have more fun like this in Chapter 6 of this
minibook, in which we cover color correction.
Choose Layer Mask in the Output To drop-down list of the Select
and Mask workspace, and then click OK. This option keeps only
the feathered selection, making the area outside your selection
transparent, as you see in Figure 3-13.
When you do this, a layer mask is created, which you can see in
Window  ⇒  Layers. Hold the Shift key and click the thumbnail of
that mask in the Layers panel to turn it off and on.
FIGURE 3-10: You can change the view of how the image appears in the preview window.

FIGURE 3-11: Use the Refine Edge feature to preview your feather amount.
FIGURE 3-12: A curve correction was applied to make this section lighter.

FIGURE 3-13: The selection used for a mask.
Tweaking the edges of a selection in the Select and
Mask workspace
You can also use the Select and Mask feature to create more difficult
selections. In this next section, you review the capabilities of the Select and
Mask feature. If you like, you can use the sample image named model for this
example.
Follow these steps:
1. Make a selection.
Painting your selection with the Quick Selection tool is an easy way to get
started.
2. With any selection tool active, click the Select and Mask button on
the Options bar at the top of the Photoshop window.
You are now entered into the Select and Mask workspace.
Select an appropriate preview method
You can choose a preview method by selecting the View drop-down list at the
top of the Properties panel. This preview option helps you to better see the
effects of the changes you are making in this dialog box.
This list describes the other selections you can choose from the View drop-
down list of the Refine Edge dialog box:
Onion Skin: Produces a preview similar to what you might see if you
were looking through onion skin paper and similar to an animation-style
onion skin scheme.
Marching Ants: Shows the marquee selection with no image masked.
Overlay: Shows the default, slightly transparent mask. It’s typically red
unless you have changed the mask color.
On Black: Reveals black around the masked area.
On White: Reveals white around the masked area.
Black and White: Reveals the masked area as black and the nonmasked
area as white. This option is helpful if you want to see only the mask and

not the image area.
On Layers: Bound to be the most popular view if you’re creating
composites. From this view, you can see the layers and how they’re
affected by your selection.
 You can cycle through views by pressing F or disable the view by
pressing X.
For this example, you can choose the On Layers view.
Making adjustments with Edge Detection
The Edge Detection section of the Properties panel offers you the opportunity
to make refinements to the selection edge. To see it in action, follow these
steps:
1. Select the Smart Radius checkbox, as shown in Figure 3-14.
The Smart Radius feature automatically adjusts the radius for hard and
soft edges found in the border region.
2. Increase the radius by dragging the slider to the right.
The Radius slider lets you precisely adjust the border area in which edge
refinement occurs. Depending on the content, you will increase or
decrease the radius.
3. If you’re interested in seeing the radius, select the Show Edge
checkbox in the upper-right corner of the Select and Mask
workspace.

FIGURE 3-14: Refining the edge of a selection.
Using the Refine Radius tool
To further improve the selection, click the Refine Radius tool, shown in
Figure 3-15. By pressing either the right (]) or left bracket ([) key, you can
increase or decrease the size of the Refine Radius tool and edit your edge
selection by painting the edge of it. If your results are a little too drastic, hold
down the Alt or Option key while painting over the area with the Refine
Radius tool again. This technique is especially helpful for creating selections
of hair or fur.

FIGURE 3-15: Use the Refine Radius tool to make difficult selections, like fur, easier to create.
Making additional refinements
But wait — there’s more! You can find additional refinements in the Adjust
Edge section of the Properties panel in the Select and Mask workspace:
Smooth: Reduces irregular areas in the selection boundary
Feather: Creates a soft-edged transition between the selection and its
surrounding pixels
Contrast: Sharpens selection edges and removes fuzzy artifacts
Shift Edge: Contracts or expands to shrink or enlarge the selection
boundary
Selecting color decontamination
Color decontamination can create unwanted artifacts, and when this option is
selected, the output option is set to create a new layer, which helps avoid
overwriting the original color pixels.
Choosing output settings
As discussed earlier in this chapter, you can choose how you want selections
implemented: only selection edges, a new layer, or a layer mask, for example.

If you’re like most professionals, you want to make sure not to affect the
original imagery unless you’re certain that you have the selection nailed
down.
Here are your output options on the Output To drop-down list:
Selection: The typical selection of a dashed selection, referred to as
marching ants
Layer Mask: Creates a mask on the active layer
New Layer: Duplicates the active layer and applies the refined selection
to the transparency of the layer
New Layer with Mask: Duplicates the active layer and uses the refined
selection or mask as the layer mask
New Document: The same as the New Layer option but creates the new
layer in a new document
New Document with Layer Mask: The same as the New Layer with
Mask option but creates the new layer in a new document
If you want to play it safe, select Layer Mask from the Output To drop-down
list. This option offers you the opportunity to edit the layer mask, using the
painting tools just as you did with the Quick Mask tool, or to turn off the
mask (by Shift-clicking the mask in the Layers panel). Read more about how
to work with layer masks in Chapter 8 of this minibook.
 If you worked hard to make the perfect selection, don’t forget to
select the Remember Settings checkbox so that your settings apply the
next time you open the Refine Edge dialog box.
Saving Selections
The term alpha channel sounds complicated, but it’s simply a saved selection.
Depending on the mode you’re in, you already have several channels to
contend with. A selection is just an extra channel that you can call on at any
time.

To create an alpha channel, follow these steps:
1. Create a selection that you want to save.
2. Choose Select  ⇒  Save Selection.
3. Name the selection and click OK.
An additional named channel that contains your selection appears in the
Channels panel.
To load a saved selection, follow these steps:
1. Choose Select  ⇒  Load Selection.
The Load Selection dialog box appears.
2. Select a named channel from the Channel drop-down list.
If you have an active selection and then choose to load a selection, you
have additional options. With an active selection, you can select one of
the following options:
New Selection: Eliminate the existing selection and create a new
selection based on the channel you select.
Add to Selection: Add the channel to the existing selection.
Subtract from Selection: Subtract the channel from the existing
selection.
Intersect with Selection: Intersect the channel with the existing
selection.
3. Click OK.
 Other Adobe applications, such as InDesign, Illustrator, Premiere,
and After Effects, also recognize alpha channels.
Preserving Corrective Perspective with
the Vanishing Point Feature

The incredible Vanishing Point feature lets you preserve correct perspective
in edits of images that contain perspective planes, such as the sides of a
building. You can do much with this feature, and we provide you with a
simple introduction. Try experimenting with multiple planes and copying and
pasting items into the Vanishing Point window for even more effects. Follow
these steps:
1. Open a file that you want to apply a perspective filter to.
If you don’t have an appropriate image handy, you can find one at in the
Book03_Photoshop folder. For this example, the
vanishing_point_exercise image could work well.
2. Create a new, blank layer by clicking the Create a New Layer button
at the bottom of the Layers panel.
If you create a new layer every time you use Vanishing Point, the results
appear on a separate layer, preserving your original image, because you
can delete the result of the vanishing point filter and still retain the
original layer.
3. Choose Filter  ⇒  Vanishing Point.
A separate Vanishing Point window appears. If you see an error message
about an existing plane, click OK.
If you’re using a sample file from Photoshop, it will have a perspective
plane already created for you. To help you understand this feature better,
delete the existing plane by pressing the Delete or Backspace key.
4. 
 Select the Create Plane tool and define the four corner nodes of
the plane surface. In Figure 3-16, the plane is built on the missing
stone wall on the left side of the doorway. If necessary, press Ctrl+–
(Windows) or ⌘  +– (Mac) to zoom back to see the entire image.
 Try to use objects in the image — for example, parts of the
existing wall — to help create the plane.
After the four corner nodes of the plane are created, the tool automatically
is switched to the Edit Plane tool.

5. Select and drag the corner nodes to make an accurate plane.
The plane grid should appear blue, not yellow or red, if it’s accurate.
After creating the plane, you can move, scale, or reshape the plane. Keep
in mind that your results depend on how accurately the plane lines up
with the perspective of the image.
 You can use your first Vanishing Point session to simply create
perspective planes and then click OK. The planes appear in subsequent
Vanishing Point sessions when you choose Filter  ⇒  Vanishing Point.
Saving perspective planes is especially useful if you plan to copy and
paste an image into Vanishing Point and need to have a readymade plane
to target.
6. Choose the Stamp tool in the Vanishing Point window and then select
On from the Heal drop-down list on the Options bar.
7. With the Stamp tool still selected, cross over part of the area or part
of the image you want to clone and Alt-click (Windows) or Option-
click (Mac) to define it as the source to be cloned.
In the image vanishing_point_exercise, the middle part of the stone wall
was Alt/Option+clicked on to set it as the source for the cloning.
8. Without clicking, move toward the back of the perspective plane (you
can even clone outside the plane), and then click and drag to
reproduce the cloned part of the image.
Notice in Figure 3-17 that it’s cloned as a smaller version, in the correct
perspective for its new location.
9. Start from Step 7 and clone any region of an image closer to the front
of the perspective pane.
The cloned region is now cloned as a larger version of itself.
You can use the Marquee tool options (Feather, Opacity, Heal, and Move
Mode) at any time, either before or after making the selection. When you
move the Marquee tool, the Stamp tool, or the Brush tool into a plane, the
bounding box is highlighted, indicating that the plane is active.
10. Click OK.

To preserve the perspective plane information in an image, save your
document in JPEG, PSD, or TIFF format.
FIGURE 3-16: Use objects in an image to build a perspective plane.

FIGURE 3-17: Cloning in perspective.

Chapter 4
Using the Photoshop Pen Tool
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Selecting the Pen tool for the task
 Using a path as a selection
 Creating curved paths
 Creating clipping paths
 Putting shape layers to work
The Pen tool is the ultimate method to make precise selections. You can also
use it to create vector shapes and clipping paths (silhouettes). In this chapter,
you see how to take advantage of this super multitasking tool. This chapter
also shows you how to apply paths made with the Pen tool to create
selections, shapes, and silhouettes using clipping paths.
 If you’re interested in fundamental practices when using the Pen tool,
check out Book 5, Chapter 4, where we cover the Pen tool in more
detail. Using that lesson helps you in Photoshop, too, because the Pen
tool works essentially the same way in both Illustrator and Photoshop.
We recommend that you use the Pen tool as much as you can to truly master
its capabilities. At first it may seem awkward, but it gets easier! Knowing
how to effectively use the Pen tool puts you a grade above the average
Photoshop user, and the quality of your selections will show it. Read Book 5
on Adobe Illustrator, Chapter 4 for tips and tricks on how to use the Pen tool.
It works very much the same in all the Adobe programs.
Selecting the Right Pen Tool for the

Task
Select the Pen tool from the Tools panel, and note the default mode setting of
the Pen tool on the left side of the Options bar. You can select the following
options from the Pick Tool Mode drop-down list, as you see in Figure 4-1:
Shape: Creates a new shape layer, a filled layer that contains the vector
path.
Path: Creates a path only; no layer is created.
Pixels: Creates pixels directly on the image. No editable path or layer is
created. This option may not be useful to new users, but some seasoned
users prefer it because it’s the only way to access the Line tool from
earlier versions.
FIGURE 4-1: Select the mode of the Pen tool from the Options bar.
Using a Path as a Selection
You can use the Pen tool to create precise selections that would be difficult to
create using other selection methods. The Pen tool produces clean edges that
print well and can be edited using the Direct Selection tool. Before using the
Pen tool, make sure that you select Path from the Pick Tool Mode drop-down
list on the Options bar.
To create a path as a selection (which is extremely helpful when you’re trying
to make a precise selection), follow these steps to create a simple straight line

path:
1. Open any file or create a new, blank file.
It is best to practice on an image that has a straight or angular item in it.
2. Select the Pen tool.
 Make sure that Path is selected from the Pick Tool Mode drop-
down list on the Options bar or else you’ll create a shape layer.
3. Click to place your first anchor point, and then click another location.
Notice that the anchor points are connected with a path.
4. Continue clicking around the object that you are selecting.
When you return to your original starting point, a closed circle appears,
indicating that you are closing this path, as you see in Figure 4-2.
5. Choose Window  ⇒  Paths.
In the Paths panel, you can create new paths and activate existing paths,
apply a stroke, or turn paths into selections by clicking the icons at the
bottom of the panel. (See Figure 4-3.)
6. Click and drag the Work Path down to the Create New Path icon at
the bottom of the Paths panel.
The path is now named Path 1 and is saved. You can also double-click to
rename the path if you like.
7. Click the Load Path as Selection icon.
The path is converted into a selection.

FIGURE 4-2: Using the Pen tool, click from one segment to another; close it at the end.
FIGURE 4-3: The Paths panel and its options.
 Use this quick and easy method for turning an existing path into a
selection: Ctrl-click (Windows) or ⌘  -click (Mac) the path thumbnail in
the Paths panel.

Creating Curved Paths
To create paths that are on a curve, you first need to understand how the
Bézier curve works. A Bézier curve in its most common form is a simple
cubic equation that can be used in any number of useful ways, but especially
when creating curves in a path. Originally developed by Pierre Bézier in the
1970s for CAD/CAM operations, it became the underpinnings of the entire
Adobe PostScript drawing model.
To get a better understanding of Bézier curves, work through this simple
exercise:
1. Open an image.
In this example, an image of an apple is used.
2. Click and drag the edge of the object that you are selecting. A
directional line appears. (This is not a path; it is just a directional line
determining the curve of your future path.) Drag along the edge of
the object and then release, as you see in Figure 4-4.
3. Move the cursor along the edge of the object that you want to select
and then click and drag again.
Pay attention to the directional lines and have them flow, either on the
shape or along the side of the shape. The path you want should fall into
place with just some minor tweaking.
4. Continue clicking and dragging to make the path, and then close the
shape.
Do not worry if the path is not perfect.
5. Choose the Direct Selection tool by holding down the Path Selection
tool, as you see in Figure 4-5.
Use this tool to adjust your path by clicking anchor points and directional
lines and repositioning them to provide you with a more accurate
selection, as you see in Figure 4-6.

FIGURE 4-4: Click and drag to make curved paths.
FIGURE 4-5: Select the hidden Direct Selection tool.

FIGURE 4-6: Edit your path with the Direct Selection tool.
Clipping Paths
If you want to create a beautiful silhouette that transfers well to other
applications as you see Figure 4-7, create a clipping path. A clipping path is
essentially a vector path that defines what part of the image is visible and
what part is transparent. Typically a path is created around an object that you
want to silhouette.
Keep in mind that you do not have to define a clipping path if you are using
your image in other Adobe applications, such as InDesign and Illustrator. A
clipping path is helpful if you are trying to keep an image transparent in apps
such as PowerPoint, Word, or various video-editing applications.

FIGURE 4-7: Clipping paths enable you to create silhouettes in other applications.
To create a clipping path, follow these steps:
1. Use the Pen tool to create a path around the image area that will
become the silhouette.
2. In the Paths panel, choose Save Path from the panel menu (click the
triangle in the upper-right corner of the panel), as shown in Figure 4-
8, and then name the path.
If Save Path is not visible, your path has already been saved; skip to Step
3.
3. From the same panel menu, choose Clipping Path.
4. In the Clipping Path dialog box, select your path from the drop-down
list, if it’s not already selected; click OK.
Leave the Flatness Device Pixels text field blank unless you need to
change it. The flatness value determines how many device pixels are used
to create your silhouette. The higher the amount, the fewer points are
created, thereby allowing for faster processing time. This speed comes at
a cost, though: If you set the flatness value too high, you may see (if you
look close) straight edges instead of curved edges.

5. Choose File  ⇒  Save As and, from the Format drop-down list, select
Photoshop EPS; in the EPS Options dialog box that appears, accept
the defaults and click OK.
If you see PostScript errors when printing, choose Clipping Path from the
panel menu and increase the value to 2 pixels in the Flatness Device
Pixels text field. Keep returning to this text field and increasing the value
until the file prints, or give up and try printing your document on another
printer.
 If you’re placing this file in other Adobe applications, such as
InDesign, you don’t need to save the file as EPS; you can leave it as a
Photoshop (.psd) file.
FIGURE 4-8: Convert your work path to a saved path.
Here’s an even faster method you can use to create a clipping path that you
can use in other Adobe applications, such as InDesign and Illustrator:

1. Create a path around the item you want to keep when you create the
clipping path.
Make sure that you’re working on a layer and not on the Background
layer. To convert the Background to a layer, hold down the Alt key
(Windows) or the Option key (Mac) and double-click the Background
layer. The Background layer is now Layer 0.
2. 
 In the Layers panel, click the Add Layer Mask button, and then
click the Add Layer Mask button again.
A layer vector mask is created, and everything outside the path becomes
transparent, as shown in Figure 4-9.
You can still edit the path by using the Direct Selection tool.
3. Save the file in the .psd format.
4. Choose File  ⇒  Place to put the image, with its clipping path included,
into other Adobe applications.
FIGURE 4-9: Creating a clipping path the easy way, with layers.
Using Shape Layers
When you start creating a path with the Pen tool, Photoshop creates a path.
You can also choose to make a vector shape or a fill (which essentially

creates pixeled, nonvector shapes and paths).
Shape layers can be very useful when the goal of your design is to seamlessly
integrate vector shapes and pixel data. A shape layer can contain vector
shapes that you can then modify with the same features of any other layer.
You can adjust the opacity of the shape layer, change the blending mode, and
even apply layer effects to add drop shadows and dimension. Find out how to
do this in Chapter 8 of this minibook.
Create a shape layer with any of these methods:
 Create a shape with the Pen tool. With the Pen tool, you can
create interesting custom shapes and even store them for future use. We
show you how in the following section.
Use a Vector Shape tool, as shown in Figure 4-10. Vector shapes are
premade shapes (you can even create your own) that you can create by
dragging the image area with a shape tool.
Import a shape from Illustrator. Choose File  ⇒  Place and choose an .ai
file; when the Options window appears, choose to place the file as a shape
layer or a path. This action imports an Illustrator file as a shape layer or
path into Photoshop.

FIGURE 4-10: The Vector Shape tools.
In Photoshop CC, you can access the Vector shape and path tool options
directly from the Options bar, as shown in Figure 4-11, when either the Pen
tool or a vector shape tool is selected.
FIGURE 4-11: You can switch to the Vector shape tool with the Options bar.
Creating and using a custom shape
Perhaps you like the wave shape (see Figure 4-12) that’s been cropping up in
design pieces all over the place.

FIGURE 4-12: A custom wave shape integrated with an image in Photoshop.
You can create a wavy shape like that, too. With an image or blank document
open, just follow these steps:
1. Select the Pen tool, and then select Shape from the Pick Tool Mode
drop-down list on the Options bar.
Refer to Figure 4-11.
2. Click and drag with the Pen tool to create a wavy shape.
Don’t worry about the size of the shape. The shape is a vector, so you can
scale it up or down to whatever size you need without worrying about
making jagged edges. Just make sure to close the shape (that is, return to
the original point with the end point).
When you create the shape, it fills in with your foreground color. Try to
ignore it if you can; the next section shows you how to change the fill
color.
3. With the shape still selected, choose Edit  ⇒  Define Custom Shape,
name the shape wave, and click OK.
After you save your custom shape, you can re-create it at any time. If you
don’t like the shape, choose Window  ⇒  Layers to open the Layers panel,
and then drag the shape layer you just created to the Trash Can in the
lower-right corner of the panel. If you want to experiment with your
custom shape now, continue with these steps.
4. Click and hold the Rectangle tool to access the other hidden vector

tools; select the last tool, the Custom Shape tool.
When the Custom Shape tool is selected, a Shape drop-down list appears
on the Options bar at the top of the screen, as shown in Figure 4-13.
You have lots of custom shapes to choose from, including the one you’ve
just created. If you just saved a shape, yours is in the last square; you may
have to scroll down to select it.
5. Click to select your custom shape; click and drag in the image area to
create your shape.
You can make the shape any size you want.
6. To resize the shape, choose Edit  ⇒  Free Transform Path, press Ctrl+T
(Windows) or ⌘  +T (Mac), grab a bounding box handle, and drag.
Shift+drag a corner handle to keep the shape proportional as you resize it.
FIGURE 4-13: A Shape drop-down list appears on the Options bar.
 Because a shape is created on its own layer, you can experiment with
different levels of transparency and blending modes in the Layers panel.
Figure 4-14 shows shapes that are partially transparent.

FIGURE 4-14: Experiment with blending modes and opacity changes on shape layers.
Changing the color of the shape
When you create a shape with a shape tool, the shape takes the color of the
current foreground color. To change the color of an existing shape, choose
Window  ⇒  Properties. If you have the Shape layer selected, you will see that
the Properties panel offers you options for changing the fill and stroke of your
shape, as shown in Figure 4-15. The shape layer is considered a live shape
because you can make nondestructive changes on this shape, as long as it
remains a shape layer and is not flattened into the other parts of the image.

FIGURE 4-15: You can apply non-destructive changes to the fill, stroke, and more using the
Properties pane.
To change the fill, follow these steps:
1. Create a standard vector shape, such as with the Rectangle tool.
Note: There is some inconsistency with custom created shapes and the
Properties panel at the time of this writing. If you do not see the fill and
stroke features in the Properties panel, see the next set of instructions.
2. Make sure that you have the shape layer selected in the Layers panel.
3. Choose Window  ⇒  Properties.
4. Click Set Shape Fill Type, as shown in Figure 4-16. A color panel
appears from which you can select the type of fill you would like to
apply to your selected shape.
5. Choose whether you want No fill (clear), a Solid Color fill, a Gradient
fill, or a Pattern fill. For this example, use a Solid Color fill.
6. From the swatches, choose the color you wish to use. If you prefer to

use the Color Picker, click the icon to the right of Pattern fill in the
Properties panel.
FIGURE 4-16: Changing the fill in a shape.
Changing the color fill of a custom shape
If you create a custom shape, you may see only some Mask features in the
Properties panel. If that is the case, follow these steps in order to change the
color fill:
1. Select the custom shape layer in the Layers panel.
2. Double-click the thumbnail of the shape layer in the Layers panel, as
shown in Figure 4-17, or click the Fill color box on the Options bar
across the top of the Document window.
The Color Picker appears.

3. To select a new color, drag the Hue slider up or down or click in the
large color pane to select a color with the saturation and lightness you
want to use. Click OK when you’re done.
 With the Color Picker open, you can also move outside the Picker
dialog box and sample colors from other open images and objects.
FIGURE 4-17: Double-click on the layer thumbnail to choose a fill color from the Picker or from a
source outside of the Picker.
Changing the stroke on a live vector shape
In addition to changing the fill, you can also change the color, width, and
even type of stroke or border on your shape. As with the fill, the Properties
panel is used to make these changes, but if you have a custom shape you may
not have access to these same controls. The next set of steps take advantage
of effects in order to apply a stroke to a custom shape.
To apply a stroke to a live shape, follow these steps:
1. Select the shape layer to which you want to apply the stroke.
2. Choose Window  ⇒  Properties.
3. Select Set Shape Stroke Type and choose the type of stroke you wish
to apply, as shown in Figure 4-18.
4. Note that you can also change the line width, cap, stroke type, and

more. See Figure 4-19 to see some of the other stroke- and shape-
related properties you can set in the Properties panel.
FIGURE 4-18: Choose the type of stroke that you would like to apply.

FIGURE 4-19: Stroke- and shape-related properties in the Properties panel.
Creating a stroke on a custom shape
If you want to create a stroke on a custom shape, you may not have the same
properties available to you. In order to apply a stroke to a custom shape,
follow these steps:
1. Select the custom shape layer in the Layers panel.
2. Choose Stroke from the menu that opens when you click the Add a
Layer Style button at the bottom of the Layers panel, as shown in
Figure 4-20.
3. When the Layer Style dialog box appears, click the Color swatch to
choose a color, as shown in Figure 4-21, and then change any other
properties such as Size (width), Position (alignment), Fill Type, and

more. Click OK when you are finished making changes.
FIGURE 4-20: You can use Layer styles in order to add a stroke to a custom shape.

FIGURE 4-21: Use the Layer Styles feature in order to apply properties for the Stroke.
Removing a shape layer
Because the Pen tool now has multiple options, you may unexpectedly create
a shape layer. You can delete a shape layer by dragging the layer thumbnail to
the Trash Can in the lower-right corner of the Layers panel.
If you want to keep your path but throw away the shape layer, choose
Window  ⇒  Paths. Then drag the shape vector mask to the Create New Path
icon, shown in Figure 4-22, which creates a saved path. Now you can throw
away the shape layer.
FIGURE 4-22: Drag the shape path to the Create New Path icon.

Chapter 5
Creating Images in the Right
Resolution for Print and the Web
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Understanding resolution basics
 Adjusting file size
 Applying the Unsharp Mask filter to your image
Something as important as setting the right resolution for your images
deserves its own chapter. In this chapter, you discover the recommended
resolution for your images, which is dependent upon where the image is to be
used. Are you going to use the image in a high-quality annual report or are
you going to email it to your family? This is important information to know
right from the start. Combine the information about resolution along with the
steps to use the color and retouching tools we show you in Chapter 7 of this
minibook, and you should be ready to roll with great imagery.
Creating Images for Print
To begin, you need to know the existing resolution of your image. To see an
open image’s present size and resolution in Photoshop, choose Image  ⇒  
Image Size. The Image Size dialog box appears, as shown in Figure 5-1.

FIGURE 5-1: The Image Size dialog box.
 At the top of the Image Size dialog box, you see the pixel dimensions
noted.
The Width and Height text fields are in inches in the English default; you can
change the increments to pixels by selecting Pixels from the measurement
unit drop-down menu. The Width and Height text fields can be used for
onscreen resizing. By switching the measurement unit back to inches, you can
determine the size at which the image will print. The Resolution text field
determines the resolution of the printed image; a higher value means a
smaller (more pixels crammed in each inch), which typically produces a more
finely detailed printed image.
Before you decide on a resolution, you should understand what some of the
resolution jargon means:
ppi (pixels per inch): The resolution of an image — how Photoshop
measures resolution of images.
dpi (dots per inch): The resolution of an image when printed.
lpi (lines per inch): The varying dot pattern that printers and presses use
to create images. (See Figure 5-2.) This dot pattern is referred to as the
lines per inch, even though it represents rows of dots. The higher the lpi,

the finer the detail and the less dot pattern or line screen you see.
Dot gain: The spread of ink as it’s applied to paper. Certain types of
paper spread a dot of ink farther than others. For example, newsprint has a
high dot gain and typically prints at 85 lpi; a coated stock paper has a
lower dot gain and can be printed at 133–150 lpi and even higher.
FIGURE 5-2: The dot pattern used to print images is referred to as lpi (lines per inch).
Human eyes typically can’t detect a dot pattern in a printed image at 133 dpi
or higher.
 Deciding the resolution or dpi of an image requires backward
planning. If you want to create the best possible image, you should know
where it’ll print before deciding its resolution. Communicate with your
printer service if the image is going to press. If you’re sending an image

to a high-speed copier, you can estimate that it will handle 100 lpi; a
desktop printer handles 85 lpi to 100 lpi.
The resolution formula
When creating an image for print, keep this formula in mind:
2 × lpi = ppi (pixels per inch)
This formula means that if your image is going to press using 150 lpi, set
your image at 300 ppi. To save space, many people in production use 1.5 ×
lpi because it reduces the file size significantly and you get similar results;
you can decide which one works best for you.
Changing the resolution
Using the Image Size dialog box is only one way that you can control the
resolution in Photoshop. Even though you can increase the resolution, do so
sparingly and avoid it, if you can. The exception is when you have an image
that’s large in dimension size but low in resolution, like those you typically
get from a digital camera. You may have a top-of-the-line digital camera that
produces 72 ppi images, but at that resolution, the pictures are 28 x 21 inches
(or larger)!
To increase the resolution of an image without sacrificing quality, follow
these steps:
1. Choose Image  ⇒  Image Size.
The Image Size dialog box appears, as shown in Figure 5-3.
2. Deselect the Resample Image checkbox.
This way, Photoshop doesn’t add any pixels.
3. Enter a resolution in the Resolution text field.
Photoshop keeps the pixel size (the size of the image onscreen) the same,
but the document size (the size of the image when printed) decreases
when you enter a higher resolution, as you see in Figure 5-3.
4. If the image isn’t the size you need, select the Resample Image
checkbox and type the size in the Width and Height text fields.
It’s best to reduce the size of a bitmap image, such as a digital photo,

rather than increase it.
 You can also deselect the Resample Image checkbox and
essentially play a game of give-and-take to see what the resolution will be
when you enter the intended size of your printed image in the Width and
Height text fields.
Images can typically be scaled from 50 to 120 percent before looking
jagged. (To scale by a percentage, select Percent from the drop-down lists
beside the Width and Height text fields.) Keep these numbers in mind
when placing and resizing images in a page layout application such as
InDesign.
5. 
 Click OK when you’re finished; double-click the Zoom tool in
the Tools panel to see the image at its onscreen size.

FIGURE 5-3: The Image Size dialog box, before and after deselecting Resample and changing
the resolution.
 To increase the resolution without changing the image size, follow
these steps. (This situation isn’t perfect because pixels that don’t
presently exist are created by Photoshop and may not be totally accurate.
Photoshop tries to give you the best image, but you may see some loss of
detail.)
1. Choose Image  ⇒  Image Size.
2. When the Image Size dialog box appears, make sure that the

Resample Image checkbox is selected.
3. Enter the resolution you need in the Resolution text field, click OK,
and then double-click the Zoom tool to see the image at its actual size.
 Reset your Image Size dialog, or any dialog box in Photoshop by
holding down the Alt or Option button. The Cancel button changes to
Reset!
Determining the Resolution for Web
Images
Have you ever received an image via email and, after spending ten minutes
downloading it, discovered that the image is so huge that all you can see on
the monitor is your nephew’s left eye? Many people are under the
misconception that if an image is 72 dpi, it’s ready for onscreen presentation.
Actually, pixel dimension is all that matters for viewing images on the web;
this section helps you make sense of this concept.
Many people view web pages in their browser windows in an area of about
1024 x 768 pixels. You can use this figure as a basis for any images you
create for the web, whether the viewer is using a 14-inch or a 21-inch
monitor. (Remember that people who have large monitors set to high screen
resolutions don’t necessarily want a web page taking up the whole screen.) If
you’re creating images for a web page or to attach to an email message, you
may want to pick a standard size to design by, such as 600 x 400 pixels at 72
ppi.
To use the Image Size dialog box to determine the resolution and size for
onscreen images, follow these steps:
1. Have an image open and choose Image  ⇒  Image Size.
The Image Size dialog box appears.
2. To make the image occupy half the width of a typical browser
window, choose Pixels for the unit type in the Width drop-down list

and type 300 (half of 600) in the Width text field.
If a little chain link is visible to the right, the Constrain Proportions
checkbox is selected, and Photoshop automatically determines the height
from the width you entered.
3. Click OK and double-click the Zoom tool to see the image at its
actual onscreen size.
That’s it! Whether your image is 3,000 or 30 pixels wide doesn’t matter;
as long as you enter the correct pixel dimension, the image works
beautifully.
Applying the Unsharp Mask Filter to
an Image
When you resample an image in Photoshop, it can become blurry. A good
practice is to apply the Unsharp Mask filter. You can see the difference in
detail in the images shown in Figure 5-4. This feature sharpens the image
based on levels of contrast while keeping smooth the areas that have no
contrasting pixels. You have to set up this feature correctly to get good
results.
FIGURE 5-4: The image with (left) and without (right) unsharp masking applied.
Here’s the down-and-dirty method of using the Unsharp Mask filter:

1. Choose View  ⇒  100% or double-click the Zoom tool.
 When you’re using a filter, view your image at its actual size to
best see the effect.
2. Choose Filter  ⇒  Sharpen  ⇒  Unsharp Mask.
In the Unsharp Mask dialog box that appears, set these three options:
Amount: The Amount value ranges from 0 to 500. The amount you
choose has a lot to do with the subject matter. Sharpening a car or
appliance at 300 to 400 is fine, but if you do this to the CEO’s 75-
year-old wife, you may suffer an untimely death because every
wrinkle, mole, or hair will magically become more defined. If
you’re not sure which amount to use, start with 150 and play
around until you find an Amount value that looks good.
Radius: The Unsharp Mask filter creates a halo around the areas
that have enough contrast to be considered an edge. Typically,
leaving the amount between 1 and 2 is fine for print, but if you’re
creating a billboard or poster, increase the size.
Threshold: This option is the most important one in the Unsharp
Mask dialog box. The Threshold setting determines what should be
sharpened. If you leave it at zero, you see noise throughout the
image, much like the grain you see in high-speed film. Increase the
setting to 10, and it triggers the Unsharp Mask filter to apply the
sharpening only when the pixels are ten shades or more away from
each other. The amount of tolerance ranges from 1 to 255. Apply
too much and no sharpening appears; apply too little and the image
becomes grainy. A good number to start with is 10.
 To compare the original state of the image with the preview of the
Unsharp Mask filter’s effect in the Preview pane of the Unsharp Mask
dialog box, click and hold the image in the Preview pane; this shows the
original state of the image. When you release the mouse button, the
Unsharp Mask filter is previewed again.

3. When you’ve made your choice, click OK.
The image appears to have more detail.
Once in a while, stray colored pixels may appear after you apply the Unsharp
Mask filter. If you feel this is a problem with your image, choose Edit  ⇒  Fade
Unsharp Mask immediately after applying the Unsharp Mask filter. In the
Fade dialog box, select the Luminosity blend mode from the Mode drop-
down list and then click OK. This step applies the Unsharp Mask filter to the
grays in the image only, thereby eliminating the sharpening of colored pixels.
 You can also choose Filter  ⇒  Convert for Smart Filters before you
apply the Unsharp Mask filter. Smart filters let you undo all or some of
any filter, including sharpening filters you apply to a layer. Find out how
by reading Chapter 8 in this minibook.

Chapter 6
Creating a Good Image
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Understanding the histogram
 Getting ready to correct an image
 Making a good tone curve
 Editing adjustment layers
 Testing your printer
When discovering all the incredible things you can do in Photoshop, you can
easily forget the basics. Yes, you can create incredible compositions with
special effects, but if the people in your image look greenish, their alien skin
tone can detract from the final result. Make it part of your image-editing
process to create clean images before adding the artsy filters and complex
compositions. Color correction isn’t complicated, and by following the steps
in this chapter you can produce almost magical results. In this chapter, you
see how to use the values you read in the Info panel and use the Curves panel
to produce quality image corrections.
Reading a Histogram
Before making adjustments, look at the image’s histogram, which displays an
image’s tonal values, to evaluate whether the image has sufficient detail to
produce a high-quality image. In Photoshop CC, choose Window  ⇒  
Histogram to display the Histogram panel.
 The greater the range of values in the histogram, the greater the
detail. Poor images without much information can be difficult, if not

impossible, to correct. The Histogram panel also displays the overall
distribution of shadows, midtones, and highlights to help you determine
which tonal corrections are needed.
Figure 6-1 shows a good, full histogram that indicates a smooth transition
from one shade to another in the image. Figure 6-2 shows that when a
histogram is spread out and has gaps in it, the image is jumping too quickly
from one shade to another, producing a posterized effect. Posterization is an
effect that reduces tonal values to a limited amount, creating a more defined
range of values from one shade to another. It’s great if you want it but yucky
if you want a smooth tonal change from one shadow to another.
FIGURE 6-1: A histogram showing smooth transitions from one color to another.

FIGURE 6-2: A histogram showing a lack of smoothness in the gradation of color.
So how do you create a good histogram? If you’re scanning, make sure that
your scanner is set for the maximum number of colors. Scanning at 16 shades
of gray gives you 16 lines in your histogram — not good.
 If you have a bad histogram, we recommend that you rescan or
reshoot the image. If you have a good histogram to start with, keep it
that way by not messing around with multiple tone correction tools.
Most professionals use the Curves feature — and that’s it. Curves
(choose Image  ⇒  Adjustments  ⇒  Curves), if used properly, do all the
adjusting of levels (brightness and contrast) and color balance, all in one
step. You can read more about curves in the section “Creating a Good
Tone Curve,” later in this chapter.

Figure 6-3 shows what happens to a perfectly good histogram when someone
gets too zealous and uses the entire plethora of color correction controls in
Photoshop. Just because the controls are there doesn’t mean that you have to
use them.
FIGURE 6-3: Tonal information is broken up.
 If a Warning icon appears while you’re making adjustments, double-
click anywhere on the histogram to refresh the display.
Breaking into key types
Don’t panic if your histogram is smashed all the way to the left or right. The
bars of the histogram represent tonal values. You can break down the types of
images, based on their values, into three key types that are defined below:
High key: An extremely light-colored image, such as the image shown in
Figure 6-4. Information is pushed toward the right in the histogram. Color
correction has to be handled a little differently for these images to keep
the light appearance to them.
Low key: An extremely dark image, such as the one shown in Figure 6-5.
Information is pushed to the left in the histogram. This type of image is
difficult to scan on low-end scanners because the dark areas tend to blend

together with little definition.
Mid key: A typical image with a full range of shades, such as the image
shown in Figure 6-6. These images are the most common and easiest to
work with. In this chapter, we deal with images that are considered mid
key.
FIGURE 6-4: A high key image is a light image.

FIGURE 6-5: A low key image is a dark image.
FIGURE 6-6: A typical image with a full range of values is a mid key image.

Setting up the correction
To produce the best possible image, avoid correcting in the CMYK (Cyan,
Magenta, Yellow, Black) mode. If your images are typically in RGB (Red,
Green, Blue) or LAB mode (L for lightness, and A and B for the color-
opponent dimensions), keep them in that mode throughout the process.
Convert them to CMYK only when you’re finished manipulating the image.
 Don’t forget! If your end result will be a printed image, you can press
Ctrl+Y (Windows) or ⌘  +Y (Mac) to toggle on and off the CMYK
preview so that you can see what your image will look like in CMYK
mode without converting it.
Set up these items before starting any color correction:
1. Select the Eyedropper tool (the keyboard shortcut is I); on the
Options bar, select the 3 by 3 Average setting from the Sample Size
drop-down list.
The 3 by 3 Average setting gives you more accurate readings than the
Point Sample setting.
2. If the Histogram panel isn’t already visible, choose Window  ⇒  
Histogram.
3. If the Info panel isn’t already visible, choose Window  ⇒  Info to show
the Info panel so that you can check values.
4. Make sure that your color settings are correct.
If you’re not sure how to check or set up color settings, see Chapter 2 of
this minibook.
Creating a Good Tone Curve
A tone curve represents the density of an image. To produce the best image,
you must first find the highlight and shadow points in it. An image created in
less-than-perfect lighting conditions may be washed out or have odd color
casts. See Figure 6-7 for an example of an image with no set highlight and
shadow. Check out Figure 6-8 to see an image that went through the process

of setting a highlight and shadow.
FIGURE 6-7: The image is murky before defining a highlight and shadow.
FIGURE 6-8: The tonal values are opened after highlight and shadow have been set.

To make the process of creating a good tone curve more manageable, we’ve
broken the process into four parts:
Find the highlight and shadow.
Set the highlight and shadow values.
Adjust the midtone.
Find a neutral.
Even though each part has its own set of steps, you must complete all four
parts to accomplish the task of creating a good tone curve (unless you’re
working with grayscale images, in which case you can skip the neutral part).
In this example, an adjustment layer is used for the curve adjustments. The
benefit is that you can turn off the visibility of the adjustment later or double-
click the adjustment layer thumbnail to make ongoing edits without
destroying your image.
Finding the highlight and the shadow
In the noncomputer world, you’d spend a fair amount of time trying to locate
the lightest and darkest parts of an image. Fortunately, you can cheat in
Photoshop by using some features in the Curves panel. Here’s how to access
the panel:
1. With an image worthy of adjustment — one that isn’t perfect already
— choose Window  ⇒  Layer (if the Layers panel isn’t already open).
2. Click and hold the Create New Fill or Adjustment Layer button at
the bottom of the Layers panel and select Curves.
The Adjustments panel appears with the Curves panel active, as shown in
Figure 6-9.

FIGURE 6-9: Access the Curves panel with the Create New Fill or Adjustment Layer button.
Notice the grayed-out histogram behind the image in the Curves panel. The
histogram helps you determine where you need to adjust the image’s curve.

 If you’re correcting in RGB (as you should be), the tone curve may
be the opposite of what you expect. Instead of light to dark displaying as
you expect, RGB displays dark to light. Think about it: RGB is
generated with light, and no RGB means that there’s no light and you
therefore have black. If you turn on all RGB full force, you create white.
Try pointing three filtered lights — one red, one green, and one blue.
The three lights pointed in one direction create white.
If working with RGB confuses you, simply select Curves Display Options
from the panel menu in the upper-right corner of the Adjustments panel.
When the Curves Display Options dialog box appears, as shown in Figure 6-
10, select the Pigment/Ink % radio button and click OK.
FIGURE 6-10: View the curve using light or pigment.
Note that in the Curves panel, you see a Preset drop-down list that offers
quick fixes using standard curves for certain corrections. These settings are
great for quick fixes, but for the best image, create a custom curve.
The first thing you need to do in the Curves panel is determine the lightest

and darkest parts of the image — referred to as locating the highlight and
shadow:
1. Before starting the correction, click the Set Black Point eyedropper
once (labeled in Figure 6-11).
2. Hold down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key and click the
Shadow input slider (labeled in Figure 6-11).
If you did not change your Curve Display Options to display Pigment/Ink
%, your highlight and shadow sliders will be opposite of what appears in
Figure 6-11.
When you Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac), the clipping
preview turns on, revealing the darkest area of the image, as shown in
Figure 6-12.
If you don’t immediately see a dark area in the clipping preview, you can
drag the shadow input slider to the right while holding down the Alt key
or Option key. Note where the darkest area of the image appears.
3. Hold down the Shift key and click directly on the image in that dark
region.
This step drops a color sampler on the image that helps you reference that
point later.
4. Repeat Steps 1 through 3 with the Highlight input slider. Select the
Set White Point eyedropper (labeled in Figure 6-11) in the Curves
panel.
5. Hold down the Alt key or Option key and click the highlight input
slider.
Again, you can drag the slider toward the left if the lightest point doesn’t
immediately show up.
When you locate the lightest point, as indicated by the lightest point in the
clipping preview, you can Shift+click to drop a second color sampler, as
shown in Figure 6-13.

FIGURE 6-11: The critical tools on the Curves panel.

FIGURE 6-12: Alt or Option click on the Shadow Slider and then drag slightly to the right to see
the darkest part of the image.
FIGURE 6-13: You can Shift-click to drop a color sampler.
Setting the highlight and shadow values

After you determine the lightest and darkest points in an image, you can set
their values. Follow these steps:
1. To activate the eyedropper tools, click the Click and Drag button,
shown in Figure 6-14.
2. Double-click the Set White Point eyedropper, the white eyedropper
on the left side of the Curves panel.
When you double-click the Set White Point eyedropper, the Color Picker
dialog box appears.
3. Enter a generic value for the lightest point in your image: Type 5 in
the Cyan text box, type 3 in the Magenta text box, type 3 in the
Yellow text box, leave the Black text box at 0 (zero), and then click
OK.
The Black value helps to correct most images for print and online.
4. When you receive an alert message asking whether you want to save
the new target colors as defaults, click Yes.
5. With the Set White Point eyedropper still selected, click the color
sampler you dropped on the image, indicating the lightest point in the
image.
Now, set the shadow point.
6. Double-click the Set Black Point eyedropper.
The Color Picker dialog box appears.
7. Type 65 in the Cyan text box, type 53 in the Magenta text box, type 51
in the Yellow text box, type 95 into the Black text box, and then click
OK.
As with the highlight value, the Black value is a generic value that works
for most print and online images. Keep in mind that if you set your Color
Settings up correctly, you don’t have to change the Set Black Point value.
8. With the Set Black Point eyedropper still selected, click the color
sampler you dropped on the image, indicating the darkest point in the
image.

FIGURE 6-14: Click the Click and Drag button.
Adjusting the midtone
You may have heard the phrase, “open up the midtones,” which essentially
means to lighten the midtonal values of an image. In many cases, opening up
the midtones is necessary to add contrast and bring out detail in an image.

To adjust the midtones, follow these steps:
1. In the Curves panel, click the middle of the curve ramp to create an
anchor point; drag up slightly.
The image lightens. (If you’re in Pigment/Ink % mode, drag down to
lighten the image.) Move only a reasonable amount and be careful to
observe what’s happening in the Histogram panel (which you should
always have open when making color corrections).
Because you set highlight and shadow (see the preceding section) and are
now making a midtone correction, you see the bars in the histogram
spreading out.
2. To adjust the three-quarter tones (the shades around 75 percent),
click halfway between the bottom of the curve ramp and the midpoint
to set an anchor point.
Use the grid in the Curves panel to find it easily. (In Pigment/Ink %, the
three-quarter point is in the upper section of the color ramp.) Adjust the
three-quarter area of the tone curve up or down slightly to create contrast
in the image. Again, keep an eye on your histogram!
If you’re working on a grayscale image, the tonal correction is done.
If you’re working on a color image, keep the Curves panel open for the
final steps, which are outlined in the next section.
Finding a neutral
The last steps in creating a tone curve apply only if you’re working on a color
image. The key to understanding color is knowing that equal amounts of
color create gray. By positioning the mouse cursor over gray areas in an
image and reading the values in the Info panel, you can determine which
colors you need to adjust.
1. With the Curves panel open, position it so that you can see the Info
panel.
If the Info panel is buried under another panel or a dialog box, choose
Window  ⇒  Info to bring it to the front or undock it from its current
location.
2. Position the cursor over an image and, in the Info panel, look for the

RGB values in the upper-left section.
You see color values and then forward slashes and more color values. The
numbers before the slash indicate the values in the image before you
opened the Curves panel; the numbers after the slash show the values now
that you’ve made changes in the Curves panel. Pay attention to the values
after the slashes.
3. Position the cursor over something gray in your image.
It can be a shadow on a white shirt, a countertop, a road — anything that’s
a shade of gray. Look at the Info panel. If your image is perfectly color
balanced, the RGB values following the forward slashes should all be the
same.
4. If the color isn’t balanced, click the Set Gray Point eyedropper in the
Curves panel and click the neutral or gray area of the image.
The middle eyedropper (Set Gray Point) is a handy way of bringing the
location you click closer together in RGB values, thereby balancing the
colors.
Curves can be as complex or as simple as you make them. As you gain more
confidence in using them, you can check neutrals throughout an image to
ensure that all unwanted color casts are eliminated. You can even individually
adjust each color’s curve by selecting it from the Channel drop-down list in
the Curves panel.
When you’re finished with color correction, using the Unsharp Mask filter on
your image is a good idea. Chapter 5 of this minibook shows you how to use
this filter.
Editing an Adjustment Layer
You may make a curve adjustment only to discover that some areas of the
image are still too dark or too light. Because you used an adjustment layer,
you can turn off the correction or change it repeatedly with no degradation to
the quality of the image.
Here are the steps to take if you still have additional adjustments to make to
an image, such as lightening or darkening other parts of the image:

1. Select the area of the image that needs adjustments.
See Chapter 4 of this minibook for a refresher on how to make selections
in Photoshop.
2. Choose Select  ⇒  Modify  ⇒  Feather to soften the selection.
The Feather dialog box appears.
3. Enter a value into the Feather dialog box.
If you’re not sure what value will work best, enter 15 in the Feather
Radius text field and click OK.
 You can also click the Refine Edge button in the Options panel
(when you have a selection tool active) to preview the feather amount.
4. If the Layers panel isn’t visible, choose Windows  ⇒  Layers; click and
hold the Create New Fill or Adjustment Layer icon and select Curves.
5. In the Curves panel, click the middle of the curve ramp to create an
anchor point; drag up or down to lighten or darken the selected area.
Notice in the Layers panel (see Figure 6-15) that the adjustment layer,
Curves 2 by default, has a mask to the right of it. This mask was
automatically created from your selection. The selected area is white;
unselected areas are black.
6. With the adjustment layer selected in the Layers panel, use the Brush
tool to paint white to apply the correction to other areas of the image;
paint with black to exclude areas from the correction.
You can even change the opacity with the Brush tool in the Options bar at
the top to apply only some of the correction!

FIGURE 6-15: Paint on the adjustment layer mask.
Testing a Printer
If you go to all the trouble of making color corrections to images and you still
see printed images that look hot pink, it may not be your fault. Test your
printer by following these steps:
1. Create a neutral gray out of equal RGB values. (Double-click the Fill
Color swatch in the Tools panel.)
2. Create a shape, using neutral gray as the fill color.
For example, you can use the Ellipse tool to create a circle or oval.
3. Choose File  ⇒  Print and click OK to print the image from a color
printer.
If you’re seeing heavy color casts, adjust the printer; cleaning or replacing the
ink cartridge may fix the problem. Check out Chapter 9 of this minibook for
more about printing Photoshop files.

Chapter 7
Working with Painting and
Retouching Tools
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Working in the Swatches panel
 Getting to know foreground and background colors
 Introducing painting and retouching tools
 Using the Content-Aware feature
 Discovering blending modes
 Saving presets for tools
This chapter explains how to use the painting and retouching tools in
Photoshop. Have fun and be creative! Because Photoshop is pixel based, you
can create incredible imagery with the painting tools. Smooth gradations from
one color to the next, integrated with blending modes and transparency, can
lead from super-artsy to super-realistic effects. In this chapter, you discover
fundamental painting concepts, and also find out how to use tools to eliminate
wrinkles, blemishes, and scratches. Don’t you wish you could do that in real
life?
Using the Swatches Panel
Use the Swatches panel to store and retrieve frequently used colors. The
Swatches panel enables you to quickly select colors and gives you access to
many other color options. By using the panel menu, which is shown in Figure
7-1, you can select from a multitude of color schemes, such as Pantone or
web-safe color sets. These color systems are converted to the color mode in
which you’re working.

FIGURE 7-1: Click the panel menu to access additional color options.
To sample and store a color for later use, follow these steps:
1. To sample a color from an image, select the Eyedropper tool in the
Tools panel and click a color in the image.
Alternatively, you can use any of the paint tools (the Brush tool, for
example) and Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac).
The color you click becomes the foreground color.
2. If the Swatches panel isn’t already open, choose Window  ⇒  Swatches.
3. Store the color in the Swatches panel by clicking the New Swatch
button at the bottom of the Swatches panel.
Anytime you want to use that color again, simply click it in the Swatches
panel to make it the foreground color.
Choosing Foreground and

Background Colors
At the bottom of the Tools panel, you can find the foreground and
background color swatches. The foreground color is the color you apply
when using any of the painting tools. The background color is the color you
see if you erase or delete pixels from the image.
Choose a foreground or background color by clicking the swatch, which then
opens the Color Picker dialog box, shown in Figure 7-2. To use the Color
Picker, you can either enter values in the text fields on the right or slide the
hue slider.
FIGURE 7-2: Use the Color Picker or enter numeric values to select color in the color panel.
Pick the hue (color) you want to start with and then click in the color panel to
the left to choose the amount of light and saturation (grayness or brightness)
you want in the color. Select the Only Web Colors checkbox to choose one of
the 216 colors in the web-safe color palette. The hexadecimal value used in
HTML documents appears in the text field in the lower-right corner of the
Color Picker.

To quickly save a color, click the Add to Swatches button directly in the
Color Picker.
The Painting and Retouching Tools
Grouped together in the Tools panel are the tools used for painting and
retouching. The arrow in the lower-right area of a tool icon indicates that the
tool has more related hidden tools; simply click and hold the tool icon to see
additional painting and retouching tools, as shown in Figure 7-3. In this
chapter, we show you how to use the Brush, Clone Stamp, Eraser, Gradient,
Healing Brush, History Brush, Patch, Red Eye, and Spot Healing Brush tools.
You also discover ways to fill shapes with colors and patterns.

FIGURE 7-3: The painting and retouching tools have hidden tools available as well.
Changing the brush
As you click to select different painting tools, you can change the size and
diameter of the tool. You can do this by accessing the Brush menu (second
from the left) on the Options bar, as shown in Figure 7-4. Click the arrow to
open the Brushes Preset picker. You can use the Master Diameter slider to
make the brush size larger or smaller and to change the hardness of the brush.

FIGURE 7-4: The Brushes Preset picker.
 The hardness refers to the fuzziness of the edges; a softer brush is
more feathered and soft around the edges, whereas a harder edge is more

definite. (See Figure 7-5.)
FIGURE 7-5: The inside border was created with a brush set to a hardness of 100%. The outside
brush was set to a hardness of 0%.
 If you don’t feel like accessing the Brushes Preset picker every time
you want to make a change, press the right bracket (]) several times to
make the brush diameter larger or press the left bracket ([) to make the
brush diameter smaller. Press Shift+] to make the brush harder or Shift+[
to make the brush softer.
Choose Window  ⇒  Brush to see a list of brush presets, plus more brush
options you can use to create custom brushes. You can also choose other

brush libraries from the panel menu of the Brush Presets panel. When you
select an additional library, a dialog box appears, asking whether you want to
replace the current brushes with the brushes in the selected library. Click the
Append button to keep existing brushes and add the library to the list, or click
OK to replace existing brushes.
 Access the Brushes Preset picker while you’re painting by right-
clicking (Windows) or Control-clicking (Mac) anywhere in the image
area. Double-click a brush to select it; press Esc to hide the Brushes
Preset picker.
The Spot Healing Brush tool and Content-Aware
feature
 The Spot Healing Brush tool was a great tool to begin with, but now,
with the Content-Aware feature, it’s even better. No matter what level of
Photoshop user you are, you’ll appreciate the magic in this tool option.
In its default settings, the Spot Healing Brush tool quickly removes blemishes
and other imperfections in images. Click a blemish and watch it paint
matching texture, lighting, transparency, and shading to the pixels being
healed. The Spot Healing Brush tool doesn’t require you to specify a sample
spot — it automatically samples from around the retouched area.
Now take this concept a step further by selecting the Content-Aware option
on the Options bar. The concept is the same, but if you look at Figure 7-6,
you can see that painting with the Spot Healing Brush sets into action an
incredible number of calculations that attempt to render pixels similar in
detail to its surroundings.

FIGURE 7-6: Using the Spot Healing Brush tool with the Content-Aware option enabled.
Does this work every time? Of course not. Does it work often enough to save
you hours of work? Yes! If you want to follow along, open the image named
beach that is located in the Book03-Photoshop folder located in the
DummiesCCFiles here: www.agitraining.com/dummies.

You can also take advantage of the Content-Aware feature by using the Fill
feature. Simply follow these steps:
1. Select the area to be replaced by the new content.
It is best to make a tight selection when using this feature.
2. Choose Edit  ⇒  Fill and, in the Fill dialog box, select Content-Aware
from the Use drop-down list, shown in Figure 7-7.
The content is replaced.
Note that if you are working on a Background layer, you can just press
Delete and see the same options for replacing with the Content-Aware
feature.
FIGURE 7-7: Use the Content-Aware feature in the Fill dialog box.
The Healing Brush tool
 You can use the Healing Brush tool for repairs, such as eliminating
scratches and dust from scanned images. The difference between the Spot
Healing Brush tool and the Healing Brush tool is that a sample spot is
required before applying the Healing Brush. Follow these steps to use this
tool:
1. Select the Healing Brush tool in the Tools panel.
It’s a hidden tool of the Spot Healing Brush tool.
2. Find an area in the image that looks good and then Alt-click
(Windows) or Option-click (Mac) to sample that area.
For example, if you want to eliminate a tear in an image, such as the one
in Figure 7-8, choose a tear-free area of image near the tear.

3. Position the mouse cursor over the area to be repaired and start
painting.
The Healing Brush tool goes into action, blending and softening to create
a realistic repair of the area.
4. Repeat Steps 2 and 3 as necessary to repair the additional tears,
scratches, blemishes, and wrinkles.
FIGURE 7-8: Position the cursor over the area that you want to use as a source for the Healing
Brush tool and Alt-click or Option-click.
The Patch tool

 Hidden behind the Healing Brush tool in the Tools panel is the Patch
tool. Use it to repair larger areas, such as a big scratch or a large area of skin,
by following these steps:
1. Click and hold the Healing Brush tool to select the Patch tool; on the
Options bar, select Normal from the Patch drop down menu and then
select the Destination tab.
You can patch either the source area or the destination — it’s up to you.
We recommend dragging a good source over the area that needs to be
repaired.
2. With the Patch tool still selected, drag to create a marquee around
the source you want to use as the patch.
The source is an unscratched or wrinkle-free area.
3. After you create the marquee, drag the selected source area to the
destination to be repaired.
The Patch tool clones the selected source area while you drag it to the
destination (the scratched area); when you release the mouse button, the
tool blends in the source selection and repairs the scratched area!
 Make the patch look better by choosing Edit  ⇒  Fade Patch Selection
immediately after you apply the patch. Adjust the opacity until no
telltale signs show that you made a change.
The Red Eye tool
 So you finally got the group together and shot the perfect image, but
red eye took over! Red eye is caused by a reflection of the camera’s flash in
the retina of your photo’s subject or subjects. You see this effect more often
when taking pictures in a dark room, because the subject’s pupils are wide
open. If you can, use your camera’s red-eye-reduction feature. Or, use a
separate flash unit that you can mount on the camera farther from the
camera’s lens.

You’ll love the fact that red eye is extremely easy to fix in Photoshop. Just
follow these steps:
1. Select the Red Eye tool (hidden behind the Spot Healing Brush tool).
2. Click and drag to surround the red-eye area.
You should see a change immediately, but if you need to make
adjustments to the size or the darkness amount, you can change options
on the Options bar.
The Brush tool
 Painting with the Brush tool in Photoshop is much like painting in the
real world. However, unlike a real brush, the Brush tool offers you nifty
keyboard shortcuts that can be much more productive when painting. These
shortcuts are truly outstanding, so make sure that you try them while you read
about them. By the way, the keyboard commands you see in Table 7-1 work
on all the painting tools.
TABLE 7-1 Brush Keyboard Shortcuts
Task
Windows
Mac
Choose the Brush tool
B
B
Increase the brush size
]
]
Decrease the brush size
[
[
Harden the brush
Shift+]
Shift+]
Soften the brush
Shift+[
Shift+[
Sample the color
Alt-click
Option-click
Switch the foreground and background
colors
X
X
Change the opacity by a given
percentage
Type a number between 1 and
100
Type a number between 1 and
100
If you’re really into brushes, don’t miss out on the many useful options
available in the Brush panel (choose Window  ⇒  Brush to open it), as shown
in Figure 7-9.

FIGURE 7-9: Additional options are available for painting in the Brush panel.
You have several attribute choices, most of which have dynamic controls in
the menu option. These options enable you to vary brush characteristics by
tilting or applying more pressure to a stylus pen (if you’re using a pressure-
sensitive drawing tablet), among other things.

 A warning sign indicates that you don’t have the appropriate device
attached to use the selected feature, such as a pressure-sensitive drawing
tablet.
The following options are available in the Brush panel:
Brush Tip Shape: Select from these standard controls for determining
brush dimensions and spacing.
Shape Dynamics: Change the size of the brush as you paint.
Scattering: Scatter the brush strokes and control the brush tip count.
Texture: Choose from preexisting patterns or your own.
 Create a pattern by selecting an image area with the Rectangular
Marquee tool. Choose Edit  ⇒  Define Pattern, name the pattern, and then
click OK. The pattern is now available in the Brush panel’s Texture
choices.
Dual Brush: Use two brushes at the same time.
Color Dynamics: Change the color as you paint.
Transfer: Adjusts the dynamics for the build-up of the paint.
Brush Pose: Adjusts the tilt of the brush. You won’t notice a difference
when you have a regular rounded brush selected. Activate Pose when you
use a beveled brush and change the X and Y tilt using the sliders to see
how the angle of the brush is changed.
Noise: Adds a grainy texture to the brush stroke.
Wet Edges: Makes the brush stroke appear to be wet by creating a
heavier amount of color on the edges of the brush strokes.
Build-up: Gives airbrush features to the Brush tools and builds up paint
based on time instead of movement. Simply hold down the mouse in one
area to see the paint expand. You can also enable the effects of an airbrush
by selecting the Enable Airbrush-Style Build-Up Effects button in the

Options bar.
 If you click and hold the Brush tool on the image area, the paint
stops spreading. Turn on the Airbrush feature and notice that when you
click and hold, the paint keeps spreading, just like using a can of spray
paint. You can use the Flow slider on the Options bar to control the
pressure.
Smoothing: Smoothes the path created with the mouse.
Protect Texture: Preserves the texture pattern when applying brush
presets.
After reviewing all the available brush options, you may want to start
thinking about how you’ll apply the same attributes later. Saving the Brush
tool attributes is important as you increase your skill level. See the Saving
Presets section later in this chapter to see how.
The Clone Stamp tool
 The Clone Stamp tool is used for pixel-to-pixel cloning. The Clone
Stamp tool is different from the Healing Brush tool in that it does no
automatic blending into the target area. You can use the Clone Stamp tool for
removing a product name from an image, replacing a telephone wire that’s
crossing in front of a building, or duplicating an item.
Here’s how to use the Clone Stamp tool:
1. With the Clone Stamp tool selected, position the cursor over the area
you want to clone and then Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click
(Mac) to define the clone source.
2. Position the cursor over the area where you want to paint the cloned
pixels and then start painting.
Note the crosshair at the original sampled area, as shown in Figure 7-10.
While you’re painting, the crosshair follows the pixels you’re cloning.

FIGURE 7-10: A crosshair over the source shows what you’re cloning.
 When using the Clone Stamp tool for touching up images, you should
resample many times so as to not leave a seam where you replaced
pixels. A good clone stamper Alt-clicks (Windows) or Option-clicks
(Mac) and paints many times over until the retouching is complete.
Choose Window  ⇒  Clone Source to open the Clone Source panel, shown in
Figure 7-11. With this handy little panel, you can save multiple clone sources
to refer to while working. Even better, you can scale, preview, and rotate your
clone source — before you start cloning.

FIGURE 7-11: Additional options in the Clone Source panel. In this example, the apple rotates
180 degrees while being cloned.
 The Clone Source panel can be extremely helpful with difficult
retouching projects that involve a little more precision.
Follow these steps to experiment with this fun and interactive panel:
1. If the Clone Source panel isn’t visible, choose Window  ⇒  Clone
Source.
The Clone Source icons across the top have yet to be defined. The first
stamp is selected as a default.
2. Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) in the image area to
record the first clone source.
3. Click the second Clone Source icon at the top of the Clone Source
panel and then Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) somewhere
else on the page to define a second clone source.
Repeat as needed to define more clone sources. You can click the Clone
Source icons at any time to retrieve the clone source and start cloning.

4. Enter any numbers you want in the Offset X and Y, W and H, and
Angle text boxes in the center section of the Clone Source panel to set
up transformations before you clone.
5. Select the Show Overlay checkbox to see a preview of your clone
source.
Whatever you plan to do, it’s much easier to see a preview before you
start cloning. If you don’t use the Clone Source panel for anything else,
use it to see a preview of your clone source before you start painting. If it
helps to see the clone source better, select the Invert checkbox.
You see an overlay (or preview) before cloning begins. This overlay helps
you better align your image, which is helpful for precision work. If you
want the preview to go away after you start cloning, select the Auto Hide
checkbox.
The History Brush tool
Choose Window  ⇒  History to see the History panel. We could play around for
weeks in the History panel, but this section gives you only the basic concepts.
At the top of the History panel is a snapshot of the last-saved version of the
image. Beside the snapshot is an icon noting that it’s the present History state,
as shown in Figure 7-12.

FIGURE 7-12: The History panel helps you see and select different states in your workflow to
revert to.
 When you paint with the History Brush tool, it reverts by default back
to the way the image looked in the last saved version. You can click the
empty square to the left of any state in the History panel (refer to Figure 7-12)
to make it the source for the History Brush tool. Use the History Brush tool to
fix errors and add pizzazz to images.
The Eraser tool
 You may not think of the Eraser tool as a painting tool, but it can be!

When you drag the image with the Eraser tool, it rubs out pixels to the
background color. (Basically, it paints with the background color.) If you’re
dragging with the Eraser tool on a layer, it rubs out pixels to reveal the layer’s
transparent background. (You can also think of using the Eraser tool as
painting with transparency.)
The Eraser tool uses all the same commands as the Brush tool. You can make
an eraser larger or softer or more or less opaque. Even better, follow these
steps to use the Eraser tool creatively:
1. Open any color image and apply a filter.
For example, we chose Filter  ⇒  Blur  ⇒  Gaussian Blur. In the Gaussian
Blur dialog box that appears, we changed the blur to 5 and then clicked
OK to apply the Gaussian Blur filter.
2. Select the Eraser tool and press 5 to change it to 50 percent opacity.
You can also use the Opacity slider on the Options bar.
3. Hold down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key to repaint 50
percent of the original image’s state before applying the filter.
4. Continue painting in the same area to bring the image back to its
original state.
The original sharpness of the image returns where you painted.
 Holding down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key is the key to
erasing the last saved version (or history state). This tool is incredible for
fixing mistakes or removing applied filters.
The Gradient tool
 Choose the Gradient tool and click and drag across an image area to
create a gradient in the direction and length of the mouse motion. A short
drag creates a short gradient; a long drag produces a smoother, longer
gradient.
From the Options bar, you also can choose the type of gradient you want:

Linear, Radial, Angle, Reflected, or Diamond.
As a default, gradients are created using the current foreground and
background colors. Click the arrow on the Gradient button on the Options bar
to assign a different preset gradient.
To create a gradient, follow these steps:
1. Choose the Gradient tool and click the Gradient Editor button
(second from the left) on the Options bar.
The Gradient Editor dialog box appears. At the bottom of the gradient
preview, you see two or more stops, which is where new colors are
inserted into the gradient. They look like little house icons. Use the stops
on top of the gradient slider to determine the opacity.
2. Click a stop and click the color swatch to the right of the word Color
to open the Color Picker and assign a different color to the stop.
3. Click anywhere below the gradient preview to add more color stops.
4. Drag a color stop off the Gradient Editor dialog box to delete it.
5. Click the top of the gradient preview to assign different stops with
varying opacity, as shown in Figure 7-13.
6. When you’re finished editing the gradient, name it and then click the
New button.
The new gradient is added to the preset gradient choices.
7. To apply your gradient, drag across a selection or image with the
Gradient tool.

FIGURE 7-13: Assigning varying amounts of opacity using the stops on top of the gradient slider.
Blending Modes
You can use blending modes to add flair to the traditional opaque paint. Use
blending modes to paint highlights or shadows that allow details to show
through from the underlying image or to colorize a desaturated image. You
access the blending modes for paint tools from the Options bar.
You can’t get an accurate idea of how the blending mode works with the paint
color and the underlying color until you experiment. (That’s what multiple
undos are for!) Alternatively, you can copy to a new layer the image you want
to experiment with and hide the original layer.
This list describes the available blending modes:
Normal: Paints normally, with no interaction with underlying colors.
Dissolve: Gives a random replacement of the pixels, depending on the
opacity at any pixel location.
Behind: Edits or paints only on the transparent part of a layer.
Darken: Replaces only the areas that are lighter than the blend color.

Areas darker than the blend color don’t change.
Multiply: Creates an effect similar to drawing on the page with magic
markers. Also looks like colored film that you see on theater lights.
Color Burn: Darkens the base color to reflect the blend color. If you’re
using white, no change occurs.
Linear Burn: Looks at the color information in each channel and darkens
the base color to reflect the blending color by decreasing the brightness.
Darker Color: Compares the total of all channel values for the blend and
base color and displays the lower value color.
Lighten: Replaces only the areas darker than the blend color. Areas
lighter than the blend color don’t change.
Screen: Multiplies the inverse of the underlying colors. The resulting
color is always a lighter color.
Color Dodge: Brightens the underlying color to reflect the blend color. If
you’re using black, there’s no change.
Linear Dodge: Looks at the color information in each channel and
brightens the base color to reflect the blending color by increasing the
brightness.
Lighter Color: Compares the total of all channel values for the blend and
base color and displays the higher-value color.
Overlay: Multiplies or screens the colors, depending on the base color.
Soft Light: Darkens or lightens colors, depending on the blend color. The
effect is similar to shining a diffused spotlight on the artwork.
Hard Light: Multiplies or screens colors, depending on the blend color.
The effect is similar to shining a harsh spotlight on the artwork.
Vivid Light: Burns or dodges colors by increasing or decreasing the
contrast.
Linear Light: Burns or dodges colors by decreasing or increasing the
brightness.
Pin Light: Replaces colors, depending on the blend color.
Hard Mix: Paints strokes that have no effect with other Hard Mix paint
strokes. Use this mode when you want no interaction between the colors.

Difference: Subtracts either the blend color from the base color or the
base color from the blend color, depending on which one has the greater
brightness value. The effect is similar to a color negative.
Exclusion: Creates an effect similar to, but with less contrast than,
Difference mode.
Subtract: Subtracts pixel values of one layer with the other. In case of
negative values, black is displayed.
Divide: Divides pixel values of one layer with the other.
Hue: Applies the hue (color) of the blend object to underlying objects but
keeps the underlying shading or luminosity intact.
Saturation: Applies the saturation of the blend color but uses the
luminance and hue of the base color.
Color: Applies the blend object’s color to underlying objects but
preserves the gray levels in the artwork. This mode is helpful for tinting
objects or changing their colors.
Luminosity: Creates a resulting color with the hue and saturation of the
base color and the luminance of the blend color. This mode is the opposite
of Color mode.
Painting with color
This section provides an example of using blending modes to change and add
color to an image. An example of using a blending mode is tinting a black-
and-white (grayscale) image with color. You can’t paint color in Grayscale
mode, so follow these steps to add color to a black-and-white image:
1. Open an image in any color mode and choose Image  ⇒  Mode  ⇒  RGB.
2. If the image isn’t already a grayscale image, choose Image  ⇒  
Adjustments  ⇒  Desaturate.
This feature makes it appear as though the image is black and white, but
you’re still in a color mode and can apply color.
3. Choose a painting tool (the Brush tool, for example) and, from the
Swatches panel, choose the first color you want to paint with.
4. On the Options bar, select Color from the Mode drop-down list and

then use the Opacity slider to change the opacity to 50 percent.
You can also just type 5.
5. Start painting!
Color Blending mode is used to change the color of pixels while keeping
intact the underlying grayscale (shading).
 Another way to bring attention to a certain item in an RGB image
(such as those cute greeting cards that have the single rose in color and
everything else in black and white) is to select the item you want to
bring attention to. Choose Select  ⇒  Modify  ⇒  Feather to soften the
selection a bit — 5 pixels is a good number to enter in the Feather
Radius text field — then click OK. Then choose Select  ⇒  Inverse. With
everything else selected, choose Image  ⇒  Adjustments  ⇒  Desaturate.
Everything in the image looks black and white, except for the original
item you selected.
Filling selections
If you have a definite shape that doesn’t lend itself to being painted, you can
fill it with color instead. Make a selection and choose Edit  ⇒  Fill to access the
Fill dialog box. From the Use drop-down list, you can select from the
following options to fill the selection: Foreground Color, Background Color,
Color (to open the Color Picker while in the Fill dialog box), Content-Aware,
Pattern, History, Black, 50% Gray, or White.
If you want to use an existing or saved pattern from the Brushes panel, you
can retrieve a pattern by selecting Pattern in the Fill dialog box as well. Select
History from the Use drop-down list to fill with the last version saved or the
history state.
 If you’d rather use the Paint Bucket tool, which fills based on the
tolerance specified on the Options bar, it’s hidden in the Gradient tool. To use
the Paint Bucket tool to fill with the foreground color, simply click the item
you want to fill.

Saving Presets
All Photoshop tools enable you to save presets so that you can retrieve them
from a list of presets. The following steps show you an example of saving a
Tool preset for a brush, but you can use the same method for all other tools as
well:
1. Choose a brush size, color, softness, or any other characteristic.
2. Click the Tool Preset Picker button on the left side of the Options bar
as shown in Figure 7-14.
3. Click the Gear icon in the upper-right corner to access the fly-out
menu and then choose New Tool Preset.
The New Tool Preset dialog box appears.
4. Type a descriptive name in the Name text field (leave the Include
Color checkbox selected if you want the preset to also remember the
present color) and then click OK.
5. Access the preset by clicking the tool’s Preset Picker button and
selecting it from the tool’s Preset Picker list.

FIGURE 7-14: Choose to save your brush properties as a Tool preset.
Each preset you create is specific to the tool it was created in, so you can
have a crop preset and an eraser preset, for example. After you get in the
habit of saving presets, you’ll wonder how you ever got along without them.

Chapter 8
Using Layers
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Discovering layers
 Using text as a layer
 Implementing layer masks
 Organizing layers
 Using Smart Objects
 Using 3D layers to create 3D objects
 Merging and flattening a layered image
By using layers, you can make realistic additions to an image that can later be
removed, edited, and changed with blending modes and transparency settings.
This chapter shows you how to create composite images using helpful layer
features. Even if you’re an experienced Photoshop user, read this chapter to
discover all sorts of great keyboard shortcuts that can help improve your
workflow.
Add the feature of multiple screens or pages to Photoshop by taking
advantage of the Artboard feature. Using the Layers panel, you can divide
your Photoshop file into multiple canvases for the purpose of creating screens
for interactive applications, or pages for print.
Want to take layers even further? You can convert layers into 3D files.
Though many 3D features are beyond the scope of this book, you can still
discover enough to be dangerous by reviewing the section “Experimenting
with 3D Files,” later in this chapter.
Creating and Working with Layers
Layers make creating composite images (images pieced together from other,

individual images) easy because you can separate individual elements of the
composite onto their own layers. Much like creating collages by cutting
pictures from magazines, you can mask out selections on one image and place
them on a layer in another image. When pixel information is on its own layer,
you can move it, transform it, correct its color, or apply filters only to that
layer, without disturbing pixel information on other layers.
The best way to understand how to create and use layers is to, well, create
and use layers. The following steps show you how to create a new, layered
image:
1. Choose File⇒  New to create a new document.
The New dialog box appears.
2. From the Photo Tab, select the Default Photoshop Size from the
Preset list, select the Transparent option from the Background
Contents area, and then click OK.
Because you selected the Transparent option, the layer appears as a
checkerboard pattern, which signifies that it’s transparent, versus a white
background layer.
 If you don’t like to see the default checkerboard pattern where
there’s transparency, choose Edit⇒  Preferences⇒  Transparency and
Gamut (Windows) or Photoshop⇒  Preferences⇒  Transparency and Gamut
(Mac). In the Preferences dialog box that appears, you can change the
Grid Size drop-down list to None to remove the checkerboard pattern
entirely. If you don’t want to remove the transparency grid, you can
change the size of the checkerboard pattern or change the color of the
checkerboard.
 When you open an existing document (say, a photograph), the
image is typically the background layer.
3. Create a square with the Rectangular Marquee tool on Layer 1.
For example, we created a green square by using the Rectangular

Marquee tool to create a square selection; we then filled the selection with
green by double-clicking the Foreground color swatch, selecting a green
shade of color from the Color Picker, and clicking in the selection with
the Paint Bucket tool (hidden under the Gradient tool).
 After you select a color, you can also use the key command
Alt+Delete (Windows) or Option+Delete (Mac) to fill the selected area
with your foreground color.
4. To rename the layer, double-click the layer name (Layer 1) in the
Layers panel and type a short, descriptive name.
A good practice is to name layers based on what they contain; for this
example, we named Layer 1 the catchy name green square.
5. 
 Create a new layer by Alt-clicking (Windows) or Option-clicking
(Mac) the New Layer button at the bottom of the Layers panel.
The New Layer dialog box appears. By holding down Alt (Windows) or
Option (Mac), you can name the layer while you create it.
6. In this example, you add a circle, so name the layer Red circle. Click
OK.
7. Create a circle using the Elliptical Marquee tool on the new layer.
In this example, we created a red circle by using the Elliptical Marquee
tool and filled it with red.
 The keyboard shortcut for Edit⇒  Fill is Shift+F5 (Windows)
Shift+Delete (Mac). After the dialog box opens, you can choose
Contents⇒  Color and select a red color from the Color Picker.
The new shape can overlap the shape on the other layer, as shown in
Figure 8-1.

FIGURE 8-1: The circle overlaps the square.
Duplicating a layer
Perhaps you want to create a duplicate of a layer for your composite. This
technique can be helpful for creating do-it-yourself drop shadows and for
adding elements to an image, such as more apples in a bowl of fruit.
 Press Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) and drag a layer to the New Layer
button at the bottom of the Layers panel to duplicate it. Again, by holding
down Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac), you can name the layer while you
create it.
Selecting a layer
When you start working with layers, you may move or adjust pixels only to
discover that you accidentally edited pixels on the wrong layer. Select the
layer you plan to work on by clicking the layer name in the Layers panel.
 Photoshop CC represents a selected layer by simply highlighting the
layer in the Layers panel. The indicator paintbrush icon is gone in this
version.

Here are some tips to help you select the correct layer:
Select the Move tool and then right-click (Windows) or Control-click
(Mac) to see a contextual menu listing all layers that have pixel data at the
point you clicked and to choose the layer you want to work with.
Get in the habit of holding down the Ctrl (Windows) or ⌘   (Mac) key
while using the Move tool and when selecting layers. This technique
temporarily turns on the Auto Select feature, which automatically selects
the topmost visible layer that contains the pixel data you clicked.
Press Alt+[ (Windows) or Option+[ (Mac) to select the next layer down
from the selected layer in the stacking order.
Press Alt+] (Windows) or Option+] (Mac) to select the next layer up from
the selected layer in the stacking order.
Controlling the visibility of a layer
Hide layers that you don’t immediately need by clicking the eye icon in the
Layers panel. To see only one layer, Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click
(Mac) the eye icon of the layer you want to keep visible. Alt-click (Windows)
or Option-click (Mac) the eye icon again to show all layers.
Rearranging the stacking order
Layers are like clear pieces of film lying on top of each other. Change the
stacking order of the layers in the Layers panel by dragging a layer until you
see a black separator line appear, indicating that you’re dragging the layer to
that location. You can also use these helpful commands to move a layer:
Command
Windows Shortcut Mac Shortcut
Move selected layer up
Ctrl+]
⌘  +]
Move selected layer down Ctrl+[
⌘  +[
Creating a Text Layer
When you create text in Photoshop, the text is created on its own layer. By
having the text separate from the rest of the image, applying different styles
and blending modes to customize the type, as well as repositioning the text, is

simplified.
 To create a text layer, choose the Type tool and click the image area.
You can also click and drag to create a text area. The Options bar, shown in
Figure 8-2, gives you the controls to change the font, size, blending mode,
and color of the text.
FIGURE 8-2: The Text tool options.
 When you’re finished typing, you must confirm your text entry by
selecting the checkbox (on the right of the Options bar) or pressing
Ctrl+Enter (Windows) or ⌘  +Return (Mac).
Warping text
 When you click the Create Warped Text button on the Options bar, the
Warp Text dialog box appears. You can use it to apply different types of
distortion to your text.
You can still edit text that’s been warped. To remove a warp, click the Create
Warp Text button again and select None from the Style drop-down list.
Fine-tuning text
For controls such as leading, baseline shift, and paragraph controls, click the
Toggle Character and Paragraph Panels icon near the right end of the Options
bar.

Use the keyboard commands in Table 8-1 to fine-tune text in Photoshop.
Make sure that you have text selected when you use these shortcuts.
TABLE 8-1 Helpful Typesetting Key Commands
Task
Windows
Mac
Increase the font size
Shift+Ctrl+>
Shift+⌘  +>
Decrease the font size
Shift+Ctrl+<
Shift+⌘  +<
Increase the kerning (the cursor must be between two letters)
Alt+→
Option+→
Decrease the kerning (the cursor must be between two letters) Alt+←
Option+←
Increase the tracking (on several selected letters)
Alt+→
Option+→
Decrease the tracking (on several selected letters)
Alt+←
Option+←
Increase or decrease the leading (on several selected lines)
Alt+↑ or Alt+↓Option+↑ or Option+↓
 To change the font, drag over the font family name on the Options
bar and then press the up-arrow key (↑) to move up in the font list or the
down-arrow key (↓) to move down in the font list.
After you’re finished editing text, confirm or delete the changes by clicking
the buttons on the right end of the Options bar.
 If you’d rather use key commands to confirm or delete changes, press
the Esc key to cancel text changes; press Ctrl+Enter (Windows) or ⌘  
+Return (Mac) to commit text changes (or use the Enter key on the
numeric keypad).
Using Layer Masks
In the following sections, we show you how to create a layer mask from a
selection or a pen path. A layer mask covers areas of the image that you want
to make transparent and exposes pixels that you want visible. Masks can be
based on a selection you’ve created by painting on the mask itself. You can
also take advantage of the Pen tool to create a path around the object you

want to keep visible.
Creating a layer mask from a selection
You need to have two images open to follow these steps where we show you
how to create layer masks from a selection:
1. When combining images, choose Image⇒  Image Size to make sure
that the images are approximately the same resolution and pixel
dimensions.
Otherwise, you may be astonished by the disproportionate images in your
composite.
2. Choose Window⇒  Arrange⇒  Tile Vertically or Horizontally to
position the images in separate windows.
3. Using the Move tool, click one image and drag it to the other image
window.
A black border appears around the image area when you drop an image
into another image window. By dragging and dropping an image, you
automatically create a new layer on top of the active layer.
 Hold down the Shift key when dragging one image to another to
perfectly center the new image layer in the document window.
You can also drag a layer (background or regular layer) to another image
file. First make sure that no selection is active. Then use the Move tool to
drag the layer from the artboard up to the tab of the image you want it to
copy the image to.
4. Using any selection method, select a part of the image that you want
to keep on the newly placed layer, and choose Select⇒  Modify⇒  
Feather to soften the selection.
Five pixels should be enough.
5. 
 Click the Add Layer Mask button at the bottom of the Layers
panel.
A mask is created to the right of the layer, leaving only your selection
visible, as shown in Figure 8-3.

6. If you click the Layer thumbnail in the Layers panel, the mask
thumbnail shows corner edges, indicating that it’s activated.
While the layer mask is active, you can paint on the mask.
7. Select the Brush tool and paint black while the mask thumbnail is
selected to cover areas of the image that you don’t want to see; press
X to switch to white and paint to expose areas on the image that you
do want to see.
You can even change the opacity while you paint to blend images with
each other.
FIGURE 8-3: Click the Layer Mask button while you have an active selection to create a custom
layer mask.
 To create a smooth transition from one image to another, drag the

Gradient tool across the image while the layer mask is selected in the
Layers panel.
Creating a vector mask from a pen path
A vector mask masks a selection, but it does so with the precision you can get
only from using a path. The following steps show you another, slightly more
precise, way to create a layer mask by using a pen path:
1. 
 Use the Pen tool and click from point to point to make a closed
pen path.
If you already have a path, choose Window⇒  Paths and click a path to
select it.
See Chapter 4 of this minibook for more about working with the Pen tool.
2. 
 On the Layers panel, click the Layer Mask button and then click
it again (see Figure 8-4).
Wow — a mask from your pen path! Anything not contained within the
path is now masked out. You can still adjust your path (and masked
selection) by using the Direct Selection tool to click and drag the anchor
points and directional lines in your path.

FIGURE 8-4: Create a mask from your pen path.
If you no longer want a vector mask, drag the thumbnail to the Trash icon in
the Layers panel. An Alert dialog box appears, asking whether you want to
discard the mask or apply it. Click the Discard button to revert your image to
the way it appeared before applying the mask, or click the Apply button to
apply the masked area.
Organizing Your Layers
As you advance in layer skills, you’ll want to keep layers named, neat, and in
order. In this section, we show you some tips to help you organize multiple
layers.
Activating multiple layers simultaneously
Select multiple layers simultaneously by selecting one layer and then Shift-
clicking to select additional layers. The selected layers are highlighted.
Selected layers move and transform together, making repositioning and
resizing easier than activating each layer independently.
Select multiple layers to keep their relative positions to each other and take

advantage of alignment features. When you select two or more layers and
choose the Move tool, you can take advantage of alignment features on the
Options bar (see Figure 8-5). Select three or more layers for distribution
options.
FIGURE 8-5: Align multiple layers simultaneously with the Move tool.
Auto-Align Layers tool
 Do you ever have multiple shots of two or more people, say, one with the
guy’s eyes shut and the girl looking the other way? Or maybe you like the
smile in one shot better than in another. With the auto-alignment feature, you
can pull the best parts of multiple images into one “best” image.
To use this tool, simply have the Move tool active, select multiple layers, and
then click the Auto-Align Layers button to the right of the alignment tools.
The Auto-Align Layers dialog box appears, as shown in Figure 8-6; make
your selection and click OK.

FIGURE 8-6: The Auto-Align Layers feature can help create a better composite.
Layer groups
After you start using layers, you’ll likely use lots of them, and your Layers
panel will become huge. If you often scroll to navigate from one layer to
another, take advantage of layer groups, which essentially act as folders that
hold layers you choose, as shown in Figure 8-7. Just as with a folder you use
for paper, you can add, remove, and shuffle around the layers within a layer
group. Use layer groups to organize layers and make the job of duplicating
multiple layers easier.

FIGURE 8-7: Select the layers that you want to group together and then choose New Group from
Layers.
To create a layer group, follow these steps:
1. After creating several layers, Shift-click to select the layers you want
to group together in a set.
2. Choose New Group from Layers from the Layers panel menu, name
the group, and then click OK.
That’s it. You’ve created a layer group from your selected layers.
 With the Blending Mode drop-down list in the Layers panel, you can
change all layers within a group to a specific blending mode, or you can
use the Opacity slider to change the opacity of all layers in a group at
one time. Pass through in the blending mode indicates that no individual
blending modes are changed.
After you create a layer group, you can still reorganize layers within the
group or even drag additional layers in or out. You can open and close a layer

group with the arrow to the left of the group name.
Duplicating a layer group
After you create a layer group, you may want to copy it. For example, you
may want to copy an image, such as a button created from several layers
topped off with a text layer. The most efficient way to make a copy of that
button is to create a layer group and copy the entire group. To copy an image
made up of several layers that aren’t in a layer group would require you to
individually duplicate each layer — how time-consuming!
To duplicate a layer group, follow these steps:
1. Select a group from the Layers panel.
2. From the panel menu, choose Duplicate Group.
The Duplicate Group dialog box appears.
3. For the destination, choose the present document or any open
document or create a new document.
Be sure to give the duplicated set a distinctive name!
4. Click OK.
Using Layer Styles
Layer styles are wonderful little extra effects that you can apply to layers to
create drop shadows and bevel and emboss effects and to apply color
overlays, gradients, patterns and strokes, and more.
Applying a style
To apply a layer style (for example, the drop shadow style, one of the most
popular effects) to an image, follow these steps:
1. Create a layer on any image.
For example, you can create a text layer to see the effects of the layer
styles.
2. With the layer selected, click and hold the Add a Layer Style button
at the bottom of the Layers panel; from the menu options, choose
Drop Shadow.

In the Layer Style dialog box that appears, you can choose to change the
blending mode, color, distance spread, and size of a drop shadow. You
should see that the style has already applied to your text. Position the
cursor on the image area and drag to visually adjust the position of the
drop shadow.
3. When you’re happy with the drop shadow, click OK to apply it.
 To apply another effect and change its options, click on the Layer
Style button in the Layers panel and choose the name of the layer style
from the menu that appears — Bevel and Emboss, for example. In the
dialog box that appears, change the settings to customize the layer style
and click OK to apply it to your image. For example, if you choose
Bevel and Emboss from the Layer Styles menu, you can choose from
several emboss styles and adjust the depth, size, and softness.
Here are some consistent items you see in the Layer Style dialog box:
Contour: Use contours to control the shape and appearance of an effect.
Click the arrow to open the Contour fly-out menu to choose a contour
preset or click the preview of the contour to open the Contour Editor and
create your own edge.
Angle: Drag the crosshair in the angle circle or enter a value in the Angle
text field to control where the light source comes from.
Global light: If you aren’t smart about lighting effects on multiple
objects, global light makes it seem as though you are. Select the Use
Global Light checkbox to keep the angle consistent from one layer style
to another.
Color: Whenever you see a color box, you can click it to select a color.
This color can be for the drop shadow, highlight, shadow of an emboss, or
for a color overlay.
Creating and saving a style
If you come up with a combination of attributes you like, click the New Style
button in the upper-right area of the Layer Style dialog box. After you name

the style, it’s stored in the Styles panel. After you click OK, you can retrieve
the style at any time by choosing Window⇒  Styles. If it helps, click the panel
menu button and choose either Small or Large List to change the Styles panel
to show only the name of the styles.
After you apply a layer style to a layer, the style is listed in the Layers panel.
You can turn off the visibility of the style by turning off the eye icon or even
throw away the layer style by dragging it to the Layers panel’s Trash icon.
Thinking about opacity versus fill
In the Layers panel, you have two transparency options: one for opacity and
one for fill. Opacity affects the opacity of the entire layer, including effects.
Fill, on the other hand, affects only the layer itself, but not layer styles. Figure
8-8 shows what happens when the Drop Shadow and Inner Glow effects are
applied to text and the fill is reduced to 0 percent. This technique gives you
the opportunity to make it look like text is chiseled into rock, wood, or even
plastic for the look of a personalized credit card.
FIGURE 8-8: A text layer with styles applied and the fill reduced to 0 percent.
Smart, Really Smart! Smart Objects

Choose File⇒  Place (embedded or linked) and place an image, an illustration,
or even a movie into a Photoshop document. A new layer is created and —
even better — a Smart Object is created. The double-square icon in the lower-
right corner of the layer thumbnail indicates that a layer is a Smart Object.
This means that you have much more flexibility in the placement of your
images because the original pixel information has essentially been embedded
into your image.
Have you ever placed a logo only to find out later that you need it to be three
times its size? Resizing is no longer an issue, because the Photoshop Smart
Object is linked to an embedded original. If the original is vector, you can
freely resize the image repeatedly without worrying about poor resolution.
Want to change the spelling of the Illustrator logo you placed? Just double-
click the Smart Object, and the embedded original is opened directly in
Adobe Illustrator. Make your changes, save the file, and — voilà — the file is
automatically updated in the Photoshop file.
What could be better? Smart Filters, of course. You can apply Smart Filters to
any Smart Object layer, or even convert a layer to use Smart Filters, by
selecting Filters⇒  Convert for Smart Filters. After a layer has been converted
to a Smart Object, you can choose filters, any filters, and apply them to the
layer. If you want to paint out the effects of the filter on the layer, simply
paint with black on the Filter Effects mask thumbnail. Paint with different
opacities of black and white to give an artistic feel to the filter effect, as
shown in Figure 8-9. You can even turn off filters by turning off the visibility
on the Filter Effects thumbnail by clicking the eye icon to the left of the
thumbnail.

FIGURE 8-9: Cover the filter effects by painting on the Filter Effects thumbnail.
Working with Artboards in Photoshop
Those of you familiar with Adobe Illustrator have been working with
artboards for several versions by now. Just like in Adobe Illustrator,
Photoshop artboards provide the capability to build separate pages or screens
within one document. This can be especially helpful if you are building
screens for a mobile application or small brochure.
You can think of an artboard as a special type of layer group created using the
Layers panel. Its functionality might not be as intuitive in Photoshop as it is
in Adobe Illustrator, but with a little practice you should get the hang of it.
Follow these steps to see how you can make artboards on your own:
1. In this example, a new document is created using the iPhone 6 start
document. If you are starting a new document with the legacy New
Document window, create a new file with these dimensions: 750 wide
x 1334 high. (See Figure 8-10.)

2. If you created your new document with the iPhone 6 start file, you
already see an artboard listed in the Layers panel, as shown in Figure
8-11. If you don’t see an artboard, create one now by choosing New
Artboard from the Layers panel menu, as shown in Figure 8-12.
Note: While creating artboards, you can choose from a wide variety of
preset sizes or define your own custom artboard size.
3. Choose File⇒  Place Embedded and navigate to the Book03-
Photoshop folder. Double-click to select the image named water_sky
or select the image and press Place.
4. When the image appears on the artboard, grab one of the corner
handles, hold down the Shift key and click and drag outward in order
to scale the image and fill the entire artboard, as shown in Figure 8-
13. When the image is sized and positioned, select the Commit
checkbox in the Options bar, or press the Enter key to confirm the
placement of the image.
Next, you add a text layer.
5. Select the Type tool and click and drag on the artboard in order to
create a text area and add a new text layer.
6. Type the text, WATER & SKY. Using the controls in the Options bar,
set the type to the following properties:
Font: Myriad Pro Bold
Size: 110 pt
Color: White
7. Select the Commit button in the Options bar after you have set your
type.

FIGURE 8-10: Create a document the size of the iPhone 6.

FIGURE 8-11: The Layers panel with an Artboard already created.

FIGURE 8-12: You can add your own Artboard using the Layers panel menu.

FIGURE 8-13: Place an image and stretch it to fit the entire artboard.
 You can press Ctrl+Return (Windows) or ⌘  +Return (Mac) in order
to commit a type layer as well.
The result should be similar to what you see in Figure 8-14.

FIGURE 8-14: Add a text layer to your artboard.
So as you see, you work with Artboards just like you would work with any
other Photoshop document. The difference comes in the next step, where you
will find how to add additional artboards to your file.

Adding additional artboards
In this section, you create additional artboards. Perhaps you want a multi-
screen mobile app created in Photoshop, or you just want to create multiple
versions of one screen. For this section, you continue with the project started
in the previous section.
1. Click on the Move tool and select the hidden Artboard tool shown in
Figure 8-15.
Plus sign icons appear on all sides of the artboard. You can click on these
plus sign icons in order to add additional artboards.
2. Click the plus sign icon to the right of your existing artboard to see
that a new blank artboard is added. (See Figure 8-16.)
Take a look in the Layers panel. Ensure that, just like layers, the newest
artboard appears above the selected layer.
FIGURE 8-15: Use the Artboard tool to manipulate the artboards and create more.

FIGURE 8-16: Add a blank artboard by clicking on the plus sign icon.
Note: You can also use the Artboard tool to create your own custom sized
artboard. Do this by clicking and dragging with the artboard tool on the
Photoshop canvas. From the tool options bar, select a preset size from the
Size pop-up menu, or just leave it in your custom size.
Naming your artboards
Before this file becomes more complex, it would be wise to name the
artboards. This is done in the Layers panel.
1. Select the initial artboard (Artboard 1) and double-click on the
artboard name. When the textbox is active, type the name Home.

2. Double-click on the name Artboard 2 in the Layers panel and name
this layer Beach.
Adding content to the second artboard
Now, add an image and some text to the second artboard:
1. Click on the Artboard tool and switch it back to the Move tool.
2. Make sure that the Beach artboard is selected in the Layers panel
and choose File⇒ Place Embedded. Navigate to the
Book03_Photoshop folder and select the image named Beach and
press Place. The image is added to the second artboard.
3. As with the last image you placed, hold down the Shift key and Shift
drag on a corner point in order to proportionally scale the image
larger and fill the screen.
4. With the Move tool active, click and drag the image. Note that even
though it is in the same document, it does not overlap or interfere
with artwork on other artboards.
Cloning from one artboard to another
Now, clone the text from the Home artboard to the Beach artboard:
1. With the Move tool still selected, Ctrl-click (Windows) or ⌘  -click
(Mac) on the WATER & SKY text in the Home artboard. This
activates that layer.
2. Hold down your Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key and click and
drag the text from one artboard to the next.
If you hold down the Shift key while dragging the image will remain
aligned.
3. Switch to the artboard and double-click on the newly cloned text to
activate the text area and type FUN BEACHES. You should have
completed something similar to what you see in Figure 8-17.

FIGURE 8-17: A Photoshop file with two artboards.
Moving elements from one artboard to another
To move an element from one artboard to another, simply drag the elements
from one artboard to another. When you move an element between artboards,
Photoshop tries to position it in the same location relative to the ruler origins
located in the upper-left corners of the artboards.
Exporting your artboards
You can save your file as a Photoshop file to maintain layers, but in this
example you will export the file as a two-page PDF. Or, use the File⇒  Export
feature in order to export your artboards as PNGs, JPEGs, PDFs, and more.
Experimenting with 3D Files
As we mention earlier in this chapter, working with 3D files is beyond the
scope of this book, but even a 3D novice can experiment with the 3D features
in Photoshop CC. Follow these steps to try out some 3D features on your
own:
1. Open an existing Photoshop document.
To eliminate any confusion, it’s best if this document simply has a

Background layer and no additional layers.
2. If you have an image open with multiple layers, select a layer to
which you want to apply 3D perspective.
3. 
 Select the Move tool.
4. Choose 3D⇒  New Mesh from Layer⇒  Postcard.
If a Warning dialog box appears asking if you want to switch to the 3D
workspace, click Yes.
The image hasn’t changed, but you can see that you’ve entered the 3D
workspace that includes a perspective plane. Also, note that the layer now
has a 3D icon (looks like a 3D box) on the layer thumbnail in the Layers
panel, as shown in Figure 8-18, indicating that it’s now a 3D layer.
5. Experiment with angle and positioning by clicking and dragging on
the 3D layer, as shown in Figure 8-19.
6. Use the Object Rotate, Roll, Drag, Slide, and Scale tools located in the
Options bar, and shown in Figure 8-20, to change the positioning of
the 3D layer.
Notice that these tools have additional options available on the Options
bar across the top of your Photoshop document.

FIGURE 8-18: Creating a 3D layer in Photoshop CC.

FIGURE 8-19: Click and drag with the Rotate the 3D Object tool to reposition the 3D layer.

FIGURE 8-20: The 3D tools appear when you are in the 3D workspace.
Filter Capabilities in the Layers Panel
Now in Photoshop CC, you can filter the display of layers in the Layers
Panel, as shown in Figure 8-21. Filter categories include Kind, Name, Effect,
Mode, Attribute, and Color.

FIGURE 8-21: Filter layers in the Layers panel to view only the ones you need.
If you would rather not use the filters, you can click the Turn Layer Filtering
On/Off toggle switch to the right of the filters.
Merging and Flattening the Image
Merging layers combines several selected layers into one layer. Flattening
occurs when you reduce all layers to one background layer. Layers can
increase file size, thereby also tying up valuable processing resources. To
keep down file size, you may choose to merge some layers or even flatten the
entire image to one background layer.
Merging
Merging layers is helpful when you no longer need every layer to be
independent, such as when you have a separate shadow layer aligned to
another layer and don’t plan to move it again or when you combine many
layers to create a composite and want to consolidate it to one layer.
To merge layers (in a visual and easy way), follow these steps:
1. Turn on the visibility of only the layers you want merged.
2. Choose Merge Visible from the Layers panel menu.
That’s it. The entire image isn’t flattened, but the visible layers are now

reduced to one layer.
 To merge visible layers on a target (selected) layer that you create
while keeping the visible layers independent, create a blank layer and
select it. Then hold down Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) when
choosing Merge Visible from the panel menu.
Flattening
 If you don’t have to flatten your image, don’t! Flattening an image
reduces all layers to one background layer, which is necessary for certain
file formats. After you flatten an image, you can’t take advantage of
blending options or reposition layered items. (Read more about saving
files in Chapter 9 of this minibook.)
If you absolutely must flatten layers, keep a copy of the original, unflattened
document for additional edits later.
To flatten all layers in an image, choose Layer⇒  Flatten Image or choose
Flatten Image from the panel menu on the Layers panel.

Chapter 9
Saving Photoshop Images for
Print and the Web
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Determining the correct file formats for saving
 Preparing images for the web
 Discovering the color table
 Saving your settings
It may seem like a minor task, saving your image, but you have to make
many decisions at this stage. Where will the image be viewed, onscreen or
print? Will the image be large, or will it be the size of your thumbnail?
Without selecting the correct settings and format, you may not be able to
import your file or place it into other applications. If you save the file in the
wrong format, you could delete valuable components, such as layers or saved
selections. This chapter provides you with the necessary information to save
the file correctly for both print and onscreen displays. Here you discover what
the file format choices are and then progress into the Export feature (for
saving in the GIF, JPEG, PNG, and WBMP file formats).
 Saving files in the correct file format is important not only for file
size, but also in support of different Photoshop features. If you’re unsure
about saving in the right format, save a copy of the file, keeping the
original in the PSD format (the native Photoshop format). Photoshop
alerts you automatically when you choose a format in the Save As or the
Export As dialog box that doesn’t support Photoshop features. When
you choose a format that doesn’t support some of the features you’ve
used, such as channels or layers, a yield sign appears when a copy is

being made. With the capability of all Adobe applications (and even
non-Adobe applications) to read native Photoshop (.psd) files, be wise
and keep files in this native file format unless you have a compelling
reason not to.
Backing Up with a Save
Before covering additional details about saving your files, keep in mind that
you can set up Automatic Saving in your Photoshop preferences. This can be
helpful if your software crashes or your computer shuts down unexpectedly.
You can change these saving options by selecting Edit⇒  Preferences⇒  File
Handling (Windows) Photoshop⇒  Preferences⇒  File Handling (Mac), as
shown in Figure 9-1. Look for the drop-down menu that states Automatically
Save Recovery Information Every: and select the length of time you would
like to lapse between saving.
FIGURE 9-1: You can set up Photoshop to automatically save your files.
Choosing a File Format for Saving
When you choose File⇒  Save for the first time (or you choose File⇒  Save As

to save a different version of a file), you see at least 18 different file formats
to choose from in the Save As Type (Windows) or Format (Mac) drop-down
list. We don’t cover every format in this chapter (some are specific to
proprietary workflows), but we show you which formats are best for the
typical workflow you may face.
Wonderful and easy Photoshop PSD
If you’re in an Adobe workflow (you’re using any Adobe product), you can
keep the image in the native Photoshop PSD format. By selecting this format,
transparency, layers, channels, and paths are all maintained and left intact
when placed in the other applications.
If compatibility with older versions of Photoshop is an issue, choose Edit⇒  
Preferences⇒  File Handling (Windows) or Photoshop⇒  Preferences⇒  File
Handling (Mac). Select Always from the Maximize PSD and PSB File
Compatibility drop-down list. This choice saves a composite (flattened)
image along with the layers of your document. (The PSB format is used for
saving large Photoshop documents — in this case, large means they measure
more than 30,000 x 30,000 pixels.)
 Leaving the Maximize PSD and PSB File Compatibility drop-down
list set to Always creates a larger file. If file size is an issue, leave the
drop-down list set to Ask and use the feature only when you need to
open the Photoshop file in older versions of Photoshop.
Photoshop EPS
Many applications accept the Encapsulated PostScript (EPS) file format. It’s
used to transfer PostScript-language artwork between various applications. It
supports vector data, duotones, and clipping paths. This means that text layers
and other vector-based artwork will remain scalable.
When you choose to save in the EPS format, an EPS Options dialog box
appears. Leave the defaults alone and click OK.
 Alter the settings in the EPS Options dialog box only if you’re

familiar with custom printer calibration or if you need to save your
image to a specific screen ruling. Screen rulings (lpi, or lines per inch)
are usually set in a page layout application, such as Adobe InDesign or
QuarkXPress.
 Even though PowerPoint accepts files saved from Photoshop in the
EPS format, it is better to use the PNG format. The PNG format is
designed for a better onscreen presentation and produces clearer results.
Find out more in the later “PNG” section.
Photoshop PDF
If compatibility is an issue, save your file in the Photoshop PDF (Portable
Document Format) format. PDF files are supported by more than a dozen
platforms when viewers use Acrobat or Adobe Reader. (Adobe Reader is
available for free at www.adobe.com.) What a perfect way to send pictures to
friends and family! Saving a file in the Photoshop PDF format supports the
capability to edit the image when you open the file by choosing File⇒  Open
in Photoshop.
 If you’re planning to send a layered file by email, choose Layer⇒  
Flatten Layers before choosing to save the file as a PDF. This command
cuts the file size considerably.
TIFF
The Tagged Image File Format (TIFF) is a flexible bitmap image format
that’s supported by most image-editing and page-layout applications widely
supported by all printers. TIFF supports layers and channels but has a
maximum size of 4GB. We hope your files aren’t that large!
DCS
The Photoshop Desktop Color Separation (DCS) 1.0 and 2.0 formats are
versions of EPS that enable you to save color separations of CMYK (Cyan,
Magenta, Yellow, Black) or multichannel files. Some workflows require this
format, but if you’ve implemented spot color channels in an image, using the

DCS file format is required to maintain them.
Choose the DCS 2.0 format unless you receive specific instructions to use the
DCS 1.0 format — for example, for reasons of incompatibility in certain
workflows.
Saving Images for the Web
There are many ways that you can save your art for the web or application
design but the method that you choose depends upon your content. In this
section, you discover the major formats used for website and application
design that you can use within Photoshop, PNG, JPG, and GIF.
 Ensuring that the image size is correct before you save the file for the
web is a good practice. If you need to read up on resizing images, see
Chapter 5 of this minibook. Generally speaking, you should resize the
image to the right pixel dimensions. Choose Filter⇒  Sharpen⇒  Unsharp
Mask to regain some of the detail that is lost in resizing the image, and
then save the image for the web.
PNG
When you choose to save in the PNG (Portable Network Graphics) format,
you have two options from which to choose — PNG-8 and PNG-24.
The PNG-8 format refers to palette variant, which supports only 256 colors,
this allows the file format to be smaller in size than some other formats.
PNG-8 can be a GIF substitute; see the “Saving a GIF” section, later in this
chapter, for more details about that format.
PNG-24 saves 24-bit images that support anti-aliasing (the smooth transition
from one color to another). These images work beautifully for continuous-
tone images but are much larger than JPEG files. The truly awesome feature
of a PNG file is that it supports 256 levels of transparency. In other words,
you can apply varying amounts of transparency in an image, as shown in
Figure 9-2, where the image shows through to the background.

FIGURE 9-2: A PNG-24 file with varying amounts of transparency.
There are several ways in which you can save a PNG image:
Choose File⇒  Quick Export as PNG: This does not provide any
additional save options other than the ability to change the name. If you
want to set up preferences for your Quick Export, you can find settings by
going to Edit⇒  Preferences⇒  Export (Windows) or Photoshop⇒  
Preferences⇒  Export (Mac), as shown in Figure 9-3. A great format if you
have an image set to the right size and don’t need any other modifications.
Choose File⇒   Export Save For Web (Legacy).
In the Preset drop-down menu, in the upper right of the Save for Web
dialog box, you can choose PNG-24 or PNG-8 Dithered. Then press
Save.

FIGURE 9-3: You can set up preferences for your Quick Export.
Note: Photoshop can use dithering to mix the pixels of available colors to
simulate missing colors.
JPEG
JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group) is a good format for continuous-
tone images — those with smooth transitions from one color to another, as in
photographs — like the image shown in Figure 9-4.
 The JPEG format is lossy, so you shouldn’t save a JPEG and then
open it, edit it, and save it again as a JPEG. Because the JPEG
compression causes data to be lost, your image will eventually look like
it was printed on the same texture as a paper towel. Save a copy of the
file as a JPEG, keeping the original image in PSD format if you need to
edit the image later, open the original PSD, make your changes, save the
PSD, and then save a copy of the edited file as a JPEG.
The JPEG format does not support transparency, but you can cheat the system
a bit by using matting.

FIGURE 9-4: Images with smooth transitions from one color to another are good candidates for
the JPEG file format.
A good image to save in the JPEG format is a typical photograph or
illustration with lots of smooth transitions from one color to the next; this
includes graphics that use gradients. To save an image as a JPEG, follow

these steps:
1. Choose File⇒  Export⇒  Save for Web (Legacy), and then click the 2-
Up tab to view the original image (left) at the same time as the
optimized image (right).
2. Select one of the JPEG preset settings from the Settings drop-down
list.
You can choose Low, Medium, or High or customize a level between the
presets by using the Quality slider.
3. Leave the Optimized checkbox selected to build the best JPEG at the
smallest size.
The only issue with leaving this checkbox selected is that some very old
browsers don’t read the JPEG correctly (not likely an issue for most
viewers).
4. Leave the Embed Color Profile checkbox deselected unless you’re in
a color-managed workflow and color accuracy is essential.
Selecting this checkbox increases the file size, and most people aren’t
looking for exact color matches from an image on the monitor.
5. If you have to have the file size even smaller, use the Blur slider to
bring down some detail.
It’s funny, but one JPEG that has exactly the same pixel dimensions as
another may vary in file size because the more detailed an image is, the
more information is needed. So, an image of lots of apples will be larger
than an image of the same size that has one apple in it. The Blur feature
blurs the image (surprise!), so you may want to use it for only a low
source image in Dreamweaver.
6. (Optional) Select a matte color from the Matte drop-down list.
Because JPEG doesn’t support transparency, you can flood the transparent
area with a color you select from the Matte drop-down list. Select the
color you’re using for the background of your web page by selecting
Other and entering the hexadecimal color in the lower portion of the
Color Picker.
7. Click Save.

GIF
Supposedly, the way you pronounce GIF (Graphics Interchange Format) is
based on the brand of peanut butter you eat. Is it pronounced like the peanut
butter brand (Jif) or with a hard g, as in gift? Most people seem to pronounce
it as “gift” (minus the T).
Use GIF if you have large areas of solid color, such as a logo like the one
shown in Figure 9-5.
FIGURE 9-5: An image with lots of solid color makes a good GIF.
GIF isn’t lossy (it doesn’t lose data when the file is compressed in this
format), but it reduces file size by using a limited number of colors in a color
table. The lower the number of colors, the smaller the file size. If you’ve ever
worked in Index Color mode, you’re familiar with this process.
Transparency is supported by the GIF file format. Generally, GIF files don’t
do a good job on anything that needs smooth transitions from one color to
another because of the format’s poor support of anti-aliasing, which is the
method Photoshop uses to smooth jagged edges. When an image transitions
from one color to another, Photoshop produces multiple colors of pixels to
create an even blend between the two colors.
Because anti-aliasing needs to create multiple colors for this effect, GIF files
generally aren’t recommended. In fact, when you reduce the size of a GIF
file, you’re more apt to see banding (an artifact that appears as streaks in the
image) because the anti-aliasing can’t take place with the limited number of

colors available in GIF.
You can, of course, dramatically increase the number of colors to create a
smoother transition, but then you risk creating monster files that take forever
to download.
Saving a GIF
When you choose File⇒  Save for Web, you first see the available GIF
options. They may be clearer to you if you have an image open (with lots of
solid color in it).
To save a file for the web as a GIF, follow these steps:
1. Choose File⇒  Export⇒  Save for Web (Legacy).
The Save for Web dialog box appears.
2. At the top, click the 2-Up tab.
You see the original image on the left and the optimized image on the
right (or top and bottom, depending on the image proportions).
In the lower portion of the display, you see the original file size compared
with the optimized file size, as well as the approximate download time.
The download time is important. Nobody wants to wait around for a web
page to load; most people don’t wait more than ten seconds for an entire
web page to appear, so try to keep an individual image’s download time to
a few seconds at the most. Remember that waiting for all images on a
page to load can add up to a monstrous wait time for the viewer!
 Change the estimated download speed by choosing the Select
Download Speed drop-down menu to the right of the file size information
in the lower-left of the preview window.
3. Select GIF 32 No Dither from the Preset drop-down list.
You may see a change already. As you can see in Figure 9-6, Photoshop
supplies you with presets to choose from, or you can customize and save
your own.
4. Choose whether you want dithering applied to the image by selecting
an option from the Specify the Dither Algorithm drop-down list.

This choice is purely personal. Because you may be limiting colors,
Photoshop can use dithering to mix the pixels of available colors to
simulate missing colors. Many designers choose the No Dither option
because dithering can create unnatural color speckles in an image.
5. If your image is on a transparent layer and you want to maintain that
transparency on a web page, select the Transparency checkbox.
FIGURE 9-6: Choose from presets, or create your own custom settings.
Using the color table in the Save for Web dialog box
When you save an image in GIF using the Save for Web feature, you see the
color table. This color table displays the limited color palette used in the
image and is located on the right side of the Save for Web window. The color
table is important because it enables you to see the colors used in the image
and to customize the color table by using the options at the bottom.
You may want to customize your color table by selecting some colors to be
web safe and locking colors so that they’re not bumped off as you reduce the
number that’s used.
To customize a color table, follow these steps:
1. If your image has only a few colors that you want to convert to web-

safe colors, choose the Eyedropper tool from the left of the Save for
Web window and click on the color (right on the image) in the
Optimized view.
The sampled color is highlighted in the color table.
2. Click the Web Safe button at the bottom of the color table, as shown
in Figure 9-7.
When you cross over this button, the tooltip Shifts/Unshifts Selected
Colors to Web Palette appears.
A diamond appears, indicating that the color is now web safe.
3. Lock colors that you don’t want to delete as you reduce the number
of colors in the color table.
Select a color with the Eyedropper tool, or select it in the color table, and
then click the Lock Color button. A white square appears in the lower-
right corner, indicating that the color is locked.
Obviously, if you lock 32 colors and then reduce the color table to 24,
some of your locked colors are deleted. If you choose to add colors, those
locked colors are the first to return.
 How is the color table created? Based on the color-reduction
algorithm method you choose, the Save for Web feature samples the
number of colors you indicate. If keeping colors web-safe is important,
select the Restrictive (Web) option for the method; if you want your
image to look better on most monitors but not necessarily to be web-safe,
choose the Adaptive option.
4. Use the Colors drop-down list or enter a number to add or delete
colors from the color table.
5. If your image uses transparency, select the Transparency checkbox
near the top of the Save for Web dialog box.
 Remember that transparency is counted as one of your colors in
the color table.

6. Select the Interlaced checkbox only if your GIF image is large (25K
or larger).
Selecting this option causes the image to build in several scans on the web
page — a low-resolution image that pops up quickly and is then refreshed
with the higher-resolution image when the download is complete.
Interlacing gives the illusion of the download going faster but makes the
file size larger, so use it only if necessary.
7. Click Save.
Now the image is ready to be attached to an email message or used in a
web page.

FIGURE 9-7: Customize colors by using the color table in the Save for Web window.
Matte
Matting appears as a choice in the GIF, JPEG, and PNG format options.
Matting is useful if you don’t want ragged edges appearing around your
images. Matting looks for pixels that are 50 percent or more transparent and
makes them fully transparent; any pixels that are 49 percent or less
transparent become fully opaque.
Even though your image might be on a transparent layer, it will have some
“iffy” pixels — the ones that aren’t sure what they want to be … to be
transparent or not to be transparent. Choose a matte color to blend in with the
transparent iffy pixels by selecting Eyedropper Color, Foreground Color,
Background Color, White, Black, or Other (to open the Color Picker) from
the Matte drop-down list in the Save for Web dialog box.
Saving Settings
Whether you’re saving a GIF, JPG, or PNG file, you probably spent some
time experimenting with settings to find what works best for your needs. Save
selected options to reload later by saving the settings. Do so by clicking the
arrow to the right of the Preset drop-down list. Select Save Settings from the
list that appears and name your settings. Your named, customized settings
then appear in the Preset drop-down list.
Generating your images assets
If you are busy creating designs for websites and applications, you will
appreciate the Generate Image Assets feature. This feature allows you to
name layers by adding extensions to layer names that will automatically
determine the file format upon saving.
Follow these steps to try out this feature. You can use the image provided
named generate-assets in the Book03-Photoshop folder.
1. Open the file named Generate-Assets, or any other file that has
multiple layers. Note that the Generate-Assets file has three layers.
2. In the Layers panel, add the following extensions to the end of the
layer names, as shown in Figure 9-8.

evening-yoga.gif
sunset.jpg
gradient.png
3. Now choose File⇒  Generate⇒  Image Assets.

FIGURE 9-8: Add extensions to the end of the layers’ names.
You don’t see it happening, but a new folder has been created in the same
folder location that is named Generate-Assets-assets. Inside this folder are the
named layers, in the format that you indicated by using the extension you
added. A great time-saving feature for those creating complex art for
applications or the web.

Book 4
InDesign CC

Contents at a Glance
Chapter 1: Introducing InDesign CC
Getting Started with InDesign CC
Touring the Workspace
Setting Up the Workspace
Working with Documents
Chapter 2: Working with Text and Text Frames
Understanding Text, Font, and Frames
Creating and Using Text Frames
Adding Text to Your Publication
Looking at Text Frame Options
Modifying and Connecting Text Frames on a Page
Understanding Paragraph Settings
Editing Stories
Using Tables
Looking at Text on a Path
Chapter 3: Understanding Page Layout
Importing Images
Linking and Embedding Images
Setting Image Quality and Display
Selecting Images
Manipulating Text and Graphics in a Layout
Merging Text and Graphics
Working with Pages and the Pages Panel
Using Master Spreads in Page Layout
Chapter 4: Drawing in InDesign
Getting Started with Drawing
Getting to Know the Tools of the Trade
Drawing Shapes
Editing Basic Shapes
Drawing Freeform Paths

Editing Freeform Paths
Modifying Frame Corners
Using Fills
Adding Layers
Creating QR Codes
Chapter 5: Understanding Color
Selecting Color with Color Controls
Understanding Color Models
Using Color Swatches and Libraries
Chapter 6: Clipping Paths, Alignment, and Object
Transformation
Working with Transformations
Understanding Clipping Paths
Arranging Objects on the Page
Chapter 7: Exporting to PDF and Printing
Preflight: Preparing Your Documents for Printing
Packaging Your Documents
Understanding File Formats
Exporting Publications
Printing Your Work
Chapter 8: Creating Digital Documents Using EPUB
Adapting Content for Digital Distribution
Creating Digital Documents
Exporting EPUB

Chapter 1
Introducing InDesign CC
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Opening InDesign
 Creating new documents
 Looking at and setting up the workspace
 Creating your first publication
InDesign is a sophisticated page-layout program. You can use it to create
professional-looking documents, including newsletters, books, and
magazines. You can also use it to create documents for distribution on a tablet
such as an iPad, and even documents that include interactivity or videos.
InDesign has evolved into a tool that lets you publish content to just about
any device or in print. For example, using InDesign you can create a
document and distribute content in print and then add hyperlinks and video
and export it to PDF or EPUB.
As powerful an application as InDesign is, you’d think it would be difficult to
use, but you’ll find that creating most basic documents is a snap. This
minibook shows you how to use InDesign to make creative page layouts. In
this chapter, you discover the InDesign interface and start your first
publication.
Getting Started with InDesign CC
InDesign is used for creating page layouts that include type, graphics (such as
fills and strokes), and images. The InDesign document you see in Figure 1-1
includes elements from Adobe Illustrator (logos) and Photoshop (images). If
this file were to be exported as a PDF or an EPUB file, it could include video
or interactive buttons.

FIGURE 1-1: A sample page layout created using InDesign CC.
In the following sections, you get familiar with creating and opening
documents in InDesign. In Chapters 2 through 8 in this minibook, you see
how to add various elements to your pages.
Creating a new publication
After you launch InDesign, you can create a new InDesign document. Just
follow these steps to create a new publication:
1. Choose File⇒  New⇒  Document.
The New Document dialog box opens, as shown in Figure 1-2.
2. Select whether you’re designing a print, web, or mobile document
from the header Intent menu.
 If you want to preview your adjustments in this panel, select the
Preview option at the bottom of the New Document window. Your
updates in the steps that follow will adjust the appearance of the
document in InDesign while you make your settings.

3. Enter a value in the Number of Pages text field for the number of
pages in the document.
This value can be between 1 and 9999. If you aren’t sure how many pages
will be in your document, take a guess. You can easily add or delete pages
later using the Pages panel. (See the section, “Pages panel,” later in this
chapter.)
4. For this example, confirm the Facing Pages checkbox has been
selected to have the pages arranged as spreads with left and right
pages.
With this option selected, pages in your document are arranged in pairs,
so you have spreads, which are facing or adjacent pages in a layout. For
example, you select this option if you’re creating a publication that will
be arranged like a book or magazine. If you deselect this option, pages are
arranged individually, which is a good choice for a single-page flyer or a
document with only a front and back side.
5. Select a Blank Document Preset.
The Blank Document Preset should be set to the size of paper you intend
to print on or the size at which the content will be displayed. You can also
create your own custom sized document by typing values into the Width
and Height text boxes.
The Orientation setting changes from Portrait (tall) to Landscape (wide)
based on the settings you enter in the Width and Height fields of the Page
Size section.
 The Intent selection you make determines the choices in the
Blank Document Presets list. If you select Web for the Intent, you can
choose from various screen resolutions, whereas if you select Mobile, you
can select from various popular tablet sizes, such as the iPad,
NOOK/Kindle Fire, or Android.
 You can enter page sizes using most common forms of
measurement or just use the appropriate abbreviation. For example, you

enter 8 in for 8 inches or 15 cm for 15 centimeters. You can use most
forms of measurement in all InDesign dialog boxes and panels; just make
sure to specify the form of measurement you want to use. When creating
web or mobile documents, these values switch to pixels.
6. Choose a number for the columns on the page.
This step creates guides for columns that do not print or display in the
completed project. These guides help you organize your pages as you
create them. You can also enter a value in the Gutter field, which specifies
the space between each of the columns. For more information about using
columns in page layout, see Chapter 3 of this minibook.
7. Choose values for the page margins.
Notice the Make All Settings the Same button, which is a chain icon, to
the right of the four text fields where you enter margin values. Toggle this
button to set all margins to the same value, or set different values (broken
chain icon).
If you see Top, Bottom, Inside, and Outside, you’re specifying margins
for a page layout that has facing pages, which you specified earlier. If you
see Top, Bottom, Left, and Right, you’re creating a page layout without
facing pages. The inside margins refer to the margins at the middle of the
spread, and the outside margins refer to the outer left and right margins of
a book or magazine. You can set the Inside setting to accommodate the
binding of a book, which may need wider margins than the outside.
 If you use the same settings repeatedly, saving those settings as a
preset is a good idea. Get your settings the way you want them, and then
click the Save Document Preset button, located to the right of the
document title and under the Preset Details header before you click
Create. Enter a name for the preset, and then click Save Preset. After you
save your preset, select Saved from the header menu (refer to the top of
Figure 1-2), and you can select your saved preset whenever you create a
new document.
8. When you’re finished, click Create.
After you click Create in the New Document dialog box, the new
document is created with the settings you just specified.

FIGURE 1-2: Setting up a new document with InDesign.
Margins, columns, orientation, and page size are discussed in more detail in
Chapter 3 of this minibook.
Opening an existing publication
You may have InDesign files on your hard drive that you created or have
saved from another source. To open existing InDesign documents (files that
end with .indd), follow these steps:
1. Choose File⇒  Open.
The Open a File dialog box appears.
2. Browse your hard drive and select a file to open.
Select a file by clicking the document’s title. To select more than one
document, press Ctrl (⌘   on the Mac) while you click the filenames.
3. Click the Open button to open the file.
The file opens in the workspace.
Looking at the document setup
If you need to change the size of your pages or the number of pages in a
document that’s already open in the workspace, you can make those changes

in the Document Setup dialog box. To access and modify settings in the
Document Setup dialog box, follow these steps:
1. Choose File⇒  Document Setup.
The Document Setup dialog box opens.
Note: You can change the value in the Number of Pages text field if you
need the number of pages in your document to be greater than or less than
the current value.
The number of pages in your document updates after you close this dialog
box. You can also add more pages by choosing Layout⇒  Pages⇒  Insert
Pages to insert several pages, or Layout⇒  Pages⇒  Add Page to add a
single page, or by using the Pages panel.
2. Select a new option from the Page Size drop-down list or manually
enter values into the Width and Height text fields to change the page
size.
You can also click the up and down arrows in the Width and Height text
fields to choose a new value.
3. Click the Portrait or Landscape button to change the page
orientation.
The page orientation updates in the workspace after you close this dialog
box.
4. Click OK when you finish changing your document setup.
The modifications are applied to the open document.
 If you make changes to the Document Setup dialog box when you
have no documents open, the changes become the default settings for all
new documents you create.
Touring the Workspace
Just like the other applications in the Creative Cloud, InDesign has a
standardized layout. Using panels that can be docked and a single-row Tools
panel, you can keep much more space open in your work area.

The InDesign workspace, or user interface, includes a large number of tools
and panels — but most users use only a few. You’ll likely use several panels
over and over again, so you should keep them easily accessible. In the default
user workspace, many of these panels are already docked to the right. Figure
1-3 shows how the InDesign workspace layout looks when you open a new
document. The Windows workspace is nearly identical to the Macintosh
version of InDesign.
FIGURE 1-3: The InDesign default workspace.
Here are the elements that create the InDesign workspace:
Page: The main area of the InDesign workspace is a page. It’s the area
that’s printed or exported when you finish making a layout.
Master pages: You can define how certain text elements and graphics
appear in an entire document (or just portions of it) by using a master
page. It’s much like a template for your document because you can reuse
elements throughout the pages. For example, if you have an element you
want on each page (such as page numbering), you can create it on the
master page. If you need to change an element on the master page, you
can change it at any time, and your changes are reflected on every page

that the master page is applied to. You access master pages in the Pages
panel. (You find out more about master pages in Chapter 3 of this
minibook.)
Spread: A spread refers to a set of two or more pages that will be printed
side by side. You usually see spreads in magazines and books when you
open them — just like the book you’re holding now. If your document has
only a single page — front and back, or with only one side — you will
not see a spread in the InDesign document window. InDesign will display
only the one page, or, for a two-sided page, both pages (if you reduce the
magnification).
Pasteboard: The pasteboard is the area around the edge of a page. You
can use the pasteboard to store objects until you’re ready to put them into
your layout. Pasteboards aren’t shared between pages or spreads. For
example, if you have certain elements placed on a pasteboard for pages 4
and 5, you can’t access these elements when you’re working on pages 8
and 9 — so each page or spread has its own pasteboard.
Tools
The Tools panel (See Figure 1-4) is where you find tools to edit, manipulate,
or select elements in your document, as well as tools to make adjustments to
pages. Simply use the cursor and click a tool to select it. See Figure 1-4 for
the default Tools panel layout.

FIGURE 1-4: The Tools panel contains tools for creating, selecting, and editing elements and
adjusting pages.
 If you decide that a single row of tools just isn’t for you, you can go
back to an older version’s Tools panel by clicking the two arrows in the
gray bar at the top of the Tools panel. If you want to relocate the tools,
click the bar at the top of the tools, under the double arrows, and drag
the tools panel to a new location.
You find out more about these tools and how to use them in the related
chapters of this minibook. For example, we discuss the drawing tools in
Chapter 4 of this minibook.

With the tools in the Tools panel, you can do the following:
Create stunning new content on a page using drawing, frame, and text
tools.
Select existing content on a page to move or edit.
View the page in different ways by moving (panning) and magnifying the
page or spread.
Edit existing objects, such as shapes, lines, and text. Use the Selection
tool to select existing objects so that you can change them.
When a tool has a small arrow next to the button’s icon, more tools are hiding
behind it. When you click the tool, and hold down the mouse button, a menu
opens that shows you other available tools. While pressing the mouse button,
move the cursor to the tool you want and release the mouse button after it’s
highlighted.
Menus
The menus on the main menu bar are used to access some of the main
commands and control the user interface of InDesign. They also allow you to
open and close panels used to edit and make settings for the publication.
InDesign menu commands such as New, Open, and Save are similar to most
other applications you’re probably familiar with. The InDesign menus also
include commands that are especially used for page layout, such as Insert
with Placeholder Text. For more information on using menus, see Book 1,
Chapter 4. Remember to refer to the common commands and shortcuts that
are also detailed in that chapter.
The InDesign main menu has the following options:
File: This menu includes some of the basic commands to create, open,
and save documents. It also includes the Place command to import new
content and many options to control document settings, exporting
documents, and printing.
Edit: You can access many commands for editing and controlling
selections in this menu — such as copying and keyboard shortcuts. The
dictionary and spell checker are on this menu, too.

Layout: Use this menu to create guides. These options help you lay
elements on the page accurately and properly align them. Use the menu to
navigate the document’s pages and spreads.
Type: From this menu, you can select fonts and control characters in the
layout. You can access the many settings related to text from this menu,
which opens the associated panel where you make the changes.
Object: You can modify the look and placement of objects on the page
with this menu. Which options are available on this menu depends on
which element you’ve selected in the workspace, such as a text field or an
image.
Table: Use this menu to create, set up, modify, and control tables on the
page.
View: You can modify the view of the page from this menu, including
zooming in and out, as well as work with guides, rulers, or grids to help
you lay out elements.
Window: Use this menu to open and close panels or switch between open
documents.
Help: This menu is where you can access the Help documents for
InDesign and configure any plug-ins you have installed.
Panels
In the default layout, you see a large area for the document. To the right of the
document are several panels that snap to the edge of the workspace — panels
that are attached to the edge of the workspace are considered docked. Panels
are used to control the publication and edit elements on pages. Panels can be
maximized, minimized, moved around, or closed altogether.
To expand a panel, you can simply click the panel name, and it expands. The
panels you expand are automatically collapsed again when a different panel is
selected.
If you’d rather work with all panels expanded, simply click the left-facing
double arrows on the gray bar above the panels. You can collapse all the
panels again by clicking the right-facing double arrows on the gray bar above
the expanded panels.
Even though some InDesign panels perform different functions, similar

panels are grouped together depending on what they’re used for. You can
change the groupings by clicking and dragging a panel’s tab into another
grouping.
Some panels change when you’re manipulating specific types of content on
an InDesign page. Throughout Chapters 2 through 8 of this minibook, you
discover these specific panels as you create layouts. For now, we briefly show
you two general InDesign panels: Control and Pages.
Control panel
The Control panel, located across the top of the document window, is used to
edit just about any element you have selected in InDesign, as shown for the
Type tool in Figure 1-5. This panel is context sensitive, so it changes
depending on which element you’ve selected on a page. For example, if you
have selected text within a frame on the page, the Control panel displays
options allowing you to edit the text. If you have a shape selected, the panel
displays options allowing you to modify the shape.
FIGURE 1-5: The Control panel, when the Type tool is active.
Figure 1-6 shows the Control panel when a frame is selected using the
Selection tool. The Control panel menu allows you to select options for the
frame.
FIGURE 1-6: The Control panel, when a frame is selected using the Selection tool.
Pages panel
You can control pages by using the Pages panel, as shown in Figure 1-7. This
panel allows you to arrange, add, and delete pages in your document. If you
are creating electronic documents, you can also use the Pages panel for
creating alternative layouts for vertical and horizontal displays on a tablet.
You can also navigate among pages with this panel, which we discuss further
in Chapter 3 of this minibook.

FIGURE 1-7: Use the Pages panel to add, delete, and move pages, as well as create alternative
layouts for tablet displays.
 You can also add and delete pages by choosing Layout⇒  Pages, and
even use a keyboard shortcut to add pages, Ctrl+Shift+P (Windows) or
⌘  +Shift+P (Mac).
 You can hide all open panels (including the Control panel) by
pressing the Tab key; press Tab for them to return to view. In InDesign
CC, you can leave tools and panels hidden and access them when you
want by moving the cursor to the left or right side of the work area.
Hover your cursor over the thin vertical gray bar on either side, and the
tools or panels (depending on which side of the workspace you’re in)
reappear! By the way, they go away again after you leave the area.
You can navigate the document’s pages by using the left- and right-arrow
buttons on either side of the page number in the lower-left corner of the
document window. You can also move to a specific page by entering a page
number into the page field and pressing Enter/Return or by selecting the page

from the drop-down list in the lower-left corner of the Document window.
Contextual menus
Contextual menus (or context menus) are menus that pop up when you right-
click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac) the mouse. Contextual menus change
depending on which element you click and which tool you’re using. If you
have no elements selected, the contextual menu opens for the overall
InDesign document, allowing you to select options such as Zoom, Paste,
Rulers, and Guides. If you have an element selected, your options include
transforming, modifying, and editing the object.
 Contextual menus are context sensitive (hence the name!).
Remember to select an element on the page before you right-click
(Windows) or Control-click (Mac) to open the contextual menu. If you
don’t select the object first, the menu that displays is for the document
instead of for an object.
You can find out more about editing and transforming elements in Chapters 2
and 3 of this minibook.
Setting Up the Workspace
Workspace settings are important because they help you quickly create the
type of layout you need. Overall document settings control elements such as
grids or guides that help you align elements on the page. Neither guides nor
grids print when you print or publish your document.
Showing and hiding grids and guides
Grids and guides are onscreen lines that help you with your layout but, by
default, don’t appear when printing. A document grid is applied across the
entire document page area. Use the document grid when you need to divide a
document into sections to achieve your intended design. You can have objects
on a page align to the document grid, which helps you accurately line up or
space objects on your page.
Another type of grid is the baseline grid, which runs horizontally across the

page. Use the baseline grid to make sure that text in different columns is
aligned, thus creating a cleaner page layout.
 The document grid is used for aligning elements on the page, and the
baseline grid is used for aligning the bottom of text across multiple
columns.
To show or hide the document grid, choose View⇒  Grids & Guides⇒  
Show (or Hide) Document Grid.
To show or hide the baseline grid, choose View⇒  Grids & Guides⇒  Show
(or Hide) Baseline Grid. If you don’t see the baseline grid, you may be
zoomed out below the view threshold of 75%.
You can immediately see the difference between these two kinds of grids.
Guides can be placed anywhere on the page (or pasteboard) and are used to
accurately position objects in a layout. Unlike grids, guides are typically
created individually. Use them to align specific objects — such as the tops of
several images — that appear across a page. Objects can snap to guides just
like they can snap to a grid.
To create a guide and show or hide guides, follow these steps:
1. Make sure that rulers are visible by choosing View⇒  Show Rulers.
Rulers appear in the workspace. If you already have rulers visible, the
option View⇒  Hide Rulers is on the View menu. Don’t hide the rulers.
2. Move the cursor to a horizontal or vertical ruler.
Make sure that the cursor is over a ruler.
3. Click the ruler and drag the mouse toward the page.
A ruler guide shows on the page as a line.
4. Release the mouse where you want the guide.
You just created a ruler guide!
5. To hide the guide, choose View⇒  Grids & Guides⇒  Hide Guides.
This step hides the guide you created but doesn’t delete it. You can make

the guide reappear easily in the next step.
6. To see the guide again, choose View⇒  Grids & Guides⇒  Show Guides.
The guide you created is shown on the page again.
 You can edit the color of the ruler guide you created by positioning
the mouse over it, clicking once to select it, and then right-clicking
(Windows) or Control-clicking it (Mac) and selecting a new color from
the Ruler Guides option.
You can find out more about the different kinds of guides and how to use
them in page layout in Chapter 3 of this minibook.
 You can also control the color of the guides and grid in your
preferences. Access them by choosing Edit⇒  Preferences⇒  Grids
(Windows) or InDesign⇒  Preferences⇒  Grids (Mac). You may need to
scroll down through the Edit drop-down menu to find Preferences. When
the Preferences dialog box opens, you can change the color and spacing
of the lines. Click Guides & Pasteboards in the list on the left to change
the color settings for guides. To change the color of your ruler guides, go
to Layout⇒  Ruler Guides, and then click on the color drop-down menu
to select a different color, or click on the color box and select a custom
color from the Color Picker. This changes the color of all future ruler
guides.
Snapping to a grid or a guide
You can have elements on the page snap to a grid or a guide. Grid or guide
snapping is useful so that you don’t have to eyeball the alignment of several
elements to one another, because they’re precisely aligned to a grid or guide.
To make sure that this setting is enabled, choose View⇒  Grids & Guides⇒  
Snap to Document Grid or View⇒  Grids & Guides⇒  Snap to Guides. If these
options are already selected, clicking them will turn them off.
Using Smart Guides

Give yourself an added hand when aligning objects on the InDesign page
with Smart Guides. Illustrator and Photoshop users may be familiar with
these interactive guides, but if you’re not, read on to discover how you can
take advantage of them.
You can experiment with this capability by creating two objects in an
InDesign document. It doesn’t matter which object or shape — any will do!
With the Selection tool, click and slowly drag one object in a circular motion
around the other. You’ll notice guides appear and disappear, indicating when
the objects are aligned on the top, center, or bottom of the other object, as
shown in Figure 1-8.
FIGURE 1-8: Click and drag one shape around another to see the interaction with Smart Guides.
As a default, pink guides appear when you align an object with the center of
the page, as shown in Figure 1-9.

FIGURE 1-9: Know when your object is at the exact center of the page when a guide crosshair
appears.
 You can see a print preview of your document by clicking the
Preview Mode button at the bottom of the Tools panel. Click and hold
the Normal button to access the Preview Mode. When you click this
button, all object bounding boxes, guides, and the grid disappear.
Customizing menus
InDesign has many menus and many choices under each menu. It’s likely
you’ll need to use only some of these menu choices. If you discover that
you’re wading through many menu items to find the items you need, you can
customize InDesign to hide menu items you don’t use.
To customize your InDesign menus, follow these steps:
1. Choose Edit⇒  Menus.
The Menu Customization window opens.
2. In the Application Menu Command column, click the triangle next to
the menu(s) you want to customize.
For example, if you never expect to import XML, which is located under
the File menu, click the triangle to the left of the File menu to display this
menu item.
3. Click the eye icon next to the menu item that you want to hide.

Or if you want to highlight a menu item, click the color column to the
right of the eye icon to add a color to the menu choice.
4. Click the Save As button at the top of the window to save the menu
customization set. Enter a name for your customized menu set, click
OK to save the name, and then click OK again to close the Menu
Customization window.
The customized menus are saved. To return to the original default menus,
or to further customize the menus, choose Edit⇒  Menus at any time
you’re using InDesign.
Customizing the interface appearance
InDesign lets you adjust the overall appearance of the workspace to
customize the color theme. You can set exactly how dark or light you would
like the panels and pasteboard to be, or select between several predefined
settings.
To customize the InDesign interface appearance, follow these steps:
1. Choose Edit⇒  Preferences⇒  Interface (Windows) or InDesign⇒  
Preferences⇒  Interface (Mac).
The Preferences window opens, with the Interface category active. The
Appearance section at the top of this window is where you adjust settings
that affect the user interface appearance.
2. In the Appearance section, adjust the color theme for the user
interface and pasteboard.
The default setting is Medium Dark, and you can switch between each
setting and InDesign will preview your selection. Alternatively, you can
enter a custom percentage setting to fine-tune the brightness setting.
3. Select or deselect Match Pasteboard to Theme Color.
The option is selected by default, which means the pasteboard (the area
around your document) is a darker shade. Deselect this option if you
prefer a white pasteboard.
4. Click OK to apply your changes.
The workspace appearance updates.

Saving a custom workspace
You’ve seen that InDesign has a number of panels. If you find that you’re
using some panels more than others, you can have InDesign remember the
grouping of panels you use most frequently, including which ones are visible
and which ones are hidden. InDesign calls this a workspace. The next time
you want a certain group of panels open together, you can return to the
workspace you previously saved. The workspace isn’t attached to a particular
document, so you can have one workspace for editing text and another for
working with a layout.
To save a custom workspace, follow these steps:
1. Have the InDesign workspace configured in the way you want to save
it — with any panels open that you might want to access together.
The open panels will be saved as a custom workspace.
2. Choose Window⇒  Workspace⇒  New Workspace.
The New Workspace dialog box opens.
3. Choose whether to save the panel locations or any menus that have
been customized. Type a new name for the workspace in the Name
text field.
Enter a name that reflects the type of work you do in that workspace, such
as text editing or layout.
4. Click OK.
The custom workspace is saved. The name you entered for your
workspace is displayed on the Workspaces menu.
To access your workspace, choose Window⇒  Workspace⇒  Your Workspace
(where Your Workspace is the name you gave the workspace in Step 3).
You can delete the workspace if you no longer want it saved. Simply choose
Window⇒  Workspace⇒  Delete Workspace.
Working with Documents
After you’re comfortable getting around the InDesign workspace, you’re
ready to begin working with a new document. After you’ve started working

on a document, you should find out how to import content from other
programs and to save that document on your hard drive. A lot of the content
you use when creating layouts with InDesign is imported from other
programs — both Creative Cloud applications like Photoshop and Illustrator,
and non-Creative Cloud applications like Microsoft Word and Excel. You use
InDesign to organize, modify, and integrate text and graphics into a layout. To
begin, we show you the steps needed to import content and save new files.
We show you how to open new and existing documents earlier in this chapter,
in the sections “Creating a new publication” and “Opening an existing
publication.”
 You may also be working with a template, which is a layout you
reuse by applying it to a document that requires a particular predesigned
format. For example, a company may use a template for its official
letterhead because every new letter requires the same page format and
design. InDesign templates use the .indt file extension.
Importing new content
You can use many different kinds of content in an InDesign document
because you can import many supported file types. You can import text,
formatted tables, and graphics that help you create an effective layout. This
capability makes integration with many different programs easy.
Follow these steps to import an image file into InDesign (in this example, we
import a bitmap graphic file):
1. Choose File⇒  New⇒  Document.
The New Document dialog box appears.
2. Review the settings, make any changes depending upon the size and
type of document you want to create, and then click Create.
Feel free to alter the settings to change the number of pages, page size,
and intent before clicking Create. Afterwards, a new document opens.
3. Choose File⇒  Place.
The Place dialog box opens, enabling you to browse the contents of your

hard drive for supported files. If you were to select the Show Import
Options checkbox, another dialog box opens before the file imports.
Leave this option deselected for now.
4. Click the file you want to import, and then click Open.
Certain files, such as bitmap photo, graphic, and PDF files, show a
thumbnail preview at the bottom or to the right of the dialog box.
When you click Open, the Place dialog box closes, and the cursor
becomes an upside-down L.
5. Click the location on the page where you want the upper-left corner
of the imported file (for example, an image) to appear.
The imported file is placed on the page.
 Click and drag to place the file into a specific frame size, or if you’ve
created an empty frame on the page, clicking on top of the frame causes
the object being imported — whether it’s text or an image — to be
placed inside the frame.
 You can Ctrl-click (Windows) or ⌘-click (Mac) to place multiple
files. After you select the images and click OK, each click places an
image on the page, or you can hold down the Shift+Ctrl (Windows) or
Shift+⌘   (Mac) while dragging a rectangle to have all selected images
placed, spaced evenly, in a grid.
Note that when you’re placing multiple images, you can see a thumbnail of
each image before it’s placed. You can also scroll through the loaded images
by pressing the arrow keys on your keyboard.
For general information about importing and exporting using the Adobe
Creative Cloud, check out Book 1, Chapter 5. For more information on
importing different kinds of file formats, such as text, images, spreadsheets,
and PDFs, see Chapters 3 and 6 in this minibook.
Viewing content

You can view elements in several different ways on your document’s pages.
For example, sometimes you need to see objects on a page close up so that
you can make precise edits. InDesign offers several ways to navigate
documents:
Scroll bars: You can use the scroll bars to move pages around. The scroll
bars are located below and to the right of the pasteboard. Click a scroll
bar handle and drag it left and right or up and down.
Zoom: Zoom in or out from the document to increase or decrease the
display of your document. Select the Zoom tool (the magnifying glass
icon) from the Tools panel and click anywhere on the page to zoom in.
Press the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key and click to zoom out.
Hand tool: Use the Hand tool to move the page around. This tool is
perhaps the best and quickest way to move pages around and navigate
documents. Select the Hand tool by pressing the spacebar (when using
any tool other than the Type tool), and then click and drag to move around
the pasteboard.
Keyboard: Press Ctrl++ (plus sign) (Windows) or ⌘  ++ (plus sign)
(Mac) to zoom in using the keyboard; replace the plus sign with the minus
sign to zoom out.
Saving your publication
Even the best computers and applications fail from time to time, so you don’t
want to lose your hard work unnecessarily. Saving a publication often is
important so that you don’t lose any work if your computer or software
crashes or the power goes out.
To save a file, choose File⇒  Save or press Ctrl+S (Windows) or ⌘  +S (Mac).
You may also want to save different versions of your files. You may want to
do this if you’re experimenting with different design options, for example,
and you want to retain earlier versions of your files. To do this, use the Save
As command, which makes creating different versions of documents easy.
 Choose File⇒  Save before proceeding if you want the current

document to save the revisions you’ve made since you last saved the
file. All new additions to the document are made in the new version of
the file.
To save a new version of the current document and then continue working on
the new document, follow these steps:
1. Choose File⇒  Save As.
The Save As dialog box opens.
2. Choose the directory you want to save the file in.
3. In the File Name text field, enter a new name for the document.
This step saves a new version of the file. Consider a naming scheme at
this point. If your file is myLayout.indd, you might call it
myLayout02.indd to signify the second version of the file. Future files
can then increase the number for each new version.
4. Click the Save button when you’re finished.
This step saves the document in the chosen directory with a new name.
The File⇒  Save As command is also used for other means. You may want to
save your design as a template. After you create the template, choose File⇒  
Save As, and then choose InDesign CC Template from the Save As Type
(Windows) or Format (Mac) drop-down list.
You can also choose File⇒  Save a Copy. This command saves with a new
name a copy of the current state of the document you’re working on, but you
then continue working on the original document. Both commands are useful
for saving incremental versions of a project you’re working on.
To find out more about working with files, go to Chapter 7 of this minibook.

Chapter 2
Working with Text and Text
Frames
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Understanding text and frames in a publication
 Adding and importing text
 Exploring text frame options
 Changing paragraph settings
 Editing with text editors and spell checking
 Working with tables
 Creating and editing text on a path
Most of the documents you create contain text, so it’s important to know how
to format, style, and control text in your layouts. Text is made up of
characters, and the characters are styled in specific fonts. If you want to find
out more about fonts and typefaces, check out Book 7, Chapter 6.
This chapter explains how to create, edit, and style text by using InDesign.
You get started by editing and manipulating text placed inside text frames —
containers on the page that hold text content. The most important concepts
you can take away from this chapter are how to add text to documents and
then change the text so that it looks the way you want on the page. In Chapter
3 of this minibook, find out how to create effective layouts that contain both
text and graphics so that your audience is encouraged to read everything you
create.
Understanding Text, Font, and Frames
Text is usually integral to a publication because it contains specific

information you want or need to convey to an audience. Understanding the
terminology that appears in the following pages is important. Text and font are
quite different from each other:
Text: The letters, words, sentences, and paragraphs making up content in
the text frames in your publication.
Font: The particular design forming a set of characters used to style text.
You can find thousands of styles of fonts from many manufacturers, and
many are included in programs you install on your computer. InDesign’s
Font menu lets you preview font faces and even set favorite fonts.
Frames resemble containers that are used to hold content. You can use two
kinds of frames in a publication:
Text: Contains text on the page in your InDesign document. You can link
text frames so that text flows from one text frame to another, and you can
have text wrap around graphic frames.
Graphic: Holds an image that you place in your publication.
When you create frames using InDesign, they can contain either text or
graphics — so the methods for creating both types of frames are identical.
InDesign automatically changes frames to adapt to content, so you can use
both the frame and shape tools for designing your layout and creating frames
that will contain text or graphics.
Creating and Using Text Frames
Text frames contain any text you add to a publication. You can create a new
text frame in many different ways. In InDesign, you can add text to creative
shapes you draw, thereby changing them into text frames. Creating and using
text frames in a publication is important because you typically use a lot of
text. Throughout the following subsections, we show you how to create text
frames in different, but important, ways using three different tools. If you
need a guide to the tools, check out Chapter 1 of this minibook.

 Text frames are sometimes automatically created when you import
text into a publication. You find out how to do this in the “Importing
text” section, later in this chapter.
Creating text frames with the Type tool
You can use the Type tool to create a text frame. If you use the Type tool and
click the page, nothing happens unless you’ve first created a frame to hold the
text. Here’s how to create a text frame by using the Type tool:
1. 
 Select the Type tool in the Tools panel and place the tool over the
page.
The Type tool cursor is an I-bar. Move the cursor to the spot where you
want to place the upper-left corner of the text frame.
2. Drag diagonally to create a text frame.
When you click, the mouse has a crosslike appearance. When you drag,
an outline of the text frame appears, giving you a reference to its
dimensions, as shown in Figure 2-1.
3. Release the mouse button when the frame is the correct size.
The text frame is created, and an insertion point is placed in the upper-left
corner of the frame. You can start typing on the keyboard to enter text or
import text from another source. (See the later section, “Importing text.”)

FIGURE 2-1: Using the Type tool, drag to create a text frame.
Creating text frames with the Frame tool
You can use the Frame tool to create frames that are rectangular, oval, or
polygonal. Then, after you’ve placed the frame on the page, you can turn it
into a text frame or use it as a graphic frame or simply a design object on the
page. To create a new text frame with the Frame tool, follow these steps:
1. Choose the Frame tool from the Tools panel and drag diagonally to
create a new frame.
A new frame is created on the page.
2. Select the Type tool and click inside the frame.
The X across the frame disappears, and the frame is now a text frame
instead of a graphic frame.
3. Choose the Selection tool and use it to move the text frame.
You can move the text frame if you click within the frame using the
Selection tool and drag it to a new location.

Creating text frames from a shape
If you have an interesting shape that you’ve created with the drawing tools or
copied and pasted from Illustrator, you can easily change the shape into a text
frame so that it can be filled with text. Just follow these steps:
1. Use the Pen tool, Pencil tool, or a Shape tool to create a shape with a
stroke color and no fill. Or, copy and paste artwork from Illustrator.
A shape is created on the page that doesn’t have a solid color for the fill.
2. Select the Type tool from the Tools panel.
The Type tool becomes active.
3. Click inside the shape you created in Step 1 and enter some text or
import text. (See the section “Importing text,” later in this chapter.)
This step changes the shape into a text frame. Notice how the text is
confined within the shape as you type.
Adding Text to Your Publication
In the preceding sections’ step lists, you find out how to add text by simply
clicking in the text frame and typing new content, but you can also add text to
publications in other ways. Doing so is particularly useful when you use other
applications to create and edit documents containing text.
Importing text
You can import text you’ve created or edited using other software, such as
Adobe InCopy or Microsoft Word or Excel. Importing edited text is a typical
workflow activity when creating a publication, because dedicated text-editing
software is often used to edit manuscripts before layout.
To import text into InDesign, follow these steps:
1. Choose File⇒  Place.
The Place dialog box opens. Choose an importable file (such as a Word
document, an InCopy story, or a plain text file) by browsing your hard
drive.
2. Select a document to import and click the Open button.

The Place Text icon, the cursor arrow, and a thumbnail image of the text
appear. Move the cursor around the page to the spot where you want the
upper-left corner of the text frame to be created when the document is
imported.
3. Click to place the imported text.
This step creates a text frame and imports the text.
 If you select a text frame before importing text, the text is
automatically placed inside the text frame — so, in this case, you
wouldn’t have to use the cursor to place the text. You can move the text
frame anywhere on the page after the text is added or resize the frame, if
necessary.
Controlling text flow
Control the flow of the text by using these simple modifier keys while placing
text:
Choose File⇒  Place, select the file you want to import, and click Open.
Hold down the Shift key and, when the loaded cursor turns into a curvy
arrow, click the document. The text is imported and automatically flows
from one column to another or from page to page until it runs out.
InDesign even creates pages, if needed.
Choose File⇒  Place, select the file you want to import, and click Open.
Hold down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key. Then click and drag
a text area. (Don’t release the Alt key or Option key!) As you continue
clicking and dragging additional text frames, your text flows from one
text frame to another until you run out of copy.
 If you select the Show Import Options checkbox in the Place dialog
box, a second window appears in which you can choose to remove styles
and formatting from text and tables. This action brings in clean,
unformatted text to edit. On a Mac, select the Options button to access

the Show Import Options checkbox.
Adding placeholder text
Suppose that you’re creating a publication but the text you need to import
into it isn’t ready to import into InDesign — perhaps the text is still being
created or edited. Rather than wait for the final text, you can use placeholder
text and continue to create your publication’s layout. Placeholder text is
commonly used to temporarily fill a document with text. The text looks a lot
like normal blocks of text, which is more natural than trying to paste the same
few words repeatedly to fill up a text frame. However, placeholder text isn’t
in any particular language, because it’s just being used as filler.
InDesign can add placeholder text into a text frame automatically. Here’s
how:
1. Create a frame on the page by selecting the Type tool, clicking on the
page and dragging diagonally to create a text frame.
2. Choose Type⇒  Fill with Placeholder Text.
The text frame is automatically filled with characters and words, similar
to the one shown in Figure 2-2.

FIGURE 2-2: The text frame, filled with placeholder text.
Copying and pasting text
You can move text from another application into an InDesign publication by
copying and pasting the text directly into InDesign. If you select and copy
text in another program, you can paste it directly into InDesign from your
computer’s Clipboard. Here’s how:
1. Highlight the text you want to use in your publication and press
Ctrl+C (Windows) or ⌘  +C (Mac) to copy the text.
When you copy text, it sits on the Clipboard (until it’s replaced by
something new), and you can transfer this information into InDesign.
2. Open InDesign and press Ctrl+V (Windows) or ⌘  +V (Mac) to create
a new text frame and paste the text into it.

A new text frame appears centered on the page with your selected text
inside it.
 You can also click in a text frame and press Ctrl+V (Windows) or ⌘  
+V (Mac) to paste text from the Clipboard directly into an existing
frame. You can do the same thing with an image.
All you need to do is double-click a text frame if you want to access or edit
some text or type or paste it into the frame.
 You can control what formatting you paste into your file by adjusting
InDesign preferences. Select Edit⇒  Preferences⇒  Clipboard Handling
(Windows) or InDesign⇒  Preferences⇒  Clipboard Handling (Mac), and
then choose either All Information (swatches, styles, and so forth) or
Text only.
Looking at Text Frame Options
In the previous sections of this chapter, we show you how to create text
frames and enter text into them. In the following sections, we show you how
to organize text frames in your publication and achieve the results you need.
Controlling text frames so that they do what you need them to do is a matter
of knowing how they work after you put text in them.
InDesign gives you a lot of control over the text in your publications.
Changing text frame options allows you to change the way text is placed
inside a frame. Changing these kinds of settings is sometimes important when
you’re working with particular kinds of fonts. (To read more about fonts,
check out Book 7, Chapter 6.)
The text frame contextual menu contains many options for working with the
text frame. You use this menu to perform basic commands, such as copy and
paste, fill the text frame with placeholder text, make transformations, add or
modify strokes, and change the frame type. Access the text frame contextual

menu by right-clicking (Windows) or Control-clicking (Mac) a text frame
with the selection tool. You can also find most of these options on the Type
and Object menus.
Changing text frame options
To change text frame options that control the look of the text within the
frame, follow these steps:
1. Create a rectangular text frame on the page, select the frame with the
Selection tool, and choose Object⇒  Text Frame Options.
You can also press Ctrl+B (Windows) or ⌘  +B (Mac) or use the text
frame’s contextual menu to open the Text Frame Options dialog box.
You can tell that a text frame is selected when it has handles around its
bounding box.
The Text Frame Options dialog box appears, showing you the current
settings for the selected text frame.
2. Select the Preview checkbox to automatically view updates.
Now any changes you make in the dialog box are instantly updated on the
page, so you can make changes and see how they’ll look before you apply
them.
3. In the Inset Spacing area of the dialog box, change the Top, Bottom,
Left, and Right values.
These values are used to inset text from the edges of the text frame. The
text is pushed inside the frame edge by the value you set. With the Make
All Settings Same toggle, the chain symbol, enabled, you only need to
enter a value into one of the four text boxes.
You can also indent text, which we discuss in the section “Indenting your
text,” later in this chapter. You can choose in this dialog box how to align
the text vertically (Top, Center, Bottom, or Justify). You can align the text
to the top or bottom of the text frame, center it vertically in the frame, or
evenly space the lines in the frame from top to bottom (Justify).
4. When you finish making changes in this dialog box, click OK.
The changes you made are applied to the text frame.
Using and modifying columns

You can specify that the document contains a certain number of columns on
the page when you create a new publication. Using columns allows you to
snap new text frames to columns so that they’re properly spaced on the page.
You can even modify the size of the gutter, which is the spacing between
columns.
You can also create columns within a single text frame by using the Text
Frame Options dialog box. You can add as many as 40 columns in a single
text frame. If you already have text in a frame, it’s automatically divided
among the columns you add. You can choose from three types of columns
when creating a layout with text using InDesign:
Use Fixed Number when you know exactly how many columns you
want to appear in a text frame.
Use Fixed Width when you know the exact width of columns that will
appear in a text frame. If the text frame becomes larger or smaller, the
number of columns may increase or decrease.
Use Flexible Width if you want the width of columns to vary depending
upon the size of the text frame. With Flexible Width, InDesign adds or
reduces the number of columns as needed depending upon the width of
the text frame.
The following steps show you how to add columns to a text frame on a page:
1. Create a rectangular text frame on the page.
Use the Text or Frame tool to create the text frame. You can create
columns in text frames that are rectangular, oval, or even freehand shapes
drawn on the page.
2. After you create the text frame, the cursor is automatically placed
inside of the frame, and you can now enter some text.
You can type some text, paste text copied from another document, or add
placeholder text by choosing Type⇒  Fill with Placeholder Text.
3. With the text frame still selected, choose Object⇒  Text Frame
Options.
In the Text Frame Options dialog box that opens, you may wish to select
the Preview checkbox to immediately view the changes your settings

make to the frame on the page.
4. In the Columns section, change the value in the Number text field.
In this example, we entered 2 in the Number text field. The selected text
frame divides the text in the frame into two columns. If you selected the
Preview checkbox, when you click in a different text field in the dialog
box, the text frame updates on the page to reflect the new value setting.
5. Change the width of the columns by entering a new value in the
Width text field.
The width of the columns is automatically set, depending on the width of
the text frame you created. We entered 10 (picas) in the Width text field
for this example. The text frame changes size depending on the width you
set in this column.
6. Change the value in the Gutter text field.
The gutter value controls the amount of space between columns. If the
gutter is too wide, change the value in the Gutter text field to a lower
number. We entered 0p5 in the Gutter text field for this example to
change the gutter width to half a point.
7. When you finish, click OK to apply the changes.
The changes are applied to the text frame you modified.
After you create columns in a text frame, you can resize the frame by using
the handles on its bounding box, detailed in the later section, “Resizing and
moving the text frame.” The columns resize as necessary to divide the text
frame into the number of columns you specified in the Text Frame Options
dialog box. If you select the Fixed Column Width option from the drop-down
menu, your text frames are always the width you specify, no matter how you
resize the text frame. When you resize the text frame, the frame snaps to the
designated fixed width.
 You can also change the number of columns in the Control panel after
selecting the text frame with the Selection tool, or by using the
paragraph options in the Control panel while using the Type tool. If you
are working on a small screen, the control panel may not display these

options due to the resolution of your screen. You can still access the
Paragraph controls by selecting Window⇒   Type & Tables⇒   Paragraph.
Modifying and Connecting Text
Frames on a Page
Making modifications to text frames and then connecting them to other text
frames in a publication so that the story can continue on a separate page is
vital in most publications. You typically work with stories of many
paragraphs that need to continue on different pages in the document.
When you have a text frame on the page, you need to be able to change the
size, position, and linking of the frame. You need to link the frame to other
frames on the page so that the text can flow between them — which is
important if you’re creating a layout that contains a lot of text.
If you paste more text content than is visible in the text frame, the text still
exists beyond the boundaries of the text frame — so if you have a text frame
that’s 20 lines tall but you paste in 50 lines of text, the last 30 lines are
cropped off. You need to resize the text frame or have the text flow to another
frame in order to see the rest of the text you pasted. You can tell that the
frame has more content when you see a small red plus sign (+) in a special
handle in the text frame’s bounding box.
Resizing and moving the text frame
When creating layouts, you regularly resize text frames and move them
around the document while you figure out how you want the page layout to
look. You can resize and move a text frame by following these steps:
1. Use the Selection tool to select a text frame on the page.
A bounding box with handles appears on the page. If the text frame has
more text than it can show at the current size, a small red box with a red
plus sign appears in the lower-right corner of the bounding box.
2. Drag one of the handles to resize the text frame.
The frame updates automatically on the page while you drag the handles,
as shown in Figure 2-3. Change the width or height by dragging the
handles at the center of each side of the frame, or change the height and

the width at the same time by dragging a corner handle.
Shift-drag a corner handle to scale the text frame proportionally.
3. When you’re finished resizing the text frame, click in the middle of a
selected frame and move it around the page.
If you click within the frame once and drag it, you move the frame around
the page. An outline of the frame follows the cursor and represents the
spot where the frame is placed if you release the mouse button. Simply
release the frame when you finish moving it.
FIGURE 2-3: Resize a text frame by dragging its handles.
 If you’re using guides or grids on the page, the text frame snaps to
them. Also, if you opened a document with columns, the text frame
snaps to the columns when you drag the frame close to the column
guidelines.
You can also use the Transform panel to change the location and dimensions
of a text frame. If the Transform panel isn’t already open, choose Window⇒  
Object and Layout⇒  Transform to open it. Make sure the text frame is
selected, then follow these steps:
1. Change the values in the X and Y text fields.
Enter 1 in both the X and Y text fields to move the text frame to the
upper-left corner of the page.

The X and Y coordinates (location) of the text frame update to 1,1. The
small square in the middle or along the edge of the text is the reference
point of the text frame: The X and Y coordinates you set match the
position of this point.
 Change the reference point by clicking any square in the reference
point indicator in the upper-left corner of the control panel.
2. Change the values in the W and H text fields.
For this example, we entered 35 (picas) in the W and H text fields. The
text frame’s width and height change to the dimensions you specify.
Using the Transform panel to change the width and height is ideal if you
need to set an exact measurement for the frame.
 You not only can resize and move text frames, but also can change
their shapes. Select a text frame and choose the Direct Selection tool
from the Tools panel. You can then select the corners on the text frame
and move them to reshape the text frame.
Threading text frames
Understanding how to thread text frames together is important if you plan to
build page layouts with a lot of text. Threading occurs when text frames are
arranged so that the text in one frame continues in a second text frame.
Threading is useful for most layouts because you can’t always include all text
in a single frame.
First, take a look at some of the related terminology because Adobe has given
some special names to text frames that are linked. Figure 2-4 shows some of
the concepts and icons we refer to in the following list:
Flowing: Describes text starting in one frame and continuing in a second
frame.
Threading: Describes two text frames that have text flowing from the
first frame to the second.
Story: The name of a group of sentences and paragraphs in threaded text

frames.
In port: An icon on the upper-left side of a text frame’s bounding box
indicating that a frame is the first one in a story or has text flowing in
from another frame. An In port icon has a story flowing into it if it
contains a small arrow; otherwise, the In port icon is empty.
Out port: An icon on the lower-right side of the text frame’s bounding
box indicating that a frame has text flowing out of it. The Out port icon
contains a small arrow if the frame is threaded to another frame; an empty
Out port icon signifies that the frame isn’t connected to another text
frame.
If a text frame isn’t connected to another frame and has overset text (more
text than can be displayed in a text frame), the Out port shows a small red
plus sign (+) icon.

FIGURE 2-4: Threaded text between two linked text frames.
Find a block of text that you want to thread (for best results, use one that has
formed sentences as opposed to placeholder text), and then follow these
steps:
1. Copy some text on the Clipboard, such as from the InDesign Help
files, a page loaded in a web browser window, or a Word, Notepad, or

SimpleText document.
The type of content you’re pasting doesn’t matter. You only need to make
sure the text is at least a few paragraphs long so that you have enough text
to flow between frames.
In Figure 2-4, you can see the text thread represented by a line connecting
one text frame to another. InDesign shows you text threads if you choose
View⇒  Extras⇒  Show Text Threads.
2. Use the Type tool to create two text frames on a page.
The text frames can be above or beside one another, similar to the layout
shown in Figure 2-5.
3. Using the Text tool, click in the first text frame, which is above or to
the left of the second text frame.
The blinking insertion point that appears in the first text frame lets you
know that you can enter or paste text into the frame.
4. Press Ctrl+V (Windows) or ⌘  +V (Mac) to paste the text into the text
frame.
The text you’ve copied to the Clipboard enters into the frame. If you’ve
pasted enough text, you see the overset text icon (a red plus sign) on the
lower-right side of the text frame. (Refer to Figure 2-5.) If you don’t see
the overset text icon, use the Paste command a second time so that more
text is entered into the frame.
5. Click the overset text icon with the Selection tool.
The cursor changes to the loaded text icon so that you can select or create
another text frame to thread the story.
6. Move the cursor over the second text frame and click.
The cursor changes to the thread text icon when it hovers over the second
text frame. When you click the second text frame, the two frames are
threaded because the text continues in the second frame.

FIGURE 2-5: Two frames on the page; the first contains text.
You can continue creating frames and threading them. You can thread them
on the same page or on subsequent pages.
You can unthread text as well, which means that you’re breaking the link
between two text frames. You can rearrange the frames used to thread text,
such as changing the page the story continues on when it’s threaded to a
second text frame. Break the connection by double-clicking the In port icon
or the Out port icon of the text frame that you want to unthread. The frame is
then unthreaded (but no text is deleted).

 If your document doesn’t have multiple pages in it, choose Layout⇒  
Pages⇒  Insert Pages. Indicate the number of pages to add, and then click
OK when you’re finished. Now you can click through the pages using
the Page Field control at the bottom of the workspace and create a new
text frame into which you can link your text.
Adding a page jump number
If your document has multiple pages, you can add a page jump number (text
that indicates where the story continues if it jumps to a text frame on another
page) to an existing file. Before you start, make sure that a story threads
between text frames on two different pages, and then follow these steps:
1. Create a new text frame on the first page and type “continued on
page”.
2. Use the Selection tool to select the text frame you just created.
3. Move the text frame so that it slightly overlaps the text frame
containing the story (if needed, repeat Steps 1 and 4 from the
preceding section, “Threading text threads,” and create a new text
frame with overset text).
4. Let InDesign know what text frame it’s tracking the story from or to.
Overlap the two text frames (and keep them overlapped), as shown in
Figure 2-6, so that InDesign knows to associate these text frames (the
continued-notice text frame and the story text frame) with each other.
 You can then group these two text frames (so that they move
together). To do so, select both frames (Shift-click with the Selection tool
to select both text frames), then choose Object⇒  Group.
5. Double-click the new text frame, which contains the text “continued
on page.” Place the cursor at the spot where you want the page
number to be inserted. (This is called the insertion point.)
The page number is inserted at the insertion point. Make sure that a space
appears after the preceding character, so they do not run together. In this

example, you would need a space after the word “page.”
6. Choose Type⇒  Insert Special Character⇒  Markers⇒  Next Page
Number.
A number is added into the text frame. The number is sensitive to the
location of the next threaded text frame, so if you move the second text
frame, the page number updates automatically. This example will look
like “continued on page 2.”
FIGURE 2-6: Slightly overlap the two text frames when creating a page jump, so that the page
jump is associated with a specific story.
 You can repeat these steps at the spot where the story is continued
from — just choose Type⇒  Insert Special Character⇒  Markers⇒  
Previous Page Number in Step 6 instead.
Understanding Paragraph Settings
You can change the settings for an entire text frame or a single paragraph in a
text frame in several ways. You can use the Paragraph panel to make
adjustments to a single paragraph or to an entire text frame’s indentation,
justification, and alignment. Open the Paragraph panel by choosing

Window⇒  Type & Tables⇒  Paragraph.
 If you want changes in the Paragraph panel to span across all text
frames you create, don’t select any paragraph or text frame before
making the changes; instead, first select the entire text frame or frames
on the page. Then the selections you make in the Paragraph panel affect
all paragraphs in the selected text frames, not just one paragraph. If you
want the selections you make in the Paragraph panel to affect just one
paragraph within a text frame, select that paragraph first by using the
Type tool, and then make your changes.
Indenting your text
You can indent a paragraph in a story by using the Paragraph panel.
Indentation moves the paragraph away from the edges of the text frame’s
bounding box. Here’s how to modify indentation:
1. Create a text frame on the page and fill it with text.
You can fill the text frame by typing text, copying and pasting text, or
inserting placeholder text by choosing Text⇒  Fill with Placeholder Text.
2. Make sure that the insertion point is blinking in the text frame in the
paragraph you want to change or use the Selection tool to select the
text frame.
3. Choose Window⇒  Type & Tables⇒  Paragraph to open the Paragraph
panel.
The Paragraph panel opens, showing the text frame’s current settings. See
Figure 2-7 to find out the name of each setting control.
4. Change the value in the Left Indent text field and press Enter.
 The larger the number, the greater the indent. You can specify the
unit of measurement as you enter the text by entering in for inches or pt
for points, using any forms of measurement InDesign supports.
5. Change the value in the First Line Left Indent text field and press

Enter.
FIGURE 2-7: The Paragraph panel.

 To change all paragraphs in a story, click the insertion point in a
paragraph and choose Edit⇒  Select All before changing settings.
Text alignment and justification
You can use the alignment and justification buttons in the Paragraph panel to
format text frames:
Align helps you left-, center-, or right-align text with the edges of the text
frames.
Justification lets you space text in relation to the edges of the text frame,
and it lets you justify the final line of text in the paragraph.
To align or justify a block of text, select the text or the text frame and click
one of the Align or Justify buttons. (Refer to Figure 2-7 to see the Align and
Justify buttons in the Paragraph panel.)
Saving a paragraph style
Do you ever go to all the trouble of finding just the right indent, font, or
spacing to use in your copy, just to find that you have to apply those attributes
a hundred times to complete your project? Or, have you ever decided that the
indent is too much? Wouldn’t it be nice to change one indent text box and
have it update all other occurrences? You can do this using paragraph styles
in InDesign.
To create a paragraph style, follow these steps:
1. Create a text frame, add text, and apply a first-line indent of any size
you want.
Select some text — you don’t have to select it all.
2. Choose Window⇒  Styles⇒  Paragraph Styles.
The Paragraph Styles panel opens.
3. From the Paragraph Styles panel menu, choose the new paragraph
style icon on the bottom of the panel (piece of paper with folded
corner).

Single-click the new style, Paragraph Style 1, and note that the Paragraph
panel will show that every attribute, font, and size is not in the Paragraph
panel and indent is already recorded in this unnamed style.
Double-click the new style, Paragraph Style 1, and the Paragraph Style
Options dialog box opens. You don’t have to do anything at this point
other than name the style.
4. Change the name from Paragraph Style 1 to something more
appropriate, such as BodyCopy, and click OK.
Your style is created! After you click OK, the dialog box closes, and the
new style is added to the Paragraph Styles panel list. You can modify the
settings by double-clicking the style name in the Paragraph Styles panel.
You can apply the style to other text frames by selecting the frame and
clicking the style in the Paragraph Styles panel.
 If you want to change an existing style, the Paragraph Style Options
dialog box has several different areas in a large list on the left side.
Select an item in the list to view and change its associated paragraph
properties on the right side of the dialog box to update all instances of
that paragraph style.
 You can import paragraph styles from other documents or from a file
on your hard drive, which is particularly useful when you need to use a
particular set of styles for a template. To import paragraph styles, choose
Load Paragraph Styles from the Paragraph Styles menu on the right side
of the header. A dialog box prompts you to browse your hard drive for a
file. Select the file to load, click Open, and then click OK to load the
selected styles.
Editing Stories
Your documents likely contain all sorts of text, and some of that text may

need to be edited. InDesign has a built-in story editor for editing text. This
feature can be useful when it’s inconvenient or impossible to open another
text editor to make changes.
 InDesign also integrates with another Adobe product: InCopy. It’s a
text editor that’s similar to Microsoft Word but has integration
capabilities with InDesign for streamlined page layout. If you work in IT
or in editorial management and have some users who only write and
others who only handle layout, you might want to have a look at InCopy
as a possible text editor.
Using the story editor
The InDesign story editor lets you view a story outside tiny columns and
format the text as necessary. To open the story editor to edit a piece of text,
follow these steps:
1. Find a piece of text that you want to edit and select the text frame
with the Selection tool.
A bounding box with handles appears around the text frame.
2. Choose Edit⇒  Edit in Story Editor or use the keyboard shortcut
Ctrl+Y (Windows) or ⌘  +Y (Mac).
The story editor opens in a new window directly in the InDesign
workspace.
3. Edit the story in the window as necessary and click the Close button
when you finish.
Your story appears in one block of text. Any paragraph styles you apply
to the text in the story editor are noted in an Information pane on the left
side of the workspace.
 Notice in Figure 2-8 that you can see tables in the story editor. Click
the small table icon to collapse and expand the table in the story editor.

FIGURE 2-8: You can see text and tables in the story editor.
 If you want to make text edits but would like to keep the original text
unchanged, you can choose Type⇒  Track Changes⇒  Track Changes in
Current Story. The original text remains in the story editor along with
your marked changes, but in layout mode only the edited text appears.
Later you (or an editor) can use the Track Changes command to accept
or reject text edits using the Story Editor.

Checking for correct spelling
Typos and spelling errors are easy to make. Therefore, you must check for
incorrect spelling in a document before you print or export it to a PDF. Here’s
how to check for spelling in InDesign:
1. Choose Edit⇒  Spelling⇒  Check Spelling.
2. In the Check Spelling dialog box that appears, choose a selection to
search from the Search drop-down list, and then click the Start
button.
The spell check automatically starts searching the selection, story, or
document.
3. Choose from three options:
Click the Skip button to ignore a misspelled word.
Select a suggested spelling correction from the list in the
Suggested Corrections pane and click the Change button.
Click Ignore All to ignore any more instances of that word.
The spelling is corrected in the text frame and moves to the next spelling
error.
4. Click the Done button to stop the spell check; otherwise, click OK
when InDesign alerts you that the spell check is done.
 It is always a good practice to proofread your work manually, even
when you use the spell check feature to adjust your writing. The spell
checker won’t reveal problems such as grammatical errors or word
misuse.
Using custom spelling dictionaries
You can easily add words, such as proper nouns, to your dictionary by
clicking the Add button.
You can create a user dictionary or add user dictionaries from previous
InDesign versions, from files that other people have sent you, or from a
server. The dictionary you add is used for all your InDesign documents.

Follow these steps to create your own, custom dictionary:
1. Choose Edit⇒  Preferences⇒  Dictionary (Windows) or InDesign⇒  
Preferences⇒  Dictionary (Mac).
The Preferences dialog box appears with the Dictionary section visible.
2. From the Language drop-down list, select the language of your
dictionary.
3. Click the New User Dictionary button below the Language drop-
down list.
4. Specify the name and location of the user dictionary, and then click
Save (Windows) or OK (Mac).
 If you want to see when a spelling error occurs without opening the
Check Spelling dialog box, choose Edit⇒  Spelling⇒  Dynamic Spelling.
Unknown words are then highlighted. To correct the spelling, right-click
(Windows) or ⌘  -click (Mac) and select the correct spelling from the
contextual menu or add the word to your dictionary.
Using Tables
A table is made of columns and rows, which divide a table into cells. You see
tables every day on television, in books and magazines, and all over the web.
In fact, a calendar is a table: All the days in a month are shown down a
column, every week is a row, and each day is a cell. You can use tables for
many different tasks, such as listing products, employees, or events.
The following list describes the components of a table and how to modify
them in InDesign:
Rows: Extend horizontally across a table. You can modify the height of a
row.
Columns: Are vertical in a table. You can modify the width of a column.
Cells: A text frame. You can enter information into this frame and format
it like any other text frame in InDesign.

Creating tables
The easiest way to create a table is to have data ready to go. (Mind you, this
isn’t the only way.) But flowing in existing data is the most dynamic way of
seeing what InDesign can do with tables.
Follow these steps to experiment with the table feature:
1. Create a text area and insert tabbed copy into it.
The example uses dates for an event:
Summer Events
June July August
1
2
3
4
5
6
Notice that the text was simply keyed in by pressing the Tab key between
every new entry and pressing the Return or Enter key for each new line.
The text doesn’t even need to be lined up.
2. Select the text and choose Table⇒  Convert Text to Table.
The Convert Text to Table Options dialog box appears. You can select
columns in the window that appears or let the tabs in your text determine
columns. You can find out more about table styles in the later section
“Creating table styles.”
 You can assign a table style at the same time you convert text to a
table.
3. Click OK to accept the default settings and select the table.
4. Hold down the Shift key and use your mouse to click and grab the
outside right border to stretch the table in or out.
The cells proportionally accommodate the new table size.
5. Double-click and drag across the top three cells to highlight them,
and then choose Table⇒  Merge Cells to merge them.
To create a new table without existing text, follow these steps:

1. Create a new text frame with the Type tool.
The insertion point should be blinking in the new text frame you create. If
it isn’t blinking, or if you created a new frame another way, double-click
the text frame so that the insertion point (I-bar) is active.
Note that you don’t have to have a text frame. You can choose Table⇒  
Create Table, and a text frame will be automatically created.
2. Choose Table⇒  Insert Table.
3. In the Insert Table dialog box that opens, enter the number of rows
and columns you want to add to the table in the Rows and Columns
text fields, and then click OK.
For example, we created a table with four rows and three columns.
Editing table settings
You can control many settings for tables. InDesign lets you change the text,
fill, and stroke properties for each cell or for the table itself. Because of this
flexibility, you can create fully customized tables to display information in an
intuitive and creative way. In this section, we show you some basic options
for editing tables.
To start editing table settings, follow these steps:
1. Select the table you want to make changes to by clicking in a cell.
2. Choose Table⇒  Table Options⇒  Table Setup.
The Table Options dialog box opens with the Table Setup tab selected.
The dialog box contains several tabs that contain settings you can change
for different parts of the table.
From the Table Setup tab, you edit the columns and rows, border, and
spacing and specify how column or row strokes are rendered in relation to
each other. For this example, we changed the number of rows and
columns. Now we will change the table border weight to a 3-point stroke.
3. Select the Preview checkbox at the bottom of the dialog box.
The Preview opens so that you can view the changes you make on the
page while you’re using the dialog box.
4. Click the Row Strokes tab and change the options.

For this example, we selected Every Second Row from the Alternating
Pattern drop-down list, changed the Weight option to 2, and changed the
Color property for the first row to C=15, M=100, Y=100, K=0 (the
CMYK equivalent of red).
This step causes every second row to have a red, 2-point stroke. You can
also click the Column Strokes tab to change the properties for column
strokes. The two tabs work the same way.
5. Click the Fills tab and change the options.
For this example, we selected Every Other Row from the Alternating
Pattern drop-down list, changed the Color property to the same CMYK
equivalent of red, and left the Tint at the default of 20 percent. This step
changes the first row and every other row to a red tint.
6. Click OK.
The changes you made in the Table Options dialog box are applied to the
table.
7. Click a table cell so that the insertion point is blinking.
The table cell is selected.
8. Find an image you can copy to the Clipboard, and then press Ctrl+C
(Windows) or ⌘  +C (Mac) to copy the image.
9. Return to InDesign and paste the image into the table cell by pressing
Ctrl+V (Windows) or ⌘  +V (Mac).
The image appears in the table cell, and the height or width (or both) of
the cell changes based on the dimensions of the image. Make sure that the
insertion point is active in the cell if you have problems pasting the
image.
You not only can change the table itself, but also customize the cells within it.
Choose Table⇒  Cell Options⇒  Text to open the Cell Options dialog box. You
can also make changes to each cell by using the Paragraph panel. Similarly,
you can change the number of rows and columns and their widths and heights
from the Tables panel. Open the Tables panel by choosing Window⇒  Type &
Tables⇒  Table.

 InDesign lets you import tables from other programs, such as Excel.
If you want to import a spreadsheet, choose File⇒  Place. The
spreadsheet is imported into InDesign as a table that you can further edit
as necessary.
Creating table styles
If you’ve spent time customizing strokes, fills, and spacing for your table,
you certainly want to save it as a style. Creating a table style lets you reuse
your table setup for future tables. To create a table style, follow these steps:
1. Make a table look the way you want.
The easiest way to create a table style is to complete the table setup and
make a table look the way you want it at completion.
2. Select the table.
Click and drag to select it with the text tool.
3. Choose Window⇒  Styles⇒  Table Styles.
The Table Styles panel appears.
4. Hold down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key and click the
Create New Style button at the bottom of the Table Styles panel.
The New Table Style dialog box appears.
5. Name the style and click OK.
Your table attributes are saved as a style.
If you want to edit table style attributes, you can simply double-click the
named style in the Table Styles panel. (Make sure nothing is selected.)
Looking at Text on a Path
You can create some interesting effects with text on a path. Using the Type
On a Path tool, you can have text curve along a line or shape. This feature is
particularly useful when you want to create interesting titling effects on a
page.

To create text on a path, follow these steps:
1. Use the Pen tool to create a path on the page.
Create at least one curve on the path after you create it. (See Chapter 4 of
this minibook to find out how to wield the Pen tool with confidence.)
2. Click and hold the Type tool to select the Type On a Path tool.
3. Move the cursor near the path you created.
When you move the cursor near a path, a plus sign (+) symbol appears
next to the cursor, and you can click and start typing on the path.
4. Click when you see the + icon and type some text on the path.
An insertion point appears at the beginning of the path after you click,
and you can then add text along the path. You select type on a path as you
would normally select other text — by dragging over the text to highlight
it.
To change properties for type on a path, select the text, and use the Type On a
Path Options dialog box, which you open by choosing Type⇒  Type On a
Path⇒  Options. In the Type On a Path Options dialog box, you can use effects
to modify the way each character is placed on the path. You can also flip the
text, change character spacing, and change character alignment to the path in
the Align drop-down list or to the stroke of the path in the To Path drop-down
list. Play with the settings to see how they affect your type. Click OK to apply
changes; to undo anything you don’t like, press Ctrl+Z (Windows) or ⌘  +Z
(Mac).
 To hide the path while keeping the text visible, set the stroke weight
for the path to 0 pt.

Chapter 3
Understanding Page Layout
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Working with and importing image files
 Selecting images on the page
 Knowing page layout settings
 Using text and graphics in your layouts
 Working with pages
 Using master pages and spreads
This chapter shows you how to put graphics and text together so that you can
start creating page layouts. Interesting and creative page layouts help draw
attention to the pictures and words contained within the publication. An
interesting layout motivates more members of the audience to read the text
you place on a page.
Importing Images
You can add many kinds of image files to an InDesign document. Some of the
most common are AI, PSD, PDF, JPG, PNG, and TIF. Images are imported
into graphic frames. You can create the frames before importing, or if you
don’t have a frame, InDesign creates one for you instantly when you add the
image to the page.
When you import an image into your InDesign layout, the original image is
still needed when you print or export the final document. You use special
controls to keep track of the linked image and to work on specific settings,
such as those that modify the quality and color. You also find additional
settings at the time you import an image, which you access using the Image
Import Options dialog box. In the “Importing other InDesign documents”

section, later in this chapter, you find out how to change various import
options.
For now, follow these steps to import an image into your InDesign layout:
1. Make sure that nothing on the page is selected.
If an object on the page is selected, click an empty area so that everything
is deselected before you proceed.
2. Choose File⇒  Place.
The Place dialog box opens, where you can browse your hard drive for
image files to import. You can use this dialog box to import various kinds
of files into InDesign, not just images.
3. Select the image you want to import and click Open.
The Place dialog box closes, and the cursor displays a thumbnail of the
image you selected.
 You can import multiple images at a time into an InDesign layout.
Simply hold down the Ctrl (Windows) or ⌘   (Mac) key and select
multiple files in the Place dialog box.
4. Move the cursor to wherever you want the upper-left corner of the
first image to be placed on the page, and then click the mouse.
If you’ve selected multiple images, you can use the left and right arrow
keys to navigate the thumbnail images in your loaded cursor before
clicking on the page. After you click on the page, the next image is
placed, until there are no more images to place.
Images are imported and placed into the publication inside a graphic
frame. You can resize, move, and modify the image by using the Selection
or Direct Selection tool or modify the frame and image together by using
the Selection tool.
 When placing multiple images, you can place all the selected images
in one step — space them evenly in a grid by pressing the Shift+Ctrl

(Windows) or Shift+⌘   (Mac) keys while dragging a rectangle using
your mouse.
Don’t worry if the image is imported and is too large for the layout or needs
to be cropped. For more information about selecting graphic frames and
modifying them, check out Chapter 4 of this minibook. To find out about
importing and working with text and stories, see Chapter 2 of this minibook.
 It’s sometimes easier to create an empty graphic frame and then add
an image to it than to import the image and create the frame at the same
time. You can create an empty frame and even set fitting properties
before you import an image — so that the image fits correctly at the time
you import it. To set the fitting properties in a blank frame, choose
Object⇒  Fitting⇒  Frame Fitting Options.
Importing PDFs
You can import PDF files to place them as images in InDesign layouts. When
importing, you can preview and crop the pages by using the Place PDF dialog
box. (Choose File⇒  Place, select the Show Import Options checkbox, and
then click Open. On a Mac, you must click the Options button to be able to
see the Show Import Options checkbox.) You import one page at a time, so
you need to use the Forward and Back buttons displayed under the preview to
select a page to place. Also, you can’t import any video, sound, or buttons,
and you can’t edit the PDF after it’s imported into InDesign — so it is more
like importing a static image such as a JPEG file.
The Place PDF dialog box offers the following options:
Crop To: You can crop the page you’re importing using this drop-down
list. Some options may be unavailable because they depend on what’s in
the PDF you’re importing. The hatched outline in the preview shows you
the crop marks.
Transparent Background: Selecting this checkbox makes the PDF
background transparent so that elements on the InDesign page show
through. The PDF background is imported as solid white if this option
isn’t selected.

 If your monitor is large enough for you to view your document
window and folders on your computer, you can click and drag image
files directly into your layout, bypassing the Place command altogether.
Importing other InDesign documents
You can place one InDesign document inside another. This feature might
sound a bit odd, but it has many uses. For example, if you have a page from a
book that you want to promote in a catalog, you can import an image of the
book page to place into a catalog — all without converting the book page into
some type of image format. This strategy not only removes a step, but also
creates a higher-quality version of the image being placed into InDesign.
Here’s how to take advantage of this feature:
1. With a document open, choose File⇒  Place or use the keyboard
shortcut Ctrl+D (Windows) or ⌘  +D (Mac).
The Place dialog box appears.
2. Select the Show Import Options checkbox at the bottom of the Place
dialog box. On a Mac, you must click the Options button to be able to see
the Show Import Options checkbox.)
3. Navigate to an InDesign file and double-click to open it.
The Place InDesign Document dialog box appears, as shown in Figure 3-
1, offering you the opportunity to choose which page or pages you want
to place.
4. Click OK.
5. Click the page to place the document.
If you’re placing a document with multiple pages, click again to place
each additional page.

FIGURE 3-1: Choose pages to import in the Place InDesign Document dialog box.
Linking and Embedding Images
You can have images that you import either linked to your document or
embedded in your document. Here’s the difference between linking and
embedding:
Linking: The image that appears in the InDesign document is a preview
of the image stored somewhere else on your computer or network. If the
file you linked to your InDesign document is changed, it must be updated.
Embedding: The image is copied into and saved within the InDesign
document itself. It doesn’t matter where the original file is located or
whether you alter the file, because an embedded image is copied and
saved directly within the InDesign document.
When you print or export a document, InDesign uses the linked images to
generate the information necessary to create a high-quality printed document,
a PDF file, or an image for posting on the web. InDesign keeps track of
linked files and alerts you if any of them are moved or changed. You can
update links for an image by selecting the image in the Links panel and
choosing Update Link or Relink from the Links panel menu. You’re
prompted to find that file on your hard drive so that the file can be linked to

the new location. And, if you send your InDesign file to someone else, make
sure to also send its linked files along with the document. You can gain a
better understanding of this process in Chapter 7 of this minibook.
 If you choose to embed images rather than link to images, your
publication’s file size increases because of the extra data that’s being
stored within it.
To find out which files are embedded or linked, look at the Links panel. (See
Figure 3-2.) Choose Window⇒  Links to open the panel and see whether any
linked or embedded images are listed in the panel.

FIGURE 3-2: The Links panel keeps track of all images used in your documents.
You can embed a file by using the Links panel menu. Select the linked file
from the list, then click the drop-down menu in the upper-right corner to
access the menu. Select Embed Link if you want a linked file to be embedded
within the document. Alternatively, choose Unembed Link from the Link

panel menu to link a file rather than have it embedded in the document. We
recommend linking to all images so that your files don’t become too large and
because it provides you with flexibility to manipulate the image files
separately.
Setting Image Quality and Display
You can select quality settings that determine how images are displayed when
they’re part of an InDesign layout. These settings may help speed up your
work if your computer is older or slower, or if you have many images.
Displaying images at a higher resolution can give you a better idea of the
finished print project and may avoid the need to print the project several
times for proofing. These settings are applicable only to how you see the
images while using InDesign to create a document — they don’t impact the
final printed or exported product.
To change the image display quality, choose Edit⇒  Preferences⇒  Display
Performance (Windows) or InDesign⇒  Preferences⇒  Display Performance
(Mac). You can then select one of the following settings from the Default
View drop-down list:
Fast: To optimize performance, the entire image or graphic is grayed out.
Typical (default): This setting tends to make bitmaps look a little blocky,
particularly if you zoom in. The speed of zooming in and out is increased
if you select this option. InDesign uses a preview that it created (or that
was already imported with the file) to display the image on the screen.
High Quality: The original image is used to display onscreen. You can
preview an accurate depiction of the final layout, but you may find that
InDesign runs slowly when you use this option.
Notice the difference among these settings in Figure 3-3.

FIGURE 3-3: From left to right: Fast Display, Typical Display, and High Quality Display.
 To change the display for an individual image, select the graphic
frame and choose View⇒  Display Performance. Then choose one of the
three options from the submenu.
Selecting Images
After you import an image into a document, you can select images in several
different ways with the Selection or Direct Selection tools. It’s useful to use
the different methods depending upon whether you want to select and edit
just the graphic frame or just the image inside it.
To select and then edit an image on the page, follow these steps:
1. Place an image on a page by importing it into InDesign.
The image is placed within a graphic frame.
2. With the Selection tool, drag one of the corner handles on the graphic
frame in toward the center of the frame.
The graphic frame is resized, but the image isn’t. The image appears to be
cropped because you resized the graphic frame — though the image
remains the same size within the frame, as shown in the center of Figure
3-4.
3. Choose Edit⇒  Undo or press Ctrl+Z (Windows) or ⌘  +Z (Mac) to
undo changes to the image.
The image returns to its original appearance on the page.

4. Continue to use the Selection tool to click the center of the picture
where a circle appears and move the picture within the frame.
The frame remains the same size, but its content is relocated. You can also
use the Selection tool to move the frame and contents together by clicking
anywhere within the frame; however, it is good practice to click on the
center section because this works with both the Selection and Direct
Selection tools.
5. Switch to the Direct Selection tool, and then click within the image
and drag to move the image within the graphic frame-bounding box.
A hand appears when you move the cursor over the graphic; when you
move the image just past the edge of the graphic frame boundaries, that
part of the image is no longer visible — it doesn’t print and doesn’t show
when exported.
FIGURE 3-4: The original image in a graphic frame (top); inside a resized frame (center); and

repositioning an image within the frame (bottom).
 You can set the frame or image to resize by choosing Object⇒  Fitting
and selecting an option. You can even set this fitting before you place an
image, which is especially helpful when creating templates. Resize
before an image is placed by choosing Object⇒  Fitting⇒  Frame Fitting
Options.
The Links panel can help you find images within documents, open images so
that you can edit them, and view important information about selected
images. Figure 3-2 can help you navigate the Links panel and work with your
images more effectively.
Manipulating Text and Graphics in a
Layout
InDesign offers many tools that help you work with text and graphics
together in a layout. From the tools in the Tools panel, to commands, to panel
options, InDesign offers you an immense amount of control over the
manipulation of graphics and text in a spread.
Page orientation and size
When you create a new document, you can set its page orientation and size. If
you ever need to change your settings after you’ve created a document,
choose File⇒  Document Setup and change the following options, which
affect all pages in your document:
Page Orientation: Select either Landscape or Portrait. One of the first
things you decide on when you create a new document is how to orient
the pages. A landscape page is wider than it is tall; a portrait orientation
is taller than it is wide.
Page Size: Choose from many standardized preset sizes, such as Letter,
Legal, and Tabloid. Alternatively, you can set a custom page size for the
document. Make sure to properly set the page size so that it fits the kind

of paper you need to print on, or screen size if you’re publishing your
work digitally.
 You can also use the pages panel to adjust the size of individual pages
and make some pages a different size. This topic is covered later in this
chapter, in the section “Working with Pages and the Pages Panel.”
Margins, columns, and gutters
Margins, columns, and gutters help divide a page for layout and confine its
dimensions:
Margin: The area between the edge of the page and the main printed
area. Together, the four margins (top, bottom, left, and right) look like a
rectangle around the page’s perimeter. Margins don’t print when you print
or export the publication.
Column: Divide a page into sections used for laying out text and graphics
on a page. A page has at least one column when you start, which is
between the margins. You can add column guides, represented by a pair
of lines separated by a gutter area. Column guides aren’t printed when
you print or export the publication.
Gutter: The space between two columns on the page. A gutter prevents
columns from running together. You can define the gutter’s width by
choosing Object⇒  Text Frame Options; see Chapter 2 of this minibook for
more information.
You can set margins and columns when you create a new document, which
we discuss in Chapter 1 of this minibook. However, you can also modify
margins and columns after the document has been created and specify
different values for each page. You can modify the gutter, which is the width
of the space between each column.
You can change margins and columns by setting new values in the Margins
and Columns dialog box. Choose Layout⇒  Margins and Columns, and then
modify each individual page.

 Margins and columns are useful for placing and aligning elements on
a page. These guides can have objects snap to them, enabling you to
accurately align multiple objects on a page.
Using guides and snapping
Using guides when you’re creating page layouts is a good idea because
guides help you more precisely align elements on a page and position objects
in the layout. Aligning objects by eyeballing them is difficult because you
often can’t tell whether an object is out of alignment by a small amount
unless you zoom in to a large percentage.
 Make sure that snapping is enabled by choosing View⇒  Grids and
Guides⇒  Snap to Guides. Snapping makes guides and grids useful.
When you drag the object close to the grid, the object attaches to the
guideline like it’s a magnet. Aligning an object to a guide is easy after
you create a guide, and you’ll notice that InDesign displays temporary
guides when you move an object near another object or near a guide.
Because guides are useful in creating a layout, check out the following kinds,
available in InDesign (see Figure 3-5):
Column guides: Evenly distribute a page into columns and can be used
to align text frames in a document. These guides are set when you open a
new document in InDesign that contains more than one column. Column
guides can also be adjusted after a document is created by choosing
Layout⇒  Margins and Columns.
Margin guides: Define the area between the edge of the page and the
main printable area. (We discuss these guides in the preceding section.)
Ruler guides: Manually defined and can be used to align graphics,
measure objects, or specify the location of a particular asset you want to
lay out. See Chapter 1 of this minibook for details about adding ruler
guides to the workspace.
Smart guides: As previously mentioned, smart guides offer the capability

to align objects on an InDesign page to other objects or even to the page.
Smart Object alignment allows for easy snapping to page item centers or
edges or page centers. In addition to snapping, smart guides give feedback
to the user indicating the object to which you are snapping.
Liquid guides: Liquid guides are useful when creating layouts that will
be displayed on a variety of tablets. They are discussed more in Chapter 8
of this minibook.
FIGURE 3-5: Column guides, margin guides, and ruler guides help create a layout.

To find out how to show and hide grids and guides, see Chapter 1 of this
minibook.
 With InDesign CC you can delete all guides at once by right-clicking
the ruler (Windows) or Control-clicking the ruler (Mac) and selecting
Delete All Guides on Spread from the contextual menu.
Locking objects and guides
You can lock in place elements such as objects and guides. This feature is
particularly useful after you’ve carefully aligned elements on a page. Locking
objects or guides prevents you from accidentally moving them from that
position.
To lock an element, follow these steps:
1. Use a drawing tool to create an object on a page, and then select the
object with the Selection tool.
A bounding box with handles appears when the object is selected.
2. Choose Object⇒  Lock.
The object is locked in position. Now when you try to use the Selection or
Direct Selection tools to move the object, it doesn’t move from its current
position.
To lock guides in place, follow these steps:
1. Drag a couple of ruler guides to the page by clicking within a ruler
and dragging toward the page.
A line appears on the page. (If rulers aren’t visible around the pasteboard,
choose View⇒  Rulers.)
2. Drag a ruler guide to a new location, if needed; when you’re happy
with the ruler guides’ placements, choose View⇒  Grids & Guides⇒  
Lock Guides.
All guides in the workspace are locked. If you try selecting a guide and
moving it, the guide remains in its present position and cannot be moved.

If you have any column guides on the page, they’re locked as well.
 Use layers in your publications for organizing different types of
content, including guides. Layers are a lot like transparencies that lie on
top of each other, so they can be used for stacking elements on a page.
For example, you may want to stack graphics or arrange similar items
(such as images or text) on the same layer. Each layer has its own
bounding box color, which helps you determine which item is on which
corresponding layer. For more information on layers in general, see
Book 3, Chapter 8.
Merging Text and Graphics
When you have text and graphics together on a page, they should flow and
work with each other to create an aesthetic layout. Luckily, you can work
with text wrap to achieve a visual flow between text and graphics. In this
section, you find out how to wrap text around images and graphics in your
publications.
Wrapping objects with text
Images can have text wrapped around them, as shown in Figure 3-6.
Wrapping is a typical feature of page layout in print and on the web. You can
choose different text wrap options by using the Text Wrap panel, which you
open by choosing Window⇒  Text Wrap. Use the five buttons at the top of the
panel to specify which kind of text wrapping to use for the selected object.
Below the buttons are text fields where you can enter offset values for the text
wrap. The fields are grayed out if the option isn’t available.

FIGURE 3-6: You can wrap text around images in InDesign in several ways.
You use the drop-down list at the bottom of the Text Wrap panel to choose
from various contour options. The following list describes what happens
when you click one of these buttons to wrap text around an object’s shape:

No Text Wrap: Use the default setting to remove any text wrapping from
the selected object.
Wrap around Bounding Box: Wrap text around all sides of the
bounding box of the object.
Wrap around Object Shape: Wrap text around the edges of an object.
Jump Object: Make the text wrapping around the image jump from
above the image to below it, with no text wrapping to the left or right of
the object in the column.
Jump to Next Column: Make text end above the image and then jump to
the next column. No text is wrapped to the left or right of the image.
Offset: Enter offset values for text wrapping on all sides of the object.
Wrap Options: Select an option to determine on which sides of the
object text will wrap.
Contour Options: Select a contour from this drop-down list, which tells
InDesign how the edges of the image are determined. You can choose
from various vector paths or the edges to be detected around an object or
image with transparency.
To add text wrapping to an object (a drawing or an image), follow these steps:
1. Create a text frame on a page with a graphic.
Add text to the text frame by typing text, pasting text from elsewhere, or
filling the frame with placeholder text. This text wraps around the image,
so make sure that the text frame is slightly larger than the graphic frame
you’ll use.
2. Use the Selection tool to select a graphic frame on the page and move
it over the text frame.
Bounding box handles appear around the edges of the image or graphic.
3. Choose Window⇒  Text Wrap to open the Text Wrap panel.
The Text Wrap panel opens.
4. With the graphic frame still selected, click the Wrap around Object
Shape button.
The text wraps around the image instead of hiding behind it.

5. If you’re working with an image that has a transparent background,
select Detect Edges or Alpha Channel from the Contour Options
drop-down list.
The text wraps around the edges of the image, as in Figure 3-7.
FIGURE 3-7: You can wrap text around an image with a transparent background.
Modifying a text wrap
If you’ve applied a text wrap around an object (as we show you how to do in
the preceding section), you can then modify that text wrap. If you have an
image with a transparent background around which you’ve wrapped text,
InDesign created a path around the edge of the image; if you have a shape
you created with the drawing tools, InDesign automatically uses those paths
to wrap text around.
 Before proceeding with the following steps, be sure that the object
uses the Wrap around Object Shape text wrap. (If not, open the Text
Wrap panel and click the Wrap around Object Shape button to apply text
wrapping.) Remember to choose Detect Edges if you’re using an image

with a transparent background.
To modify the path around an image with text wrapping, using the Direct
Selection tool, follow these steps:
1. Select the object by using the Direct Selection tool.
The image is selected, and you can see the path around the object.
2. Click to select one of the anchor points on the text wrap path by using
the Direct Selection tool; then click and drag the point to move it.
The path is modified according to how you move the point. (For more
about manipulating paths, take a look at Chapter 4 of this minibook.) The
text wrapping immediately changes, based on the modifications you make
to the path around the object.
3. Select the Delete Anchor Point tool from the Tools panel and delete an
anchor point.
The path changes again, and the text wrapping modifies around the object
accordingly.
 You can also use the Offset values in the Text Wrap panel to
determine the distance between the wrapping text and the edge of the
object. Simply increase the values to move the text farther from the
object’s edge.
Working with Pages and the Pages
Panel
The page is the central part of any publication — it’s where the visible part of
your publication is created. Navigating and controlling pages are important
parts of working in InDesign. The Pages panel allows you to select, adjust,
move, and navigate pages in a publication. When you use default settings,
pages are created as facing pages, which means that they’re laid out as two-
page pairs, or spreads. Otherwise, pages are laid out individually. Whether a
page is part of a spread or a single page is reflected in the Pages panel, the

option is specified when you create a new document and can be changed in
the Document Setup window.
The Pages panel, which you open by choosing Window⇒  Pages, also lets you
add new pages to the document, duplicate pages, delete a page, or change the
size of a page. The pages panel, shown in Figure 3-8, contains two main
areas: the master pages (upper) section and the (lower) section containing the
document’s pages.

FIGURE 3-8: The Pages panel with page previews.
To discover more about master pages and how they differ from regular pages
in your document, see the “Using Master Spreads in Page Layout” section,
later in this chapter.

Selecting and moving pages
Use the Pages panel to select a page or spread in your publication. Select a
page by clicking the page. If you Ctrl-click (Windows) or ⌘  -click (Mac)
pages, you can select more than one page at a time. The Pages panel also lets
you move pages to a new position in the document: Select a page in the
document pages area of the panel, and then drag it wherever you want to
move the page. A small line and changed cursor indicate where the page will
be moved. You can move a page so that it’s between two pages in a spread; a
hollow line indicates where you’re moving the page. If you move a page
before or after a spread, a solid line appears. Release the mouse button to
move the page to the new location.
Adding and deleting pages
You can also add new pages to the publication by using the Pages panel. To
add a new page, follow these steps:
1. Choose Window⇒  Pages to open the Pages panel.
The Pages panel opens.
2. Click the Create New Page button.
A new page is added to the document.
 Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac OS) the Create New
Page button, and you can then specify the exact number of pages to add
and the location of these new pages.
3. Select a page in the Pages panel.
The selected page is highlighted in the Pages panel.
4. Click the Create New Page button again.
A new page is added following the selected page.
 To delete a page, select it in the Pages panel and click the Delete
Selected Pages button. The selected page is removed from the document.

You can also add, delete, and move pages and more without the Pages panel
by choosing from the Layout⇒  Pages submenu.
Numbering your pages
When you’re working with longer documents, adding page numbers before
you print or export the publication is a good idea. You don’t have to add them
manually: A special InDesign tool lets you number pages automatically. This
tool is particularly useful when you move pages around the document. You
don’t have to keep track of updating the numbering when you make these
kinds of edits.
To number pages, follow these steps:
1. Using the Type tool, create a text frame on the page where you want
the page number to be added.
2. Choose Type⇒  Insert Special Character⇒  Markers⇒  Current Page
Number.
The current page number appears in the text frame you selected. If you
added the page number to a master page, the master page’s letter appears
in the field instead.
If you want page numbers to appear on all pages in the document, add the
text frame to a master page. Remember that page numbers are added only to
the pages in your document that are associated with that master page. If you
want to add page numbers to the left and right sides of a book or magazine,
you need to repeat this process on the left and right sides of the master pages.
Remember that if you add a page number only on a document page — and
not on a master — the page number is added to only that single page.
 To modify automatic-numbering settings, choose Layout⇒  
Numbering and Section Options. You can choose to have numbering
start from a specific number or use a different style, such as Roman
numerals.
Using Master Spreads in Page Layout

Master pages are a lot like templates you use to format page layouts. The
settings, such as margins and columns, are applied to each layout that the
master page is applied to. If you put a page number on a master page, the
number also appears on every page that uses the layout. You can have more
than one master page in a single publication, and you can choose which pages
use a particular master page.
A master page, or spread, typically contains layout items that are used on
many pages, such as page numbering, text frames, background images, or
headings that are used on every page. By default, you cannot edit items that
have been placed on a master page, on the pages that are using a particular
master. You can, however, override or even completely detach these master
page elements to modify them directly on a document page by pressing
Ctrl+Shift (Windows) or ⌘  +Shift (Mac) while clicking on the master page
element. This functionality is useful for special cases like changing the
background of just one, or removing a page number.
 Master pages are lettered. The first master page is the A-Master by
default. If you create a second master page, it’s the B-Master by default.
When you create a new publication, the A-Master is applied to all pages
you initially open in the document. You can add pages at the end that
don’t have a master page applied to them.
Creating master pages and applying them to your publication enables you to
create a reusable format for it, which can dramatically speed up your
workflow when you put together documents with InDesign.
Creating a master spread
You may need more than one master page or master spread for a document.
You may have another series of pages that need a unique format. In this
situation, you need to create a second master page. You can create a master
page or a master spread from any other page in the publication, or you can
create a new one with the Pages panel.
To create a master page by using a page in the publication, do one of the
following:

Choose New Master from the Page panel’s menu, and then click OK. A
blank master page is created.
Drag a page from the pages section of the panel into the master page
section of the Pages panel. The document page turns into a master page.
 If the page you’re trying to drag into the master pages section is part
of a spread, select both pages in the spread before you drag it into the
master pages section. You can drag individual pages into the master page
section only if they’re not part of a spread.
Applying, removing, and deleting master pages
After you create a master page, you can apply it to a page. You can also
remove a page from a master page layout and delete a master page altogether:
To add master page formatting to a page or spread in a publication:
In the Pages panel, drag the master page you want to use from the master
page section on top of the page you want to format in the document pages
section. When you drag the master page on top of the page, it has a thick
outline around it. Release the mouse button when you see this outline, and
the formatting is applied to the page.
To remove any master page applied to a document page: In the Pages
panel, drag the None page from the master area in the Pages panel to that
document page. You may need to use the scroll bar in the master pages
area of the Pages panel to find the None page.
To delete a master page: In the Pages panel, select the unwanted master
page, and then choose Delete Master Page from the panel menu.
 This action permanently deletes the master page — you can’t get
it back — so think carefully before deleting a master page.
Changing individual page sizes
Using the Pages panel, you can change the size of individual pages in a

document, which is useful if you have one page that folds out and is larger
than others. Or, maybe you want to create a single document that includes a
business card, an envelope, and a letterhead.
To change the size of individual pages using the Pages panel, follow these
steps:
1. In the Pages panel, click to select the page you want to modify.
2. Click the Edit Page Size button at the bottom of the Pages panel and
select the new size.
3. Repeat the process to adjust the size for any pages you want to
modify.
When you’re done editing the size of the pages, continue to work on their
design and layout like you would work on any other pages. The only
difference is that some pages in your document may be a different size.
 You can also use the Pages panel to create alternative layouts for
display on various tablet devices. These alternative layouts are discussed
in Chapter 8 of this minibook.

Chapter 4
Drawing in InDesign
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Discovering the drawing tools
 Drawing and editing shapes and paths
 Introducing corner effects
 Working with fills and layers
 Creating QR Codes
Many of the tools you find in the InDesign Tools panel are used for drawing
lines and shapes on a page, so you have several different ways of creating
interesting drawings for your publications. You can create anything from
basic shapes to intricate drawings inside InDesign, instead of having to use a
drawing program such as Illustrator. Even though InDesign doesn’t replace
Illustrator (see Book 5), which has many more versatile drawing tools and
options for creating intricate drawings, InDesign is adequate for many
drawing tasks. In this chapter, you discover how to use the most popular
InDesign drawing tools and how to add colorful fills to illustrations.
Even if you don’t think you’ll be drawing using InDesign, you should still
take a look at the sections “Modifying Frame Corners” and “Using Fills,”
later in this chapter, before jumping ahead.
Getting Started with Drawing
When you’re creating a document, you may want drawn shapes and paths to
be parts of the layout. For example, you may want to have a star shape for a
yearbook page about a talent show or to run text along a path. Whatever it is
you need to do, you can draw shapes and paths to get the job done.
Paths and shapes

Paths can take a few different formats. They can either be open or closed and
with or without a stroke:
Path: The outline of a shape or an object. Paths can be closed and have
no gaps, or they can be open like a line on the page. You can draw
freeform paths, such as squiggles on a page, freely by hand.
Stroke: A line style and thickness that you apply to a path. A stroke can
look like a line or like an outline of a shape.
Figure 4-1 shows the different kinds of paths and strokes you can create.
FIGURE 4-1: Different kinds of paths and strokes created in InDesign.
Paths contain points where the direction of the path can change. (You can find
out more about points in the later section “Points and segments.”) You can
make paths by using freeform drawing tools, such as the Pen or Pencil tools,
or by using the basic shape tools, such as Ellipse, Rectangle, Polygon, or
Line.
The shape tools create paths in a predefined way so that you can make basic
geometric shapes, such as a star or an ellipse. Just select the shape tool and
drag the cursor onto the page, and the shape is automatically drawn. Creating

shapes this way is a lot easier than trying to create them manually by using
the Pen or Pencil tool. Figure 4-2 shows shapes drawn with the shape tools
found in the Tools panel.
FIGURE 4-2: You can create many shapes with the basic shape tools.
You can change shapes into freeform paths, like those drawn with the Pencil
or Pen tools. Similarly, you can make freeform paths into basic shapes.
Therefore, you don’t need to worry about which tool you initially choose.
 We created the star and starburst shown in Figure 4-2 by double-
clicking the Polygon tool and changing the options. Read more about the
Polygon tool in the “Drawing Shapes” section, later in this chapter.

Points and segments
Paths are made up of points and segments:
Point: Where the path changes somehow, such as a change in direction.
Many points along a path can be joined with segments. Points are
sometimes called anchor points. You can create two kinds of points:
Corner points: Have a straight line between them. Shapes such as
squares and stars have corner points.
Curve points: Occur along a curved path. Circles or snaking paths
have lots of curve points.
Segment: A line or curve connecting two points — similar to connect-
the-dots.
Figure 4-3 shows corner points and curve points joined by segments.
FIGURE 4-3: Points are joined by line segments.
Getting to Know the Tools of the Trade
The following sections introduce you to tools that you’ll probably use most
often when creating drawings in your publications. When you draw with

these tools, you’re using strokes and fills to make designs. The following
sections show you what these common tools can do to help you create basic
or complex illustrations in InDesign.
The Pencil tool
 The Pencil tool is used to draw simple or complex shapes on a page.
Because the Pencil tool is a freeform tool, you can freely drag it all over the
page and create lines or shapes, instead of having them automatically made
for you, such as when you use basic shape tools. The Pencil tool is an
intuitive and easy tool to use. You find out how to use it in the later section
“Drawing Freeform Paths.”
The Pen tool
 You use the Pen tool to create complex shapes on the page. The Pen
tool works with other tools, such as the Add, Remove, and Convert Point
tools. The Pen tool works by adding and editing points along a path, thereby
manipulating the segments that join them.
Drawing with the Pen tool isn’t easy at first. In fact, it takes many people a
considerable amount of time to use this tool well. Don’t become frustrated if
you don’t get used to it right away — the Pen tool can take some practice to
get it to do what you want. You find out how to use the Pen tool in the
“Drawing Freeform Paths” section, later in this chapter.
Basic shapes and frame shapes
Basic shapes are preformed shapes that you can add to a document by using
tools in the Tools panel. The basic shape tools include the Line, Rectangle,
Ellipse, and Polygon tools.
You can also draw these shapes and turn them into frames (containers that
hold content in a document). You can use a frame as a text frame or as a
graphic frame used to hold pictures and text. Draw a basic shape and then
convert it to a graphic or text frame by choosing Object  ⇒  Content  ⇒  Text or
Object  ⇒  Content  ⇒  Graphic. We discuss graphic frames and text frames in
more detail in Chapter 2 of this minibook.

 The frame and shape tools look the same and can even act the same.
Both can hold text and images, but look out! By default, shapes created
with the shape tools have a 1-point black stroke around them. Many
folks don’t see these strokes on the screen but later discover them
surrounding their text boxes when they print. Stick with the frame tools,
and you’ll be fine.
Drawing Shapes
InDesign allows you to create basic shapes in a document. You can easily
create a basic shape by following these steps:
1. Create a new document by choosing File  ⇒  New  ⇒  Document.
2. When the New Document dialog box appears, select Print, choose a
blank document preset size, and then click Create.
A new document opens.
3. Select the Rectangle tool in the Tools panel.
4. Click anywhere on the page and drag the mouse diagonally.
When the rectangle is the dimension you want, release the mouse button.
You’ve created a rectangle.
That’s all you need to do to create a basic shape. You can also use these steps
with the other basic shape tools (the Line, Ellipse, and Polygon tools) to
create other basic shapes. To access the other basic shapes from the Tools
panel, follow these steps:
1. 
 Click the Rectangle tool and hold down the mouse button.
A menu that contains all the basic shapes opens.
2. Release the mouse button.
The menu remains open, and you can mouse over the menu items. Each
menu item becomes highlighted when the mouse pointer is placed over it.

3. Select a basic shape tool by clicking a highlighted menu item.
The new basic shape tool is now active. Follow the preceding set of steps
to create basic shapes by using any of these tools.
 To draw a square shape, use the Rectangle tool and press the Shift
key while you drag the mouse on the page. The sides of the shape are all
drawn at the same length, so you create a perfect square. You can also
use the Shift key with the Ellipse tool if you want a perfect circle — just
hold down Shift while you’re using the Ellipse tool. Release the mouse
before the Shift key to ensure that this constrain shape trick works!
Creating a shape with exact dimensions
Dragging on the page to create a shape is easy, but making a shape with
precise dimensions using this method requires a few more steps. If you want
to make a shape that’s a specific size, follow these steps:
1. Select the Rectangle tool or the Ellipse tool.
The tool is highlighted in the Tools panel.
2. Click anywhere on the page, but don’t drag the cursor.
This point becomes the upper-left corner of the Rectangle or Ellipse
bounding box (the rectangle that defines the object’s vertical and
horizontal dimensions). After you click to place a corner, the Rectangle or
Ellipse dialog box appears.
3. In the Width and Height text fields, enter the dimensions for creating
the shape.
4. Click OK.
The shape is created on the page, with the upper-left corner at the place
where you initially clicked the page.
Using the Polygon tool
A polygon is a shape that has many sides. For example, a square is a polygon
with four sides, but the Polygon tool enables you to choose the number of
sides you want for the polygon you create. When you’re using the Polygon

tool, you may not want to create a shape with the default number of sides.
You can change these settings before you start drawing the shape.
To customize the shape of a polygon, follow these steps:
1. Select the Polygon tool in the Tools panel by selecting the Rectangle
tool and holding down the mouse button until the menu pops up.
2. Double-click the Polygon tool in the Tools panel.
The Polygon dialog box opens, as shown at the bottom of Figure 4-4.
3. In the Number of Sides text field, enter the number of sides you want
the new polygon to have.
To create a star instead of a polygon, enter a number in the Star Inset text
field for the percentage of the star inset you want the new shape to have.
A higher percentage means that the sides are inset farther toward the
center of the polygon, creating a star. If you want a regular polygon and
not a star, enter 0 in the Star Inset text field. If you want a star, enter 50%;
for a starburst, enter 25%.
4. Click OK.
5. Move the cursor to the page and click and drag to create a new
polygon or star.
Your new polygon or star appears on the page.

FIGURE 4-4: Change the star inset percentage to create different kinds of shapes.
Figure 4-4 shows what a few different polygons and stars with different
settings look like.
Editing Basic Shapes
You can edit basic shapes InDesign in order to create original shapes and craft
exactly the kind of design you want. You aren’t stuck with predetermined
shapes, such as a square or an oval. You can make these forms take on much
more custom shapes.
Changing the size with the Transform panel
You can change the size of a shape by using the Transform panel. Here’s
how:
1. 
 With the Selection tool (the solid black arrow tool that’s used to
select objects), select the shape you want to resize.
When the shape is selected, a bounding box appears around it. You can

see a selected shape in Figure 4-5.
2. Open the Transform panel by choosing Window  ⇒  Object and
Layout  ⇒  Transform.
3. In the Transform panel that appears, enter different number values
in the W and H fields to change the size of the shape.
The shape automatically changes size on the page to the new size
dimensions you specify in the Transform panel.

FIGURE 4-5: A selected shape with the bounding box visible.
Changing the size with the Free Transform tool
 Easily resize objects in InDesign by using the Free Transform tool.
To resize a selected object with the Free Transform tool, follow these steps:

1. Make sure that only the object you want to resize is selected.
 Group multiple objects if you want to resize several objects
simultaneously. To group objects, select one object and Shift-click to add
it to the selection, and then press Ctrl+G (Windows) or ⌘  +G (Mac).
2. Select the Free Transform tool.
3. Click any corner point and drag to resize the object.
 Hold down the Shift key while dragging to keep the objects
constrained proportionally as you resize.
Changing the stroke of a shape
You can change the stroke of shapes you’ve created. The stroke is the outline
that appears around the edge of the shape. The stroke can range from no
stroke to a very thick stroke, and it’s measured in point sizes. Even if a shape
has a stroke set to 0 points, it still has a stroke — you just can’t see it.
Follow these steps to edit the stroke of your shapes:
1. Select a shape on the page.
A bounding box appears around the selected shape.
2. Select a new width for the Stroke by using the Stroke Weight drop-
down list in the Control panel.
As soon as a value is selected, the stroke automatically changes on the
page. This number is measured in points. You use some of the other
options in the following step list.
You can click in the Stroke text field and manually enter a numerical value
for the stroke width. The higher the number you enter, the thicker the stroke.
You can also change the style of the stroke from the Control panel by
following these steps:
1. With a basic shape selected, select the stroke type from the drop-

down list in the Control panel and select a new line.
As soon as a new line is selected, the stroke automatically changes.
2. Choose a new line weight from the Stroke Weight drop-down list.
For example, we chose 10 points. The shape updates automatically on the
page.
 If you want to create custom dashes, you can see more options by
choosing Window  ⇒  Stroke. Choose the panel menu in the upper-right
corner of the panel and select Stroke Styles, and then select New. You
can define the dash and gap size. Define custom dashes by clicking in
the ruler and dragging to define the dash length. Enter one value for an
even dash or several numbers for custom dashes for maps, diagrams,
fold marks, and more! Your custom stroke appears in the Stroke panel
after you create it.
Add special ends to the lines with the Start and End drop-down lists. For
example, you can add an arrowhead or a large circle to the beginning or end
of the stroke. The Cap and Join buttons allow you to choose the shape of the
line ends and how they join with other paths when you’re working with
complex paths or shapes.
Changing the shear value
You can change the shear of a shape by using the Transform panel. Skew and
shear mean the same thing: The shape is slanted, so you create the
appearance of some form of perspective for the skewed or sheared element.
This transformation is useful if you want to create the illusion of depth on a
page.
Follow these simple steps to skew a shape:
1. With a basic shape selected, choose Window  ⇒  Object & Layout  ⇒  
Transform.
2. Select a value from the Shear X Angle drop-down list in the lower-
right corner of the Transform panel.
After you select a new value, the shape skews (or shears), depending on

what value you select. Manually entering a numerical value into this field
also skews the shape.
Rotating a shape
You can change the rotation of a shape by using the Transform panel. The
process of rotating a shape is similar to skewing a shape (see the preceding
section):
1. With a basic shape selected, choose Window  ⇒  Object & Layout  ⇒  
Transform.
The Transform panel opens.
2. Select a value from the Rotation Angle drop-down list.
After you select a new value, the shape rotates automatically, based on the
rotation angle you specified. You can also manually enter a value into the
text field.
Drawing Freeform Paths
You can use different tools to draw paths. For example, you can use the
Pencil tool to draw freeform paths. These kinds of paths typically look like
lines, and you can use the Pencil and Pen tools to create simple or complex
paths.
Using the Pencil tool
The Pencil tool is perhaps the easiest tool to use when drawing freeform
paths. (See Figure 4-6.)

FIGURE 4-6: This freeform drawing was created with the Pencil tool.
Follow these steps to get started:
1. To create a new document, choose File  ⇒  New  ⇒  Document  ⇒  Print,
and then click Create in the New Document dialog box that appears.
2. 
 Select the Pencil tool in the Tools panel. Make sure you have
defined a stroke weight and color for your stroke.
3. Drag the cursor around the page.
You’ve created a new path by using the Pencil tool.
Using the Pen tool
Using the Pen tool is different from using the Pencil tool. When you start out,

the Pen tool may seem a bit complicated — but after you get the hang of it,
using it isn’t hard after all. The Pen tool uses points to create a particular
path. You can edit these points to change the segments between them.
Gaining control of these points can take a bit of practice.
To create points and segments on a page, follow these steps:
1. Close any existing documents and create a new document by choosing
File  ⇒  New  ⇒  Document.
2. Select Print, then click Create in the New Document dialog box.
A new document opens with the default settings.
3. 
 Select the Pen tool in the Tools panel. Make sure a stroke weight
and color are defined before using this tool.
4. Click anywhere on the page, and then click a second location.
You’ve created a new path with two points and one segment joining them.
5. Ctrl-click (Windows) or ⌘  -click (Mac) an empty part of the page to
deselect the current path.
After you deselect the path, you can create a new path or add new points
to the path you just created.
6. Add a new point to a selected segment by selecting the segment, then
hovering the mouse over the line and clicking.
A small plus (+) icon appears next to the Pen tool cursor. You can also do
the same thing by selecting the Add Anchor Point tool (located on the
menu that flies out when you click and hold the Pen icon in the Tools
panel).
7. Repeat Step 6, but this time click a new location on a line segment
and drag away from the line.
This step creates a curved path. The segments change and curve
depending on where the points are located along the path. The point you
created is a curve point.
For more information about working with the Pen tool, check out Book 5,
Chapter 4.

Editing Freeform Paths
Even the best artists sometimes need to make changes or delete parts of their
work. If you’ve made mistakes or change your mind about a drawing, follow
the steps in this section to make changes.
To change a path segment, make sure the segment is deselected, then select a
point with the Direct Selection tool. When a point is selected, it appears solid;
unselected points appear hollow.
 You can automatically select the Direct Selection tool by pressing the
A key.
All you need to do to select a point is click the point itself. Then you can use
the handles that appear when the point is selected to modify the segments.
Follow these steps:
1. Select the Direct Selection tool (or press the A key) from the Tools
panel, and then click a point.
The selected point appears solid. If you select a curve point, handles
extend from it.
A curved point and a corner point edit differently when you select and
drag them. Curve points have handles that extend from the point, but
corner points don’t.
2. Drag the point where you want it; to edit a curve point, click a handle
end and drag the handle left or right.
The path changes, depending on how you drag the handles.
Suppose that you want to make a corner point a curve point. You can do just
that with the Convert Direction Point tool. To understand how the Convert
Direction Point tool works best, you should have a path that contains both
straight and curved segments. Follow these steps to change a corner point into
a curved point and vice versa:
1. Select the Convert Direction Point tool.

This tool resides on a menu under the Pen tool in the Tools panel. Hold
down the mouse button over the Pen tool icon until a menu appears; select
the Convert Direction Point tool from the menu.
2. Click a curved point with the Convert Direction Point tool.
The point you click changes into a corner point, which changes the path’s
appearance.
3. Click and drag a corner point with the Convert Direction Point tool.
The point is modified as a curved point. This step changes the appearance
of the path again.
This tool is handy when you need to alter the way a path changes direction. If
you need to manipulate a point in a different way, you may need to change its
type by using the Convert Direction Point tool.
Modifying Frame Corners
You can use corner effects on basic shapes to customize the shape’s look.
Corner effects are useful for adding an interesting look to borders. You can be
quite creative with some of the shapes you apply effects to or by applying
more than one effect to a single shape. Here’s how to create a corner effect on
a rectangle:
1. Select the Rectangle tool and create a new rectangle anywhere on the
page.
Hold the Shift key when using the Rectangle tool if you want to create a
square.
2. With the Selection tool, select the shape, and then choose Object  ⇒  
Corner Options.
The Corner Options dialog box opens.
3. Select the type of corner to apply, then click OK.
The corner option is applied to the shape. To apply the corner option to all
corners of the shape, make sure the Make All Settings the Same chain
icon is selected.

 To adjust corner effects visually, use the Selection tool to click and
select a frame. With the frame selected, click the yellow box that appears
toward the top of the right edge of the frame. After clicking the yellow
box, each corner handle becomes yellow and can be dragged
horizontally left or right.
Using Fills
A fill is located inside a path. You can fill paths and shapes with several
different kinds of colors, transparent colors, or even gradients. Fills can help
you achieve artistic effects and illusions of depth or add interest to a page
design.
You may have already created a fill. The Tools panel contains two swatches:
one for the stroke (a hollow square) and one for the fill (a solid box). (Refer
to Chapter 2 of this minibook to locate the Fill and Stroke boxes.) If the Fill
box contains a color, your shape has a fill when it’s created. If the Fill box has
a red line through it, the shape is created without a fill.
Creating basic fills
You can create a basic fill in several different ways. One of the most common
ways is to specify a color in the Fill swatch before you create a new shape. To
create a shape with a fill, follow these steps:
1. Make sure you don’t have anything selected on the page. Make sure
that the Fill box is selected so that you aren’t adding color to the
stroke instead.
2. Open the Color panel by choosing Window  ⇒  Color  ⇒  Color.
3. Select a color in the Color panel.
You can enter values into the CMYK (Cyan, Magenta, Yellow, Black)
fields manually or by using the sliders. Alternatively, you can use the
Eyedropper tool to select a color from the color ramp at the bottom of the
Color panel.

 Use the Color panel menu to select different color modes if
CMYK isn’t already selected. Select the Panel menu in the upper right
and then select CMYK.
The Fill box in the Tools panel is updated with the new color you’ve
selected in the Color panel.
4. Create a new shape on the page.
Select a shape tool and drag on the page to create a shape. The shape is
filled with the fill color you chose.
 As in the other Creative Cloud applications, you can create tints of a
color built with CMYK by holding down the Shift key while dragging
any color’s slider. All color sliders then move proportionally.
You can also choose to use color swatches to select a fill color by using the
Swatches panel. (Choose Window  ⇒  Color  ⇒  Swatches to open the Swatches
panel.) Create a new color swatch (of the present color) by clicking the New
Swatch button at the bottom of the panel. Double-click the new swatch to add
new color properties by using sliders to set CMYK color values or by
entering numbers into each text field.
Perhaps you already have a shape without a fill and you want to add a fill to
it, or maybe you want to change the color of an existing fill. Select the shape
and, with the Fill box in the Tools panel selected, select a color from the
Color or Swatches panel. A new fill color is applied to the shape.
 You can drag and drop a swatch color to fill a shape on a page, even
if that shape isn’t selected. Open the Swatches panel by choosing
Window  ⇒  Color  ⇒  Swatches, and then drag the color swatch over to the
shape. Release the mouse button, and the fill color is applied
automatically to the shape.

Making transparent fills
Fills that are partially transparent can create some interesting effects for the
layout of your document. You can set transparency to more than one element
on the page and layer those elements to create the illusion of depth and
stacking.
Follow these steps to apply transparency to an element on the page:
1. Using the Selection tool, select a shape on the page.
A bounding box appears around the selected shape.
2. Open the Effects panel by choosing Window  ⇒  Effects.
3. Use the Opacity slider to specify how transparent the shape appears.
Click the arrow to open the slider or click in the text field to manually
enter a value using the keyboard. The effect is immediately applied to the
selected shape.
4. Select Stroke or Fill in the Effects panel to apply a separate opacity to
each one.
Looking at gradients
A gradient is the color transition from one color (or no color) to a different
color. Gradients can have two or more colors in the transition.
Gradients can add interesting effects to shapes, including 3D effects.
Sometimes you can use a gradient to achieve glowing effects or the effect of
light hitting a surface. The two kinds of gradients available in InDesign are
radial and linear, as shown in Figure 4-7 and described in this list:
Radial: A transition of colors in a circular fashion from a center point
radiating outward
Linear: A transition of colors along a straight path

FIGURE 4-7: A linear gradient (left) and radial gradient (right).
You can apply a gradient to a stroke or a fill or even to text. To apply a
gradient to a stroke, simply select the stroke instead of the fill.
 Even though you can apply a gradient to the stroke of live text, you’ll
create a printing nightmare — use these features sparingly!
Here’s how to add a gradient fill to a shape:
1. With the Selection tool, select the object you want to apply a gradient
to and then choose Window  ⇒  Color  ⇒  Swatches.
The Swatches panel opens.
2. Choose New Gradient Swatch from the Swatches panel drop-down
menu.
The New Gradient Swatch dialog box opens. (See Figure 4-8.)
3. Type a new name for the swatch in the Swatch Name field.
Sometimes, giving the swatch a descriptive name, such as one indicating
what the swatch is being used for, is helpful.
4. Select Linear or Radial from the Type drop-down list.
This option determines the type of gradient the swatch creates every time
you use it. We selected Radial from the drop-down list. (Refer to Figure
4-8.)
5. Manipulate the gradient stops, below the Gradient Ramp, to position
each color in the gradient.
Gradient stops are the color chips located below the Gradient Ramp. You
can move the diamond shape above the Gradient Ramp to determine the
center point of the gradient. You can select each gradient stop to change
the color and move them around to edit the gradient. When the gradient
stops are selected, you can change the color values in the Stop Color area
by using sliders or entering values in each CMYK text field. If a list of
swatches comes up and you want the CMYK sliders, select CMYK from
the Stop Color drop-down menu.

 You can add a new color to the gradient by clicking the area
between gradient stops. Then you can edit the new stop, just like you edit
the others. To remove the gradient stop, drag the stop away from the
Gradient Ramp.
6. Click OK.
The gradient swatch is created and applied to the selected object.
FIGURE 4-8: The New Gradient Swatch dialog box.
 To edit a gradient, double-click the gradient’s swatch in the Swatches
panel. This step opens the Gradient Options dialog box, where you can
modify the settings made in the New Gradient Swatch dialog box.
Removing fills

Removing fills is even easier than creating them. Follow these steps:
1. Select the shape with the Selection tool.
A bounding box appears around the shape.
2. Click the Fill box in the Tools panel.
3. Click the Apply None button, located below the Fill box.
The button is white with a red line through it. The fill is removed from the
selected shape, and the Fill box changes to No Fill. You also see the None
fill on the Swatches and Color panels.
If you’re using a single-row Tools panel, you don’t see the Apply None
button unless you click and hold down the Apply Gradient (or Apply
Color) button.
Adding Layers
Layers are like transparent sheets stacked on top of one another. If you add
layers to a drawing, you can create the appearance that graphics are stacked
on top of one another. The Layers panel allows you to create new layers,
delete layers you don’t need, or even rearrange layers to change the stacking
order. You can even duplicate an InDesign file, and then add or remove layers
to create an alternative version of the document.
Here’s how to work with layers in InDesign:
1. Open the Layers panel by choosing Window  ⇒  Layers.
This panel allows you to create, delete, and arrange layers.
2. Draw a shape on the page using a shape tool.
Create the shape anywhere on the page and make it large enough so that
you can easily stack another shape on top of part of it.
3. Click the Create New Layer button, on the bottom of the Layers
panel, to create a new layer.
A new layer is stacked on top of the selected layer and becomes the active
layer.

 Double-click a layer to give it an appropriate name or, even
better, hold down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key and click the
Create New Layer button to open the Layer Options dialog box before the
layer is created.
 Make sure that the layer you want to create content on is selected
before you start modifying the layer. You can tell which layer is selected
because it’s always highlighted in the Layers panel. You can easily add
content to the incorrect layer if you don’t check this panel frequently. (If
you inadvertently add an item to the wrong layer, you can always cut and
paste items to the correct layer.)
4. Make sure that a shape tool is still selected, and then create a shape
on the new layer by dragging the cursor so that part of the new shape
covers the shape you created in Step 2.
The new shape is stacked on top of the shape you created in Step 2.
For more information about working with layers, refer to Book 3, Chapter 8.
Creating QR Codes
You can use InDesign to create and modify QR code graphics. QR codes are a
form of barcode that can store information such as words, numbers, URLs, or
other forms of data. The user scans the QR code using her camera and
software on a device, such as a smartphone, and the software makes use of
the encoded data; for example, it opens a browser with the encoded URL,
identifies a product, tracks a package, and so on. InDesign lets you encode
hyperlinks, text, text messages, email messages, or business cards.
InDesign treats QR codes as graphics, so you can scale and modify the colors
like other artwork in your documents. You can even copy and paste them into
Illustrator!
You add a QR code to an empty frame in InDesign. Follow these steps to add
one to your document:

1. Click and drag the Rectangle Frame tool on the page to create an
empty frame.
2. With your new frame selected, choose Object  ⇒  Generate QR Code.
The Generate QR Code dialog box appears, with the Content tab active.
3. Select what type of data to encode using the Type menu.
Select Web Hyperlink, Plain Text, Text Message, Email, or Business
Card. The content area below this menu updates depending on what Type
you choose.
4. Enter the data to encode in your QR code.
The area below the Type menu updates with text boxes to enter your data
in. For example, if you chose Email, you enter an address, subject, and
message to send. Or if you chose Business Card, you need to fill in Name,
Organization, addresses, and so on.
5. Click the Color tab and choose a color swatch.
This sets the color for your QR code, affecting how it displays on the
page. You can modify the color after placing the QR code on the page by
changing the Fill and Stroke attributes of the selected frame.
6. Click OK.
The QR code is added to the selected frame. If you need to edit it further,
select the text frame and choose Object  ⇒  Edit QR Code.

Chapter 5
Understanding Color
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Using color in your InDesign layout
 Looking at color controls and models
 Discovering how to use swatches and swatch libraries
Color is an important part of design. Advertisements often rely on color to
relay brands or effective messages — think of the package delivery company
based on brown or a soft drink company known for its red cans and bottles.
Color can enhance your message and, when used consistently, helps create a
brand identity. When you use color, you want it to be accurate, whether
you’re printing or viewing the color online. In this chapter, you find out some
of the fundamental aspects of working with color and the basic instructions
on how to prepare documents for printing.
Selecting Color with Color Controls
You have several different color modes and options to choose when working
in InDesign. In this minibook, you find out how to add color to drawings with
the Color panel. In this section, you use the Color panel to choose colors and
apply them to elements on your page. You also discover how to save colors as
swatches so you can easily reuse them.
You should use swatches whenever possible because they use named colors
that can be matched by others more easily. A swatch can have exactly the
same appearance as any color you choose that’s unnamed, but a swatch
establishes a link between the color on the page and the name of a color, such
as a Pantone color number. Discover more about these kinds of color in the
later section “Using Color Swatches and Libraries.”
You can use these color controls for choosing colors for selections in a

document:
Stroke color: Choose colors for strokes and paths in InDesign. A hollow
box represents the Stroke color control.
Fill color: Choose colors for filling shapes. A solid square box represents
the Fill color control.
In the Tools panel, you can toggle between the Fill and Stroke color
controls by clicking them. Alternatively, you can press X on the keyboard
to toggle between selected controls.
Text color: When you’re working with text, a different color control
becomes active. The Text color control is visible and displays the selected
text color. Text can have both the stroke and fill colored.
To apply colors to selections, you can click the Apply color button below the
color controls in the Tools panel. Alternatively, you can select and click a
color swatch.
 The default colors in InDesign are a black stroke and no fill color.
Restore the default colors at any time by pressing D. This shortcut works
while using any tool except the Type tool.
Understanding Color Models
You can use any of three kinds of color models in InDesign: CMYK (Cyan,
Magenta, Yellow, Black), RGB (Red, Green, Blue), and LAB colors
(Lightness and A and B for the color-opponent dimensions of the color
space). A color model is a system used for representing each color as a set of
numbers or letters (or both). The best color model to use depends on how you
plan to print or display your document:
If you’re creating a PDF that will be distributed electronically and
probably not printed, use the RGB color model. RGB is how colors are
displayed on a computer monitor.
You must use the CMYK color model if you’re working with process

color. Instead of having inks that match specified colors, you have four
ink colors layered to simulate a particular color. Note that the colors on
the monitor may differ from the ones that are printed. Sample swatch
books and numbers can help you determine which colors you need to use
in a document to match colors printed in the end.
If you know that the document needs to be printed by professionals who
determine what each color is before it’s printed, it doesn’t matter whether
you use CMYK, RGB, or Pantone colors. In many cases, CMYK colors
give you a more accurate representation of what can be printed, because
RGB colors are often more vivid and bright on your monitor.
Using Color Swatches and Libraries
The Swatches panel and swatch libraries help you choose, save, and apply
colors in your documents. The colors you use in a document can vary greatly.
For example, one publication you make with InDesign may be for a
newsletter that has only two colors; another may be a catalog printing with
CMYK along with a separate spot color. For each document, you should
customize the available swatches so you can work more efficiently.
The Swatches panel
You can create, apply, and edit colors from the Swatches panel. In addition,
you can also create and save solid colors. Choose Window  ⇒  Color  ⇒  
Swatches to open or expand the Swatches panel.
To create a new color swatch to use in a document, follow these steps:
1. Click the panel menu drop-down located in the upper-right corner of
the Swatches Panel; choose New Color Swatch.
The New Color Swatch dialog box opens.
2. Leave the Name with Color Value checkbox selected or deselect to
name your new color swatch.
The colors in the Swatches panel are named by their color values as a
default.
The name you choose is displayed next to the color swatch when it’s
entered into the panel.

3. Choose the color type from the Color Type drop-down list.
Are you using a spot color, Pantone, for example, or Process, which is
used when printing a color with Cyan, Magenta, Yellow, and Black
(CMYK)?
4. Choose the color mode.
From the Color Mode drop-down list, select a color mode. For this
example, we use CMYK. Many of the other choices you see are prebuilt
color libraries for various systems.
5. Create the color by using the color sliders.
Note that if you start with Black, you have to adjust that slider to the left
to see the other colors.
 If you choose a spot color, such as Pantone, you are presented
with a list of available color swatches instead of the color sliders.
6. Click OK or Add.
Click Add if you want to continue adding colors to the Swatches panel or
click OK if this color is the only one you’re adding. The color or colors
are added to the Swatches panel. If you clicked Add, click OK when
you’re done adding color swatches.
 You can make changes to the swatch by selecting it in the Swatches
panel and then choosing Swatch Options from the panel menu, or by
simply double-clicking it in the Swatches panel.
Swatch libraries
Swatch libraries, also known as color libraries, are standardized sets of
named colors that help you because they’re the most commonly and
frequently used sets of color swatches. You can avoid trying to mix your own
colors, which can be a difficult or tedious process to get right. For example,
InDesign includes a swatch library for Pantone spot colors and a different
library for Pantone process colors. These libraries are quite useful if you’re

working with either color set. If you skipped over it, you may want to review
the earlier section “Understanding Color Models,” where we explain the
difference between spot and process colors.
To choose a swatch from a swatch library, follow these steps:
1. Choose New Color Swatch from the Swatches panel menu.
The New Color Swatch dialog box opens.
2. Choose the color type you want to work with from the Color Type
drop-down list.
Choose from Process or Spot Color types.
3. Select a color library from the Color Mode drop-down list.
The drop-down list contains a list of color swatch libraries to choose
from, such as Pantone Process Coated or TRUMATCH. After choosing a
swatch set, the library opens and appears in the dialog box. For this
example, we chose PANTONE+ Solid Coated, which is standard. If
you’re looking for the standard numbered Pantone colors, this set is the
easiest to choose from. The Pantone Solid-Coated library of swatches
loads.
4. Pick a swatch from the library.
If you were provided with a Pantone number, type it into the Pantone
textbox. Most companies have set Pantone colors that they use in order to
keep their color consistent no matter where it is printed or displayed. You
can also scroll and click a swatch in the library’s list of colors, shown in
Figure 5-1.
 Your monitor doesn’t provide the most accurate representation of
a color or show you how a color will print. If color accuracy is critical,
you should consider purchasing a color swatch book from Pantone, such
as the Pantone Color Bridge Set. For more details about this guide, go to
www.pantone.com and search for Color Bridge.
5. Click the Add button.
This step adds the swatch to your list of color swatches in the Swatches
panel. You can add as many color swatches as you like.

6. When you finish adding swatches, click the OK button.
After you add a new color, the swatch is added to the list of swatches in
the swatches panel and is ready to use in your project. Look in the
swatches panel to see the newly added colors.
FIGURE 5-1: Choose a color from the swatch library to add it to the Swatches panel.

Chapter 6
Clipping Paths, Alignment, and
Object Transformation
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Transforming objects with the Transform panel Transforming
objects with the Free Transform tool Rotating and scaling objects
 Shearing and reflecting objects
 Adding a clipping path
 Aligning and distributing objects in a layout
In this chapter, you discover several different ways to manipulate and arrange
objects on a page. You find out how to use the Transform panel and other
tools in the Tools panel to transform objects on page layouts. You can make
the same transformation to an object several different ways in InDesign, so
we show you a couple different ways to do the same job.
Aligning and distributing objects and images helps you organize elements
logically on a page. In this chapter, you find out how to align objects by using
the Align panel. In Chapter 4 of this minibook, we touch on paths. This
chapter provides more information about clipping paths. We show you how to
create a new path to use as a clipping path for an image in your document.
Working with Transformations
Chapter 4 of this minibook shows you how to transform graphic objects by
skewing them. You can manipulate objects in InDesign in many other ways.
You can transform an object by selecting an individual object and choosing
the Transform panel, which is available by choosing Window  ⇒  Object &
Layout  ⇒  Transform, or by using the Free Transform tool to visually adjust
objects.
Looking at the Transform panel
The Transform panel, shown in Figure 6-1, is extremely useful for changing

the way an image or graphic looks and also for changing the scale, rotation,
or skew of selected objects. You can choose from a range of values for some
of these modifiers or manually set your own by typing them.
FIGURE 6-1: The Transform panel makes it easy to resize, rotate, and reposition selected
objects.
The Transform panel offers the following information and functionality:
Reference point: Indicates which handle is the reference for any
transformations you make. For example, if you reset the X and Y
coordinates, the reference point is set to this position. In Figure 6-1, the
reference point is in the top-left corner, as indicated by the solid square.
Position: Change these values to reset the X and Y coordinate positions
of the selected object.
Size: The W and H text fields are used to change the current dimensions
of the object.
Scale: Enter or choose a percentage from the Scale X Percentage and
Scale Y Percentage drop-down lists to scale (resize) the object on either
of these axes.
Constraining proportions: Click the Constrain Proportions button to
maintain the current proportions of the object being scaled.
Shearing: Enter or choose a negative or positive number to modify the
shearing angle (skew) of the selected object.
Rotation angle: Set a negative value to rotate the object clockwise; a

positive value rotates the object counterclockwise.
When you’re scaling, shearing, or rotating an object in your layout, it
transforms based on the reference point in the Transform panel. For example,
when you rotate an object, InDesign considers the reference point to be the
center point of the rotation.
Click a new reference point square in the Transform panel to change the
reference point of the graphic to the equivalent bounding box handle of the
selected object.
Using the Free Transform tool
 The multipurpose Free Transform tool lets you transform objects in
different ways. Using the Free Transform tool, you can move, rotate, shear,
reflect, and scale objects.
The functions of the Free Transform Tool are represented in InDesign by
different cursors, as shown in Figure 6-2.
FIGURE 6-2: Different cursors indicate options for using the Transform tool.
To move an object by using the Free Transform tool, follow these steps:
1. Use the Selection tool to select an object on the page.
You can use an object that’s already on the page or create a new shape by
using the drawing tools. When the object is selected, you see handles
around its edges.
2. Select the Free Transform tool from the Tools panel.

The cursor changes to the Free Transform tool.
3. Move the cursor over the middle of the selected object.
The cursor changes its appearance to indicate that you can drag to move
the object. (Refer to Figure 6-2.) If you move the cursor outside the edges
of the object, the cursor changes when other tools, such as rotate, scale,
and shear, become active.
4. Drag the object to a different location.
The object is moved to a new location on the page.
Rotating objects
You can rotate an object by using the Free Transform tool, the Rotate tool, or
the Transform panel. Use the panel to enter a specific degree that you want
the object to rotate. The Free Transform tool lets you visually manipulate the
object on the page.
To rotate an image by using the Free Transform tool, follow these steps:
1. Select an object on the page with the Selection tool.
Handles appear around the edges of the object. You can rotate any object
on the page.
2. Select the Free Transform tool in the Tools panel and move it near the
handle of an object outside the bounding box.
The cursor changes when you move it close to the handle of an object.
For rotation, you must keep the cursor just outside the object.
3. When the cursor changes to the rotate cursor, drag to rotate the
object.
Drag the cursor until the object is rotated the correct amount.
Alternatively, you can use the Rotate tool to spin an object by following these
steps:
1. With the object selected, select the Rotate tool in the Tools panel by
clicking and holding the arrow in the lower corner of the Free
Transform tool, then move the cursor near the object.
The cursor looks similar to a crosshair.

2. Click the cursor anywhere on the page near the object.
The point that the object rotates around is set on the page.
3. Drag the cursor outside the object.
The object rotates around the reference point you set on the page. Hold
the Shift key if you want to rotate in 45-degree increments.
You can also rotate objects by using the Transform panel. Here’s how:
1. Select an object on the page with the Selection tool.
The bounding box with handles appears around the selected object.
2. If the Transform panel isn’t open, choose Window  ⇒  Object &
Layout  ⇒  Transform.
The Transform panel appears.
3. Select a value from the Rotation Angle drop-down list or click the
text field and enter a percentage.
The object rotates to the degree you set in the Transform panel. Negative
angles (in degrees) rotate the image clockwise, and positive angles (in
degrees) rotate the image counterclockwise.
Scaling objects
 
 You can scale objects by using the Transform panel (refer to Figure
6-1), the Scale tool, or the Free Transform tool. Use the Transform panel to
set exact width and height dimensions that you want to scale the object to,
just as you can set exact percentages for rotating.
To scale an object by using the Free Transform tool or the Scale tool, follow
these steps:
1. Select an object on the page.
A bounding box appears around the object.
2. Select the Free Transform tool or the Scale tool from the Tools panel.
3. Move the cursor directly over a corner handle.
The cursor changes into a double-ended arrow. (Refer to Figure 6-2.)
4. Drag outward to increase the size of the object; drag inward to

decrease the size of the object.
 If you want to scale the image proportionally, hold down the Shift
key while you drag.
5. Release the mouse button when the object is scaled to the correct size.
To resize an object using the Transform panel, select the object and enter new
values into the W and H text fields in the panel. The object then resizes to
those exact dimensions.
Shearing objects
Shearing an object means that you’re skewing it horizontally, slanting it to
the left or right. A sheared object may appear to have perspective or depth
because of this modification. You use the Shear tool to create a shearing
effect, as shown in Figure 6-3.
FIGURE 6-3: The original image is on the left, and the sheared image is on the right.
Follow these steps to shear an object:
1. Select an object on the page.
The bounding box appears around the object that’s selected.
2. 
 Choose the Shear tool in the Tools panel by clicking and holding
the Free Transform tool.
The cursor changes so that it looks similar to a crosshair. Click the corner
of the object that you want to shear from, and a crosshair appears (refer to

Figure 6-3).
3. Click anywhere above or below the object and drag.
The selected object shears depending on which direction you drag. Press
the Shift key while you drag to shear an object in 45-degree increments.
 To shear objects with the Free Transform tool, begin dragging a
handle and then hold down Ctrl+Alt (Windows) or ⌘  +Option (Mac)
while dragging.
You can also enter an exact value into the Transform panel to shear an object.
Select the object and then enter a positive or negative value in the panel
representing the amount of slant you want to apply to the object.
 You can apply shear by choosing Object  ⇒  Transform  ⇒  Shear to
display the Shear dialog box.
Reflecting objects
You can reflect objects to create mirror images by using the Transform panel
menu. The menu provides several additional options for manipulating objects.
Follow these steps to reflect an object:
1. Select an object on the page and then choose Window  ⇒  Object &
Layout  ⇒  Transform to open the Transform panel or open it from the
Window menu.
The object’s bounding box and handles appear. The Transform panel
shows the current values of the selected object.
2. Click the panel menu in the Transform panel.
The menu opens, revealing many options available for manipulating the
object.
3. Select Flip Horizontal from the Transform panel menu.
The object on the page flips on its horizontal axis. You can repeat this step

with other reflection options in the menu, such as Flip Vertical.
 You can also reflect objects with the Free Transform tool by dragging
a corner handle past the opposite end of the object. The object reflects
on its axis.
Understanding Clipping Paths
Clipping paths allow you to create a path that crops a part of an image based
on the path, such as removing the background area of an image. This shape
can be one you create using InDesign, or you can import an image that
already has a clipping path. InDesign can also use an existing alpha or mask
layer, such as one created using Photoshop, and treat it like a clipping path.
Clipping paths are useful when you want to block out areas of an image and
have text wrap around the leftover image.
You can create a clipping path directly in InDesign by using a drawing tool,
such as the Pen tool. You use the tool to create a shape and then paste an
image into this shape on the page. If you expect you’ll want to reuse the
clipping path and the image in the future, create the path in Photoshop and
save it as part of the image instead. See Book 3, dedicated to Photoshop, for
more details on how to do this.
Here’s a quick way to remove the background of an image using InDesign:
1. Choose File  ⇒  Place and browse to locate and open an image.
2. 
 With the Pen tool, create a path right on top of the image.
The path should be created so that it can contain the image.
3. With the Selection tool, click to select the image and then choose Edit  
⇒  Cut.
4. Select the shape you created in Step 1 and choose Edit  ⇒  Paste Into.
The image is pasted into the selected shape you drew with the Pen tool.
If an image placed into your InDesign layout already includes a clipping path,

you can choose to use it by selecting Show Import Options at the time you
place the image into your layout. On the Mac OS, click on the Options button
to be able to check the Show Import Options checkbox.
If that image contains multiple paths, you can choose which path to use by
selecting Object  ⇒  Clipping Path  ⇒  Options, and then selecting either Alpha
Channel or Clipping Path from the Type menu, depending upon what is used
in the image.
If an image you import into your layout was photographed against a solid
light colored or white background — such as a picture of a product for a
catalog that was taken against a white background — you can have InDesign
create a clipping path for that image. Here’s how:
1. Find an image that has a solid background and place it into your
document. Using the Selection tool, click to select the image.
2. Choose Object  ⇒  Clipping Path  ⇒  Options.
3. In the Clipping Path dialog box, click the Type drop-down menu and
choose Detect Edges. Adjust the threshold slider until the background
surrounding the image disappears.
4. Click OK.
The path is created so that the image is visible and the background has
been removed. The image can be placed over any other object, and it will
reveal any items behind it.
 For a clipping path to reveal objects behind it, the object with the
clipping path needs to be at the top-most layer or the top-most object
within its layer. You can check this by selecting the object and choosing
Object  ⇒  Arrange  ⇒  Bring to Front and also using the layers panel,
available by choosing Window  ⇒  Layers.
Arranging Objects on the Page
This section covers the additional ways you can arrange objects, which gives
you more control over the placement of elements in your document.

Aligning objects
In InDesign CC, you can align visually without the need for any extra tools or
panels. If you keep Smart Guides activated (they’re on by default), when you
use the Selection tool to select and move objects around a page, guides
appear automatically. These guides appear when the selected object is aligned
with other objects on the page or with the page itself. If viewing these pesky
guides starts to bother you, choose Edit  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  Guides & Pasteboard
(Windows) or InDesign  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  Guides & Pasteboard (Mac) and turn
off the four options underneath the Smart Guide Options heading.
You can also align objects on a page by using the Align panel: Choose
Window  ⇒  Object & Layout  ⇒  Align. This panel gives you control over the
way elements align to one another or to the overall page. The Align panel has
many buttons to control selected objects. Mouse over a button to see its
tooltip describe how that button aligns elements.
 If you’re not sure what each button does after reading the associated
tooltip, look at the icon on the button. The icon is sometimes helpful in
depicting what the Align button does to selected objects.
Here’s how to align elements on the page:
1. Select several objects on the page with the Selection tool.
Hold the Shift key while clicking each object to select several objects.
Each object is selected when you click it on the page. If you don’t have a
few objects on a page, quickly create a couple new objects by using the
drawing tools.
2. Choose Window  ⇒  Object & Layout  ⇒  Align.
The Align panel opens.
3. Select the kind of alignment you want to apply to the selected objects.
Try clicking the Align Vertical Centers button. Each selected object aligns
to the vertical center point on the page.
Distributing objects

In the previous section, you find out how to align a few objects on a page, but
what if the objects you’re aligning aren’t distributed evenly? Maybe their
centers are lined up, but there’s a large gap between two of the images and a
narrow gap between the other ones. In that case, you need to distribute
objects and align them. Distribute objects on the page to space them relative
to the page or to each other in different ways. Here’s how:
1. Select objects on a page that are neither aligned nor evenly
distributed by using the Selection tool while holding the Shift key.
The objects are selected when you click each one. All objects you select
will be aligned to each other on the page.
2. If the Align panel isn’t open, choose Window  ⇒  Object & Layout  ⇒  
Align.
The Align panel opens.
3. Click the Distribute Horizontal Centers button and then click the
Align Vertical Centers button directly above it on the Align panel.
The selected objects are distributed evenly and aligned horizontally on the
page.
Don’t forget about the cool Multiple Place feature: It lets you distribute and
align on the fly! Try this handy option to place several images at one time:
1. Choose File  ⇒  Place.
2. Press Ctrl (Windows) or ⌘   (Mac), select multiple images, and then
click the Open button.
3. Before clicking to place the images, hold down Ctrl+Shift (Windows)
or ⌘  +Shift (Mac).
The cursor appears as a grid, as shown in Figure 6-4.
4. Click and drag to create the rectangle that you want your images
aligned to and distributed within.
The images are aligned and distributed automatically, as shown in Figure
6-5.

FIGURE 6-4: Place multiple images by holding down Ctrl+Shift (Windows) or ⌘  +Shift (Mac) and
dragging.
FIGURE 6-5: Images are aligned and distributed automatically when placed.

Chapter 7
Exporting to PDF and Printing
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Checking (preflighting) documents
 Packaging documents for delivery
 Understanding file formats
 Exporting to different file formats
 Printing documents
In addition to printing, you can also export InDesign documents into several
different kinds of file formats. In this chapter, you take a closer look at the
preparations for delivering a file to a print vendor, as well as many of the
different kinds of files you can create electronically from an InDesign
document. Before you print a document, it’s good to make sure you have
everything you need, so we start by looking at the preflight option.
Preflight: Preparing Your Documents
for Printing
The Preflight feature in InDesign helps confirm that everything you need to
print your document is ready and available. It also provides information about
the document you’re printing, such as listing its fonts, print settings, and inks
used. Using Preflight can help you determine whether your InDesign
document has unlinked images or missing fonts before printing it. Here’s how
to use the Preflight option:
1. If you don’t have a file to work with, you can access the file named
Preflight in the Book04_InDesign folder in the DummiesCCfiles
folder located at https://www.agitraining.com/dummies.

This page intentionally has missing fonts and images.
2. With the file still open, choose Window  ⇒  Output  ⇒  Preflight.
The Preflight panel opens.
3. Make sure the On checkbox is selected and the Profile is set to [Basic]
(working).
These settings provide a basic preflight of the document, confirming that
all images and fonts are available for printing.
4. If any errors are noted in the document, click the page number listed
to the right of the error in the preflight window to view the error.
Common errors, such as missing fonts and overset text (text that doesn’t
fit completely into a text frame) are all listed in the Preflight panel, and
can generally be corrected easily with a little time. It’s much better to fix
errors before you print them!
 When the Preflight option is turned on, a small green or red circle
appears along the bottom-left corner of the document window. Green
indicates that the document is preflighted and no errors are reported,
whereas red indicates a possible error. You can simply click the errors
drop-down along the bottom-left corner of the Document window to
open the Preflight panel and investigate any possible errors.
Packaging Your Documents
If you need to deliver your documents to a print service provider or to another
designer, you’ll want to provide everything that provider needs to continue
working on the InDesign file. This is where the Package command is helpful.
Package gathers copies of all images and fonts used in the document along
with a copy of the InDesign document itself into a single folder that you can
easily deliver to a print service provider or to a colleague. You can even use
this option to archive completed jobs, to make sure that all necessary
elements are stored together. Here’s how:
1. Choose File  ⇒  Package.

The Package dialog box opens. The Summary screen shows you all
current images and fonts in the document, based on an analysis of that
document.
2. Click Fonts in the list on the left side of the dialog box.
Any fonts in your document are listed on this screen. Select fonts from
this list and click the Find Font button to discover where they’re located.
Click the More Info button to see the path to the font. These fonts are
saved directly into the package folder when you finish.
3. Click Links and Images in the list on the left side of the dialog box.
The Links and Images screen lists the images within your document. If
any images aren’t properly linked, your document is incomplete and
prints with pictures missing. Find the image, update it, and repair links
before packing the file.
4. When you’re finished, click the Package button at the bottom of the
dialog box.
Your document and all its associated files are saved into a folder. You’re
given the opportunity to name the folder, specify a location on your hard
drive, and add instructions for printing.
 If you’re taking a file to a professional print service provider, you can
give the vendor your original InDesign document or you can create a
high-quality PDF file suitable for printing. It’s a good idea to ask your
print service provider about the file type it prefers to receive. By
providing an InDesign file, you give the printing service a chance to
fine-tune the document before printing, and if you provide a PDF, the
document has limited capabilities for editing. Different print vendors
prefer to receive different file types.
Understanding File Formats
The kind of file you decide to create by exporting depends on your needs.
The first thing to determine is where you’ll use the exported file. For
example, you might need to

Put an image of your InDesign document, or page, on the web.
Send an entire document to someone who doesn’t have InDesign, but
wants to receive it by email.
Import the content into a different program, such as Adobe Animate or
Illustrator.
Take a particular kind of file somewhere else to print it.
Exporting InDesign documents lets you make them “portable” so that they
can be used in different ways — such as on the web or in another program.
You can choose from the many file formats InDesign supports, and you can
control many settings related to the files you create.
Some of the file formats you can create from InDesign are listed in Table 7-1.
TABLE 7-1 File Formats
File Format
Description
JPEG (Joint
Photographic
Experts
Group), PNG
(Portable
Network
Graphics)
Either of these commonly used formats for compressed images is a good choice for
creating a picture of an InDesign page to post on a website. This is only a picture and is
good for something like a thumbnail image representing a document. Don’t use this if you
want someone to actually read the InDesign file on the web — for that you’ll want to export
to PDF. This is simply a picture preview of what a document page looks like.
EPS
(Encapsulated
PostScript)
A self-contained image file that contains high-resolution printing information about all the
text and graphics used on a page. This format is commonly used for high-quality printing
when you need to have an image of an InDesign page used within another document —
such as a picture of a book cover created with InDesign that needs to appear in a
promotional catalog — so that you can use an EPS of the book cover in your layout.
XML
(Extensible
Markup
Language)
Let’s you separate the content from the layout so that all the content on a page can be
repurposed and used in different ways — online or in print. Corporations commonly use
XML for storing their product data when they have a large amount of information — such as
thousands of items in a catalog.
PDF (Portable
Document
Format)
Used to exchange documents with users on different computer systems and operating
systems. This format is used extensively for distributing files such as e-books and
brochures. You may need to distribute the file to a wide audience or to a service provider for
printing. Anyone who has installed Adobe Reader (also known as Acrobat Reader) on a
computer can view your document. You can export PDFs designed for printing by selecting
PDF (Print). Select PDF (Interactive) if your PDF contains hyperlinks or movies and will be
distributed online instead of being printed.
Rich or Plain
text (text files)
Can include formatting (Rich) or plain text only (Plain). A text file is a simple way to export
content. If you need the text from your document to incorporate or send elsewhere, you can
export it as Plain (Text Only), Tagged, or Rich Txt. If you need to send a document to
someone who doesn’t have InDesign, exporting it as text may be a good option.
Use the e-pub file format to create electronic books that can be read using an electronic

EPUB
book reader, including devices such as the nook or iPad, or using any e-book reader
software. With additional conversion, this file can also be read on the Amazon Kindle.
HTML
Use the HTML file format to export a document as HTML (HyperText Markup Language),
which is the language used by web browsers. Documents exported using this option
typically require some HTML editing for formatting and design, which you can do using
Adobe Dreamweaver.
IDML
Use the InDesign Markup Language option to export InDesign documents in a format that
can be read by earlier versions of InDesign. For example, a colleague is using InDesign
CS6, but you are using InDesign CC. Export the document using the IDML option so that
your colleague can successfully open it in InDesign CS6. If you simply save the file, the
older version of InDesign is not able to open the document.
 JPEG, PDF, and EPS files can be exported from InDesign and then
imported into other software programs. You can export these images for
use in print after they’re imported into a different graphics program, or
you can use the images on the web. It all depends on how you set up the
document for export and the settings you use.
After determining which file format to export your file in, learn how to export
the file and the different kinds of settings you can control when doing so. The
rest of this chapter shows you how to export different file types from
InDesign.
Exporting Publications
You can export publications from the Export dialog box. After you open it by
choosing File  ⇒  Export, you can choose the file format, name, and location.
After specifying a name and location and a format to export to, click Save. A
new dialog box opens, where you can make settings specific to the file format
you picked. We discuss in the following sections some of the most common
file formats you’re likely to use for export.
Exporting PDF documents for printing
Create a PDF file of your document if you want to make sure that viewers see
exactly what you have created — even if they don’t have InDesign. A PDF
file also limits the editing capabilities, making it unlikely your document will
be changed. If you choose to export a PDF document, you have many options
to customize the document you’re exporting. You can control the amount of

compression in the document, the marks and bleeds it has in InDesign, and its
security settings. Here’s how to export to PDF:
1. Choose File  ⇒  Export.
The Export dialog box opens.
2. Choose a location in which to save the file and then enter a new
filename.
Browse to a location on your hard drive using the Save In drop-down list
(if you’re using Windows) and name the file in the File Name text field. If
you’re using a Mac, name the file in the Save As text field and select a
location from the Where drop-down list.
3. Select Adobe PDF (Print) from the Save As Type (Windows) or
Format (Mac) drop-down list at the bottom of the Export window.
4. Click Save.
The Export Adobe PDF dialog box appears with the General options
screen open, as shown in Figure 7-1.
5. Choose a preset from the Adobe PDF Preset drop-down list.
These presets are easy to use. If you’re familiar with Adobe Acrobat and
the Adobe Distiller functions, they’re the same. (For more detailed
information about what each setting does, see Book 6.)
 The presets on the Adobe PDF Preset drop-down list
automatically change the individual export settings of a document. For
example, you can select Smallest File Size from the list if you’re
displaying your work online or select High Quality Print if you plan for
the PDF to be printed on home printers. Select Press Quality if you intend
to have the PDF professionally printed.
6. Leave the Standard drop-down list at None.
Leave it at None unless, of course, you know about the PDF/X standards
used for sharing advertisements. (For more on PDF/X, see Book 6.)
7. Select a range of pages to export by typing the start page (and then a
hyphen) and the end page in the Range text box.

You can also export nonconsecutive pages by separating the page
numbers with a comma.
By default, all pages are exported.
8. Choose a compatibility setting for the PDF from the Compatibility
drop-down list.
Compatibility settings determine which kind of reader is required in order
to view the document. Setting compatibility to Acrobat 5 (PDF 1.4)
ensures that a wide audience can view your PDF files. Some older PDF
readers may not be able to interpret certain features in your document if
you choose compatibility for a higher version. Setting this value to
Acrobat 5 or later ensures that anyone who has installed Adobe Reader or
Acrobat in the past ten years will be able to view the PDF file.
9. Choose whether to embed thumbnails and whether to optimize the
document, and then choose which kinds of elements to include in the
file by selecting the checkbox to the left of the options in the Include
section.
Other settings specify the inclusion of bookmarks, links, and other
elements in the file. Unless you’ve added any of these elements, you don’t
need to worry about selecting these options. You may want to embed
thumbnail previews, but Acrobat creates thumbnails automatically when
the file is opened, so this can add to the file size unnecessarily.
 Click Security in the list on the left of the Export Adobe PDF
dialog box to open the Security screen, where you can specify passwords
to open the document. You can also choose a password that’s required to
print or modify the PDF file.
10. Click the Export button to export the file.
The file is saved to the location you specified in Step 2.

FIGURE 7-1: Choose the export options to export a file in the PDF format.
Exporting EPS files
From InDesign, you can export EPS files, which are useful for importing into
other programs. EPS files are single-page graphics files, which means that
each exported InDesign page is saved as a separate EPS file.
 You do not need to export an EPS file to place one InDesign file into
another! If you’re creating classified pages or any page that contains
other InDesign pages, you can save yourself a few steps by simply
choosing File  ⇒  Place and selecting the InDesign file. InDesign can

import InDesign files into a layout, or even PDFs — so the only reason
to export to EPS is to create a picture for an older software or database
that doesn’t work with newer file formats.
Here’s how to export EPS files:
1. Choose File  ⇒  Export.
The Export dialog box opens.
2. Select a location on your hard drive to save the EPS files, enter a new
filename, and select EPS from the Save As Type (Windows) or
Format (Mac) drop-down list; click Save.
The Export EPS dialog box opens.
3. Choose a page or range of pages to export.
Select the All Pages option to export all pages or select the Ranges option
and enter a range of pages. If you want spreads to export as one file,
select the Spreads radio button.
If you’re creating more than one EPS file (for example, exporting more
than one page of your InDesign document), the file is saved with the
filename, an underscore, and then the page number. For example, page 7
of a cats.indd file would be saved as cats_7.eps in the designated
location.
4. From the Color drop-down list, select a color mode; from the Embed
Fonts drop-down list, select how to embed fonts.
From the Color drop-down list, select Leave Unchanged to retain the
color mode you’re using for the InDesign document. You can also change
the color mode to CMYK (Cyan, Magenta, Yellow, Black), Gray
(grayscale), or RGB (Red, Green, Blue). For more information on color
modes, flip back to Chapter 5 of this minibook.
From the Embed Fonts drop-down list, select Subset to embed only the
characters used in the file. If you select Complete, all fonts in the file are
loaded when you print the file. Selecting None means that a reference to
where the font is located is written into the file.
5. Choose whether you want a preview to be generated for the file by
choosing from the Preview drop-down list.
A preview (a small thumbnail image) is useful if an EPS file can’t be

displayed. For example, you’re browsing a library of images and you see
a small thumbnail image of the EPS file; so whether or not you use the
image or open it on your computer, you can see what the file looks like.
From the Preview drop-down list, you can select TIFF to generate a
preview; select None if you don’t want a preview to be created.
6. Click the Export button to export the files.
The files are saved to the location you designated in Step 2.
Exporting JPEG and PNG files
You can export JPEG and PNG files from an InDesign document. These file
formats are commonly used in web publishing and are useful if you need to
place a picture of an InDesign document or page online. You can export a
single image on a selected page, or even entire pages and spreads as a JPEG
or PNG. JPEG and PNG files allow you to effectively compress full color or
black-and-white images, which is useful if you need a picture of an InDesign
page to appear on the web.
To export a JPEG or PNG image, follow these steps:
1. Select an object on a page or make sure that no object is selected if
you want to export a page or spread.
2. Choose File  ⇒  Export.
The Export dialog box opens.
3. Type a filename, locate the spot where you want to save the file on
your hard drive, and select either JPEG or PNG from the Save As
Type (Windows) or Format (Mac) drop-down list; click Save.
The Export JPEG or PNG dialog box opens.
4. If you want to export a page, select the Pages radio button and enter
the page number in the Range text field; if you want to export the
selected object, make sure that the Selection option is selected.
The Selection option is available only if a selection was made in Step 1.
5. Choose an image quality and format to export by selecting from the
Image Quality and Format Method drop-down lists.
The Image Quality drop-down list controls the amount of compression
that’s used when you export a JPEG or PNG file. Choose from these

options:
Maximum: Creates an image with the largest file size and highest
quality
High: Creates an image with a larger file size and high quality
Medium: Creates an image with medium file size and medium
quality
Low: Creates a smaller file of lesser quality because it includes less
image information
If you select the Baseline format from the Format Method drop-down list,
the entire image has to be downloaded before it’s displayed in a web
browser. Select Progressive to show the image in a progressively
complete display as it downloads in a web browser.
The Format Method options do not appear if you are creating a PNG
image.
6. Click the Export button.
The file is exported and saved to the location you specified in Step 3.
Exporting to Flash
Using InDesign CC, you can export an InDesign document as a Flash
Professional file (FLA) that can be edited in Flash Animate CC (formerly
Flash), or as a Flash Player (SWF) file that can be viewed, but not edited.
 Many modern web browsers do not support the SWF file format. This
includes the browsers on the Apple iPhone and iPad, and there is limited
support in some of the Microsoft browsers. Because the Flash file format
is currently on the decline, you should carefully consider whether you
want to export to Flash at all. We suggest you review other options for
exporting digital documents, which we cover in the next chapter in this
minibook. However, because Flash export is still an available option, we
cover it here.
To export to the Flash Player (SWF) format, follow these steps:

1. Choose File  ⇒  Export.
The Export dialog box appears.
2. Choose a location to save the files, enter a new filename, and choose
Flash Player (SWF) from the Save As Type (Windows) or Format
(Mac) drop-down list.
 If you need to include video, audio, animation, or complex
interactivity, export the file in the Flash Professional (FLA) format
because you can then use Animate to modify and edit the file until it
meets your exact needs. While the SWF format will quickly create a SWF
version of your document that can be viewed online, it doesn’t provide
you with an option to refine and edit your choices after exporting.
In the Export SWF dialog box, you can set the output size, specify pages
to include, and make various conversion and compression choices.
3. Choose the size you want for the exported file.
If you do not want to change the size of the exported file, select the Scale
option and leave the drop-down list at 100%. Otherwise, select the Fit To
option to select and option from the drop-down list, or select the Width
option and enter your own dimensions in the Width and Height drop-
down lists.
4. Select which page or pages you want to export.
Select the All Pages option to export the entire document; select Range to
enter a page number if you want to export only a specific page or pages.
5. Select the Interactivity options you want by choosing whether you
want to include all interactive options or only those that affect
appearance.
6. Select whether you want Page Transitions to export, or select from
the list of included transitions such as Dissolve or Wipe.
7. Choose whether you want an interactive page curl to appear at the
top corner of the document page.
8. Click OK to export your InDesign document as a SWF file.

Exporting text files
You can extract text from an InDesign document so that it can be edited or
used elsewhere. The text formats vary slightly depending on the text in your
document.
To export text, follow these steps:
1. Select the Text tool from the toolbox and select some text within a text
frame in your document, or place the cursor within a text frame
where you want to export all the text.
The cursor must be in a text frame in order to export text.
2. Choose File  ⇒  Export.
The Export dialog box opens.
3. Enter a filename, select a location to save the file in, and select Text
Only from the Save As Type (Windows) or Format (Mac) drop-down
list; click Save.
The Text Export Options dialog box opens.
4. Choose a platform and encoding for the export.
Select either PC or Macintosh from the Platform drop-down list to set the
PC or Mac operating system compatibility. Select an encoding method for
the platform you choose from the Encoding drop-down list; you can
choose either Default Platform or Unicode.
The universal character-encoding standard Unicode is compatible with
major operating systems. Encoding, which refers to how characters are
represented in a digital format, is essentially a set of rules that determines
how the character set is represented by associating each character with a
particular code sequence.
5. Click the Export button.
The file is exported and saved to the location you specified in Step 3.
Printing Your Work
You can print your work from an InDesign document in many different ways,
with many kinds of printers and processes. You can either use your home or
office printer, or you can take your work to a professional printing service.

Both printers and printing services vary in the quality of production they can
offer you.
The following sections look at the different ways you can set up a document
for printing and the kinds of issues you may encounter during this process.
Understanding bleed
If you want an image or span of color to go to the edge of a page, without any
white margins, you bleed it off the edge of the document. Bleeding extends
the print area slightly beyond the edge of the page into the area that will be
cut and removed during the printing process. (Professional printers
sometimes print your documents on a larger page size than necessary, and
then trim off the extra paper.) You can bleed your own work, too. While
you’re designing, you can turn on crop and bleed marks to show where the
page needs to be trimmed to make sure that the image bleeds far enough off
the edge of the page area. We cover this topic in the next section.
Doing it yourself: Printing and proofing at home or
the office
Because many InDesign documents are designed to be professionally printed,
the available print settings are quite robust. Just because they are robust
doesn’t make them complicated, though. We demystify the settings for you
here:
Choose File  ⇒  Print to open the Print dialog box. Choose the printer you
intend to use from the Printer drop-down menu. If you don’t have a printer,
choose Adobe PDF from the Printer drop-down menu to follow along with
the steps below.
Many printing options are available in the list on the left side of the Print
dialog box. Clicking an item causes the dialog box to change, displaying the
settings you can change for the selected item. Click each of the items below
to better understand these common printing options:
General: Set the number of copies of the document you want to print and
the range of pages to print. You can select the Reverse Order checkbox to
print from the last to first page. Select an option from the Sequence drop-
down list to print only even or odd pages instead of all pages. If you’re
working with spreads that need to be printed on a single page, select the

Spreads radio button.
Setup: Define the paper size, orientation (portrait or landscape), and
scale. You can scale a page so that it’s as much as 1,000 percent of its
original size or as little as 1 percent. You can (optionally) constrain the
scale of the width and height so that the page remains at the same ratio.
The Page Position drop-down list is useful when you’re using paper that’s
larger than the document you’ve created. This option helps you center the
document on larger paper.
Marks and Bleed: Turn on or off many of the printing marks in the
document, such as crop, bleed, and registration marks. For example, you
may want to show these marks if a bleed extends past the boundaries of
the page and you need to show where to crop each page. You see a
preview of what the page looks like when printed, and you can select
options to print page information (such as filename and date) on each
page.
 Output: Choose how to print pages — for example, as a
separation or a composite, using which inks (if you’re using separations),
or with or without trapping. InDesign can separate and print documents as
plates (which are used in commercial printing) from settings you specify.
Depending on the printer you have selected, you may or may not have
separations as an option.
Graphics: Control how graphics and fonts in the document are printed.
The Send Data drop-down list controls bitmap images and specifies how
much of the data from these images is sent to the printer. Here are some
other options available when printing:
All: Sends all bitmap data. Use this for the highest quality printing,
but it may take a long time for your jobs to print if you’re using
high-resolution images.
Optimized Subsampling: Sends as much image data as the printer
can handle. Use this if you are having difficulty with printing high-
quality images when using the All option.
Proxy: Prints lower-quality images mostly to preview them.

None: Prints placeholder boxes with an X through them. This
option lets you quickly print a proof of a layout to just get a quick
understanding of a page design.
Color Management: Choose how you want color handled when it’s
output. If you have profiles loaded in your system for your output
devices, you can select the profiles here. Color management is more
commonly used by commercial print vendors and vendors with critical
color needs. It’s a complex topic — entire books are available on the
subject of color management — and we don’t have space to cover it in
depth here.
Advanced: Determine how you want images to be sent to the printer. If
you are unfamiliar with Open Prepress Interface (OPI), you can leave this
setting at the default. Also known as image-swapping technology, the OPI
process allows low-resolution images inserted into InDesign to be
swapped with the high-resolution version for output. It’s a highly
specialized setting used by commercial print vendors — such as catalog
print vendors — that work with a large number of images.
Flattening needs to be addressed if you use a drop shadow, feather an
object in InDesign, or apply transparency to any objects, even if they
were created in Photoshop or Illustrator.
Use the preset Medium Resolution for desktop printers and High
Resolution for professional press output.
Summary: You can’t make modifications but you can see a good
overview of all your print settings.
 After you finish your settings, click the Save Preset button if you
want to save the changes you’ve made. If you think you may print other
documents with these settings repeatedly, using the Save Preset feature
can be a great timesaver.
After you click the Save Preset button, the Save Preset dialog box opens,
where you can enter a new name to save the settings. The next time you print
a document, you can select the saved preset from the Print Preset drop-down
list in the Print dialog box.

Click the Print button at the bottom of the Print dialog box when you’re ready
to print the document.

Chapter 8
Creating Digital Documents Using
EPUB
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Digital document essentials
 Alternate layouts for varying devices
 Liquid Layout rules
 Exporting to EPUB 2.0 (Reflowable)
 Exporting to EPUB 3.0 (Fixed Layout)
InDesign was built more than a decade ago as a tool for creating printed
documents not for creating digital documents and electronic books. As of
InDesign CS5, however, Adobe added the capability to create digital
documents for distribution on tablets, e-readers, and the web. Since then,
many new features have been added to InDesign that are focused on creating
digital documents.
Because publishing on tablets is still relatively new, the workflows, tools, and
features are still in their infancy. In some cases, we find the process a bit
clumsy and the tools added to InDesign feel like an afterthought, but, unless
you want to learn to code HTML5 and CSS3, the Creative Cloud tools are
your best bet for getting your content delivered onto a tablet or e-reading
device.
Digital documents can be optimized to appear on a variety of devices, and in
different formats. In this chapter, you discovered two such formats:
EPUB 2.0 (reflowable): The standard for electronic books that can be
viewed online and offline is EPUB. If your content is text-heavy, the
EPUB 2.0 (reflowable) file format is what you should use.

EPUB 3.0 (fixed layout): If your document is highly stylized and
designed, the new EPUB 3.0 (fixed layout) is a better alternative and
allows for animation and interactivity.
In this chapter, you discover how to create documents for distribution using
both of these EPUB formats.
Adapting Content for Digital
Distribution
Creating a digital document requires more than just selecting an output type
and pressing the Export button. To make effective documents, you must
design them according to the needs of the device upon which they will be
viewed.
To do this, you can design the document’s layout for specific devices, such as
an iPad vertical or iPad horizontal layout, using alternative layouts. The
Liquid Layout feature aids in the creation of these alternative layouts.
Creating Digital Documents
These days, you should intentionally design your documents for digital
distribution. If you must adapt a print document for electronic distribution,
you should save a copy of the original InDesign document and work on the
copy as a dedicated electronic document.
To convert an existing print document to a digital document layout, follow
these steps:
1. Open the existing document and choose File  ⇒  Save As and name the
copy of the document. Then click Save.
Choose a name that relates to your intended distribution. Consider
including terms such as EPUB or iPad in the filename so you can
distinguish the electronic version from the print version.

 If you’re creating an EPUB document for a book that primarily
uses text and that will be viewed on many readers, after Step 1 you can go
directly to Step 5, because you do not need to specify layout details or
size details for specific devices. For EPUB documents that require highly
formatted layouts, continue with Steps 2 through 4.
2. Choose File  ⇒  Document Setup. In the Document Setup window,
choose Mobile from the Intent drop-down menu, and select the
desired Page Size and orientation (vertical or horizontal).
3. Click OK to close the Document Setup window and then choose File  
⇒  Save to save these changes.
4. Scroll through the document and make adjustments to the layout
based upon the available page size. Use the Selection tool to move
objects and use the Pages panel to add pages as needed.
5. Choose Window  ⇒  Articles to open the Articles panel. Use the
Selection tool to drag items from your layout into the Articles panel,
defining the order in which they will be displayed in an EPUB. If you
have something that you don’t want to include in the digital version of the
book, simply don’t drag it into the Articles panel. If you have images that
are specific to an area of text, make sure that those images are anchored to
the text. This ensures that the images appear near the text, as opposed to
at the end of the story. Save your document after dragging all elements to
be exported to the Articles panel.
Creating liquid layouts
The Liquid Layout feature, borrowed from the idea of Responsive Design in
the web design community, lets you use InDesign as a tool for creating
alternate layouts with less manual work.
To use Liquid Layout, follow these steps:
1. Choose Layout  ⇒  Liquid Layout to open the Liquid Layout panel, as
shown in Figure 8-1.
If you notice a yellow triangle in your liquid layout panel, it means that
Layout adjustment is enabled with the document. You must disable this

before you continue. Go to Layout  ⇒  Margin and Columns and uncheck
the Enable Layout Adjustment checkbox.
2. From the Liquid Layout panel, choose a Liquid Page Rule. You can
choose a different rule for each page depending on its content. With
the Scale, Re-center, and Guide based options, you can choose to
auto-fit your images to their new size. With the Object-based option,
you can choose auto-fit as well as object constraints and you can
determine how to anchor your images when they move.
3. Test the Liquid Layout by selecting the Page tool from the Tools
Panel. Click and drag the page handles and see how the objects on
the page are modified.
If you selected the Scale option, the page objects should all reduce in size
as you reduce the size of the page using the Page tool. The page tool will
not change the size of your page; it just previews how it will look.
FIGURE 8-1: Create a Liquid Layout.
Creating alternate layouts
After you have indicated how you want your pages to change using the
Liquid Layout rules, you can create separate horizontal and vertical layouts
for your document. When you export your document, the document will
include information in the Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) that adapts the
layout based upon the way it is being viewed.
To create an alternative layout, follow these steps:

1. From the Layout menu, choose Layout  ⇒  Create Alternate Layout to
create an additional alternative layout to your current layout.
For example, if you have a horizontal layout, you may want to also create
a vertical version of the layout, or you may need to create a larger or
smaller version of your content.
2. Name the alternate layout, specify the page attributes, and then click
OK, as shown in Figure 8-2.
A new layout of all pages is created with the alternate size or orientation,
and the content from the original pages is duplicated and linked onto the
new layout.
3. Modify the layout of page elements on the alternate layout as needed.
Keep in mind, the Liquid Layout feature is not a perfect fit for all designs.
You may need to make additional changes to your layout once you have
created the alternate layout.
 Notice that any text frames and image frames that were
duplicated onto the alternate layout also contain a link symbol in the
upper-left corner. This indicates that the text and images on the alternate
layout are linked to the original. Changes made to the items in the original
layout are reflected on the alternate layout. If an item in the alternate
layout is different from the original layout, a yellow triangle appears
instead of the link symbol. Double-click the yellow triangle, and the item
in the alternate layout is then synchronized with the original layout. Any
changes made to an alternate layout will not be reflected in the original
layout.

FIGURE 8-2: Create an alternate layout.
Other digital document features
There are many interactive features in InDesign that can be added to your
digital files. Depending on what your final export version will be, these
features will work for you; however, some are not supported in the EPUB 2.0
version.
Use these features to add interactivity to your digital documents:
Animation panel: Use the Animation panel to apply animation to objects
on your page. For example, you can have an object fade in as the page
appears, or fade out and disappear. Access this panel by choosing
Window  ⇒  Interactive  ⇒  Animation, and apply animation to individual
objects by selecting them and choosing an animation option from the
Preset drop-down menu in the Animation panel.
Timing panel: Use the Timing panel to modify animations you have
created using the Animation panel. Access this panel by choosing
Window  ⇒  Interactive  ⇒  Timing. Use the Event drop-down list to specify
when an object’s animation occurs, and use the Delay option to specify if
the animation should wait before it occurs.

Buttons and Forms: Use this panel to convert text or images to buttons
that become interactive when the InDesign document is exported to
EPUB 3.0. Access this panel by choosing Window  ⇒  Interactive  ⇒  
Buttons and Forms. Buttons can have actions associated with them, so
that something occurs when they are clicked. For example, when clicked,
a button can play a movie or sound, navigate to a specific page, or play an
animation.
Exporting EPUB
Books displayed using iBooks, Nook devices, Kobo readers, or Sony
eReaders all use the EPUB file format. Books displayed on the Kindle begin
as EPUB files but undergo an additional conversion process into Amazon’s
proprietary Kindle format. The bottom line if you want to create electronic
books: You need to know about creating EPUB files. When you have either
created the digital version of your layout or converted your print document to
a digital layout, this is how to create an EPUB file using InDesign:
Exporting EPUB (Reflowable)
The EPUB – Reflowable version is best for documents that are text-heavy,
such as novels and cookbooks. Prior to exporting you should make sure that
all of your images are anchored and that the order in which you want your
content to flow is dictated in the Articles panel.
1. With an InDesign document open, choose File  ⇒  Export.
The Export dialog box appears.
2. From the Save as Type (Windows) or Format (Mac) drop-down list.
Select EPUB (Reflowable) and then find a location on your hard drive or
network for the document to be saved. Enter a name for the EPUB file in
the File Name portion of the Export dialog box.
3. Click the Save button.
The EPUB – Reflowable Layout Export Options dialog box appears, as
shown in Figure 8-3, with the General options available for editing.
Here is an overview of essential settings in the General tab when creating
an EPUB:

Version: By default, the EPUB 2.0.1 option is selected. This will
allow readers on older devices to be able to view your reflowable
content.
Cover: If you want InDesign to generate the cover image displayed
for the EPUB, choose whether it should use the first page
(Rasterize First Page) of the document or choose a specific image
file to use instead.
Navigation: Choose Multi Level (TOC Style) if you want InDesign
to automatically generate a table of contents that will be used by
readers to more easily navigate the EPUB file.
Content: For Order, choose Same as Articles Panel. This flows
your content based on how you added your images and stories into
the Articles panel.
4. Additional Options available in the Text and Objects tab, on the left
side of the dialog box.
You can specify additional options for how your text (bullets and
numbering lists) and graphics (fixed or relative size) will be displayed
under the Text and Objects tabs.
5. Click the Conversion Settings tab, on the left side of the dialog box.
In the Conversion Settings, specify the resolution that images should be
set at when created for the EPUB. If you choose Automatic for the
format, InDesign will determine whether to save an image as a JPG, GIF,
or PNG.
6. Make these adjustments as needed, before creating the EPUB:
EPUB Metadata: Select the Metadata tab. Document metadata is
used by EPUB readers to describe the book title, publisher, ISBN,
and other information. You can enter the Publisher here and the
ISBN number for your book in the Identifier text box.
CSS Options: Select the CSS tab. If you have created Cascading
Style Sheets (CSS) to control the formatting for your EPUB files,
you can add a style sheet, by selecting Add Style Sheet.

 Additional document metadata can be entered in the Document
Information field. Access this by choosing File  ⇒  File Info.
7. Click the Viewing Apps tab in the EPUB – Reflowable Layout Export
Options dialog box.
The View EPUB after Exporting option causes the EPUB to open and be
displayed in the default EPUB reader after InDesign generates the EPUB
file.
 There are many free EPUB readers available. iBooks on a Mac
and Adobe Digital Editions (available for Windows and MAC) are just
two examples. It is a good idea to preview your EPUB file on multiple e-
readers to make sure that what you designed looks good across multiple
readers and devices.
8. Click the OK button.
The EPUB is generated. If you selected the View EPUB after Exporting
checkbox, the EPUB file opens using your default EPUB reader.
 If the EPUB Options dialog box looks similar to the HTML
Export window, it is because EPUBs actually use HTML as their
foundation. Electronic book readers are essentially specialized browsers
designed to display books formatted using HTML and CSS. All the
HTML and CSS content for an EPUB file is contained within the
compressed folder named with the EPUB file extension.

FIGURE 8-3: The reflowable Layout Export Options.
Exporting EPUB (Fixed-Layout)
If your document is heavily designed and has a very graphic layout, or
contains any of the interactive elements of InDesign, you will want to use the
EPUB (Fixed-Layout) option. The steps to export your document and many
of the options are the same as those for the EPUB (Reflowable). However,
below you will find information about the General Options for Fixed Layout
Export.
1. With an InDesign document open, choose File  ⇒  Export.
The Export dialog box appears.
2. From the Save as Type (Windows) or Format (Mac) drop-down list.
Select EPUB (Fixed-Layout) and then find a location on your hard drive
or network for the document to be saved. Enter a name for the EPUB file

in the File Name portion of the Export dialog box.
3. Click the Save button.
The EPUB – Fixed Layout Export Options dialog box appears with the
General options available for editing, as shown in Figure 8-4. Here is an
overview of essential settings in the General tab when creating an EPUB:
Version: By default, the EPUB 3 option is selected and no other
version can be chosen if you want a fixed layout.
Navigation: Choose Multi Level (TOC Style) if you want InDesign
to automatically generate a table of contents that will be used by
readers to more easily navigate the EPUB file.
However, if you are exporting a graphic heavy book such as a
children’s book, you can choose none and the table of contents will
be not be re-created in the sidebar of the reader.
Options: For Spread Control, depending on how you created your
document, using Facing Pages or not, you can control how these
pages are displayed in the reader. If you choose Based on
Document Setup, InDesign will output your pages as either single
pages or spreads, depending on how you defined your pages in the
Document Setup Dialog Box.
4. For additional Export Layout Tab options, see the definitions for
Export Reflowable.
5. Click OK to save.
 Both EPUB file formats are created using HTML and CSS. The
HTML and CSS from an EPUB Reflowable is easily changed using a web
editor such as Dreamweaver or Sigil. However, if you need to make a
change to an EPUB (Fixed Layout) file, it is best if you go back to the
original InDesign file, make your changes and reexport your document.
The HTML and CSS for fixed layout EPUBs is rather complex and
difficult to make changes to.

FIGURE 8-4: The Fixed Layout Export Options.

Book 5
Illustrator CC

Contents at a Glance
Chapter 1: Discovering Illustrator CC
Deciding When to Use Illustrator CC
Creating a New Document
Try a Template
Opening an Existing Document
Taking a Look at the Document Window
Taking Advantage of Artboards
Becoming Familiar with the Tools
Checking Out the Panels
Changing Views
Navigating the Work Area with Zoom Controls
Chapter 2: Using the Selection Tools
Getting to Know the Selection Tools
Working with Selections
Grouping and Ungrouping
Manipulating Selected Objects
Chapter 3: Creating Basic Shapes
The Basic Shape Tools
Resizing Shapes
Tips for Creating Shapes
Chapter 4: Using the Pen Tool and Placing Images
Pen Tool Fundamentals
The Hidden Pen Tools
Tracing Artwork
Other Details You Should Know about Placing Images
Using Photoshop Layer Comps
Chapter 5: Using Type in Illustrator
Working with Type
Assigning Font Styles
Using the Character Panel

Using the Control Panel
Using the Paragraph Panel
Text Utilities: Your Key to Efficiency
Chapter 6: Organizing Your Illustrations
Setting Ruler Increments
Using Guides
Using the Transform Panel for Placement
Changing the Ruler Origin
Thinking about Object Arrangement
Hiding Objects
Locking Objects
Creating a Clipping Mask
Creating a Clipping Path Using the Draw Inside Button
Chapter 7: Using Layers
Creating New Layers
Using Layers for Selections
Changing the Layer Stacking Order
Moving and Cloning Objects
Hiding Layers
Locking Layers
Chapter 8: Livening Up Illustrations with Color
Choosing a Document Profile
Using the Swatches Panel
Applying Color to the Fill and Stroke
Changing the Width and Type of a Stroke
Using the Color Panel
Saving Colors
Editing Colors
Building and Editing Patterns
Advanced Pattern Editing
Working with Gradients
Copying Color Attributes
Painting Made Easy: The Live Paint Feature
Chapter 9: Using the Transform and Distortion Tools

Working with Transformations
Creating Distortions
Chapter 10: Working with Transparency and Special Effects
Tools
The Mesh Tool
The Blend Tool
The Symbol Sprayer Tool
Transparency
Chapter 11: Using Filters and Effects
Working with Effects
Saving Graphic Styles
Creating 3D Artwork
Adding Multiple Fills and Strokes
Using the Perspective Grid
Chapter 12: Using Your Illustrator Images
Saving and Exporting Illustrator Files
Saving Your Artwork for the Web
Saving Multiple Assets out of Illustrator
Flattening Transparency
Printing from Illustrator

Chapter 1
Discovering Illustrator CC
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Knowing when to use Illustrator Looking around the Document
window Opening and creating documents Checking out the tools
and panels Changing your view Zooming in and out
Adobe Illustrator goes hand in hand with other Adobe products but serves its
own unique purpose. Although Illustrator can create multiple-page artwork
(with artboards), it isn’t meant to create lengthy documents with repeated
headers, footers, and page numbers. Those types of files are more appropriate
for applications such as InDesign. Typically, you wouldn’t create artwork in
Illustrator that’s made from pixels, such as images edited or created in
Photoshop. Illustrator is generally used to create vector logos, illustrations,
maps, packages, labels, signage, art for applications, websites, and more. (See
the nearby “Vector graphics” sidebar for more information.) This chapter gets
you started with Illustrator and helps you understand when Illustrator is the
tool best suited for creating your art.
Deciding When to Use Illustrator CC
How do you draw a line in the sand and decide to create graphics in
Illustrator rather than in Photoshop? The following questions can help you
make up your mind:
Does the graphic need to be scaled? Will it be used in sizes that you
cannot predict at this time?
Is the artwork technical in nature? Are precise measurements and
placement of elements critical?
Does the artwork require the use of spot colors, using a system such as the
Pantone Matching System (PMS)?
Will the artwork be used frequently in different formats, such as print and
onscreen in apps or websites?

Is the artwork illustrative with many solid colors and occasional gradients
and vignettes? (If you have a photograph, or an illustration that contains
many variations of tonal values, use Photoshop for your editing.)
If you answered yes to any of these questions, it is probably best to create and
edit your artwork in Illustrator.
Keep in mind that by using Illustrator, you gain these benefits:
Illustrator can save and export graphics into most file formats. By
choosing to save or export, you can create a file that can be used in most
other applications. For instance, Illustrator files can be saved as .bmp,
.jpg, .pdf, .svg, .tiff, and .png files, to name a few.
Illustrator files are easily integrated into other Adobe applications.
You can save Illustrator files in their native format and open or place them
in other Adobe applications such as InDesign, Photoshop, and Adobe XD.
You can also save Illustrator artwork as Portable Document Format (.pdf)
files, which lets anyone using the free Acrobat Reader software open and
view the file but maintains editing capabilities when the file is opened
later in Illustrator.
Illustrator artwork is reusable because the resolution of vector
artwork isn’t determined until output. In other words, if you print to a
600-dpi (dots per inch) printer, the artwork is printed at 600 dpi; print to a
2,400-dpi printer, and the artwork prints at 2,400 dpi. Illustrator graphics
are quite different from the bitmap images you create or edit in
Photoshop, where resolution is determined as soon as you scan, take a
picture, or create a new bitmap (created from pixels) document.
Illustrator has limitless scalability. You can create vector artwork in
Illustrator and scale it to the size of your thumb or to the size of a barn,
and either way, it still looks good. See the nearby sidebar “Vector
graphics” for more information.
VECTOR GRAPHICS
Vector graphics are made up of lines and curves defined by mathematical objects called
vectors. Because the paths (the lines and curves) are defined mathematically, you can move,
resize, or change the color of vector objects without losing quality in the graphic.

Vector graphics are resolution-independent: They can be scaled to any size and printed at
any resolution without losing detail. On the other hand, a predetermined number of pixels
creates bitmap graphics, so you can’t scale (resize) them easily — if you scale them smaller,
you throw out pixels; if you scale them larger, you end up with a blocky, jagged picture.
The following figure shows the differences between an enlarged vector graphic (left; notice
the smooth edges) and an enlarged bitmap graphic (right; note the jagged edges). Many
designers create company logos as vectors to avoid problems with scaling: A vector graphic
logo maintains its high-quality appearance at any size.
Creating a New Document
In Illustrator CC, you may see a start screen when you launch Adobe
Illustrator, as shown in Figure 1-1.
FIGURE 1-1: The initial start screen in Illustrator allows you to see recent files or start a new file.

To create a new document in Illustrator, click the New button on this screen.
Note: If you prefer not to see this start screen, you can choose to turn it off by
unchecking Show the Start Workspace When No Files Are Open button in
Edit  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  General (Windows) or Illustrator  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  
General (Mac).
1. If you do not see the start screen, choose File  ⇒  New.
The New Document dialog box appears, as shown in Figure 1-2. You use
it to determine the new document’s profile, size, measurement unit, color
mode, and page orientation as well as the number of artboards (pages)
you want in the document.
If you are working with the default preferences, you see a rather large
New Document window that allows you to choose a new document
specific to the artwork you need to create, Mobile, Web, Print, Film &
Video, Art & Illustration. Each of these choices comes with preset details
that you can edit on the right side of the New Document dialog box.
These options also come with templates that you are free to use in order
to get a jump-start on your design.
 If you would prefer to see the legacy New Document window,
you can click on the More Settings button at the bottom of the Preset
Details section. You can set your preferences to always see the legacy
New Document window by choosing Edit  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  General
(Windows) or Illustrator  ⇒   Preferences  ⇒  General (Mac) and checking
the Use legacy “File New” interface option.
In this example, the legacy New Document window is referenced.
2. Click on More Settings at the bottom of the Preset details section.
The legacy New Document dialog appears, as shown in Figure 1-3.
3. Enter a name for your new file in the Name text field.
You can determine the name of the file now or later when you save the
document. This can be done when you initially save your file as well.
4. Choose a profile from the New Document Profile drop-down list.
Selecting the correct profile sets up preferences, such as resolution and

colors. If you choose a Print profile, your basic color swatches are built
from CMYK colors (Cyan, Magenta, Yellow, and Black), and your
settings default to a higher resolution. For the web, your color swatches
are built from RGB colors (Red, Green, Blue), and your default resolution
is set to a lower amount.
You can choose from the following default profiles: Print, Web, Mobile,
Film and Video, Art & Illustration, Devices, and Basic RGB.
Based upon the profile that you select, you will be provided with certain
size options. In this example, Print is selected as the profile and Letter is
selected as the size.
5. In the Number of Artboards text box, you can enter the number of
artboards you want in the document.
If you want a single-page document, leave this setting at 1. Creating a
document with multiple artboards is discussed later in this chapter in the
section “Creating multiple artboards.”
6. Enter in the Spacing text box the amount of space to leave between
artboards.
You do not have to bother with making changes in this section unless you
selected multiple artboards. If you want pages to abut, enter 0 (zero) or
enter additional values if you want a little space between each artboard. If
you’re adding artboards, you can enter in the Columns text box the
number of columns of artboards you want arranged in the document.
7. Select from the Size drop-down list or type measurements in the
Width and Height text fields to set the size of the document page.
You can select from several standard sizes in the Size drop-down list or
enter your own measurements in the Width and Height text fields. As
previously mentioned, these size options are dependent upon your profile
selection.
8. Select from the Units drop-down list to select the type of
measurement you’re most comfortable with.
Your selection sets all measurement boxes and rulers to the increments
you choose: points, picas, inches, millimeters, centimeters, or pixels.
9. Pick the orientation for the artboard.
The artboard is your canvas for creating artwork in Illustrator. You can

choose between Portrait (the short sides of the artboard on the top and
bottom) and Landscape (the long sides of the artboard on the top and
bottom).
10. Add values in the Bleed text boxes, if necessary.
A bleed value is the amount of image area that extends beyond the
artboard. To print from edge to edge, enter a value for the bleed. Keep in
mind that most desktop printers need a grip area, which is the part of the
page that a printer needs to grab on to the paper. It typically forces any
image area near the edge of a page to not print. Bleeds are typically used
in jobs to be printed on a press.
11. When you’re finished making selections, click OK.
One or more Illustrator artboards appear.
FIGURE 1-2: The New Document interface offers options for different types of files and templates.

FIGURE 1-3: The legacy New Document window.
Try a Template
 In the New Document dialog box, click the Templates button to get a
precreated artboard that can be used for web banner ads, business cards,
and more.
Opening an Existing Document
It’s a good idea to familiarize yourself with the workspace before starting to

work in Adobe Illustrator, but to do this you should have a document open. In
this section, you jump right in by opening an existing document. Here’s how:
1. Launch Adobe Illustrator CC.
2. Choose File  ⇒  Open and select a file in the Open dialog box.
For this exercise, you can open one of your own files or one of the sample
files located in the DummiesCCfiles folder that you can download from
www.agitraining.com/dummies. If you choose to use the samples
provided, open the sample file called CrazyFish.ai.
Keep this file open so that you can follow along with the explanation of
the workspace in the next section.
Taking a Look at the Document
Window
To investigate the work area (shown in Figure 1-4) and become truly familiar
with Illustrator, have a document open, like the AI_Sample file you were
directed to in the preceding section, or create a new document and take a look
around. In the Illustrator work area, a total of 227 inches in width and height
helps create your artwork (and all artboards). That’s helpful, but it also leaves
enough space to lose objects! The following list explains the tools you work
with as you create artwork in Illustrator:
Imageable area: If you’re planning to print your Illustrator document,
choose View  ⇒  Show Print Tiling. A dotted line appears that marks the
printing area on the page. Many printers can’t print all the way to the
edges of the paper, so the imageable area is determined by the printer you
set in the Print dialog box. If you don’t want to see the print tiling, choose
View  ⇒  Hide Print Tiling.
You can move the imageable area around on your page by using the Print
Tiling tool. See the nearby sidebar, “The Print Tiling tool,” for more on
this tool.
Artboard: This area, bounded by solid lines, represents the entire region
that can contain printable artwork. By default, the artboard is the same
size as the page, but it can be enlarged or reduced. The U.S. default

artboard size is 8.5 x 11 inches, but it can be set as large as 227 x 227
inches. If you’re using the default settings for Illustrator, the edge of the
artboard is indicated by a transition from a white to a medium gray
canvas.
Scratch area: This area outside the artboards extends to the edge of the
227-inch square window. The scratch area represents a space on which
you can create, edit, and store elements of artwork before moving them
onto the artboard. Objects placed onto the scratch area are visible
onscreen, but they don’t print. However, objects in the scratch area appear
if the document is saved and placed as an image in other applications.
 If you’re having a difficult time seeing your items in the scratch
area, choose Edit  ⇒  Preferences  ⇒  User Interface (Windows) or Illustrator  
⇒  Preferences  ⇒  User Interface (Mac) and select White for the Canvas
color.

FIGURE 1-4: The Illustrator work area.
THE PRINT TILING TOOL
Use the Print Tiling tool to move the printable area of your page to a different location. For
example, if your printer can print only on paper that’s 8.5 x 11 inches or smaller but the page
size is 11 x 17, you can use the Print Tiling tool (a hidden tool accessed by holding down the
mouse button on the Hand tool) to indicate which part of the page you want to print. Follow
these steps to use the Print Tiling tool:
1. When adjusting page boundaries, choose View  ⇒  Fit All in Window so that you
can see all your artwork.
2. Hold down the mouse button on the Hand tool to select the hidden Print Tiling
tool.
The pointer becomes a dotted cross when you move it to the active window.
3. Position the mouse pointer over the artboard and click and drag the page to a
new location.
While you drag, the Print Tiling tool acts as though you’re moving the page from its

lower-left corner. Two gray rectangles are displayed. The outer rectangle represents
the page size, and the inner rectangle represents the printable area of a page. You
can move the page anywhere on the artboard; just remember that any part of a page
that extends past the printable area boundary will not print.
Taking Advantage of Artboards
As you already discovered, the page itself is referred to as the artboard. The
options available to you when using artboards include the following:
You can have multiple artboards in one document, creating essentially a
multipage document.
You can name and rearrange artboards by using the Artboard panel.
You can copy entire artboards, allowing you to quickly create multiple
versions for your artwork.
You can use artboards to define a print area, eliminating the need to use
the Print Tiling tool.
Creating multiple artboards
To create a document with multiple artboards, follow these steps:
1. Launch Adobe Illustrator CC and choose File  ⇒  New.
The New Document dialog box appears, as shown in Figure 1-5 (if you
still have the “Legacy” New Window option checked).
2. Specify the number of artboards to start with by entering a number
in the Number of Artboards text box.
In our example, we added four artboards.
3. To specify how to arrange the artboard, click a grid or row
arrangement icon to the right of the Number of Artboards text box,
as shown in Figure 1-6.
Using these grid boxes, you can
Specify how many rows and columns to use.
Change the direction of the layout from left to right or right to left.

4. Enter an amount in the Spacing text box to determine the distance
between artboards.
Enter 0 (zero) if you want the artboards to butt against each other, or a
higher value if you want some space between them.
5. Click OK to create your new document. (See Figure 1-7.) The
document will not have multiple sized artboards or content.
FIGURE 1-5: Add multiple artboards right from the start.

FIGURE 1-6: Choose how you want the artboards arranged.

FIGURE 1-7: A document created using four artboards.
Exploring enhanced artboard features
After you create multiple artboards, choose Window  ⇒  Artboards to see a
panel with artboards listed individually, as shown in Figure 1-8.
FIGURE 1-8: The Artboard panel, keeping your project organized.
Here are some swell things you can do to artboards from the Artboard panel:

Navigate to a specific artboard. Just double-click the artboard’s number.
Rearrange artboards. Drag the artboards inside the Artboard panel to
reorganize their stacking order.
Delete an artboard. Drag it to the Trash icon.
Copy an existing artboard. Drag it to the New Artboard icon.
Create a new artboard. Click the New Artboard icon.
Edit additional artboard options, such as size and orientation, by
selecting Artboard Options from the panel menu. The Artboard
options appear as you see in Figure 1-9. Keep in mind that each artboard
can be a different size than others in the same document.
Rename an artboard. Double-click the Artboard name right in the
Artboards panel, type a new name, and then press the Tab or Enter key.

FIGURE 1-9: Edit existing artboards by using the Artboard Options dialog box.
Printing a document with multiple artboards
Pay close attention before you print a document with multiple artboards, or
else you may print needless pages. To control which artboards are printed,
follow these steps:

1. Choose File  ⇒  Print.
The Print dialog box appears, as shown in Figure 1-10.
2. Click the arrows underneath the Preview box in the lower-left corner
to preview the artboards.
3. After you decide which artboards to print, enter them into the Range
text box.
To print all artboards, select the All radio button; otherwise, enter a
consecutive range such as 1–3 in the Range text box. You can also print
nonconsecutive pages by separating them with commas — enter 1, 3, 4 to
print only artboards 1, 3, and 4.
4. Click Print to print the selected artboards.

FIGURE 1-10: Printing a document with multiple artboards.
 If you want to define an artboard within an artboard, select the
Artboard tool and then hold down the Shift key when dragging out a
new artboard.
Becoming Familiar with the Tools
As you begin using Illustrator, you’ll find it helpful to be familiar with its
tools. Tools are used to create, select, and manipulate objects in Illustrator.
The tools should be visible as a default, but if not, you can access them by
choosing Window  ⇒  Tools.
Table 1-1 lists the tools that we show you how to use throughout this
minibook. Hover the cursor over the tool in the Tools panel to see the name of
the tool in a tooltip. In parentheses on the tooltip (and noted in Column 2 of
Table 1-1) is the keyboard command you can use to access that tool. When
you see a small triangle at the lower-right corner of the tool icon, it contains
additional, hidden tools. Select the tool and hold the mouse button to see it.
TABLE 1-1 Illustrator CC Tools
Icon
Tool or Keyboard
Command
Task
See Minibook
Chapter
Selection (V)
Activate objects
2
Direct Selection (A)
Activate individual points or paths
2
Group Selection (A)
Select grouped items
2
Magic Wand (Y)
Select based on similarity
2
Lasso (Q)
Select freehand
2

Pen (P)
Create paths
4
Curvature tool (Shift+~)
Create curves
4
Type (T)
Create text
5
Line Segment (/)
Draw line segments
5
Rectangle tool (M)
Create shape objects
3
Paint Brush (B)
Create paths
n/a
Shaper (Shift+N)
Create shapes
n/a
Eraser (Shift+E)
Erase vector paths
4
Rotate (R)
Rotate objects
9
Scale (S)
Enlarge or reduce objects
9
Width tool (Shift+W)
Adjust strokes to variable widths
9
Free Transform (E)
Transform objects
9
Shape Builder (Shift+M)
Combine, edit, and fill shapes
3
Perspective Grid (Shift+P)
Provide perspective plane
11
Mesh (U)
Create a gradient mesh
10
Gradient (G)
Modify gradients
8
Eyedropper (I)
Copy and apply attributes
8

Blend (W)
Create transitional blends
10
Symbol Sprayer (Shift+S)
Spray symbols
10
Column Graph (J)
Create graphs
n/a
Artboard tool (Shift+O)
Add or edit artboards
1
Slice (Shift+K)
Create HTML slices
n/a
Hand tool
Push document window
1
Zoom (Z)
Increase and decrease the onscreen
view
1
Checking Out the Panels
The standardized interface in Adobe Creative Cloud is a useful boost for
users because the Illustrator panel system is similar to all other products in
the Creative Cloud. This consistency makes working and finding tools and
features easier.
When you first open Illustrator, notice that some panels may have been
reduced to icons on the right. To select a panel, click the appropriate icon, and
the panel appears.
If all you see is an icon, how do you know which icon brings up which panel?
Good question. If you’re hunting around for the appropriate panels, you can
Choose Window  ⇒  Name of Panel.
Position your mouse on the left side of the icons and, when you see the
double-arrow icon, click and drag to the left. The panel names appear.
Click the Expand Panels button on the gray bar at the top of the icons, as
shown in Figure 1-11. The panels expand so that you can see their
contents and names.

FIGURE 1-11: Expand the panels to see more options.
The panels you see as a default are docked together. To dock a panel means to
attach the panel in the docking area for organizational purposes.
You can arrange panels to make them more helpful for production. You may
choose to have only certain panels visible while working. Here’s the
lowdown on using Illustrator panels:

To see additional options for each panel (because some options are
hidden), click the panel menu in the upper-right corner of the panel. (See
Figure 1-12.)
To move a panel group, click and drag above the tabbed panel name.
To rearrange or separate a panel from its group, drag the panel’s tab.
Dragging a tab outside the docking area creates a new, separate panel.
To move a tab to another panel, drag the tab to that panel.
FIGURE 1-12: Many panels have additional menu options.
Look out for those panels — they can take over your screen! Some panels,
but not all, can be resized. A panel that you can resize has an active lower-
right corner (denoted by three small lines on the PC). To change the size of a
panel, drag its lower-right corner (Windows) or drag the size box in the
lower-right corner of the panel (Mac).
 As you become more efficient, you may find it helpful to reduce the
clutter on your screen by hiding all panels except the ones necessary for
your work. You can save your own panel configuration by choosing
Window  ⇒  Workspace  ⇒  New Workspace. Choose Window  ⇒  
Workspace  ⇒  Essentials to return to the default workspace. You may
need to reset the Essentials workspace if it still doesn’t look like the
default. Choose Window  ⇒  Workspace  ⇒  Reset Essentials.

Changing Views
When you’re working in Illustrator, precision is important, but you also want
to see how the artwork looks. Whether for the web or print, Illustrator offers
several ways in which to view your artwork:
Preview and Outline views: By default, Illustrator shows Preview view,
where you see colors, stroke widths, images, and patterns as they should
appear when printed or completed for onscreen presentation. Sometimes
this view can become a nuisance, especially if you’re trying to create a
corner point by connecting two thick lines. At times like this, or whenever
you want the strokes and fills reduced to the underlying structure, choose
View  ⇒  Outline. You now see the outline of the illustration, shown in
Figure 1-13.
Pixel view: If you don’t want to be surprised when your artwork appears
in your web browser, use Pixel view. This view, shown in Figure 1-14,
maintains the vectors of your artwork but shows how the pixels will
appear when the image is viewed onscreen, as though it’s on the web.
 Pixel view is helpful for previewing the look of text onscreen —
some fonts just don’t look good as pixels, especially if the text is small. In
Pixel view, you can review fonts until you find one that’s easily readable
as pixels.
Overprint view: For people in print production, the Overprint preview
can be a real timesaver. Choose Window  ⇒  Attributes to bring up the
Attributes panel, which you can use to set the fill and stroke colors to
overprint. This view creates additional colors when printing and aids
printers when trapping abutting colors.
Trapping is the slight overprint of a lighter color into a darker color to
correct for press misregistration — that is, when the printed colors don’t
align exactly. When several colors are printed on one piece, the likelihood
of perfect alignment is slim! Setting a stroke to Overprint on the Window  
⇒  Attributes panel is one solution. With Overprint selected, the stroke is

overprinted on the nearby colors. This mixing of color produces an
additional color but is less obvious to the viewer than a white space
created by misregistration. Select Overprint (View  ⇒  Overprint Preview)
to see the result of overprinting in Overprint view, as shown in Figure 1-
15. With the Crazy Fish image, the Overprint Stroke is grayed out.
FIGURE 1-13: Preview mode (top) and Outline mode (bottom).
FIGURE 1-14: See how your artwork translates into pixels in Pixel view.

FIGURE 1-15: Overprint view. Image is of the Attributes panel.
Navigating the Work Area with Zoom
Controls
You can navigate the work area efficiently by using the Hand tool and the
various zoom controls. You can change the magnification of the artboard in
several ways, including using menu items, the Zoom tool, and keyboard
commands. Choose the method you feel most comfortable with:
 Hand tool: Scroll around the Document window by using the
scroll bars or the Hand tool. The Hand tool lets you scroll by dragging.
You can imagine that you’re pushing a piece of paper around on your
desk when you use the Hand tool.
Hold down the spacebar to temporarily access the Hand tool while any
tool (except the Type tool) is selected. Holding down the spacebar while
the Type tool is selected gives you only spaces!
View menu: Using the View menu, you can easily select the
magnification you want by using Zoom In, Zoom Out, Fit in Window
(especially useful when you’re lost in the scratch area), and Actual Size
(provides a 100-percent view of your artwork).
 Zoom tool: Using the Zoom tool, you can click the Document
window to zoom in; to zoom out, Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click
(Mac). Double-click on the Zoom tool to quickly resize the Document
window to 100 percent. Control which elements are visible when using
the Zoom tool by clicking and dragging over the area you want zoomed

into.
Keyboard shortcuts: Even if you normally dislike using keyboard
shortcuts, you may change your mind about using them for magnification.
They make sense and are easy to use and remember. Table 1-2 lists the
most popular keyboard shortcuts to change magnification.
 The shortcuts in Table 1-3 require a little coordination to use, but
they give you more control in your zoom. While holding down the keys,
drag from the upper-left corner to the lower-right corner of the area you
want to zoom to. A marquee appears while you’re dragging; when you
release the mouse button, the selected area zooms to the size of your
window. The Zoom Out command doesn’t give you much control; it
simply zooms back out, much like the commands in Table 1-2.
TABLE 1-2 Magnification Keyboard Shortcuts
Command
Windows Shortcut Mac Shortcut
Actual Size
Ctrl+1
⌘  +1
Fit in Window Ctrl+0 (zero)
⌘  +0 (zero)
Zoom In
Ctrl+ + (plus)
⌘  + + (plus)
Zoom Out
Ctrl+  – (minus)
⌘  +– (minus)
Hand tool
Spacebar
Spacebar
TABLE 1-3 Zoom Keyboard Shortcuts
Command
Windows Shortcut Mac Shortcut
Zoom In to Selected Area Ctrl+spacebar+drag ⌘  +spacebar+drag
Zoom Out
Ctrl+Alt+spacebar
⌘  +Option+spacebar

Chapter 2
Using the Selection Tools
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Knowing the anchor points, bounding boxes, and selection tools
 Working with a selection
 Grouping and ungrouping selections
 Constraining movement and cloning objects
If someone has been coaching you in using Adobe Illustrator, you may have
heard the old line “You have to select it to affect it,” meaning that if you want
to apply a change to an object in Illustrator, you must have that object
selected or no change will occur. Although making selections may sound
simple, it can become tricky when you’re working on complicated artwork.
This chapter shows you the tools that will help save you editing time when
working in Adobe Illustrator.
Getting to Know the Selection Tools
In the following sections, you take a quick tour of anchor points (integral to
the world of selections), the bounding box, and, of course, the selection tools.
(Yes, Illustrator has several selection tools.)
 See our website at www.agitraining.com/dummies to find files that
you can practice with in this section.
Anchor points
To understand selections, you must first understand how Illustrator works
with anchor points, which act like handles and can be individually selected
and moved to other locations. You essentially use the anchor points to drag

objects or parts of objects around the workspace. After you place anchor
points on an object, you can create strokes or paths from the anchor points.
You can select several anchor points at the same time, as shown in Figure 2-1,
or only one, as shown in Figure 2-2. Selecting all anchor points in an object
lets you move the entire object without changing the anchor points in
relationship to one another. You can tell which anchor points are selected and
active because they appear as solid boxes.
FIGURE 2-1: Multiple anchor points are selected.

FIGURE 2-2: One anchor point is selected.
Bounding boxes
As a default, Illustrator shows a bounding box when an object is selected with
the Selection tool. This feature can be helpful if you understand its function
but confusing if you don’t know how to use it.
By dragging the handles, you can use the bounding box for quick transforms,
such as scaling and rotating. To rotate, you pass the mouse cursor (without
clicking) outside a handle until you see a rotate symbol and then drag.
If the bounding box bothers you, you can turn off the feature by choosing
View⇒  Hide Bounding Box.
Selection tools
Illustrator CC offers five main selection tools:
 Selection: Selects entire objects or groups. This tool activates all
anchor points in an object or group at the same time, allowing you to
move an object without changing its shape.

 Direct Selection: Selects individual points.
 Group Selection: Hidden in the Direct Selection tool in the Tools
panel and used to select items within a group. This tool adds grouped
items as you click objects in the order in which they were grouped. This
selection tool becomes more useful to you as you find out about grouping
objects in Illustrator.
 Magic Wand: Use the Magic Wand tool to select objects with like
values, such as fill and stroke colors, based on a tolerance and stroke
weight. Change the options of this tool by double-clicking it.
 Lasso: Use the Lasso tool to click and drag around anchor points
you want to select.
You can select an object with the Selection tool by using one of three main
methods:
Click the object’s path.
Click an anchor point of the object.
Drag a marquee around part or all of an object. (In a later section named
“Using a marquee to select an object,” we discuss using the marquee
method.)
Working with Selections
After you gain an understanding about the basics of selections, you’ll
probably be eager to try some techniques. In the following sections, you see
the basics: Make a selection, work with anchor points and the marquee, make
multiple selections, and of course, save your work.
 Smart guides, turned on by default in Illustrator CC, can help you

make accurate selections. These guides are visible as you’re drawing.
They display names such as anchor point and path, and they highlight
paths when you’re lined up with endpoints or center points. You can
come to love these helpful aids, but if you don’t want to see them,
simply choose View⇒  Smart Guides or press the keyboard shortcut
Ctrl+U (Windows) or ⌘  +U (Mac) to toggle the smart guides off and on.
Creating a selection
To work with selections, you need to have something on the page in
Illustrator. Follow these steps to make a selection:
1. Create a new page in Adobe Illustrator. (Any size or profile is okay.)
Alternatively, you can open an existing illustration; see Chapter 1 of this
minibook for instructions. Skip to Step 3 if you’re working with an
existing illustration.
2. If you’re starting from a new page, create an object to work with.
For example, click and hold down the Rectangle tool to select the Star
tool. Then click and drag from the upper left to the lower right to create a
star shape.
Exact size doesn’t matter, but make it large enough that you can see it. To
start over, choose Edit⇒  Undo or press Ctrl+Z (Windows) or ⌘  +Z
(Mac).
As a default, all shapes start with a black stroke and a white fill. (See
Figure 2-3.) If yours isn’t black and white, press D, which changes the
selected object to the default colors.
 You can see the width and height of your object while you click
and drag. If you don’t want those values to display, choose Edit⇒  
Preferences⇒  Smart Guides (Windows) or Illustrator⇒  Preferences⇒  
Smart Guides (Mac) and deselect the Measurement Labels check box.
3. Using the Selection tool, click the object to make sure it’s active.
All anchor points are solid, indicating that they’re all active. (Refer to
Figure 2-3.) You see, as a default, many additional points you can use to
transform your selected object.

4. Click and drag the shape to another location.
All anchor points travel together.
5. When you’re finished relocating your selection, use one of these three
methods to deactivate your selection:
Choose Select⇒  Deselect.
Ctrl-click (Windows) or ⌘  -click (Mac) anywhere on the page.
Use the keyboard shortcut Ctrl+Shift+A (Windows) or ⌘  +Shift+A
(Mac).
FIGURE 2-3: A shape created by a selection tool.
 To select an object behind another, use the Select-behind keyboard
shortcut. Simply place the cursor over the area where you know that the
object (to be selected) is located and press Ctrl-click (Windows) or ⌘  -
click (Mac OS). (You may have to do this twice to ensure you select the
object behind.)
Selecting an anchor point
When you have a selection to work with (see the numbered list), you can
deselect all active anchor points and then make just one anchor point active.
Follow these steps:
1. Choose Select⇒  Deselect to make sure the object isn’t selected.
2. Select the Direct Selection tool (the white arrow) from the Tools
panel.
3. Click one anchor point.
Only one anchor point (the one you clicked) is solid, and the others are

hollow, as shown in Figure 2-4.
4. Click and drag that solid anchor point with the Direct Selection tool.
Only that solid anchor point moves.
FIGURE 2-4: Select only one anchor point.
 Note that an anchor point enlarges when you cross over it with the
Direct Selection tool. This enlargement is a big break for people who
typically have to squint to see where the anchor points are positioned.
Using a marquee to select an object
Sometimes you can more easily surround the object you want to select by
dragging the mouse to create a marquee. Follow these steps to select an
object by creating a marquee:
1. Choose the Selection tool.
2. Click outside the object and drag over a small part of it, as shown in
Figure 2-5.
The entire object becomes selected.
FIGURE 2-5: Select an entire object.

You can also select only one anchor point in an object by using the marquee
method:
1. Choose Select⇒  Deselect to make sure the object isn’t selected, and
then choose the Direct Selection tool.
2. Click outside a corner of the object and drag over only the anchor
point you want to select.
Notice that only that anchor point is active, which can be a sight-saver
when you’re trying to select individual points. (See Figure 2-6.)
FIGURE 2-6: Select individual anchor points.
 You can use this method to cross over just the two top points or side
anchor points to activate multiple anchor points as well.
Selecting multiple objects
If you have multiple items on a page, you can select them by using one of
these methods:
Select one object or anchor point, and then hold down the Shift key
and click another object or anchor point. Depending on which
selection tool you’re using, you select either all anchor points on an object
or additional objects (Selection tool) or additional anchor points only
(Direct Selection tool).
You can use the Shift key to deactivate an object as well. shift-click a
selected object to deselect it.
Choose Select⇒  All or press Ctrl+A (Windows) or ⌘  +A (Mac).
Use the marquee selection technique and drag outside and over the

objects. When you use this technique with the Selection tool, all anchor
points in the objects are selected; when using the Direct Selection tool,
only the points you drag over are selected.
Saving a selection
Spending way too much time trying to make your selections? Illustrator
comes to the rescue with the Save Selection feature. After you have a
selection that you may need again, choose Select⇒  Save Selection and name
the selection. The selection now appears at the bottom of the Select menu. To
change the name or delete the saved selection, choose Select⇒  Edit Selection.
This selection is saved with the document.
Grouping and Ungrouping
Keep objects together by grouping them. The Group function is handy when
you’re creating something from multiple objects, such as a logo. Using the
Group function, you can ensure that all objects that make up the logo stay
together when you move, rotate, scale, or copy it.
Creating a group
Follow these steps to create a group:
1. If you aren’t already working with an illustration that contains a
bunch of objects, create several objects on a new page — anywhere,
any size.
For example, select the Rectangle tool and click and drag the page several
times to create additional rectangles.
2. Select the first object with the Selection tool and then hold down the
Shift key and click a second object.
3. Choose Object⇒  Group or press Ctrl+G (Windows) or ⌘  +G (Mac).
4. Choose Select⇒  Deselect, and then click one of the objects with the
Selection tool.
Both objects become selected.
5. While the first two objects are still selected, Shift-click a third object.
6. With all three objects selected, choose Object⇒  Group again.

Illustrator remembers the grouping order. To prove it, choose Select⇒  
Deselect to deselect the group and switch to the Group Selection tool.
(Hold down the mouse button on the Direct Selection tool to access the
Group Selection tool.)
7. With the Group Selection tool, click the first object; all anchor points
become active. Click the first object again; the second object becomes
selected. Click the first object again, and the third object becomes
selected.
The Group Selection tool activates the objects in the order you grouped
them. After you group the objects, you can treat them as a single object.
To ungroup objects, choose Object⇒  Ungroup or use the keyboard shortcut
Ctrl+Shift+G (Windows) or ⌘  +Shift+G (Mac). In a situation where you
group objects twice (because you added an object to the group, for example),
you have to choose Ungroup twice.
Using Isolation mode
When you use Isolation mode in Illustrator, you can easily select and edit
objects in a group without disturbing other parts of your artwork. With the
Selection Tool, simply double-click a group, and it opens in a separate
Isolation mode, where all objects outside the group are dimmed and inactive.
Do the work you need to do on the group and exit from Isolation mode by
clicking the arrow to the left of Group in the upper-left corner of the window,
shown in Figure 2-7.
FIGURE 2-7: In Isolation mode, you can edit group contents without disturbing other artwork.

 With an object selected, click the Isolate Selected Object button in the
Control panel to quickly access the Isolation mode.
Manipulating Selected Objects
In the following list, you discover a few other cool things you can do with
selected objects:
Move selected objects: When an object is selected, you can drag it to any
location on the page, but what if you only want to nudge it a bit? To
nudge an item one pixel at a time, select it with the Selection tool and
press the left-, right-, up-, or down-arrow key to reposition the object.
Hold down the Shift key as you press an arrow key to move an object by
ten pixels at a time.
Constrain movement: Want to move an object over to the other side of
the page without changing its alignment? Constrain something by
selecting an object with the Selection tool and dragging the item and then
holding down the Shift key before you release the mouse button. By
pressing the Shift key mid-drag, you constrain the movement to 45-, 90-,
or 180-degree angles!
Clone selected objects: Use the Selection tool to easily clone (duplicate)
an item and move it to a new location. To clone an item, simply select it
with the Selection tool and then hold down the Alt key (Windows) or
Option key (Mac). Look for the cursor to change to two arrows (see
Figure 2-8) and then drag the item to another location on the page. Let go
of the mouse before you let go of the Alt or Option key. Notice that the
original object is left intact and that a copy of the object has been created
and moved.
Constrain the clone: By Alt-dragging (Windows) or Option-dragging
(Mac) an item and then pressing Shift, you can clone the item and keep it
aligned with the original.
 Don’t hold down the Shift key until you’re in the process of

dragging the item; otherwise, pressing Shift deselects the original object.
After you clone an object to a new location, try this neat trick to create
multiple objects the same distance apart from each other by using the
Transform Again command: Choose Object⇒  Transform⇒  Transform
Again or press Ctrl+D (Windows) or ⌘  +D (Mac) to have another object
cloned the exact distance as the first cloned object. (See Figure 2-9.) We
discuss transformations in more detail in Chapter 9 of this minibook.
Use the Select menu: By using the Select menu, you can gain additional
selection controls, such as choosing Select⇒  Inverse, which allows you to
select one object and then turn your selection inside out. Also, choosing
the Select⇒  Same option lets you select one object and then select
additional objects on the page based on similarities in color, fill, stroke,
and other special attributes.
 Take advantage of the Select Similar button on the Control panel
to easily access that feature. Notice that in Figure 2-10 you can hold down
the arrow to the right of the Select Similar button to choose which
similarities should be considered to make the selection.
FIGURE 2-8: Drag the double arrow to clone an object.
FIGURE 2-9: Using the Transform Again command.

FIGURE 2-10: Define the similarities you want your selections based on.

Chapter 3
Creating Basic Shapes
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Creating rectangles, ellipses, stars, and polygons
 Resizing shapes
 Using the Pathfinder panel
 Using the Shape Builder tool
Basic shapes, such as squares, circles, polygons, and stars, are used in all
types of illustrations. With the right know-how and use of the right tools, you
can easily create any shape that you want for your artwork. In this chapter,
you find out how to use the shape tools to create shapes based on precise
measurements, and combine shapes to create custom shapes. You also learn
how to edit and resize your shapes.
The Basic Shape Tools
As a default, the only visible shape tool in the Tools panel is the Rectangle
tool. If you click and hold down that tool, you can access hidden tools such as
the Rounded Rectangle, Ellipse, Polygon, and Star tools, shown in Figure 3-
1. (Although you see the Flare tool, it isn’t a basic shape.)

FIGURE 3-1: Basic shape tools.
 You can tear off this tool set so that you don’t have to find the hidden
shapes later. Click and hold the Rectangle tool and drag to the arrow on
the far-right side, and then release the mouse button. These tools are now
on a free-floating toolbar that you can drag to another location.
Creating rectangles and ellipses
Rectangles and ellipses are the most fundamental shapes you can create. (See
Figure 3-2.) To create a rectangle shape freehand, select the Rectangle tool
and simply click and drag on the page where you want the shape to appear.

Then drag diagonally toward the opposite side, drag your mouse the distance
you want the shape to be in size, and release the mouse button. You can drag
up or down. You do the same to create a circle or oval by using the Ellipse
tool.
FIGURE 3-2: Click and drag diagonally to create a shape.
 After you create the shape, adjust its size and position by using the
Selection tool. Reposition the shape by clicking the selected object and
dragging. Resize the object by grabbing a handle and adjusting in or out. To
adjust two sides together, grab a corner handle. To resize a shape
proportionally, Shift-drag a corner handle.
Using the Rounded Rectangle tool
You can create a rounded rectangle by using one of two methods:
Click and drag freehand to create the rounded rectangle shape.
Click the artboard once to open the Rounded Rectangle dialog box, where
you can enter values to define the shape.
The difference between these two methods is that when you open the
Rounded Rectangle dialog box (see Figure 3-3), you can enter a value in the
Corner Radius text field, which determines how much rounding is applied to
the corners of the shape.

FIGURE 3-3: Customize the size of a rounded rectangle.
 Change the rounded corner visually by pressing the up and down
keys on your keyboard while you’re dragging out the Rounded
Rectangle shape on the artboard.
The smaller the value, the less rounded the corners; the higher the value, the
more rounded the corners. Be careful: You can round a rectangle’s corners so
much that it becomes an ellipse!
Using the Polygon tool
You create stars and polygons in much the same way as you create rectangles
and ellipses. Select the Polygon tool and click and drag from one corner to
another to create the default six-sided polygon shape. You can also select the
Polygon tool and click once on the artboard to change the Polygon tool
options in the Polygon dialog box.
You can change the polygon shape by entering new values in the Radius and
Sides text fields, as shown in Figure 3-4. The radius is determined from the
center to the edge of the polygon. The value for the number of sides can
range from 3 (making triangles a breeze to create) to 1,000. Whoa — a
polygon with 1,000 sides would look like a circle unless it was the size of
Texas!

FIGURE 3-4: Creating a polygon shape.
Using the Star tool
To create a star shape, select the Star tool from the Tools panel. (Remember
that it may hide under other shape tools.) If you click the artboard once to
open the Star dialog box, you see three text fields in which you can enter
values to customize your star shape:
Radius 1: Distance from the outer points to the center of the star
Radius 2: Distance from the inner points to the center of the star
Points: Number of points that comprise the star
The closer together the Radius 1 and Radius 2 values are to each other, the
shorter the points on your star. In other words, you can go from a starburst to
a seal of approval by entering values that are close in the Radius 1 and Radius
2 text fields, as shown in Figure 3-5.

FIGURE 3-5: Radius 1 and Radius 2 are closer to each other in the star on the bottom.
Resizing Shapes
You often need a shape to be an exact size (for example, 2 x 3 inches). After
you create a shape, the best way to resize it to exact measurements is to use
the Transform panel, shown in Figure 3-6. Have the object selected and then
choose Window⇒  Transform to open the Transform panel. Note that on this

panel you can enter values to place an object in the X and Y fields as well as
enter values in the width (W) and height (H) text fields to determine the exact
size of an object.
FIGURE 3-6: Precisely set the size of a shape.
In many Adobe Illustrator panels, you may see measurement increments
consisting of points, picas, millimeters, centimeters, or inches, which can be
confusing and maybe even intimidating. But you can control which
measurement increments to use.
 Show rulers by choosing View⇒  Rulers⇒  Show Rulers or press
Ctrl+R (Windows) or ⌘  +R (Mac). Then right-click (Windows) or

Control-click (Mac) the ruler to change the measurement increment to
an increment you’re more familiar with. Using the contextual menu that
appears, you can change the measurement increment directly on the
document.
Alternatively, you can simply type the number followed by a measurement
extension into the width and height text fields in the Transform panel (refer to
Figure 3-6), and the measurement converts properly for you. Table 3-1 lists
the extensions you can use.
TABLE 3-1 Measurement Extensions
Extension Measurement Unit
in (or “)
Inch
pt
Point
mm
Millimeter
pp
Pica
 If you don’t want to bother creating a freehand shape and then
changing its size, select the Shape tool and click the artboard. The
Options dialog box specific to the shape you’re creating appears, and
you can type values into the Width and Height text fields.
If you accidentally click and drag, you end up with a tiny shape on your page.
Don’t fret. Simply get rid of the small shape by selecting it and pressing the
Delete key, and then you can try again.
Tips for Creating Shapes
The following simple tips can improve your skills at creating basic shapes in
Illustrator:
Press and hold the Shift key while dragging with the Rectangle or Ellipse
tool to create a perfect square or circle. (See Figure 3-7.) This trick is also
helpful when you’re using the Polygon and Star tools — holding down
the Shift key constrains them so that they’re straight.

Create a shape from the center out by holding down the Alt (Windows) or
Option (Mac) key while dragging. Hold down Alt+Shift (Windows) or
Option+Shift (Mac) to pull a constrained shape out from the center.
When creating a star or polygon shape by clicking and dragging, if you
keep the mouse button down, you can then press the up- or down-arrow
key to interactively add or subtract points or sides to your shape.
FIGURE 3-7: Use the Shift key to constrain a shape while you create it.
Creating advanced shapes
At times, it may be wise to use advanced tools in Illustrator to create unique
shapes. The Pathfinder panel is an incredible tool you can use to combine,
knock out (eliminate one shape from another), and even create shapes from
other intersected shapes.
You use the Pathfinder panel, shown in Figure 3-8, to combine objects into
new shapes. To use the Pathfinder panel, choose Window⇒  Pathfinder.

FIGURE 3-8: Combine objects into new shapes.
Across the top row of the Pathfinder panel are the Shape modes, which let
you control the interaction between selected shapes. You can choose from the
Shape modes listed in Table 3-2.
TABLE 3-2 Shape Modes
Button Mode
What You Can Do with It
Unite
Unite selected shapes into one shape.
Minus Front
Cut out the topmost shape from the underlying shape.
Intersect Shape Areas
Use the area of the topmost shape to clip the underlying shape as a
mask would.
Exclude Overlapping
Shape Areas
Use the area of the shape to invert the underlying shape, turning filled
regions into holes and vice versa.
 If you like the result from using Exclude Overlapping Shapes mode,
you can also create a similar effect by selecting several shapes and
choosing Object⇒  Compound Path⇒  Make. This command “punches”
the topmost shapes from the bottom shape.
 The shapes remain separate so that you can still adjust them, which is
helpful if you like to tweak your artwork (but it drives some people
crazy). You can turn the result of using the Shape Mode buttons into one
shape either by clicking the Expand button after selecting the Shape
mode or by holding down the Alt key (Windows) or Option key (Mac)
when clicking a Shape Mode button. Option on a Mac makes separate
objects. Expand makes multiple objects from a compound path.
Using the Pathfinders
Pathfinders are the buttons at the bottom of the Pathfinder panel that let you

create new shapes from overlapping objects. Table 3-3 summarizes what each
Pathfinder does.
TABLE 3-3 The Pathfinders
Button Mode
What You Can Do with It
Divide
Divide all shapes into their own individual shapes. This tool is quite useful when you’re
trying to create custom shapes.
Trim
Remove the part of a filled object that’s hidden.
Merge
Remove the part of a filled object that’s hidden. Also, remove any strokes and merge any
adjoining or overlapping objects filled with the same color.
Crop
Delete all parts of the artwork that fall outside the boundary of the topmost object. You can
also remove any strokes. If you want strokes to remain when using this feature, select
them and choose Object⇒  Path⇒  Outline Stroke.
Outline Divide an object into its shape’s line segments or edges. This tool is useful for preparing
artwork that needs a trap for overprinting objects.
Minus
Back
Delete an object that’s behind the front-most object.
Using the Shape Builder tool
Using the Shape Builder tool, you can intuitively combine, edit, and fill
shapes on your artboard. Follow these steps to create your own unique shape
using the Shape Builder tool:
1. Create several overlapping shapes.
2. Select the shapes that you want to combine.
3. 
 Select the Shape Builder tool and then click and drag across
the selected shapes, as shown on the left in Figure 3-9.
The selected shapes are combined into one shape, as shown on the right in
Figure 3-9.
The Shape Builder tool also enables merging objects, breaking
overlapping shapes, subtracting areas, and more.
4. Create another shape that overlaps your new combined shape.
5. Using the Selection tool, select both shapes.
6. Select the Shape Builder tool again.

7. Hold down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key and click and
drag across the newly added shape, as shown in Figure 3-10.
It’s subtracted from the underlying shape.
FIGURE 3-9: Create several shapes in order to use the Shape Builder tool.
FIGURE 3-10: Use the Shape Builder tool to subtract from another shape.
 Coloring fills and strokes is easier now, too. When you’re finished
making your shape, you can use the Live Paint Bucket tool that is hidden in
the Shape Builder tool to intuitively fill your shape with color.

Chapter 4
Using the Pen Tool and Placing
Images
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Familiarizing yourself with the Pen tool
 Creating paths, closed shapes, and curves
 Using the hidden Pen tools
 Tracing some artwork
 Using the Image Trace feature
 Placing images in Illustrator CC
You’ve seen illustrations that you know are made from paths, but how do you
make your own? In this chapter, we show you how to use the Pen tool to
create paths and closed shapes.
 Using the Pen tool requires a little more coordination than using other
Illustrator tools. Fortunately, Adobe Illustrator includes features to help
make using the Pen tool a little easier. After you master the Pen tool, the
possibilities for creating illustrations are unlimited. Read this chapter to
build your skills using one of most popular tools in the creative industry:
the Pen tool’s Bézier curve capabilities.
Pen Tool Fundamentals
 You can use the Pen tool to create all sorts of elements, such as straight
lines, curves, and closed shapes, which you can then incorporate into

illustrations:
Bézier curve: Originally developed by Pierre Bézier in the 1970s for
CAD/CAM operations, the Bézier curve (shown in Figure 4-1) became
the underpinnings of the entire Adobe PostScript drawing model. You can
control the depth and size of a Bézier curve by using direction lines.
Anchor point: You can use anchor points to control the shape of a path or
an object. Anchor points are created automatically when using shape
tools. You can manually create anchor points by clicking from point to
point with the Pen tool.
Direction line: These lines are essentially the handles you use on curved
points to adjust the depth and angle of curved paths.
Closed shape: When a path is created, it becomes a closed shape when
the start point joins the endpoint.
Simple path: A path consists of one or more straight or curved segments.
Anchor points mark the endpoints of the path segments.

FIGURE 4-1: Bézier curves are controlled by direction lines.
In the next section, we show you how to control the anchor points.
Creating a straight line
A basic function of the Pen tool is to create a simple path. For this next set of
steps create a new Illustrator document.
You can create a simple, straight line with the Pen tool by following these
steps:
1. Press D or click the small black-and-white color swatches at the
bottom of the Tools panel.
You revert to the default colors of a black stroke and a white fill. With
black as a stroke, you can see your path clearly.

 The trick of pressing D to change the foreground and background
colors to the default of black and white also works in Photoshop and
InDesign.
2. Click the Fill swatch, at the bottom of the Tools panel, to ensure that
the Fill swatch is in front of the Stroke swatch, and then press the
forward slash (/) key to change the fill to None.
3. Open a new blank page and select the Pen tool.
Notice that when you move the mouse over the artboard, the Pen cursor
appears with an * beside it, indicating that you’re creating the first anchor
point of a path.
4. Click the artboard to create the first anchor point of a line.
The * disappears.
 Avoid dragging the mouse or you’ll end up creating a curve rather
than a straight segment.
5. Click anywhere else on the document to create the ending anchor
point of the line.
Illustrator creates a path between the two anchor points. Essentially, the
path looks like a line segment with an anchor point at each end. (See
Figure 4-2.)
TURNING OFF THE RUBBER BAND FEATURE
As a default, the Pen tool uses a rubber band feature that hints where your path will go as you
reposition your cursor. This feature is distracting to some users. If you prefer to not have that
feature enabled, choose Edit⇒  Preferences (Windows) or Illustrator⇒  Preferences (Mac) and
select the Selection and Anchor Display option. Uncheck the Pen option at the bottom of the
window, as shown in the figure below.

FIGURE 4-2: A path connected by two anchor points.
To make a correction to a line you created with the Pen tool (as described in
the preceding step list), follow these steps:
1. Choose Select⇒  Deselect to make sure that no objects are selected.

2. Select the Direct Selection tool from the Tools panel.
Notice the helpful feature that enlarges the anchor point when you pass
over it with the Direct Selection tool.
3. Click an anchor to select one point on the line.
Notice that the selected anchor point is solid and the other is hollow. Solid
indicates that the anchor point you clicked is active, whereas hollow is
inactive.
4. Click and drag the anchor point with the Direct Selection tool.
The selected anchor point moves, changing the direction of the path while
not affecting the other anchor point.
 Use the Direct Selection tool (press A to use the keyboard shortcut to
select the Direct Selection tool) to make corrections to paths.
Make sure that only the anchor point you want to change is active. If the
entire path is selected, all anchor points are solid. If only one anchor point is
selected, all but that one point will be hollow.
Creating a constrained straight line
In this section, we show you how to create a real straight line — one that’s on
multiples of a 45-degree angle. Illustrator makes it easy; just follow these
steps:
1. Select the Pen tool and click the artboard anywhere to place an
anchor point.
2. Hold down the Shift key and click another location to place the
ending anchor point.
Notice that when you’re holding down the Shift key, the line snaps to a
multiple of 45 degrees.
 Release the mouse button before you release the Shift key or else the

line pops out of alignment.
Creating a curve
In this section, you see how to use the Bézier path to create a curved segment.
We don’t guarantee that you’ll love this process — not at first, anyway. But
after you know how to use a Bézier path, you’ll likely find it useful. To create
a Bézier path, follow these steps:
1. Starting with a blank artboard, select the Pen tool and click the
artboard anywhere to place the first anchor point.
2. Click someplace else to place the ending anchor point — don’t let go
of the mouse button — and then drag the cursor until a direction line
appears.
If you look closely, you see that anchor points are square and that
direction lines have circles at the end, as shown in Figure 4-3.
3. Drag the direction line closer to the anchor point to flatten the curve;
drag farther away from the anchor point to increase the curve, as
shown in Figure 4-4.
4. When you’re happy with the curve, release the mouse button.
FIGURE 4-3: Click and drag with the Pen tool to create a curved path.

FIGURE 4-4: Adding curve to the curve.
You’ve created an open path, or a path that doesn’t form a closed shape. We
show you in the next section how to reconnect to the starting point of the path
to make a closed shape.
To alter a curved segment after you create it, follow these steps:
1. Choose Select⇒  Deselect to ensure that no objects are selected.
2. Choose the Direct Selection tool and click the last anchor point
created.
If the direction lines aren’t already visible, they appear.
 If you have difficulty selecting the anchor point, drag a marquee
around it with the Direct Selection tool.
3. Click precisely at the end of one of the direction lines; drag the
direction line to change the curve.
Reconnecting to an existing path
Creating one segment is fine if you want just a line or an arch. But if you
want to create a shape, you need to add more anchor points to the original
segment. If you want to fill your shape with a color or a gradient, you need to
close it, which means that you need to eventually return to the starting anchor
point.

To add segments to your path and create a closed shape, follow these steps:
1. Create a segment (straight or curved).
We show you how in the preceding sections of this chapter.
You can continue from this point, clicking and adding anchor points until
you eventually close the shape. For this example, you deselect the path so
that you can discover how to continue adding to paths that have already
been created. Knowing how to edit existing paths is extremely helpful
when you need to make adjustments to artwork.
2. With the Pen tool selected, move the cursor over an end anchor point
on the deselected path.
3. Click when you see the Pen icon with a forward slash to connect your
next segment.
The forward slash indicates that you’re connecting to this path.
4. Click someplace else to create the next anchor point in the path; drag
the mouse if you want to create a curved segment.
5. Click to place additional anchor points, dragging as needed to curve
those segments.
Remember that you want to close this shape, so place the anchor points so
that you can eventually come back to the first anchor point.
The shape shown in Figure 4-5 is a result of adding several linked anchor
points.
6. When you return to the first anchor point, move the cursor over it
and click when the close icon (a small, hollow circle) appears, as
shown in Figure 4-6.
The shape now has no endpoints.

FIGURE 4-5: Adding anchor points to create a shape.
FIGURE 4-6: Click when the close path icon appears.
Controlling curves
After you feel comfortable creating curves and paths, take control of those
curves so that you can create them with a greater degree of precision. The
following steps walk you through the manual method for changing the
direction of anchor points and reveal a helpful keyboard shortcut to make
controlling paths a little more fluid. At the end of this section, we introduce
new tools that you may also want to take advantage of to help you get control
of the Pen tool.
To control a curve, follow these steps:
1. Create a new document and then choose View⇒  Show Grid to show a
series of horizontal and vertical rules that act as guides.
If it helps, use the Zoom tool to zoom in to the document.
2. With the Pen tool, click an intersection of any of these lines in the

middle area of the page to place the initial anchor point and drag
upward.
Let go but don’t click when the direction line has extended to the
horizontal grid line above it, as shown in Figure 4-7(a).
3. Click to place the second anchor point on the intersection of the grid
directly to the right of your initial point; drag the direction line to the
grid line directly below it, as shown in Figure 4-7(b).
 If you have difficulty keeping the direction line straight, hold
down the Shift key to constrain it.
4. Choose Select⇒  Deselect to deselect your curve.
Congratulations! You’ve created a controlled curve. In these steps, you
created an arch that’s going up, so you first clicked and dragged up.
Likewise, to create a downward arch, you must click and drag down.
Using the grid, try to create a downward arch like the one shown in
Figure 4-7(c).
FIGURE 4-7: Creating a controlled Bézier curve.
Creating a corner point
To change the direction of a path from being a curve to a corner, you have to
create a corner point, shown on the right in Figure 4-8. A corner point has no
direction lines and allows for a sharp directional change in a path.

FIGURE 4-8: Smooth versus corner points.
You can switch from the Pen tool to the Convert Anchor Point tool to change
a smooth anchor point into a corner point, but that process is time-consuming.
An easier way is to press the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key — the Pen
tool temporarily changes into the Convert Anchor Point tool — while
clicking the anchor point.
To change a smooth anchor point into a corner point by using the shortcut
method, follow these steps:
1. Create an upward arch.
We show you how in the preceding section, “Controlling curves.” (Refer
to Figure 4-7[b]).
2. Hold down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key and position the
cursor over the last anchor point (the last point that you created with
the Pen tool).
3. 
 When the cursor changes to a caret (that’s the Convert
Anchor Point tool), click and drag until the direction line is up to the
grid line above, as shown on the left in Figure 4-9.
4. Release the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key and the mouse
button, move the cursor to the grid line to the right, and click and
drag down.

FIGURE 4-9: Converting from smooth to corner.
The Hidden Pen Tools
Hold down the Pen tool icon in the Tools panel to access additional tools: the
Add Anchor Point, Delete Anchor Point, and Convert Anchor Point tools,
shown in Table 4-1. In the preceding section, we show you how to create a
corner point by using the shortcut method, by pressing the Alt (Windows) or
Option (Mac) key to access the Convert Anchor Point tool. You may feel
more comfortable switching to that tool when you need to convert a point, but
switching tools can be more time-consuming.
TABLE 4-1 The Hidden Pen Tools
Icon
Tool
Pen
Add Anchor Point
Delete Anchor Point
Convert Anchor Point

 Even though you can use a hidden tool to delete and add anchor
points, Illustrator automatically does this as a default when you’re using
the Pen tool. When you move the cursor over an anchor point by using
the Pen tool, a minus icon appears. To delete that anchor point, simply
click. Likewise, when you move the cursor over a part of the path that
doesn’t contain anchor points, a plus icon appears. Simply click to add
an anchor point.
If you prefer to use the tools dedicated to adding and deleting anchor points,
choose Edit⇒  Preferences⇒  General (Windows) or Illustrator⇒  Preferences⇒  
General (Mac); in the Preferences dialog box that appears, select the Disable
Auto Add/Delete checkbox. Then, when you want to add or delete an anchor
point, select the appropriate tool and click the path.
Adding tools to help make paths
Some Pen tool modifiers are available in the Control panel in Illustrator CC.
You can take advantage of them for many Pen tool uses, but using keyboard
shortcuts to switch the Pen tool to its various options is probably still faster. If
you’re resistant to contorting your fingers while trying to create a path, you
should appreciate these tools.
 To see the Control panel tools, select the Pen tool and start creating a
path. Notice that the Control panel has a series of buttons available, shown in
Figure 4-10.

FIGURE 4-10: Control panel tools for easy editing.
Using the Eraser tool
If you haven’t discovered the Eraser tool, you will wonder how you got along
without it! Using the Eraser tool, you can quickly remove areas of artwork as
easily as you erase pixels in Photoshop by stroking with your mouse over any
shape or set of shapes.
New paths are automatically created along the edges of the erasure, even
preserving its smoothness, as shown in Figure 4-11.
FIGURE 4-11: The Eraser tool deletes sections of a path.
By double-clicking the Eraser tool, you can define the diameter, angle, and
roundness of your eraser. (See Figure 4-12.) If you’re using a drawing tablet,
you can even set Wacom tablet interaction parameters, such as Pressure and
Tilt.

FIGURE 4-12: Double-click the Eraser tool to set various tool options.
If you want to erase more than a single selected object, use Isolation mode to
segregate grouped objects for editing. Remember that in order to enter this
mode, you simply double-click a group of items. You can then use the eraser
on all objects in that group at one time without disturbing the rest of your
design.
Tracing Artwork
You can use a template layer to trace an image manually. A template layer is
a locked, dimmed layer you can use to draw over placed images with the Pen
tool, much like you would do with a piece of onion skin paper over the top of
an image.
Creating a template layer
Follow these steps to create a template layer:
1. Take a scanned image or logo and save it in a format that Illustrator
can import from your image-editing program, such as Photoshop.
Typically, you save the image as an .eps, a .tif, or a native .psd

(Photoshop) file.
2. Choose File⇒  Place to open the Place dialog box.
3. In the Place dialog box, locate the saved image; then select the
Template checkbox and click Place.
On the Mac OS, you must select the Options button in order to be able to
check the Template checkbox.
Note that the Template checkbox is located at the bottom of the dialog
box.
Selecting the Template checkbox tells Illustrator to lock down the scanned
image on a layer. Essentially, you can’t reposition or edit your image.
After you click Place, a template layer is automatically created for you,
and another layer is waiting for you to create your path. The newly
created top layer resembles a piece of tracing paper that has been placed
on top of the scanned image.
4. Re-create the image by tracing over it with the Pen tool.
5. When you’re done, turn off the visibility of the placed image by
clicking the Visibility icon to the left of the template layer.
You now have a path you can use in place of the image, which is useful if
you’re creating an illustration of an image or are digitally re-creating a
logo.
For more about layers, check out Chapter 7 of this minibook.
 Keep practicing to become more comfortable with clicking and
dragging, flowing with the direction line pointing the way you want the
path to be created; everything will fall into place.
Using Image Trace
With the Image Trace feature, you can take raster (bitmap) artwork and
automatically trace it to convert it into vector artwork. This means that you
can take scans of sketches, illustrations, and even photographs, and convert
them into vector artwork that can be edited in Illustrator. The Image Trace
feature is not totally new — in previous versions it was known as Live Trace

— but with CC it has been greatly improved. Additional options have been
added, and you can easily access those options and “test” your trace using the
new Image Trace panel. Follow these steps to try out this improved feature:
1. Choose File⇒  Place and place a scan or raster illustration that you
want to convert to vector paths.
Immediately after placing, you see that the Control panel now has
additional buttons available, as shown in Figure 4-13.
 Even though you can click Image Trace immediately, you may
want to consider selecting Window⇒  Image Trace to access the Image
Trace panel, which offers you more options and the opportunity to test
your selections in advance.
2. Click the Preset drop-down menu to select a preset most similar to
the artwork you want to convert.
Many of the presets are defined according to the type of artwork that you
are tracing — such as a sketch, technical drawing, or photograph. (See
Figure 4-14.) The 3 Colors, 6 Colors, and 16 Colors options are useful
when converting a photograph to a vector image.
3. Expand the Advanced section and note the additional path options
available there:
Paths determines how accurate a representation of the original art
the path trace will be. The higher the percentage, the more accurate
the tracing. (See Figure 4-15.) Be careful with this feature — if
you set the percentage too high, you can end up with more anchor
points than necessary. By default, this setting is at 50%, which
should work for most of your artwork.
Corner determines how the Image Trace traces corners. A lower
percentage produces a more rounded corner; a higher amount a
sharper corner. (See Figure 4-16.) Again, the default setting (75%)
works for most cases.
Noise determines the minimum details size Image Trace can
reproduce. The default of 100 pixels tends to work well. This

provides you an area that will be recognized by the Image Trace
feature of about 10 x 10 pixels. You might have to play with this
setting a bit to see what works best for your image.
FIGURE 4-13: Image Trace Control panel features.

FIGURE 4-14: Select a preset that best fits your placed image.

FIGURE 4-15: The image on the left has a low path tolerance of 0%. The image on the right has a
high path tolerance of 100%.
FIGURE 4-16: On the left, a traced image with the corner setting at 0%. On the right, a traced
image with a corner setting of 100%.
Changing the view
Can’t see the results of your trace? Keep in mind that you can change the
view. Just select the traced image and click the View drop-down menu in the
Control panel. Using this you can turn off and on the view for the original
image as well as the tracing results.

 Image Trace is a memory-intensive feature, and your computer may
take a little more time than normal to preview each preset.
See Chapter 8 of this minibook for more information on painting fills and
strokes.
Other Details You Should Know about
Placing Images
In the preceding section, you discover how to place an image as a template.
But what if you want to place an image to be used in an illustration file?
Simply choose File⇒  Place.
Click an image once to see its Link checkbox. On the Mac OS, click the
Options button in order to see this information. If you keep the checkbox
selected, the image is linked to the original file, which is helpful if you plan
to reference the file several times in the illustration (it saves file space) or edit
the original and have it update the placed image in Illustrator. This option is
usually selected by people in the prepress industry who want to have access
to the original image file. Just remember to send the image with the Illustrator
file if it’s to be printed or used someplace other than on your computer.
 You can unembed an image by selecting it in the Links panel
(Window⇒  Links) and then choosing Unembed from the panel menu, as
shown in Figure 4-17.

FIGURE 4-17: You can unembed an embedded image by using the Links panel options.
If you are worried about keeping all your placed files associated with your
Illustrator file, you can now use File⇒  Package in Illustrator CC. This feature
gives you the option to create a folder that contains your linked files, fonts,
and a report about your file, as you see in Figure 4-18.

FIGURE 4-18: Collect images and fonts and create a report using the Package feature.
If you deselect the Link checkbox, the image is embedded into the Illustrator
file. This option builds the image data into the Illustrator file. With an
embedded image you won’t need to remember where the original file is
stored, but it does make for a larger Illustrator file. Now that you have the
ability to choose Unembed from the Links panel menu, you can retrieve the
image data and save it for future editing if you need to. In certain instances,
such as when you want an image to become a symbol (see Chapter 10 of this
minibook), the image will have to be embedded, but most functions work
with both linked and unlinked files.
Using Photoshop Layer Comps
The Layer Comps feature in Photoshop lets you set the visibility, appearance,

and position of layers. You can take advantage of this useful organizational
tool in other Adobe products. Read more about Photoshop in Book 3.
You can place in Illustrator a .psd (Photoshop) image that has saved Layer
Comps and choose which layer comp set you want visible.

Chapter 5
Using Type in Illustrator
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Using the Type tools
 Getting to know text areas
 Manipulating text along paths and within shapes
 Assigning font styles
 Discovering the Character, Control, and Paragraph panels
 Saving time with text utilities
One of Illustrator’s strongest areas is manipulating text. Whether you’re using
Illustrator to create logos, business cards, or type to be used on the web, or
any number of other screen devices, you have everything you need to create
professional-looking text.
In this chapter, you meet the Type tools and discover a few basic (and more
advanced) text-editing tricks that you can take advantage of. You then find
out about other text tools, such as the Character and Paragraph panels. At the
end of this chapter, you get the quick-and-dirty lowdown on the Illustrator
text utilities. These utilities can save you loads of time, so don’t skip that
section.
Working with Type
You can do all sorts of cool things with type, from the simplest task of
creating a single line of text to more complicated creative uses of text, such as
placing text along paths and wrapping text around objects.
Click and hold the Type tool to see the hidden type tools, as shown in Figure
5-1. The different tools give you the capability to be creative and also
accommodate foreign languages.

FIGURE 5-1: The Type tools.
Creating text areas
A text area is a region that you define. Text, when inserted in this region, is
constrained within the shape. To create a text area, click and drag with the
Type tool. Lorem Ipsum fills the area.
Note: Adobe Illustrator inserts placeholder text for you as a default. If you
would prefer that your textbox stay empty, choose Edit⇒  Preferences⇒  Type
(Windows) or Illustrator⇒  Preferences⇒  Type (Mac OS), and then uncheck
the Fill New Type Objects With Placeholder Text checkbox.
 As you create and finish typing in a text area, you may want to

quickly click and drag to create a new text area elsewhere on your
artboard. Unfortunately, Illustrator doesn’t allow you to do that. You do
have two options that will help you to create multiple text boxes quickly
on your artboard:
Choose Select⇒  Deselect and then create another area.
Hold down the Ctrl (Windows) or ⌘   (Mac) key, and click anywhere on
the artboard outside of the active text area. By clicking, you deactivate the
current text box so that you can click and drag out a new text area.
Creating a line of text
To create a simple line of text, select the Type tool and click the artboard. A
blinking insertion point appears. You can now start typing. With this method,
the line of type goes on forever (even beyond the end of the Scratch area)
until you press Enter (Windows) or Return (Mac) to start a new line of text.
This excess length is fine if you just need short lines of text for callouts or
captions, for example, but it doesn’t work well if you’re creating a label or
anything else that has large amounts of copy.
 Many new users click and drag an ever-so-small text area that doesn’t
allow room for even one letter. If you accidentally do this, switch to the
Selection tool, delete the active type area, and then click to create a new
text insertion point.
Flowing text into an area
Select the Type tool and then drag on the artboard to create a text area. The
cursor appears in the text area; text you type flows automatically to the next
line when it reaches the edge of the text area. You can also switch to the
Selection tool and adjust the width and height of the text area with the
handles.
 Need an exact size for a text area? With the Type tool selected, drag
to create a text area of any size. Then choose Window⇒  Transform to

view the Transform panel. Type an exact width measurement in the W
text field and an exact height measurement in the H text field.
Dealing with text overflow
Watch out for excess text! If you create a text area that’s too small to hold all
the text you want to put into it, a red plus sign appears in the lower-right
corner, as shown in Figure 5-2.
FIGURE 5-2: The plus icon indicates that text is overflowing.
When Illustrator indicates that you have too much text for the text area, you
have three options:
Make the text area larger by switching to the Selection tool and dragging
the handles.
Make the text smaller until you no longer see the overflow indicator.
Thread this text area (link it to another), which is a topic covered later in
this chapter, in the “Threading text into shapes” section.
Creating columns of text with the Area Type tool
The easiest and most practical way to create rows and columns of text is to
use the area type options in Adobe Illustrator. This feature lets you create
rows and columns from any text area. You can have only rows, only columns
(much like columns of text in a newspaper), or even both.

1. Select the Type tool and drag on the artboard to create a text area.
2. Choose Type⇒  Area Type Options.
The Area Type Options dialog box appears, as shown in Figure 5-3. At
the end of this section, a list explains all options in the Area Type.
3. In the Area Type Options dialog box, enter a width and height in the
Width and Height text fields.
The Width and Height text fields contain the height and width of your
entire text area. In Figure 5-3, 288 pt is in the Width text field and 263
pt is in the Height text field.
4. In the Columns area, enter the number of columns you want to create
in the Number text field, the span distance in the Span text field, and
the gutter space in the Gutter text field.
The span specifies the height of individual rows and the width of
individual columns. The gutter is the space between columns and is
automatically set for you, but you can change it to any value you like.
5. Click OK.

FIGURE 5-3: The Area Type Options dialog box lets you create columns of text.
When you create two or more columns of text from the Area Type Options
dialog box, text flows to the next column when you reach the end of the
previous column, as shown in Figure 5-4.

FIGURE 5-4 One column of text flows into the next.
 The following list breaks down the options available in the Area Type
Options dialog box (refer to Figure 5-3):
Width and Height: The present width and height of the entire text area.
Number: The number of rows and/or columns that you want the text area
to contain.
Span: The height of individual rows and the width of individual columns.
Fixed: Determines what happens to the span of rows and columns if you
resize the type area. When this check box is selected, resizing the area can
change the number of rows and columns but not their width. Leave this
option deselected if you want to resize the entire text area and have the
columns automatically resize with it.

Gutter: The empty space between rows or columns.
Inset Spacing: The distance from the edges of the text area.
First Baseline: Where you want the first line of text to appear. The
default Ascent option starts your text normally at the top. If you want to
put in a fixed size, such as 50 points from the top, select Fixed from the
drop-down list and enter 50 pt in the Min text field.
Text Flow: The direction in which you read the text as it flows to another
row or column. You can choose to have the text flow horizontally (across
rows) or vertically (down columns).
Threading text into shapes
Create custom columns of text that are in different shapes and sizes by
threading closed shapes together. This technique, of flowing text from one
shape to another, works with rectangles, circles, stars, or any other closed
shape and can lead to some creative text areas.
Follow these steps to thread text into shapes:
1. Create any shape, any size.
For this example, we’ve created a circle.
2. Create another shape (it can be any shape) someplace else on the
page.
3. With the Selection tool, select one shape and Shift-click the other to
make just those two shapes active.
4. Choose Type⇒  Threaded Text⇒  Create.
A threading line appears, as shown in Figure 5-5, indicating the direction
of the threaded text.
5. Select the Type tool, click the top of the first shape to start the
threading, and start typing.
Continue typing until the text flows over into the other shape.

FIGURE 5-5: Threaded text areas flow from one area to another.
If you no longer want the text to be threaded, choose Type⇒  Threaded Text⇒  
Remove Threading, which eliminates all threading from the text shapes. To
remove one or more, but not all, shapes from the threading, select the shape
you want to remove from the threading and choose Type⇒  Threaded Text⇒  
Release Selection.
Wrapping text
Wrapping text isn’t quite the same as wrapping a present — it’s easier! A text
wrap forces text to wrap around a graphic, as shown in Figure 5-6. This
feature can add a bit of creativity to any piece.

FIGURE 5-6: The graphic is forcing the text to wrap around it.
First, create a text area and either enter text or paste text into it. Then place an
image that you can wrap the text around. Follow these steps to wrap text
around another object or group of objects:
1. Select the wrap object.
This object is the one you want the text to wrap around.
2. Make sure that the wrap object is on top of the text you want to wrap
around it by choosing Object⇒  Arrange⇒  Bring to Front.
 If you’re working in layers (which we discuss in Chapter 7 of this
minibook), make sure that the wrap object is on the top layer.
3. Choose Object⇒  Text Wrap⇒  Make.
An outline of the wrap area is visible.

4. Adjust the wrap area by choosing Object⇒  Text Wrap⇒  Text Wrap
Options.
The Text Wrap Options dialog box appears, as shown in Figure 5-7.
You have these options:
Offset: Specifies the amount of space between the text and the
wrap object. You can enter a positive or negative value.
Invert Wrap: Wraps the text on the inside of the wrap object
instead of around it.
5. When you finish making selections, click OK.
FIGURE 5-7: Adjust the distance of the text wrap from the object.
If you want to change the text wrap at a later point, select the object and
choose Object⇒  Text Wrap⇒  Text Wrap Options. Make your changes and
click OK.
If you want to unwrap text from an object, select the wrap object and choose
Object⇒  Text Wrap⇒  Release.
Outlining text
Illustrator gives you the opportunity to change text into outlines or artwork.
Basically, you change the text into an object, so you can no longer edit that
text by typing. The plus side is that it saves you the trouble of sending fonts
to everyone who wants to use the file. Turning text into outlines makes it
appear as though your text was created with the Pen tool. You want to use this
tool when creating logos that will be used frequently by other people or
artwork that you may not have control over.

To turn text into an outline, follow these steps:
1. Type some text on your page.
For this example, just type a word (say, your name) and make sure that
the font size is at least 36 points. You can change your font size in the
Font Size box in the Control panel at the top. You want to have it large
enough to see the effect of outlining it.
2. Switch to the Selection tool and choose Type⇒  Create Outlines.
You can also use the keyboard command Ctrl+Shift+O (Windows) or ⌘  
+Shift+O (Mac).
The text is now grouped together in outline form.
3. If you’re being creative, or just particular, and want to move
individual letters, use the Group Select tool or choose Object⇒  
Ungroup to separate the letters, as shown in Figure 5-8.
FIGURE 5-8: Letters converted to outlines.

 When you convert type to outlines, the type loses its hints, which are
the instructions built in to fonts to adjust their shape so that your system
displays or prints them in the best way based on their size. Without hints,
letters such as lowercase e or a might fill in as the letter forms are
reduced in size. Make sure that the text is the approximate size it might
be used at before creating outlines. Because the text loses the hints, try
not to create outlines on text smaller than 10 points.
Putting text on a path, in a closed shape, or on the
path of a shape
Wow — that’s some heading, huh? You’ve probably seen text following a
swirly path or inside a shape. Maybe you think that accomplishing such a task
is too intimidating to even attempt. In this section, we show you just how
easy these tasks are! Some Type tools are dedicated to putting type on a path
or a shape (refer to Figure 5-1), but we think you’ll find that the key
modifiers we show you in the following sections are easier to use.
Creating text on a path
Follow these steps to put type on a path:
1. Create a path with the Pen, Line, or Pencil tool.
Don’t worry if it has a stroke or fill applied.
2. Select the Type tool and simply cross over the start of the path.
3. When an I-bar with a squiggle appears (which indicates that the text
will run along the path), click.
The stroke and fill of the path immediately change to None.
4. Start typing, and the text runs on the path.
5. Choose Window⇒  Type⇒  Paragraph and change the alignment in the
Paragraph panel to reposition where the text falls on the path.
Alternatively, switch to the Selection tool and drag the first of the three I-
bars that appear, as shown in Figure 5-9. This allows you to freely move
the text on that path. The path in Figure 5-9 was created with the Pen tool.

FIGURE 5-9: Use the Selection tool to drag the I-bar to adjust the text.
 Flip the text to the other side of a path by clicking and dragging the
middle I-bar under or over the path.
Creating text in a closed shape
Putting text inside a shape can add spunk to a layout. This feature allows you
to custom-create a closed shape with the shape tools or the Pen tool and flow
text into it. Follow these steps to add text inside a shape:
1. Create a closed shape — a circle or an oval, for example.
2. Select the Type tool and cross over the path of the closed shape.
3. When you see the I-bar swell or become rounded, click inside the
shape.
4. Start typing, and the text is contained inside the shape.
Text on the path of a closed shape

Perhaps you want text to run around the edge of a shape instead of inside it.
Follow these steps to have text created on the path of a closed shape:
1. Create a closed shape, such as a circle.
2. Select the Type tool and cross over the path of the circle.
3. Don’t click when you see the I-bar swell up; hold down the Alt
(Windows) or Option (Mac) key instead.
The icon changes into the squiggle I-bar you see when creating text on a
path.
4. When the squiggle line appears, click.
5. Start typing, and the text flows around the path of the shape, as
shown in Figure 5-10.
To change the origin of the text or move it around, use the alignment
options in the Paragraph panel or switch to the Selection tool and drag the
I-bar to a new location on the path.
You can drag the middle I-bar in and out of the shape to flip the text so
that it appears on the outside or inside of the path.

FIGURE 5-10: Holding down the Alt or Option key flows text around a closed shape.
Assigning Font Styles
After you have text on your page, you’ll often want to change it to be more
interesting than the typical 12-point Times font. Formatting text in Illustrator
isn’t only simple, but you can also do it multiple ways. In the following list,
we name and define some basic type components (see Figure 5-11):
Font: A complete set of characters, letters, and symbols of a particular
typeface design.
X height: The height of type, based on the height of the small x in that
type family.
Kerning: The space between two letters. Often used for letters in larger

type that need to be pulled closer together, such as W i. Kern a little to
slide the i in a little closer to the W, maybe even moving into the space
occupied by the W, as shown in Figure 5-12. Kerning doesn’t distort the
text; it only increases or decreases the space between two letters.
Leading: Space between the lines of text.
Tracking: The space between multiple letters. Designers like to use this
technique to spread out words by increasing the space between letters.
Adjusting the tracking doesn’t distort text; it increases or decreases the
space between the letters, as shown in Figure 5-13.
 Pretty good tracking and kerning have already been determined in
most fonts. You don’t need to bother with these settings unless you’re
tweaking text for a more customized look.
Baseline: The line that type sits on. The baseline doesn’t include
descenders, type that extends down, like lowercase y and g. You adjust
the baseline for trademark signs or mathematical formulas, as shown in
Figure 5-14.
FIGURE 5-11: Components of type.
FIGURE 5-12: Before kerning (left) and after (right).

FIGURE 5-13: Tracking set at 0 (top) and 300 (bottom).
FIGURE 5-14: Adjust the baseline for superscript.
 The keyboard shortcuts for type shown in Table 5-1 work with Adobe
Illustrator, InDesign, and Photoshop.
TABLE 5-1 Keyboard Shortcuts for Type
Command
Windows
Mac
Align left, right, or center
Shift+Ctrl+L, R, or C
Shift+⌘  +L, R, or C
Justify
Shift+Ctrl+J
Shift+⌘  +J
Insert soft return
Shift+Enter
Shift+Return
Reset horizontal scale to 100 percent
Shift+Ctrl+X
Shift+⌘  +X
Increase or decrease point size
Shift+Ctrl+> or <
Shift+⌘  +> or <
Increase or decrease leading
Alt+↑ or ↓
Option+↑ or ↓
Set leading to the font size
Double-click the leading
icon in the Character
panel
Double-click the leading
icon in the Character
panel
Reset tracking or kerning to 0
Alt+Ctrl+Q
Option+⌘  +Q
Add or remove space (kerning) between two characters
Alt+→ or ←
Option+→ or ←
Add or remove space (kerning) between two characters
by 5 times the increment value
Alt+Ctrl+→ or ←
Option+⌘  +→ or ←

Add or remove space (kerning) between selected words;
if selected, it changes tracking. Leave cursor in between
words.
Alt+← or →
Option+← or →
Increase or decrease baseline shift
Alt+Shift+↑ or ↓
Option+Shift+↑ or ↓
Using the Character Panel
To visualize changes you’re making to text and to see characteristics that are
already selected, choose Window⇒  Type⇒  Character or press Ctrl+T
(Windows) or ⌘  +T (Mac), which opens the Character panel. Click the
triangle in the upper-right corner to see a panel menu of additional options.
Choose Show Options, and additional type attributes appear, such as baseline
shift, underline, and strikethrough.
 Pressing Ctrl+T (Windows) or ⌘  +T (Mac) is a toggle switch to
either show or hide the Character panel. If you don’t see the Character
panel appear at first, you may have hidden it by pressing the keyboard
shortcut. Just try it again.
The following list explains the options in the Character panel (see Figure 5-
15):
Font: Select the font you want to use from this drop-down list.
 You can click and drag across the font name in the Character
panel or Control panel, and press the up- or down-arrow key to
automatically switch to the next font above or below on the font list. Do
this while you have text selected to see the text change live!
Set font style: Select the style (for example, Bold, Italic, or Bold Italic)
from this drop-down list. The choices here are limited by the fonts you
have loaded. In other words, if you have only Times regular loaded in
your system, you don’t have the choice to bold or italicize it.
Type size: Set the size of the type in this combo box. Average readable

type is 12-point; headlines can vary from 18 points and up.
Leading: Select how much space you want between the lines of text in
this combo box. Illustrator uses the professional typesetting method of
including the type size in the total leading. In other words, if you have 12-
point and want it double-spaced, set the leading at 24 points.
Kerning: To use this combo box, you first need to place the cursor
between two letters. Then, to push the letters farther apart from each
other, you can click the up arrow or type a value; to decrease the spacing
between the letters, type a lower value, even negative numbers, or click
the down arrow.
Tracking: Use the Tracking combo box by selecting multiple letters and
increasing or decreasing the space between them all at once by clicking
the up or down arrows or by typing a positive or negative value.
Horizontal scale: Distort selected text by stretching it horizontally. Enter
a positive number to increase the size of the letters; enter a negative
number to decrease the size.
Vertical scale: Distort selected text vertically. Enter a positive number to
increase the size of the letters; enter a negative number to decrease the
size.
 Using horizontal or vertical scaling to make text look like
condensed type often doesn’t give good results. When you distort text, the
nice thick and thin characteristics of the typeface also become distorted
and can produce weird effects.
Baseline shift: Use baseline shift for trademark signs and mathematical
formulas that require selected characters to be moved above or below the
baseline.
Character rotation: Rotate just the selected text by entering an angle in
this text field or by clicking the up or down arrows.
Rotate: Choose to rotate selected text on any angle.
Underline and strikethrough: These simple text attributes underline and
strikethrough selected text.

Language: Select a language from this drop-down list. Note: The
language you specify here is used by Illustrator’s spell checker and
hyphenation feature. We discuss these features in the later section “Text
Utilities: Your Key to Efficiency.”
FIGURE 5-15: The Character panel shows additional options.
Using the Control Panel
Use the Control panel to quickly access your Type tools and Type panels.
Note in Figure 5-16 that when you have active text, hyperlinked text buttons
allow you to quickly access panels, such as the Character and Paragraph

panels. You can also use this Control panel as a quick and easy way to select
the font, size, alignment, color, and transparency.
FIGURE 5-16: Control panel type functions.
Using the Paragraph Panel
Access the Paragraph panel quickly by clicking the Paragraph hyperlink in
the Control panel or by choosing Window⇒  Type⇒  Paragraph. This panel,
shown in Figure 5-17, has all the attributes that apply to an entire paragraph
(such as alignment and indents, which we discuss in the next two sections,
and hyphenation, which we discuss later in this chapter). For example, you
can’t flush-left one word in a paragraph — when you click the Flush Left
button, the entire paragraph flushes left. To see additional options in the
Paragraph panel, click the triangle in the upper-right corner of the panel (the
panel menu) and choose Show Options.
FIGURE 5-17: Use this panel to open typographic controls that apply to paragraphs.

Alignment
You can choose any of the following alignment methods by clicking the
appropriate button on the Paragraph panel:
Flush Left: All text is flush to the left with a ragged edge on the right.
This is the most common way to align text.
Center: All text is centered.
Flush Right: All text is flush to the right and ragged on the left.
Justify with the Last Line Aligned Left: Right and left edges are both
straight, with the last line left-aligned.
Justify with the Last Line Aligned Center: Right and left edges are
both straight, with the last line centered.
Justify with the Last Line Aligned Right: Right and left edges are both
straight, with the last line right-aligned.
Justify All Lines: In this forced justification method, the last line is
stretched the entire column width, no matter how short it is. This
alignment is used in many publications, but it can create some awful
results.
Indentation
You can choose from the following methods of indentation:
First Line Indent: Indents the first line of every paragraph. In other
words, every time you press the Enter (Windows) or Return (Mac) key,
this spacing is created.
To avoid first-line indents and space after from occurring — if you just
want to break a line in a specific place, for example — create a line break
or a soft return by pressing Shift+Enter (Windows) or Shift+Return
(Mac).
Right Indent: Indents from the right side of the column of text.
Left Indent: Indents from the left side of the column of text.
 Use the Eyedropper tool to copy the character, paragraph, fill, and

stroke attributes. Select the text you want to change, select the Eyedropper
tool, and click the text once with the attributes you want to apply to the
selected text.
By default, the Eyedropper affects all attributes of a type selection, including
appearance attributes. To customize the attributes affected by these tools,
double-click the Eyedropper tool to open the Eyedropper dialog box.
Text Utilities: Your Key to Efficiency
After you have text in an Illustrator document, you may need to perform
various tasks within that text, such as search for a word to replace with
another word, check your spelling and grammar, save and create your own
styles, or change the case of a block of text. You’re in luck because Illustrator
provides various text utilities that enable you to easily and efficiently perform
all these otherwise tedious tasks. In the following sections, we give you a
quick tour of these utilities.
Find and Replace
Generally, artwork created in Illustrator isn’t text heavy, but the fact that
Illustrator has a Find and Replace feature can be a huge help. Use the Find
and Replace dialog box (choose Edit⇒  Find and Replace) to search for words
that need to be changed, such as changing Smyth to Smith, or to locate items
that may be difficult to find otherwise. This feature works much like all other
search-and-replace methods.
Spell checker
Can you believe there was a time when Illustrator didn’t have a spell
checker? Thankfully, it does now — and its simple design makes it easy to
use.
To use the spell checker, choose Edit⇒  Check Spelling and then click the
Start button in the dialog box that appears. The spell checker works much like
the spell checker in Microsoft Word and other popular applications: When a
misspelled word is found, you’re offered a list of replacements. You can
choose to fix that instance, fix all instances, ignore the misspelling, or add the
word to the dictionary.
If you click the arrow to the left of Options, you can set other specifications,

such as whether you want to look for letter case issues or have the spell
checker note repeated words.
Note: The spell checker uses whatever language you specify in the Character
panel. We discuss this panel in the earlier section “Using the Character
Panel.”
 If you work in a specialized industry that uses loads of custom words,
save yourself time by choosing Edit⇒  Edit Custom Dictionary and then
adding your own words. We recommend that you do so before you’re
ready to spell check a document so that the spell checker doesn’t flag the
custom words later (which slows you down).
Don’t forget that just because a word is spelled correctly doesn’t mean it’s the
correct word in the context of a sentence. You should still proofread manually
your text.
The Hyphenation feature
Nothing is worse than trying to read severely hyphenated copy. Most
designers either use hyphenation as little as possible or avoid it altogether by
turning off the Hyphenation feature.
Here are a few things you should know about customizing your hyphenation
settings if you decide to use this feature:
Turning the Hyphenation feature on or off: Activate or deactivate the
feature in the Hyphenation dialog box (see Figure 5-18); open this dialog
box by choosing Window⇒  Type⇒  Paragraph, clicking the arrow in the
upper-right corner of the Paragraph panel to access the panel menu, and
then choosing Hyphenation from the list of options that appears. If you
won’t use the Hyphenation feature, turn it off by deselecting the
Hyphenation checkbox at the top of the Hyphenation dialog box.
 You can also simply click the Paragraph hyperlink in the Control
panel to access the Paragraph panel.

Setting specifications in the Hyphenation dialog box: Set specifications
in the dialog box that determine the length of words to hyphenate, the
number of hyphens to be used in a single document, whether to hyphenate
capitalized words, and how words should be hyphenated. The Before Last
setting is useful, for example, if you don’t want to have a word, such as
liquidated hyphenated as liquidat-ed. Type 3 in the Before Last text field
and Illustrator won’t hyphenate words if it leaves only two letters on the
next line.
Setting the Hyphenation Limit and Hyphenation Zone: They’re not
diets or worlds in another dimension — the Hyphenation Limit setting
enables you to limit the number of hyphens in a row. For example, type 2
in the Hyphenation Limit text field so that you never see more than two
hyphenated words in a row. The Hyphenation Zone text field enables you
to set up an area of hyphenation based on a measurement. For example,
you can specify 1 inch to allow for only one hyphenation every inch. You
can also use the slider to determine whether you want better spacing or
fewer hyphens. This slider works only with the Single-Line Composer
(the default).

FIGURE 5-18: Customizing hyphenation settings.
The Find Font feature
If you work in production, you’ll love the Find Font feature, which enables
you to list all fonts in a file that contains text and then search for and replace
fonts (including the font’s type style) by name. You do so from the Find Font
dialog box (see Figure 5-19), opened by choosing Type⇒  Find Font. Select

the font you want to replace from the Fonts in Document list. Next, select a
font from the Replace with Font From list. Note that the font must already
appear in the document. Click the Change button to replace the font (or click
the Change All button to replace all instances of the font) and then click OK.
That’s it!
FIGURE 5-19: Use the Find Font dialog box to find and replace typefaces.

This cool feature enables you to replace fonts with fonts from the current
working document or from your entire system. Select System from the
Replace with Font From drop-down list to choose from all fonts loaded in
your system.
The Change Case feature
Doesn’t it drive you crazy when you type an entire paragraph before
discovering that you somehow pressed the Caps Lock key? Fix it fast by
selecting the text, choosing Type⇒  Change Case, and then choosing one of
these options:
Uppercase: Makes the selected text all uppercase
Lowercase: Makes the selected text all lowercase
Title Case: Capitalizes the first letter in each word
Sentence Case: Capitalizes just the first letter in selected sentences
In Illustrator, you use the same type engine used by InDesign for high-quality
text control. You’re working, as a default, in what’s referred to as Single-Line
Composer. Select Single or Every Line composer from the Paragraph panel
menu.
The options include the following:
Single-Line Composer: Useful if you prefer to have manual control over
how lines break. In fact, this method had been in place in the past. The
Single-Line Composer option doesn’t take the entire paragraph into
consideration when expanding letter space and word spacing, so justified
text can sometimes look odd in its entire form. (See Figure 5-20, left.)
Every-Line Composer: A professional way of setting text; many factors
are taken into account as far as spacing is concerned, and spacing is based
on the entire paragraph. With this method, you see few spacing issues that
create strange effects, such as the ones on the left in Figure 5-20, right.

FIGURE 5-20: Single-Line Composer (left) and Every-Line Composer (right).
Text styles
A text style is a saved set of text attributes, such as font and size. Creating text
styles keeps you consistent and saves you time by enabling you to efficiently
implement changes in one step rather than have to select the text attributes for
each instance of that style of text (say, a heading or caption). So when you’re
finally happy with the way your headlines appear and how the body copy
looks or when your boss asks whether the body copy can be a smidgen
smaller (hmm, how much is a smidgen?), you can confidently answer,
“Sure!”
If you’ve created styles, changing a text attribute is simple. What’s more, the
change is applied at once to all text using that style. Otherwise, you would
have to make the attribute change to every occurrence of body text, which
could take a long time if your text is spread out.
Illustrator offers two types of text styles:
Character: Saves attributes for individual selected text. If you want just
the word New in a line of text to be red, 20-point Arial, you can save it as
a character style. Then, when you apply it, the attribute apply to only the
selected text (and not to the entire line or paragraph).
Paragraph: Saves attributes for an entire paragraph. A span of text is
considered a paragraph until it reaches a hard return or paragraph break.
Note that pressing Shift+Enter (Windows) or Shift+Return (Mac) is
considered a soft return, and paragraph styles continue to apply beyond
the soft return.

You can create character and paragraph styles in many ways, but we show
you the easiest and most direct methods in the following subsections.
Creating character styles
Create a character style when you want individual sections of text to be
treated differently from other text in the paragraph. So rather than repeatedly
apply a style manually, you create and implement a character style. To do so,
open a document containing text and follow these steps:
1. Set up text with the text attributes you want included in the character
style in the Character panel, and then choose Window⇒  Type⇒  
Character Styles.
The Character Styles panel opens.
2. 
 Select the text from Step 1 and Alt-click (Windows) or Option-
click (Mac) the New Style button (the dog-eared page icon) at the
bottom of the Character Styles panel.
3. In the Character Styles Options dialog box that appears, name your
style and click OK.
Illustrator records which attributes have been applied already to the
selected text and builds a style from them.
4. Create another text area by choosing Select⇒  Deselect and using the
Type tool to drag out a new text area.
We discuss using the Type tool in the earlier section “Creating text areas.”
5. Change the font and size to dramatically different choices from your
saved style and type some text.
6. Select some (not all) of the new text and then Alt-click (Windows) or
Option-click (Mac) the style name in the Character Styles panel.
Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) to eliminate any attributes that
weren’t part of the saved style. The attributes of the saved character style
are applied to the selected text.
 When you create a new panel item (any panel) in Adobe Illustrator,

InDesign, or Photoshop, we recommend that you get in the habit of Alt-
clicking (Windows) or Option-clicking (Mac) the New Style button.
This habit allows you to name the item (style, layer, or swatch, for
example) while adding it to the panel.
Creating paragraph styles
Paragraph styles include attributes that are applied to an entire paragraph.
What constitutes a paragraph is all text that falls before a hard return (you
create a hard return when you press Enter in Windows or Return on the Mac),
so this could be one line of text for a headline or ten lines in a body text
paragraph.
To create a paragraph style, open a document that contains text or open a new
document and add text to it; then follow these steps:
1. Choose Window⇒  Type⇒  Paragraph Styles to open the Paragraph
Styles panel.
2. Find a paragraph of text that has the same text attributes throughout
it and put your cursor anywhere in that paragraph.
You don’t even have to select the whole paragraph!
3. Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) the Create New Style
button (the dog-eared icon at the bottom of the Paragraph panel) to
create a new paragraph style; give your new style a name.
Your new style now appears in the Paragraph Styles panel list of styles.
4. Create a paragraph of text elsewhere in your document and make its
attributes different from the text in Step 2.
5. Put your cursor anywhere in the new paragraph and Alt-click
(Windows) or Option-click (Mac) your named style in the Paragraph
Styles panel.
The attributes from the style are applied to the entire paragraph.
 If style doesn’t seem to work, make sure that the Character Style is
set to Normal Character Style.

Updating styles
When you use existing text to build styles, reselect the text and assign the
style. In other words, if you put the cursor in the original text whose attributes
were saved as a style, it doesn’t have a style assigned to it in the Styles panel.
Assign the style by selecting the text or paragraph and clicking the
appropriate style listed in the Styles panel. By doing so, you ensure that any
future updates to that style apply to that original text and to all other
instances.
Before updating a style, make sure you have nothing selected (Select⇒  
Deselect). To update a style, simply select its name in either the Character or
Paragraph Styles panel. Choose Options from the panel menu, which you
access by clicking the arrow in the upper-right corner of the panel. In the
resulting dialog box (see Figure 5-21), make changes by clicking the main
attribute on the left and then updating the choices on the right. After you do
so, all tagged styles are updated.
FIGURE 5-21: Updating a paragraph style.

 Documents created in older versions of Adobe Illustrator (Version 10
or earlier) contain legacy text, which is text using the older text engine.
When these files are opened, you see a Warning dialog box. If you click
the Update button, any text on the document will most likely reflow,
causing line breaks, leading, and other types of spacing to change.
Click the OK button to update the file after it’s opened to lock down the text.
If necessary, you can use the Type tool to click a selected text area to update
only the contained text. Another Warning dialog box appears that gives you
the opportunity to update selected text, copy the text object, or cancel the text
tool selection. This method is the best way to see which changes are
occurring so that you can catch any spacing issues right off the bat. See
Figure 5-22 for samples of the three options in the Warning dialog box.
FIGURE 5-22: Original text (left), updated text (center), and text object copied (right).
 If you click Copy the Text Object, you can use the underlying locked
copy to adjust the new text flow to match the old. Throw away the
legacy text layer by clicking and dragging it to the Trash icon in the
Layers panel, or click the visibility eye icon to the left of the Legacy
Text layer to hide it when you’re finished.

Chapter 6
Organizing Your Illustrations
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Using rulers
 Using ruler and custom guides
 Working with the Transform panel for placement Changing ruler
origin
 Rearranging, hiding, and locking objects
 Masking objects
You can create incredible effects in Illustrator, but if don’t organize your
artwork, you can make completing your artwork much more difficult. In this
chapter, you focus on organizational tricks that will save you time.
Setting Ruler Increments
Using rulers to help accurately place objects in an illustration is not difficult,
but not knowing how to effectively use the rulers in Illustrator can drive you
straight over the edge.
To view rulers in Illustrator, choose View⇒  Rulers⇒  Show Rulers or press
Ctrl+R (Windows) or ⌘  +R (Mac). When the rulers appear, their default
measurement setting is the point (or whichever measurement increment was
last set up in the preferences).
To change the ruler increment to the measurement system you prefer, use one
of these methods:
Create a new document and select a measurement unit in the New
Document dialog box.
Right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac) the horizontal or vertical

ruler and pick a measurement increment from the contextual menu that
appears.
Choose Edit⇒  Preferences⇒  Units (Windows) or Illustrator⇒  
Preferences⇒  Units (Mac) to open the Preferences dialog box.
 Change the ruler unit only by using the General drop-down list in
the Preferences dialog box. If you change the measurement unit on the
Stroke and Type tabs, you can end up with 12-inch type rather than that
dainty 12-point type you were expecting.
 Setting general preferences changes them in all future documents.
Choose File⇒  Document Setup to change the measurement unit for only
the document you’re working on.
Using Guides
Guides can help you create more accurate illustrations. After a guide is
created, you can turn its visibility off or on quickly with the View menu. You
can use two kinds of guides in Illustrator:
Ruler guides: You create these straight-line guides by clicking the ruler
and dragging out to the artboard.
Custom guides: These guides, created from Illustrator objects such as
shapes or paths, are helpful for replicating the exact angle of a path, as
shown in Figure 6-1.

FIGURE 6-1: Turn selected paths and shapes into custom guides.
Creating a ruler guide
A ruler guide is the easiest guide to create: Click the vertical or horizontal
ruler anywhere and drag it to the artboard, as shown in Figure 6-2. By default,
the horizontal ruler creates horizontal guides (no kidding), and the vertical
ruler creates vertical guides. You can press Alt-drag (Windows) or Option-
drag (Mac) to change the orientation of the guide. The vertical ruler then
creates a horizontal guide, and the horizontal ruler then creates a vertical
guide.
FIGURE 6-2: Click the ruler and drag out a guide.
Creating a custom guide
Create a custom guide by selecting a path or a shape and choosing View⇒  
Guides⇒  Make Guides. The selected object turns into a nonprinting guide.
Changing a path into a guide isn’t a permanent change. Choose View⇒  
Guides⇒  Release Guides to turn guides back into paths.

Using the Transform Panel for
Placement
Placing shapes and paths precisely where you want them can be difficult even
if you have steady hands. Save yourself some aggravation by using the
Transform panel to achieve this. Type x, y coordinates in the Transform panel
to position objects exactly where you want them.
 In Adobe Illustrator and InDesign, the Reference Point Indicator icon
is on the left side of the Transform panel. Click the handle of the icon to
change the point of reference. To measure from the upper-left corner,
click the indicator on the handle there. If you want to know the exact
center of an object, click the center point in the indicator. The point of
reference is the spot on the object that falls at the x, y coordinates, which
specify the placement of the selected object:
x coordinate: From left to right
y coordinate: From top to bottom
Changing the Ruler Origin
In Adobe Illustrator, InDesign, and Photoshop, you can change the ruler
origin, which defines the start of a printing area of an image.
To change the ruler origin, follow these steps:
1. Move the pointer to the upper-left corner of the rulers where the
rulers intersect, as shown in Figure 6-3.
2. Drag the pointer to the spot where you want the new ruler origin.
While you drag, a crosshair in the window and in the rulers indicates
where the new ruler origin will be placed.

FIGURE 6-3: Changing the ruler’s origin.
 You can restore the original ruler origin by double-clicking the ruler
intersection.
Thinking about Object Arrangement
Just like the stacks of paper on your desk, new objects in Illustrator are placed
on top of existing objects. Change their order by choosing the Object⇒  
Arrange menu options.
The easiest choices are to bring an object to the front or send it to the back.
The results of sending forward or backward can be unnerving if you don’t
know the exact order in which objects were created. The illustration in Figure
6-4 shows three objects that we plan to rearrange by using four available
choices. Figure 6-5 shows the result of each choice.

FIGURE 6-4: Objects in their original positions.
FIGURE 6-5: Rearranging objects.
To change the stacking order, select the object (or objects) whose placement
you want to change and then choose one of these commands:
Object⇒  Arrange⇒  Bring to Front: Moves the selected object to the top
of the painting order. In Figure 6-5a, the square is brought in front by
using the Bring to Front command.

Object⇒  Arrange⇒  Bring Forward: Moves a selected object in front of
the object created just before it or one level closer to the front. In Figure
6-5b, the triangle is moved in front of the square by using the Bring
Forward command.
Object⇒  Arrange⇒  Send Backward: Moves a selected object so that it
falls under the object created just before it or one level back. In Figure 6-
5c, the triangle is sent backward so that it’s just under the circle.
Object⇒  Arrange⇒  Send to Back: Moves a selected object to the
bottom of the painting order. In Figure 6-5d, the triangle is placed on the
bottom by using the Send to Back command.
Hiding Objects
Seasoned Illustrator users love the Hide command. Use it when the object
you want to select is stuck behind something else or when you need to select
one object and another repeatedly activates instead.
A good opportunity to use the Hide command is when you’re creating text
inside a shape. In Chapter 5 of this minibook, we show you that as soon as
you turn a shape into a text area, the fill and stroke attributes turn into None.
Follow these steps to hide a shape:
1. Create a shape.
For this example, we created an ellipse.
2. Click the Fill color box at the bottom of the Illustrator Tools panel
and then choose Window⇒  Swatches.
The Swatches panel appears.
3. In the Swatches panel, choose a color for the fill.
In this example, yellow is selected. The stroke doesn’t matter; this one is
set to None.
Clicking a shape with the Type tool converts the shape to a text area and
converts the fill and stroke to None. To have a colored shape remain, you
must hide a copy.
4. After selecting a colored shape, choose Edit⇒  Copy; alternatively, you
can press Ctrl+C (Windows) or ⌘  +C (Mac).

This step makes a copy of your shape.
5. Choose Edit⇒  Paste in Back or press Ctrl+B (Windows) or ⌘  +B
(Mac).
This step puts a copy of your shape exactly in back of the original.
6. Choose Object⇒  Hide or press Ctrl+3 (Windows) or ⌘  +3 (Mac).
The copy of the shape is now hidden; what you see is your original shape.
7. Switch to the Type tool by selecting it in the Tools panel or pressing T.
8. Use the cursor to cross over the edge of the shape and change it to the
Area Type tool.
You use the Area Type tool to type text in a shape.
9. When you see the type insertion cursor swell up, as shown in Figure
6-6, click the edge of the shape.
The insertion point is now blinking inside the shape, and the fill and
stroke attributes of the shape have been changed to None.
10. Type some text, as shown in Figure 6-7.
11. When you finish entering text, choose Object⇒  Show All or press
Ctrl+Alt+3 (Windows) or ⌘  +Option+3 (Mac).
The colored shape reappears with the text in the middle of it, as shown in
Figure 6-8.
FIGURE 6-6: The type insertion cursor on the edge of a shape.

FIGURE 6-7: Type directly in the shape.
FIGURE 6-8: The hidden shape reappears behind the text.
Use the Hide command anytime you want to tuck away objects for later use.
We promise: Nothing hidden in Illustrator will be lost. Just use the Show All
command, and any hidden objects are revealed, exactly where you left them.
(Too bad the Show All command can’t reveal where you left your car keys!)
Locking Objects
Being able to lock items is handy when you’re building an illustration. The
Lock command not only locks down objects you don’t want to change, but
also drives anyone crazy who tries to edit your files. In fact, we mention
locking mainly to help preserve your sanity. Sometimes you need to make
simple adjustments to another designer’s artwork and can’t, unless the objects
are first unlocked. Follow these instructions:

To lock an object: Choose Object⇒  Lock or press Ctrl+2 (Windows) or
⌘  +2 (Mac) to lock an object so that you can’t select it, move it, or
change its attributes.
To unlock an object: Choose Object⇒  Unlock All or press Ctrl+Alt+2
(Windows) or ⌘  +Option+2 (Mac). Then you can make changes to it.
You can also lock and hide objects with layers. See Chapter 7 in this
minibook for more information about using layers.
Creating a Clipping Mask
Creating a clipping mask may sound complex, but it’s easy and highlights
some topics in this chapter, such as arranging objects. Similar to peering
through a hole in a piece of paper to the objects underneath it, a clipping
mask allows a topmost object to define the selected shapes underneath it; with
a clipping mask, however, the area around the defining shape is transparent,
as shown in Figure 6-9.
FIGURE 6-9: Some items using the clipping mask feature.

You may recall what a film mask looks like — it’s black to block out the
picture and clear where you want to view an image, as shown in Figure 6-10.
FIGURE 6-10: A conventional film mask.
The clipping mask feature uses the same principle as the conventional film
mask. It hides the area outside the mask area. To create a clipping mask,
follow these steps:
1. Choose File⇒  Place to place an image.
Masks work with objects created in Illustrator and with objects placed
(scanned or otherwise imported) there.
2. Create the item you want to use as a mask by using the Pen tool to
create a shape or a closed path.

For example, in Figure 6-11, the circle is the mask. (The photo underneath
it is the placed image from Step 1.) The circle is placed where the mask
will be created. The shape’s color, fill, and stroke values don’t matter
because they automatically change to None when you create a mask.
Note: When creating a clipping mask, make sure that the object to be
used as a mask is a closed shape and is at the top of the stacking order.
3. Use the Selection tool to select the placed image and the shape.
Shift-click to add an object to the selection.
4. Choose Object⇒  Clipping Mask⇒  Make.
Alternatively, you can use the keyboard shortcut Ctrl+7 (Windows) or ⌘  
+7 (Mac) to create the clipping mask.
Ta-da! You created the clipping mask. Masked items are grouped, but you
can use the Direct Selection tool to move the image or mask individually.
5. To turn off the clipping mask, choose Object⇒  Clipping Mask⇒  
Release.
FIGURE 6-11: Position the mask shape over the object.
 You can also use text as a clipping mask: Type a word and ensure that
it’s positioned over an image or another Illustrator object (or objects).
Then select both the text and the object and choose Object⇒  Clipping
Mask⇒  Make.
Creating a Clipping Path Using the

Draw Inside Button
 You can use the Draw Inside button to create a clipping path. The button
is at the bottom of the Tools panel. Just follow these steps:
1. Select your artwork and choose Edit⇒  Copy or Cut.
In Figure 6-12, the artwork to the right has been cut to fit into the star
image.
2. Select the artwork that you want to “paste into” existing artwork and
then click the Draw Inside button.
3. Choose Edit⇒  Paste.
The artwork is pasted inside the shape, as shown in Figure 6-13.
 After you have pasted your artwork, you can use the Direct
Selection tool to reposition it.
FIGURE 6-12: Select artwork and copy or paste it.

FIGURE 6-13: Create a clipping path by using the Draw Inside button at the bottom of the Tools
panel.

Chapter 7
Using Layers
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Working with layers
 Using layers for a selection
 Changing the stacking order of a layer
 Moving and cloning objects to another layer
 Hiding and locking layers
This chapter shows you how helpful layers can be when you’re producing
complex artwork. Layers are similar to clear films stacked on top of your
artwork: You can place content (text, shapes, and other objects) on a layer, lift
up a layer, remove a layer, hide and show layers, or lock a layer so that you
can’t edit its content. Taking advantage of the Layers feature can help you:
Organize the painting (stacking) order of objects.
Activate objects that would otherwise be difficult to select by using either
the Selection or Direct Selection tool.
Lock items that you don’t want to reposition or change.
Hide items until you need them.
Repurpose objects for artwork variations. For example, a company’s
business cards use the same logo and company address, but the name and
contact information change for each person. In this case, placing the logo
and company address on one layer and the person’s name and contact
information on another layer lets you easily create a new business card
just by changing the person’s name and contact details.
Creating New Layers

When you create a new Illustrator document, you automatically start with a
single layer. To understand how layers work, you can create a new file and
follow some steps to create new layers and place objects on them:
1. Choose File⇒  New, select Print from the Profile drop-down list, and
then click OK.
2. If the Layers panel isn’t already visible (see Figure 7-1), choose
Window⇒  Layers.
3. Using the Rectangle tool, click and drag anywhere on the artboard to
create a rectangle.
The size doesn’t matter.
4. Click the Fill button in the Control panel and select any color for the
shape from the Color Picker that appears, as shown in Figure 7-2.
The Fill button is the swatch with an arrow on the left side of the Control
panel.
This fill color makes the rectangle easier to identify later.
The blue handle color that appears on the active shape matches the blue
color bar you see in the Layers panel on the left side of the layer name
and the small selection square to the right of the radio button. The small
selection square on the right disappears if you choose Select⇒  Deselect.
You use that square to see which layer a selected object is on.
Notice in Figure 7-3 that you’ve added a shape to this layer, so an arrow
appears to the left of the layer name. This arrow indicates that you now
have a sublayer, which is essentially a layer within a layer. Click the
arrow to expand the layer and show any sublayers nested underneath it;
sublayers are automatically created when you add objects, which helps
when you’re making difficult selections.
It helps to name layers with a unique name so that you can identify them
while working.
5. Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) the Create New Layer
button at the bottom of the Layers panel to create a new layer.
The Layer Options dialog box appears (see Figure 7-4), and you can use it
to name a layer and change the selection color. You don’t have to hold
down the Alt or Option key when making a new layer, but if you don’t,

the Layer Options window does not appear.
6. Enter the name Circle for the new layer in the Name text box and
click OK.
In Figure 7-5, we entered circle because it’s the shape we add in Step 7.
If you want to stay organized, you can name the original layer rectangle
by double-clicking Layer 1. Just make sure that you click the circle layer
again to make it the active layer.
A new layer is added to the top of the stack in the Layers panel.
7. Make a shape on the new layer and overlap the shape you created in
Step 2. (See Figure 7-5.)
In this example, we created a circle, as shown in Figure 7-5.
8. Change the fill color for your new shape.
Look at the selection handles on the circle that you just created: They
change to a different color, indicating that you’re on a different layer. The
different handle colors are for organizational purposes only and aren’t
printed.
9. Just to be different this time, choose New Layer from the panel menu.
The Layer Options dialog box appears.
10. (Optional) In the Layer Options dialog box, change the color of the
selection handles by selecting an option from the Color drop-down
list.
You can also hide or lock the contents of the layer.
11. Enter the name Star in the Name text field, click OK, and then create
a shape on it.
For the example shown in Figure 7-6, we entered star into the Name text
box and used the Star tool to create a star on the new layer. The Star tool
is hidden in the Rectangle shape tool.
12. Again, change the fill color of your newest shape so that it’s different
from the other shapes.
13. Use the Selection tool to move the new shape so that it overlaps the
others slightly.

FIGURE 7-1: The Layers panel.
FIGURE 7-2: Select any color from the Fill Color Picker.

FIGURE 7-3: Adding objects to a layer automatically creates sublayers.

FIGURE 7-4: Creating a new layer.

FIGURE 7-5: A circle on the new layer overlaps the rectangle on its underlying layer.
FIGURE 7-6: Create a new layer by using the panel menu.
 You can open the Options dialog box for any existing layer by
choosing Options for “Layer” (Named Layer) from the panel menu in
the Layers panel, or by double-clicking on a layer in the Layers panel.
You’ve created new layers and now have a file that you can use to practice
working with layers.
Using Layers for Selections
When you have a selected object on a layer, a color selection square appears
to the right of the named layer. If you select the radio button directly to the
right of the layer’s name in the Layers panel, as shown in Figure 7-7, all
objects are selected on that layer.

FIGURE 7-7: Selecting the entire contents of a layer.
Sublayers have their own radio buttons. If sublayers are visible, you can use
the same technique to select objects that may be buried behind others.
If you need help selecting a specific graphic’s layer, select the graphic, and
then click the Locate Object button in the lower-left of the Layers panel.
 If you think you’ll be selecting sublayers frequently, double-click the
default name and type a more descriptive name for that layer.
Changing the Layer Stacking Order
In Chapter 6 of this minibook, we tell you about the Object⇒  Arrange feature
in Illustrator; with layers, this process becomes slightly more complicated.
Each layer has its own painting order, the order in which you see the layers.
To move a layer (and thereby change the stacking order of the layers), click
and drag that layer until you see the black insertion line where you want the
layer to be moved.
As you add shapes to a layer, a sublayer is created, and it has its own little
stacking order that’s separate from other layers. In other words, if you choose

to send an object to the back and it’s on the top layer, it goes only to the back
of that layer and is still in front of any objects on layers beneath it.
 Understanding how the stacking order affects the illustration is
probably the most confusing part about layers. Just remember that in
order for an object to appear behind everything else, it has to be on the
bottom layer (and at the bottom of all objects on that bottom layer); for
an object to appear in front of everything else, it has to be on the
topmost layer.
Moving and Cloning Objects
To move a selected object from one layer to another, click the small color-
selection square (shown in Figure 7-8) to the right of the layer’s radio button
in the Layers panel, drag the object to the target layer, and release. That’s all
there is to moving an object from one layer to another.
FIGURE 7-8: Drag the small square icon to move the selected object to another layer.

You can also clone an item, or make a copy of it while you move the copy to
another layer. Clone an object by Alt-dragging (Windows) or Option-
dragging (Mac) the color selection square to another layer. A plus sign
appears while you drag (so you know that you’re making a clone of the
object). Release when you reach the cloned object’s target layer.
 Choose Paste Remembers Layers from the Layers panel to have
Illustrator automatically remember which layer you copied an object
from. No matter which layer is active, Illustrator always pastes the
object back on the original layer it was copied from.
Hiding Layers
To the left of each layer in the Layers panel is an eye icon — a visibility
toggle button. Simply clicking the eye icon hides the layer (the eye
disappears, denoting that this layer is hidden). Click the empty square (where
the eye icon was) to show the layer again.
Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) an eye icon to hide all layers
except the one you click; Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) the eye
icon to show all layers again.
Ctrl-click (Windows) or ⌘  -click (Mac) the eye icon to turn just the selected
layer into Outline view. In Outline view, all you see are the outlines of the
artwork with no stroke widths or fill colors. The rest of your artwork remains
in Preview mode, with strokes and fills visible. This tricky technique is
helpful when you’re looking for stray points or need to close paths. Ctrl-click
(Windows) or ⌘  -click (Mac) the eye icon again to return the layer to
Preview mode.
Locking Layers
Lock layers by clicking the empty square to the right of the Visibility (eye)
icon. A padlock icon appears so that you know the layer is now locked.
Locking a layer prevents you from making changes to the objects on that
layer. Click the padlock to unlock the layer.

Chapter 8
Livening Up Illustrations with
Color
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Choosing a color mode
 Using the Swatches and Color panels
 Working with strokes and fills
 Changing the stroke width and type
 Saving and editing colors
 Discovering patterns
 Taking advantage of gradients and meshes
 Copying color attributes
 Using the Live Paint feature
This chapter is all about making your illustrations come alive with color. We
show you how to create new colors, patterns, and gradients as well as how to
edit existing colors and save custom colors. We also explain how to apply and
edit color attributes to many objects at the same time.
Choosing a Document Profile
Whether you are using the default New dialog box or the legacy dialog box,
you are offered the option to choose a color profile. In the default dialog, you
can choose from Mobile, Web, Print, Film & Video, or Art & Illustration. If
you are using the legacy New dialog box, click on More settings, and you can
choose a color profile from the Profile drop-down menu, as shown in Figure
8-1. If you must set your preferences every time you create a new file, choose
a document profile, as you see in Figure 8-1. This profile determines the

default settings from which you create your document. Some of the settings
established here are the artboard size, units of measure, color mode,
resolution, and more.
FIGURE 8-1: Use the New Document profiles to start with the right colors, resolution,
measurement units, artboard size, and more.
Illustrator CC offers several profiles, and they fall into two basic categories:
onscreen and print.
The following New Document profiles are used for onscreen display:
Mobile: This profile ensures a small file size and uses a resolution that is
preset for a specific mobile device. You can choose your device from the
Size menu.
Web: This profile provides preset options, such as size and resolution,
that are optimized for output to the web.
Print: This profile provides preset options for size and resoluton defaults
that are optimized for print graphics. The colors in the Swatches panel are
in CMYK, as well as gradients and patterns.
Film & Video: This profile provides several preset video- and film-
specific crop area sizes. Illustrator also creates only square pixel files so
that the sizes are interpreted correctly in video applications.
Art & Illustration: This profile creates a document in RGB mode with
the Raster Effects Resolution set to 72 ppi.
The Print profile is used for print display. By default this profile uses a letter-
size artboard, but it provides a variety of other preset print sizes to choose

from. A document created with this profile is also set to a default resolution
of 300 dpi. Use this profile if you plan to send your file to a commercial
printer.
 You can change the color mode at any time without losing
information by choosing File⇒  Document Color Mode.
Using the Swatches Panel
Accessing color from the Control panel is probably the easiest way to make
color choices: You can use the Fill and Stroke drop-down lists to quickly
access the Swatches panel, shown in Figure 8-2, and at the same time ensure
that the color is applied to either the fill or stroke. How many times have you
mixed up colors and assigned the stroke color to the fill or vice versa?
FIGURE 8-2: Use these buttons to quickly access color options.
You can also access the Swatches panel, which you open by choosing
Window⇒  Swatches. Although limited in choice, its basic colors, patterns,
and gradients are ready to go. You can use the buttons at the bottom of the

Swatches panel (refer to Figure 8-2) to quickly open color libraries, select
kinds of colors to view, access swatch options, create color groups, add new
swatches, and delete selected swatches.
You may notice some odd color swatches — for example, the crosshair and
the diagonal line.
 The crosshair represents the Registration color. Use this swatch only
when creating custom crop marks or printer marks. The Registration color
looks black, but it’s created from 100 percent of all colors. This way, when
artwork is separated, the crop mark appears on all color separations.
 The diagonal line represents None. Use this option if you want no fill or
stroke.
Applying Color to the Fill and Stroke
Illustrator objects are created from fills (the inside) and strokes (border or
path). Look at the bottom of the Tools panel for the Fill and Stroke color
boxes. If you’re applying color to the fill, the Fill color box must be forward
in the Tools panel. If you’re applying color to the stroke, the Stroke color box
must be forward.
Table 8-1 lists keyboard shortcuts that can be a tremendous help to you when
applying colors to fills and strokes.
TABLE 8-1 Color Keyboard Shortcuts
Function
Keyboard Shortcut
Switch the Fill or Stroke color box position X
Inverse the Fill and the Stroke color boxes Shift+X
Default (black stroke, white fill)
D
None
/
Last color used
<
Last gradient used
>
Color Picker
Double-click the Fill or Stroke color box

 Try this trick: Drag a color from the Swatches panel to the Fill or
Stroke color box at the bottom of the toolbar or the top left of the
Swatches panel. This action applies the color to the color box that you
dragged to. It doesn’t matter which is forward!
To apply a fill color to an existing shape, drag the swatch directly to the
shape. Select a swatch, hold down Alt+Shift+Ctrl (Windows) or Option+Shift
(Mac), and drag a color to a shape to apply that color to the stroke.
Changing the Width and Type of a
Stroke
Access the Stroke panel by clicking the Stroke hyperlink in the Control panel.
In the Stroke panel, shown in Figure 8-3, you can choose to change the Width
height by clicking and selecting a preset width from the Width drop-down
menu, or you can type in a value. You can also customize the caps (the end of
a line), joins (the endpoints of a path or dash), and the miter limit (the length
of a point). The Stroke panel also enables you to turn a path into a dashed line

FIGURE 8-3: The Stroke panel options.
In the Stroke panel options, you can choose to align the stroke on the center
(default) of a path, the inside of a path, and the outside of a path. Figure 8-4
shows the results.

FIGURE 8-4: The Align Stroke options affect the placement of the stroke.
This feature is especially helpful when stroking outlined text. Refer to Figure
8-4 to compare text with the traditional centered stroke, as compared with the
options for aligning the stroke inside and outside of a path.
 You can’t adjust the alignment of a stroke on text unless you change
the text to outlines first. Select the text with the Selection tool and
choose Type⇒  Create Outlines to enable the Align Stroke options.
You can also customize the following aspects of a stroke from the Stroke
panel by clicking the buttons we describe:
Cap Options: The endpoints of a path or dash
Butt Cap: Makes the ends of stroked lines square
Round Cap: Makes the ends of stroked lines semicircular
Projecting Cap: Makes the ends of stroked lines square and
extends half the line width beyond the end of the line
Join Options: How corner points appear
Miter Join: Makes stroked lines with pointed corners
Round Join: Makes stroked lines with rounded corners
Bevel Join: Makes stroked lines with squared corners
Dashed Lines: Regularly spaced lines, based on values you set

 To create a dashed line, specify a dash sequence by entering the
lengths of dashes and the gaps between them in the Dash Pattern text
fields. (See Figure 8-5.) The numbers entered are repeated in sequence so
that after you set up the pattern, you don’t need to fill in all the text fields.
In other words, if you want an evenly spaced dashed stroke, just type the
same number in the first and second text fields, and all dashes and spaces
will be the same length (say, 12 points). Change that number to 12 in the
first text field and 24 in the next to create a larger space between dashes.
 Click the Aligns Dashes button to create improved corners for
your dashed object.
Arrowhead: Arrowheads have been surprisingly difficult for new users
to locate and use in previous versions of Illustrator. In CC, you can just
open the Stroke dialog box, shown in Figure 8-6, and use simple drop-
down lists to set start and end times to your arrowhead as well as the
scale.
FIGURE 8-5: Setting up a dashed stroke.

FIGURE 8-6: Arrowheads are easy to find and use in the Stroke dialog box.
Using the Color Panel
The Color panel (choose Window⇒  Color) offers another method for
choosing color. You must custom-pick a color using values on the color ramp.
You see as a default only the color ramp — the large color well spanning the
panel. If you don’t see all color options, choose Show Options from the Color
panel menu. (Click the triangle in the upper-right corner to access the panel
menu.)
 If you ever want to create tints of a CMYK color but aren’t quite sure
how to adjust individual color sliders, just hold down the Shift key while
adjusting the color slider of any color. Then watch as all colors move to
a relative position at the same time!
As shown in Figure 8-7, the panel menu offers many other choices. Even
though you may be in RGB or CMYK color mode, you can still choose to
build colors in Grayscale, RGB, HSB (Hue, Saturation, Brightness), CMYK,
or web-safe RGB. Choosing Invert or Complement from the panel menu
reverses the color of the selected object or changes it to a complementary

color, respectively. You can also choose the Fill and Stroke color boxes in the
upper-left corner of the Color panel.
FIGURE 8-7: Different color models are available in the Color panel.
You see the infamous cube-and-exclamation-point in the Color panels in most
Adobe software. The cube warns you that the color you’ve selected isn’t one
of the 216 nondithering, web-safe colors, and the exclamation point warns
you that your color isn’t within the CMYK print gamut. In other words, if you
see the exclamation point in the Color panel, don’t expect the cool electric
blue you see onscreen to print correctly — it may print as dark purple!
 Click the cube or exclamation point symbols when you see them to
select the closest color in the web-safe or CMYK color gamut.
Saving Colors
Saving your colors not only keeps you consistent, but also makes future edits
easier. Any time you build a color, drag it from the Color panel (or the Tools
panel) to the Swatches panel to save it as a color swatch for future use. You
can also select an object that uses the color and click the New Swatch button
at the bottom of the Swatches panel. (Refer to Figure 8-2 to see this button.)

To save a color and name it at the same time, Alt-click (Windows) or Shift-
click (Mac) the New Swatch icon. The New Swatch dialog box opens,
allowing you to name and edit the color, if you want. By double-clicking a
swatch in the Swatches panel, you can access the options at any time.
A color in the Swatches panel is available only in the document in which it
was created. Read the next section on custom libraries to see how to import
swatches from saved documents.
Building and using custom libraries
When you save a color in the Swatches panel, you’re essentially saving it to
your own custom library. You import the Swatches panel from one document
into another by using the Libraries feature.
Retrieve colors saved in a document’s Swatches panel by clicking the Swatch
Libraries menu button at the bottom of the Swatches panel and selecting
Other Library. You can also access swatch libraries, including those in other
documents, by choosing Window⇒  Swatch Libraries⇒  Other Library. Locate
the saved document and click Open. A panel appears with the document
name, as shown in Figure 8-8. You can’t edit the colors in this panel, but you
can use the colors in this panel by double-clicking a swatch (which adds it to
the Swatches panel) or dragging it to the current document’s Swatches panel
where it can be edited.
FIGURE 8-8: An imported custom swatch library.
 You can also click the Swatch Libraries button to access color
libraries for Pantone colors, web colors, and some neat creative colors,
such as jewel tones and metals.

Using the Color Guide and color groups
Perhaps you failed at color selection in art class or just don’t feel that you
pick colors that work well together. Fortunately, you can use the Color Guide
to find colors and save them to organized color groups in your Swatches
panel. You can create color schemes based on 23 classic color-harmony rules,
such as the Complementary, Analogous, Monochromatic, and Triad options,
or you can create custom harmony rules.
Sounds complicated, doesn’t it? Fortunately, all you have to do is choose a
base color and then see which variations you come up with according to rules
you choose. Give it a try:
1. Choose Window⇒  Color Guide. Click on the tab and drag the Color
Guide panel away from the docking area so that it does not go away
when you select another panel.
The Color Guide appears, as shown in Figure 8-9.
2. Select a color from the Swatches panel. If it isn’t visible, choose
Window⇒  Swatches.
Immediately, the Color Guide panel kicks in to provide you with colors
related to your original swatch.
3. Change the harmony rules by clicking the Edit or Apply Colors
button at the bottom of the Color Guide panel.
The Recolor Artwork dialog box appears.
4. Change the Harmony Rules by clicking the Harmony Rules arrow to
the right of the color bar.
A drop-down list appears with many choices for selecting colors, as
shown in Figure 8-10.
5. Select a color harmony to see your artwork recolored.
6. Save your color selection as a color group by clicking the New Color
Group icon, located at the top right of the dialog box.
If you like, you can rename the color group by double-clicking the group
name in the Color Group text field in the Recolor Artwork dialog box.
7. Click OK.
The color group is added to the Swatches panel.

FIGURE 8-9: The Color Guide panel identifies related colors.
FIGURE 8-10: Make a selection from the Harmony Rule drop-down list.

 You don’t have to use the Recolor Artwork dialog box to save a
group of colors. You can Ctrl-click (Windows) or ⌘  -click (Mac) to
select multiple colors and then click the New Color Group button at the
bottom of the Swatches panel.
Adding Pantone colors
If you’re looking for the typical swatches numbered in the Pantone Matching
System (PMS), follow these steps:
1. Click the Swatch Libraries menu button at the bottom of the
Swatches panel.
2. From the drop-down list, select Color Books and then Pantone Solid
Coated or whatever Pantone library you want to access. The Pantone
colors appear in a separate panel.
Colors in the Pantone numbering system are often referred to as PMS 485 or
PMS 201 or whatever number the color has been designated. You can locate
the numbered swatch by typing the number into the Find text field of the
Pantone panel, as shown in Figure 8-11. When that number’s corresponding
color is highlighted in the panel, click it to add it to your Swatches panel.
Many users find it easier to see colored swatches by using List view. Choose
Small List View or Large List View from the panel menu.
FIGURE 8-11: Use the Find text box to locate Pantone colors.
Editing Colors
Edit colors in the Swatches panel by using the Swatch Options dialog box

(shown in Figure 8-12), which you access by double-clicking the color or
choosing Swatch Options from the Swatches panel menu.
FIGURE 8-12: Edit a color swatch in the Swatch Options dialog box.
Use the Swatch Options dialog box to:
Change color values: Change the values in a color by using the sliders or
typing values in the color text fields. Being able to enter exact color
values is especially helpful if you’re given a color build to match. Select

the Preview checkbox to see results as you make the changes.
Use global colors: If you plan to use a color frequently, select the Global
checkbox. If it’s selected and you use the swatch throughout the artwork,
you have to change the swatch options only one time, and then all
instances of that color are updated.
One important option to note in the Swatch Options dialog box is the Color
Type drop-down list. You have two choices: spot color and process color.
What’s the difference?
Spot color: A color that isn’t broken down into the CMYK values. Spot
colors are used for one- or two-color print runs or when precise color
matching is important.
Suppose that you’re printing 20,000 catalogs and decide to run only two
colors: red and black. If you pick spot colors, the catalogs have to be run
through the press that contains two ink applications: one for black and
one for red. If red were a process color, however, it would be created from
a combination of cyan, magenta, yellow, and black inks, and the catalogs
would need to be run through a press with four or more ink applications
in order to build that color. Plus, if you went to a print service and asked
for red, what color would you get — fire engine red, maroon, or a light
and delicate pinkish red? But if the red you pick is PMS 485, your printer
in Kutztown, Pennsylvania, can then print the same color of red on your
brochure as the printer making your business cards in Woburn,
Massachusetts.
Process color: A color that’s built from four colors (cyan, magenta,
yellow, and black); used for multicolor jobs.
For example, you would use process colors to send an ad to a four-color
magazine. Its printers certainly want to use the same inks they’re already
running, and using a spot color would require another ink application in
addition to the cyan, magenta, yellow, and black plates. In this case, you
convert to process colors any spot colors created in corporate logos or
similar projects.
Building and Editing Patterns

Using patterns can be as simple or as complicated as you want. If you become
familiar with the basic concepts, you can take off in all sorts of creative
directions. To build a simple pattern, start by creating the artwork you want to
use as a pattern on your artboard — polka dots, smiley faces, wavy lines, or
whatever. Then select all components of the pattern and drag them to the
Swatches panel. That’s it — you made a pattern! Use the pattern by selecting
it as the fill or stroke of an object.
 You can’t use patterns in artwork that will then be saved as a pattern.
If you have a pattern in your artwork and try to drag it into the Swatches
panel, Illustrator kicks it back out with no error message. On a good
note, you can drag text directly into the Swatches panel to become a
pattern.
You can update patterns you created or patterns that already reside in the
Swatches panel. To edit an existing pattern, follow these steps:
1. Click the pattern swatch in the Swatches panel and drag it to the
artboard.
2. Deselect the pattern and use the Direct Selection make changes to the
pattern.
Keep making changes until you’re happy with the result.
3. To update the pattern with your new edited version, use the Selection
tool to select all pattern elements and Alt-drag (Windows) or Option-
drag (Mac) the new pattern over the existing pattern swatch in the
Swatches panel.
4. When a black border appears around the existing pattern, release the
mouse button.
All instances of the pattern in your illustration are updated.
 To add some space between tiles, as shown in Figure 8-13, create a
bounding box by drawing a rectangle shape with no fill or stroke

(representing the repeat you want to create). Send the rectangle behind
the other objects in the pattern and drag all objects, including the
bounding box, to the Swatches panel.
FIGURE 8-13: A pattern with a transparent bounding box.
 Transformations are covered in detail in Chapter 9 of this minibook,
but some specific transform features apply to patterns. To scale a pattern, but
not the object it’s filling, double-click the Scale tool, shown in the margin. In
the Scale dialog box that appears, type the value that you want to scale and
deselect all options except Transform Patterns, as shown in Figure 8-14. This
method works for the Rotate tool as well.

FIGURE 8-14: Choose to scale or rotate only the pattern, not the object.
Advanced Pattern Editing
In Illustrator CC, you have more control over patterns than ever before. The
preceding section tells you how to start your pattern, but what if you want to
create the perfect repeat? Or what if you want to align your repeated tile in a
different offset — like stacking bricks — instead of just tiling one pattern
right next to the other? With Illustrator CC, you can!
These steps show you how to take advantage of the powerful Pattern editor.
To do so, first create your pattern art by following the steps outlined in the
preceding section. If you don’t have a pattern available, you can use one of
the default patterns or locate a sample pattern file at
www.agitraining.com/dummies. Follow these steps:
1. After you add the pattern to the Swatches panel, double-click the
swatch. The Pattern Options panel appears, and the artboard
switches to Pattern Editor Preview mode, as shown in Figure 8-15.
2. Click Save a Copy in the upper-left corner of the screen.
3. When the New Pattern dialog box appears, type a name to keep a
copy of your original Pattern swatch. Click OK.

Keep in mind that the Save a Copy feature allows you to keep a copy of
your original pattern swatch, but you’ll still be editing your original
pattern. (Refer to Figure 8-15.)
When you click OK, a dialog box appears, indicating that you’ve just
created a copy of your original pattern swatch.
4. Press OK again.
5. Locate the Pattern Options panel and change the name of your
pattern, if you want.
In this example, we changed the pattern name to Fish_Brick, to save a
copy before the tile is going to be changed.
6. Click the Tile Type drop-down menu and select Brick by Row, as
shown in Figure 8-16.
The artboard displays the change in the pattern repeat.
7. If you want, change the default Brick Offset by opening that drop-
down list and selecting another option.
8. You can also edit the size of the repeat by manually entering a size in
the Width and Height text boxes, as show in Figure 8-17.
 Keep in mind that you can return to the original size by selecting
the Size Tile to Art checkbox below at any time.
9. Change the type of overlap — that is, which item is on top of the
stacking order — by using the Overlap section in the Pattern Options
panel, as shown in Figure 8-18.
10. (Optional) Make further adjustments to the pattern and edit the
artwork if needed.
In the lower section of the Pattern Options panel, you can control the
visual look of the pattern preview you’re seeing, from the amount of
copies that you see, to how dimmed the non-original pattern tiles appear.
You can edit your artwork using the drawing and editing tools, just like
you would if you weren’t in the Pattern Editor Preview mode. You can
see that a pen path is being created in Figure 8-19, and the change is
reflected in all the pattern tiles instantaneously.

11. When you’re finished making changes to your pattern, click Done,
located to the right of Save a Copy at the top of the editing window.
FIGURE 8-15: Pattern options allow you to edit pattern art, change the offset, and more.

FIGURE 8-16: Change the Tile Type using the Pattern Options panel.
FIGURE 8-17: Change the size of the repeat tile using the Width and Height text boxes.

FIGURE 8-18: Use the Overlap controls to change which part of the pattern is on the top of the
stacking order.

FIGURE 8-19: Add and edit artwork right in the pattern editing preview mode.
Working with Gradients
Create gradients for smooth metallic effects or just to add dimension to
illustrations. If you’re not sure which swatches are considered gradients,
choose Gradient from the Show Swatch Kinds button at the bottom of the
Swatches panel. (Refer to Figure 8-2.)
After the Gradient (shown in Figure 8-20) is applied, you can access the
Gradient panel for further options by choosing Window⇒  Gradient. If the
Gradient options aren’t visible, choose Show Options from the Gradient panel
menu to see more options.

FIGURE 8-20: The Gradient panel.
On the Gradient panel, use the Type drop-down list to select a Radial gradient
(one that radiates from the center point) or a Linear gradient (one that follows
a linear path).
Use the Gradient tool to change the direction and distance of a gradient blend:
1. Select an object and apply any existing gradient from the Swatches
panel to its fill.
2. Choose the Gradient tool (press G) and drag in the direction you
want the gradient to go.
Drag a long path for a smooth, long gradient. Drag a short path for a
short, more defined gradient.

 Before following the next steps, it would be a good idea to undock
your Color panel. Click the Color tab on the Color panel and drag it out
to the artboard, essentially separating it from the rest of the panel group.
To create a new gradient, follow these steps:
1. Click the White/Black Linear Gradient swatch in the Swatches panel,
as shown in Figure 8-21, to reach a good base point.
2. Notice the Gradient Slider that appears at the bottom of the Gradient
panel. On the left and right side of the slider, you see color stops.
Click the left color stop on the Gradient Slider to see that this white
color stop is set to 100% opacity, as shown in Figure 8-22.
3. Click the right black color stop to see that it is also set to 100%
opacity.
When a color stop is active, the triangle on top turns solid.
4. If necessary, choose Window⇒  Color to access the Color panel. If the
ramp on the Color panel is displaying a black-to-white ramp, click
the triangle in the upper-right corner to open the panel menu and
choose RGB or CMYK colors.
This step provides you with additional colors.
5. Click the color ramp (across the bottom) in the Color panel to pick a
random color (or enter values in the text fields to select a specific
color) for the active color stop in the Gradient panel.
6. In the Gradient panel, click the right color stop and change the
Opacity to 50%, as shown in Figure 8-23.
7. With the right color stop still selected, click another color in the color
ramp in the Colors panel.

FIGURE 8-21: Select the Linear Gradient swatch from the Swatches panel.

FIGURE 8-22: Click a color stop to activate it.

FIGURE 8-23: Change the opacity of the right color stop to 50%.
To add color stops, click beneath the gradient ramp and then choose a color
from the Color panel. You can also drag a swatch from the Swatches panel to
add a new color to the gradient. To remove a color stop, drag it off the
Gradient panel.
 You can click the gradient ramp to add colors and also to change the
opacity of that location of the ramp by entering values in the Opacity
text box. This technique is a helpful way to create stripes and other
reflective gradients.
Using the Gradient tool

 Take advantage of the Gradient tool to adjust the length and direction
of the gradient that you apply to objects. To use the Gradient tool, simply
select the object that has the gradient applied to it and then click and drag. A
color ramp appears, indicating the length and direction of your gradient, as
shown in Figure 8-24.
FIGURE 8-24: Use the Gradient tool to change the direction and length of your gradient.
You can also use the Gradient tool to apply and change colors on the color
ramp. To use the Gradient tool, follow these steps:
1. Apply a gradient to an object.
2. Select the Gradient tool (or press G) and click and drag to define the
length and direction of the gradient.
Drag a long path for a smooth, long gradient. Drag a short path for a
short, more defined gradient.
3. Hover over the gradient ramp (on top of the object), as shown in
Figure 8-25.
The color ramp appears with the color stops visible.

4. Double-click the color stop to open the color panel.
5. Select another color and then click outside the Color panel when
you’re finished editing the gradient ramp.
FIGURE 8-25: Use the Gradient tool to change the color stops.
Apply a gradient to a stroke
You can also apply a gradient to a stroke. To apply a gradient to a stroke,
follow these steps:
1. Make sure that you have the stroke of an object selected. You may
want to increase the stroke to a larger point size so that you can see
the gradient that you will apply a little better.
You can do this by bringing forward the stroke at the bottom of the
toolbar, or you can click Stroke in the Control panel and then select a
gradient from the Swatches menu that appears.
2. Choose a gradient from the Swatches panel.
The gradient is applied.
 You can’t change the direction or distance of a gradient applied to
a stroke with the Gradient tool. To make these changes, choose
Window⇒  Gradient and use the angle (for the direction) and the Gradient
slider to change the span of the color stops, as you see in Figure 8-26.

FIGURE 8-26: To edit a gradient on a stroke, you must use the Gradient panel.
Using transparency in gradient meshes
The Gradient Mesh tool helps you to create incredible photo-realistic
illustrations using meshes you build on vector objects. If you’ve already
discovered the Gradient Mesh tool, you know how useful this tool is. If you
add in the transparency feature, the number of ways you can use it
skyrockets.
Follow these simple steps to try the new transparency feature:
1. Choose a solid color for your fill and no stroke.
2. Create a shape.
In this example, we created a circle.
3. Choose Object⇒  Create Gradient Mesh and leave the default of 4
Rows and 4 Columns, Appearance, Flat, as shown in Figure 8-27.
Click OK.
A gradient mesh appears in your shape with multiple mesh nodes.
4. Using the Direct Selection tool, click an individual node.
5. Either choose another color to create a blending effect from one color
to another or choose Window⇒  Transparency and decrease the value
of the transparency drop-down list.

The individual node becomes transparent based on the value you select.
FIGURE 8-27: Choose how many rows and columns you want to start your mesh with.
Copying Color Attributes
 Wouldn’t it be helpful if you had tools that could record the fill and
stroke attributes and apply them to other shapes? You’re in luck — the
Eyedropper tool can do just that. Copy the fill and stroke of an object and
apply it to another object by using the Eyedropper tool:
1. Create several shapes with different fill and stroke attributes or open
an existing file that contains several different objects.
2. Select the Eyedropper tool and click a shape that has attributes you
want to copy.
3. Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) another object to apply
those attributes.

Not only is this technique simple, but you can also change which attributes
the Eyedropper applies. Do so by double-clicking the Eyedropper tool; in the
dialog box that appears, select only the attributes you want to copy.
Painting Made Easy: The Live Paint
Feature
 Don’t worry about filling closed shapes or letting fills escape from
objects with gaps into unwanted areas. Using the Live Paint feature, you can
create the image you want and fill in regions with color. The Live Paint
bucket automatically detects regions composed of independent intersecting
paths and fills them accordingly. The paint within a given region remains live
and flows automatically if any paths are moved.
If you want to give it a try, follow these steps to put together an example to
experiment with:
1. Use the Ellipse tool to create a circle on your page.
Make the circle large enough to accommodate two or three inner circles.
2. Press D (and nothing else).
As long as you aren’t using the Type tool, you revert to the default colors
of a black stroke and a white fill.
3. Double-click the Scale tool and enter 75% in the Uniform Scale text
box.
4. Press the Copy button and then click OK.
You see a smaller circle inside the original.
5. Press Ctrl+D (Windows) or ⌘  +D (Mac) to duplicate the
transformation and create another circle inside the last one.
6. Choose Select⇒  All or press Ctrl+A (Windows) or ⌘  +A (Mac) to
activate the circles you just created.
7. Make sure that the Fill swatch is forward.
The Fill swatch is at the bottom of the Tools panel.

8. Use the Swatches or Color panel and choose any fill color.
9. Using the Selection tool, select all the circles. Next, click on the Live
Paint Bucket tool, which is hidden under the Shape Builder tool, and
click the selection.
This turns the selected objects into a Live Paint Group. Now when you
move the Live Paint Bucket tool over them again, the different regions
become highlighted, indicating they are ready to paint.
See how the different regions become highlighted?
10. Click when the region you want to fill is activated.
Now try it with other fill colors in different regions, as shown in Figure 8-
28.
FIGURE 8-28: Painting objects with the Live Paint feature.
A companion feature to the Live Paint Bucket is support for gap detection.
With this feature in its arsenal, Illustrator automatically and dynamically
detects and closes small to large gaps that may be part of the artwork. You
can determine whether you want paint to flow across region gap boundaries
by using the Gap Options dialog box, accessible by choosing Object⇒  Live
Paint⇒  Gap Options.
 Before you save a file for an older version of Illustrator that uses the
Live Paint feature, first select the occurrences of Live Paint and choose
Object⇒  Expand. When the Expand dialog box appears, leave the

options at their defaults and click OK. This setting breaks down the Live
Paint objects to individual shapes, which older versions of Illustrator can
understand.

Chapter 9
Using the Transform and
Distortion Tools
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Discovering transformation methods
 Putting the Transform tools to work
 Becoming familiar with the Liquify tools
 Distorting, warping, and otherwise reshaping objects
You can apply transformations to objects in Illustrator that include scaling,
rotating, skewing, and distorting. In this chapter, you discover how to use the
general transform tools as well as some of the interesting liquify and
envelope distort features available in Illustrator.
Working with Transformations
Using just the Selection tool, you can scale and rotate a selected object. Drag
the bounding box handles to resize the object, shown in Figure 9-1, or move
outside a handle and then, when the cursor changes to a flippy arrow (a
curved arrow with arrowheads on both ends), drag to rotate the object.

FIGURE 9-1: Use the bounding box to resize or rotate a selected object.
 If you want to scale proportionally, hold down the Shift key while
you drag to resize. To rotate an object at 45-degree increments, hold
down the Shift key while you’re rotating.
When you use the bounding box to rotate a selection, the bounding box
rotates with the object, but its handles show the object’s original orientation,
as shown in Figure 9-2. The orientation can help you keep track of the
original placement but can also interfere when you’re building additional
artwork. To reset the bounding box so that it’s straight at the new orientation,
choose Object  ⇒  Transform  ⇒  Reset Bounding Box.

FIGURE 9-2: The bounding box in its original position and after it has been reset.
 When you scale, rotate, or use any other type of transformation in
Illustrator, the final location becomes the zero point. In other
applications, such as InDesign, you can rotate an object by any number
of degrees (45 degrees, for example) and later enter 0 for the rotation
angle in the Transform panel or in the Rotate dialog box to return the
object to its original position. In Illustrator, if you enter 0 for the rotation
angle to return a rotated object to its original position, the object doesn’t
change its position. To return the object to the previous position in
Illustrator, you have to enter the negative of the number you originally
entered to rotate the object, so you would enter –45 for the degree of
rotation in this example.
Transforming an object
The Rotate, Reflect, Scale, and Shear tools all use the same basic steps to
perform transformations. Read on for those basic steps and then follow some
individual examples of the most often used Transform tools. The following
sections show five ways to transform an object: one for an arbitrary
transformation and four others for exact transformations based on a numeric
amount you enter.
Arbitrary transformation method

Because this transformation method is arbitrary, you’re eyeballing the
transformation of an object — in other words, you don’t have an exact
percentage or angle in mind, and you want to freely transform the object until
it looks right. Just follow these steps:
1. Select an object and then choose a Transform tool (Rotate, Reflect,
Scale, or Shear).
2. Click the artboard once.
Be careful where you click because the click determines the point of
reference, or axis point, for the transformation. In Figure 9-3, the click put
the axis point above the right ear. The image is rotated on the axis created
at that point.
3. Drag in one smooth movement.
Just drag until you create the transformation you want.

FIGURE 9-3: The first mouse click creates the axis point.
 Hold down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key when dragging to
clone a newly transformed item while keeping the original object intact.
This trick is especially helpful when you’re using the Reflect tool.
Exact transformation methods
In the methods in this section, you discover how to perform transformations
using specific numeric information:
Exact transformation method 1 — using the tool’s dialog box:
1. Select an object and then choose the Rotate, Reflect, Scale, or Shear

tool.
2. Double-click the Transform tool that you selected in the Tools panel.
A dialog box specific to your chosen tool appears, as shown in Figure 9-4.
In this example, the Rotate tool was selected to open the Rotate dialog
box.
3. Type an angle, a scaled amount, or a percentage in the appropriate
text field.
In Figure 9-4, 45 degrees is entered.
4. Select the Preview checkbox to see the effect of the transformation
before you click OK; click the Copy button instead of OK to keep the
original object intact and transform a copy.
FIGURE 9-4: Double-click a Transform tool to open its dialog box.
Exact transformation method 2 — using the reference point:
1. Select an object and then choose the Rotate, Reflect, Scale, or Shear
tool.
2. Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) wherever you want to

place the reference point.
3. In the Transform tool dialog box that appears, enter values and click
OK or click the Copy button to apply the transformation.
This method is the best one to use if you need to rotate an object an exact
amount on a defined axis.
Exact transformation method 3 — using the Transform menu:
1. Select an object and then choose a transform option from the Object  
⇒  Transform menu.
The appropriate transform dialog box appears.
2. Enter some values and click OK or the Copy button.
Exact transformation method 4 — using the Transform panel:
1. Select an object and choose Window  ⇒  Transform to access the
Transform panel, shown in Figure 9-5.
2. Set your options.
FIGURE 9-5: Enter values on the Transform panel.
Though using the Transform panel is probably the easiest way to change
values, it doesn’t offer you the capability to specify an exact reference point
or other options that apply to the individual Transform tools. Keep in mind
that by using the square grid on the left side of the transform panel you can
select a point of reference for your object. By using this grid, you can
measure from the corners or center point of an object.
Using the Transform tools
In the following sections, you discover how to use some of the most popular
Transform tools to create transformations.
The Reflect tool

Nothing in life is perfectly symmetrical, right? Maybe not, but objects not
created symmetrically in Illustrator can look off-kilter. Using the Reflect tool,
you can reflect an object to create an exact mirrored shape of it; just follow
these steps:
1. Open a new document in Illustrator and type some text or create an
object.
If you want to reflect text, make sure that you use at least 60-point type so
that you can easily see it.
2. 
 Select the Reflect tool (hidden under the Rotate tool) and click
the object; if you’re using text, click in the middle of the text baseline.
This step sets the reference point for the reflection.
3. Alt+Shift+drag (Windows) or Option+Shift+drag (Mac) and release
when the object or text is reflecting itself, as shown in Figure 9-6.
This step not only clones the reflected object or text, but also snaps it to
45-degree angles.
FIGURE 9-6: The completed reflection.
The Scale tool
Using the Scale tool, you can scale an object proportionally or non-uniformly.
Most people like to be scaled non-uniformly — maybe a little taller, a little
thinner — but on with the topic. Follow these steps to see the Scale tool in
action:
1. Create a shape and give it no fill and a 5-point black stroke.
For this example, we created a circle. See Chapter 3 of this minibook if
you need a reminder on how to do it.

2. 
 Select the shape and double-click the Scale tool.
The Scale dialog box appears.
3. Type a number in the Scale text field (in the Uniform section) and
click the Copy button.
We entered 125 in the Scale text field to increase the size of the object by
125 percent.
4. Press Ctrl+D (Windows) or ⌘  +D (Mac) to repeat the transformation
as many times as you want.
Every time you press Ctrl+D (Windows) or ⌘  +D (Mac), the shape is
copied and sized by the percentage you entered in the Scale text field.
This trick, especially handy with circles, creates an instant bull’s-eye!
To experiment with the Scale tool, create different shapes in Step 1 and enter
different values in Step 3. Remember that if you type 50% in the Scale text
field, the object is made smaller; surpass 100 percent — say, to 150 percent
— to make the object larger. Leaving the Scale text field at 100 percent has
no effect on the object.
The Shear tool
 The Shear tool lets you shear an object by selecting an axis and dragging
to set a shear angle, as shown in Figure 9-7.

FIGURE 9-7: Create perspective with the Shear tool.
The axis is always the center of the object unless you use method 1 or 2 from
the earlier section “Exact transformation methods.” Use the Shear tool in
combination with the Rotate tool to give an object perspective.
The Reshape tool
The Reshape tool lets you select anchor points and sections of paths and
adjust them in one direction. You determine that direction by dragging an
anchor point with the Reshape tool selected.
 The Reshape tool works differently from the other Transform tools. To
use it, follow these steps:
1. Select just the anchor points on the paths that you want to reshape.
Deselect any points that you want to remain in place.
2. Select the Reshape tool (hidden under the Scale tool) and position the
cursor over the anchor point you want to modify; click the anchor
point.
If you click a path segment, a highlighted anchor point with a square
around it is added to the path.

3. Shift-click more anchor points or path segments to act as selection
points.
You can highlight an unlimited number of anchor points or path segments.
4. Drag the highlighted anchor points to adjust the path.
The Free Transform tool
 You use the Free Transform tool in much the same way as you use the
bounding box. (See the earlier section “Working with Transformations.”) This
tool is necessary only if you choose View  ⇒  Hide Bounding Box but want
free transform capabilities.
Creating Distortions
You can bend objects — make them wavy, gooey, or spiky — by creating
simple to complex distortions with the Liquify tools and the Envelope Distort
features.
The Liquify tools
The Liquify tools can accomplish all sorts of creative or wacky (depending
on how you look at it) distortions to your objects.
You can choose from eight Liquify tools. You should experiment with these
tools to understand their full capabilities. Here are some tips:
A variety of Liquify tools are available by holding down the mouse button
on the default selection, the Width tool. (Table 9-1 shows the Width tool
keyboard shortcuts.) If you use the tools frequently, drag to the arrow at
the end of the tools. You can then position the tools anywhere in your
work area.
Double-click any Liquify tool to open a dialog box specific to the selected
tool. The Liquify tools are shown in Table 9-2.
When a Liquify tool is selected, the brush size appears. Adjust the
diameter and shape of the Liquify tool by holding down the Alt
(Windows) or Option (Mac) key while dragging the brush shape smaller
or larger. Press the Shift key to constrain the shape to a circle.

 Using the Width tool, cross over a selected path. When a hollow
square appears, click and drag outward (or inward), and the stroke width at
that location is adjusted. See Figure 9-8.
FIGURE 9-8: Use the Width tool.
If you want a little more accuracy, you can double-click the stroke by using
the Width tool and create, modify, or delete the width point by using the
Width Point Edit dialog box, shown in Figure 9-9.
FIGURE 9-9: Customize the Width tool in this dialog box.

 To create a discontinuous width point, just create two width points on
a stroke with different stroke widths and then drag one width point on to
the other width point to create a discontinuous width point for the stroke.
TABLE 9-1 Width Tool Keyboard Shortcuts
Width Tool Function
Windows
Mac OS
Create non-uniform widths
Alt-drag
Opt-drag
Create a copy of the width point
Alt-drag the width point Opt-drag the width point
Copy and move all the points along the path Alt+Shift+drag
Opt+Shift+drag
Change the position of multiple width points
Shift-drag
Shift-drag
Select multiple width points
Shift-click
Shift-click
Delete selected width points
Delete
Delete
Deselect a width point
Esc
Esc
TABLE 9-2 The Liquify Tools
Icon
Tool
Name
What It Does to an Object
Width
Increases the stroke width or height when you click and drag a path.
Warp
Molds it with the movement of the cursor. (Pretend that you’re pushing through dough
with this tool.)
Twirl
Creates swirling distortions within it.
Pucker
Deflates it.
Bloat
Inflates it.
Scallop
Adds curved details to its outline. (Think of a seashell with scalloped edges.)
Crystallize Adds many spiked details to the outline of an object, such as crystals on a rock.
Wrinkle
Adds wrinklelike details to the outline of an object.

Using the Envelope Distort command
Use the Envelope Distort command to arch text and apply other creative
distortions to an Illustrator object. To use the Envelope Distort command, you
can use a preset warp (the easiest method), a grid, or a top object to determine
the amount and type of distortion. In this section, we discuss all three
methods.
Using the preset warps
Experimenting with warp presets is a little more interesting if you have a
word or an object selected before trying out the warp options. To warp an
object or some text to a preset style, follow these steps:
1. Select the text or object that you want to distort and then choose
Object  ⇒  Envelope Distort  ⇒  Make with Warp.
The Warp Options dialog box appears.
2. Select a warp style from the Style drop-down list and then specify any
other options you want.
3. Click OK to apply the distortion.
 If you want to experiment with warping but also want to revert to the
original at any time, choose Effect  ⇒  Warp. You later change or delete
the warp effect by double-clicking it in the Appearance panel or by
dragging the effect to the trash can in the Appearance panel. Find out
more in Chapters 10 and 11 of this minibook about exciting effects you
can apply to objects.
Reshaping with a mesh grid
You can assign a grid to an object so that you can drag different points and
create your own, custom distortion, as shown in Figure 9-10.

FIGURE 9-10: Custom distortion using a mesh grid.
Follow these steps to apply a mesh grid:
1. Using the Selection tool, select the text or object that you want to
distort and then choose Object  ⇒  Envelope Distort  ⇒  Make with
Mesh.
The Envelope Mesh dialog box appears.
2. Specify the number of rows and columns you want the mesh to
contain and then click OK.
3. Drag any anchor point on the mesh grid with the Direct Selection tool
to reshape the object.
 To delete anchor points on the mesh grid, select an anchor point by
using the Direct Selection tool and press the Delete key.
 You can also use the Mesh tool to edit and delete points when using a
mesh grid on objects.
Reshaping an object with a different object
To form letters into the shape of an oval or to distort selected objects into
another object, use this technique:
1. Create text that you want to distort.
2. Create the object you want to use as the envelope (the object to be
used to define the distortion).
3. Choose Object  ⇒  Arrange to ensure that the envelope object is on top,

as shown in Figure 9-11.
4. Select the text and Shift-click to select the envelope object.
5. Choose Object  ⇒  Envelope Distort  ⇒  Make with Top Object.
FIGURE 9-11: Position the shape over the text.
The underlying object is distorted to fit the shape of the top (envelope) object.
 Choose Effect  ⇒  Distort and Transform  ⇒  Free Distort to take
advantage of the Free Distort dialog box, shown in Figure 9-12. You can
edit or undo effects at any time by clicking or deleting the Free Distort
effect from the Appearance menu.

FIGURE 9-12: Distort an object from the Free Distort dialog box.

Chapter 10
Working with Transparency and
Special Effects Tools
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Adding dimension with the Mesh tool
 Getting to know the Blend tool
 Using the Symbol Sprayer tool
 Discovering transparency, blend modes, and opacity masks
This chapter is full of neat things you can do using some of the more
advanced features in Adobe Illustrator. These special effects tools can help
you create art that makes an impact: Discover how to make your art look like
a painting with the Gradient Mesh tool, create morphlike blends with the
Blend tool, become a graffiti artist by trying out the Symbol Sprayer tool, and
see what’s underneath objects by using transparency.
The Mesh Tool
If you’re creating art in Illustrator that requires solid colors or continuous
patterns, you can achieve those results quite easily. But if you’re working on
an element that requires continuous tones, such as a person’s face, you turn to
the handy Mesh tool to create smooth tonal variations in your illustration.
Choose to blend one color into another and then use the Mesh tool to adjust
your blend. You can also apply varying levels of transparency to these mesh
points.
The Mesh tool can be as complex or simple as you want. Using the Mesh
tool, you can create intense illustrations that look like they were painted with
an airbrush or just use the tool to give dimension to an object, as in the
illustration shown in Figure 10-1.

FIGURE 10-1: Mesh tool illustrations can be complex or simple.
In this chapter, you discover two ways to create gradient meshes in Illustrator,
manually and automatically. By manually selecting where you want mesh
points, you gain more freedom. By automatically defining rows and columns,
you can be more precise in the placement of your mesh points.
To create a gradient mesh by clicking, follow these steps:
1. Create any shape by using the shape tools. Make sure the shape has a

solid color; any color will do.
2. Deselect all objects by choosing Select⇒  Deselect.
3. Select a fill color that you want to apply as a mesh point to an object.
For example, if you want to add a shaded white spot to a red circle,
choose white for the fill color.
4. 
 Select the Mesh tool (the keyboard shortcut is U) and click
anywhere in a filled vector object.
The object is converted to a mesh object.
5. Click the object as many times as you want to add more mesh points.
To create a gradient mesh by setting the number of rows and columns, follow
these steps:
1. Select an object.
2. Choose Object⇒  Create Gradient Mesh.
The Create Gradient Mesh dialog box appears.
3. Set the number of rows and columns of mesh lines to create on the
object by entering numbers in the Rows and Columns text fields.
4. Choose the direction of the highlight from the Appearance drop-
down list.
The direction of the highlight determines which way the gradient flows
(see Figure 10-2); you have these choices:
Flat: Applies the object’s original color evenly across the surface,
resulting in no highlight
To Center: Creates a highlight in the center of the object
To Edge: Creates a highlight on the edges of the object
5. Enter a percentage of white highlight to apply to the mesh object in
the Highlight text field.
6. Click OK to apply the gradient mesh to the object.

FIGURE 10-2: Choose a highlight direction.
You can select individual or multiple mesh points and apply varying levels of
transparency to them. Follow these steps to apply transparency to a gradient
mesh:
1. Select a shape tool and click and drag to the artboard to add the
shape to your document.
2. Give the shape a solid fill (any color) and no stroke.
3. Choose the Mesh tool and click anywhere in the object.
This step adds a mesh point to your object.
4. Choose Window⇒  Transparency and select a percent from the
Opacity drop-down list or type in any other value you want in the
Opacity text field.
As you can see in Figure 10-3, an illustration was sent behind the object
to demonstrate transparency in the object.

FIGURE 10-3: The transparency of these mesh points varies.
 You can change the color in mesh points by choosing the Direct
Selection tool and then either clicking a mesh point and picking a fill
color or clicking in the center of a mesh area and choosing a fill.
Whether you select the mesh point (see the left side of Figure 10-4) or
the area between the mesh points (see the right side of Figure 10-4), it
changes the painting result. To add a mesh point without changing to the
current fill color, Shift-click anywhere in a filled vector object.

FIGURE 10-4: The mesh point changes the painting result.
The Blend Tool
 Use the Blend tool (located in the main Illustrator Tools panel) to
transform one object to another to create interesting morphed artwork or to
create shaded objects. Using the Blend tool, you can give illustrations a
rendered look by blending from one color to another or create an even
number of shapes from one point to another. Figure 10-5 shows examples of
what you can do with this tool.
FIGURE 10-5: Some objects using the Blend tool.

Creating a blend
Creating a blend isn’t difficult, and as you get used to it you can take the
process even further, to create incredibly realistic effects. Follow these steps
to create a simple blend from one rectangle size to another, creating an
algorithmic stripe pattern (a rectangle of one height blended to a rectangle of
another height):
1. Create a rectangle.
Size doesn’t matter in this example; just be sure that you can see a
difference in shapes when you blend. This example uses a rectangle that
measures roughly 4 x 1 inches.
2. Give your shape a fill and assign None to the stroke.
You can use other settings, but we recommend keeping it simple if you’re
new to working with blends.
3. Using the Selection tool, click the rectangle and Alt-drag (Windows)
or Option-drag (Mac) toward the bottom of the artboard to clone
your shape; press the Shift key before you release the mouse button to
make sure that the cloned shape stays perfectly aligned with the
original shape.
4. Reduce the cloned shape to about half its original height by using the
Transform panel.
If the Transform panel isn’t visible, choose Window⇒  Transform.
Alternatively, you can hold down the Shift key and drag the lower-middle
bounding box handle, shown in Figure 10-6.
5. In the Swatches panel (choose Window⇒  Swatches), change the
cloned shape’s fill to a different color but keep the stroke set to None.
Changing the color just helps you see the blend effect a little better.
6. Using the Blend tool, click the original shape and then click the
cloned shape.
As a default action, the Blend tool creates a smooth blend that transitions
from one color to another, as shown in Figure 10-7. To change the blend
effect, experiment with the Blend Options dialog box.

FIGURE 10-6: Reduce the size of the cloned shape.
FIGURE 10-7: Creating a smooth transition between rectangles.

Setting Blend options
You can change the way a blend appears by using the Blend Options dialog
box: Choose Object⇒  Blend⇒  Blend Options. From the Spacing drop-down
list, change the blend to one of these options:
Smooth Color: Blend steps are calculated to provide the optimum
number of steps for a smooth transition.
Specified Steps: Determine the number of steps in a blend by typing a
number in the text field to the right of the drop-down list.
Specified Distance: Control the distance between steps in the blend by
typing a number in the text field to the right of the drop-down list.
You can also choose between two orientation options:
Align to Page: Orients the blend perpendicular to the x-axis of the page.
Align to Path: Orients the blend perpendicular to the path. You probably
won’t see a difference when changing orientation unless you’ve edited the
blend path.
 You can easily access the Blend tool options by selecting a blended
object and double-clicking the Blend tool in the Tools panel.
If you’re feeling adventurous, try changing a smooth blend (such as the one
you create in the preceding step list) into a logarithmic blend. In the Blend
Options dialog box, select Specified Steps from the Spacing drop-down list
and change the value to 5. This change creates the blend in 5 steps rather than
in the more than 200 steps that may have been necessary to create the smooth
blend.
Here are a few more tips to help you become more comfortable using blends.
You can
Blend between an unlimited number of objects, colors, opacities, or
gradients.

Edit blends directly with tools, such as Selection, Rotate, or Scale.
Switch to the Direct Selection tool and edit the blend path by dragging
anchor points. A straight path is created between blended objects when
the blend is first applied.
Edit blends that you created by moving, resizing, deleting, or adding
objects. After you make editing changes, the artwork is blended again
automatically.
The Symbol Sprayer Tool
The super Symbol Sprayer tool is one you must experiment with in order to
understand its full potential. In a nutshell, it works like a can of spray paint
that sprays, rather than paints, symbols — objects that, in Illustrator, can be
either vector- or pixel-based. Each symbol is an instance.
Exploring the symbol tools
Illustrator comes with a library of symbols ready for use in the symbols
panel. (If the symbols panel isn’t visible, choose Window⇒  Symbols.) Use
this panel as a storage bin or library to save repeatedly used artwork or to
create your own symbols to apply as instances in your artwork, like blades of
grass or stars in the sky. You can then use the symbolism tools, described in
Table 10-1, to adjust and change the appearance of the symbol instances.
TABLE 10-1 The Symbol Tools
Icon
Tool Name
What You Can Do with It
Symbol
Sprayer
Create a set of symbol instances.
Symbol
Shifter
Move symbol instances around; can also change the relative paint order of symbol
instances.
Symbol
Scruncher
Pull apart, or put together, symbol instances.
Symbol
Sizer
Increase or decrease the size of symbol instances.
Symbol
Spinner
Orient the symbol instances in a set. Symbol instances located near the cursor spin
in the direction you move the cursor.
Symbol

Stainer
Colorize symbol instances.
Symbol
Screener
Increase or decrease the transparency of the symbol instances in a set.
Symbol
Styler
Apply or remove a graphic style from a symbol instance.
 Press the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key to reduce the effect of
the symbolism tools. In other words, if you’re using the Symbol Sizer
tool, you click and hold to make the symbol instances larger; hold down
the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key to make the symbol instances
smaller.
You can also selectively choose the symbols you want to affect with the
Symbolism tools by activating them in the Symbols panel. Ctrl-click
(Windows) or ⌘  -click (Mac) multiple symbols to change them at the same
time.
 Just about anything can be a symbol, including placed objects and
objects with patterns and gradients. If you’re going to use placed images
as symbols, however, choose File⇒  Place and deselect the Link
checkbox in the Place dialog box.
Creating and spraying symbols on the artboard
To create a symbol, select the object and drag it to the Symbols panel or click
the New Symbol button at the bottom of the Symbols panel. Yes, it’s that
easy. Then use the Symbol Sprayer tool to apply the symbol instance on the
artboard by following these steps:
1. Select the symbol instance in the Symbols panel.
Either create your own symbol or use one of the default symbols supplied
in the panel.
2. Drag with the Symbol Sprayer tool, spraying the symbol on the

artboard. (See Figure 10-8.)
That’s it. You can increase or reduce the area affected by the Symbol
Sprayer tool by pressing the bracket keys. Press ] repeatedly to enlarge
the application area for the symbol or press [ to make it smaller.
FIGURE 10-8: Using the Symbol Sprayer tool to create fish.
Note that you can access all sorts of symbol libraries from the Symbols panel
menu. Find 3D, nature, map, flower, and even hair and fur symbol collections
by selecting Open Symbol Library.
 If you want to store artwork that you frequently need to access,
simply drag selected objects to the Symbols panel or Alt-click
(Windows) or Option-click (Mac) the New Symbol button to name and
store the artwork. Retrieve the artwork later by dragging it from the
Symbols panel to the artboard. In fact, you can drag any symbol out to
your artboard to change or use it in your own artwork. To release the
symbol back into its original art elements, choose Object⇒  Expand. In
the Expand dialog box, click OK to restore the defaults.

Transparency
Using transparency can add a new level to your illustrations. The
transparency feature does exactly what its name implies — changes an object
to make it transparent so that what’s underneath that object is visible to
varying degrees. You can use the Transparency panel for simple applications
of transparency to show through to underlying objects or for more complex
artwork using opacity masks, which can control the visibility of selected
objects.
Choosing Window⇒  Transparency opens the Transparency panel, where you
can apply different levels of transparency to objects. To do so, create an
arrangement of objects that intersect, select the topmost object, and then
change the transparency level of the object in the Transparency panel, by
either selecting a percentage from the Opacity drop-down list or entering a
value of less than 100 in the Opacity text field.
Blend modes
A blending mode determines how the resulting transparency will look. To
achieve different blending effects, choose different blend modes from the
Blend Mode drop-down list in the Transparency panel.
 Truly, the best way to find out what all these modes do is to create
two overlapping shapes and start experimenting. Give the shapes
differently colored fills (but note that many blending modes don’t work
with black-and-white fills). Then select the topmost object and change
the opacity to anything other than 0% or 100% and change the blending
mode by selecting an option from the Blend Mode drop-down list in the
Transparency panel. You see all sorts of neat effects and might even pick
a few favorites.
We define each blend mode in the following list, but we’ll say it again: The
best way to see what each mode does is to apply it — so start experimenting.
Normal: Creates no interaction with underlying colors.
Darken: Replaces only the areas that are lighter than the blend color.

Areas darker than the blend color don’t change.
Multiply: Creates an effect similar to drawing on the page with magic
markers, or like the colored film you see on theater lights.
Color Burn: Darkens the base color to reflect the blend color. If you’re
using white, no change occurs.
Lighten: Replaces only the areas that are darker than the blend color.
Areas lighter than the blend color don’t change.
Screen: Multiplies the inverse of the underlying colors. The resulting
color is always a lighter color.
Color Dodge: Brightens the underlying color to reflect the blend color. If
you’re using black, there’s no change.
Overlay: Multiplies or screens the colors, depending on the base color.
Soft Light: Darkens or lightens colors, depending on the blend color. The
effect is similar to shining a diffused spotlight on the artwork.
Hard Light: Multiplies or screens colors, depending on the blend color.
The effect is similar to shining a harsh spotlight on the artwork.
Difference: Subtracts either the blend color from the base color or the
base color from the blend color, depending on which has the greater
brightness value. The effect is similar to a color negative.
Exclusion: Creates an effect similar to, but with less contrast than,
Difference mode.
Hue: Applies the hue (color) of the blend object to underlying objects but
keeps the underlying shading, or luminosity.
Saturation: Applies the saturation of the blend color but uses the
luminance and hue of the base color.
Color: Applies the blend object’s color to the underlying objects but
preserves the gray levels in the artwork; works well for tinting objects or
changing their colors.
Luminosity: Creates a resulting color with the hue and saturation of the
base color and the luminance of the blend color. This mode is essentially
the opposite of Color mode.

Opacity masks
Just like in Photoshop, you can use masks to make more interesting artwork
in Illustrator. You can create an opacity mask from the topmost object in a
selection or by drawing a mask on a single object. The mask uses the
grayscale of the selected object as its opacity mask. Black areas are
transparent; shades of gray are semitransparent, depending on the amount of
gray; white areas are opaque. Figure 10-9 shows the effect of using an opacity
mask.
FIGURE 10-9: An opacity mask converts the topmost object into a mask that then masks out the
underlying objects.
To create an opacity mask, follow these steps:
1. Open the Transparency panel menu.
2. Make sure that the Blend Mode drop-down list is set to Normal.
3. Create a shape anywhere on the artboard or open a document that
has artwork on it.
We’re using a circle, but the shape doesn’t matter. Make sure that the
artwork has a fill. A solid color helps you see the effect.
4. Open the Symbols panel (choose Window⇒  Symbols Panel) and drag
a symbol to the artboard.
In this example, we’re using the drums symbol.
5. Using the Selection tool, enlarge your symbol so that it fills the shape.
See the image on the left in Figure 10-10.

6. Select both the symbol and the shape and then click the Make Mask
button.
See the image on the right in Figure 10-10.
The symbol turns into a mask, showing varying levels of the underlying
box of the newly created mask, depending on the original color value.
Click on the Clip and Invert Mask checkboxes to see how your artwork is
affected. To delete an opacity mask, click the Release button.
FIGURE 10-10: Creating an opacity mask.
Click the right thumbnail (which represents the mask) in the Transparency
panel, and a black border appears around it, indicating that it’s active. You
can move the items on the mask or even create items to be added to the mask.
The mask works just like the regular artboard, except that anything done on
the mask side is used only as an opacity mask. To work on the regular
artboard, click the left thumbnail.

Chapter 11
Using Filters and Effects
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Applying effects
 Getting to know the Appearance panel
 Discovering graphic styles
 Making artwork 3D
 Playing with additional fills and strokes
 Creating the illusion of space and distance with the perspective grid
Effects give you the opportunity to make jazzy changes to your Illustrator
objects, such as add drop shadows and zigzagged artwork. You can even use
Photoshop filters directly in Illustrator. In this chapter, you find out how to
apply, save, and edit effects; you also take a quick tour of the Appearance
panel (your trusty sidekick when performing these tasks).
Working with Effects
Adobe Illustrator offers many artistic and creative effects that you can use to
add blurs, drop shadows, inner glows, and more. Effects are connected
dynamically to the objects they are applied to. You can add, change, and
remove effects at any time from the Appearance panel. (Choose Window⇒  
Appearance.)
Understanding the Appearance panel
Using the Appearance panel you can apply multiple effects to one object and
even copy them to other objects. If it isn’t visible, choose Window⇒  
Appearance to open the Appearance panel, as shown in Figure 11-1,
alongside an object with several effects applied to it.

FIGURE 11-1: Discover how useful the Appearance panel can be.
If you have no effects applied, you see as a default only a fill and a stroke
listed in the Appearance panel. As you create effects, they’re added to this
list. You can add more strokes and fills to the list; you find out why that
capability is so useful in the following sections.
Applying an effect
In this section, you see how to apply an effect. You can choose from many
effects, and they’re all applied in much the same manner. In this example, you
create an interesting effect for a border.
Create a new document using any of the default profiles, and then follow
these steps to apply an effect:
1. Make sure that your Appearance panel is visible. Choose Window⇒  
Appearance and click and drag the panel out of the dock area so that
it doesn’t collapse while you’re working.
2. Select the Rectangle tool and click and drag a rectangle out on the
artboard.
Any size rectangle is fine for this example.
3. Using Stroke in the Control panel, change the stroke to 3 pt.
4. Using Stroke Color in the Control panel, assign any color except the

default color of black.
5. Notice in the Appearance panel, shown in Figure 11-2, that you can
select the Stroke and the Fill. By selecting one or the other, you can
apply an effect to just the stroke or the fill. In this example, select
Stroke.
6. Choose Effect⇒  Distort and Transform⇒  Zig Zag.
Choose the settings that work well to make your straight border appear as
a zigzag. In Figure 11-3, we selected Smooth to round out the points of
the zigzag effect and changed the Ridges per segment to 15.
FIGURE 11-2: You can change the stroke and fill attributes right in the Appearance panel.
FIGURE 11-3: Convert a straight path into a zigzag using the Zig Zag effect.

 Effects are linked dynamically to the object they’re applied to. They
can be scaled, modified, and even deleted with no harm done to the
original object.
Adding a Drop Shadow effect
Creating a drop shadow is a quick and easy way to add dimension and a bit of
sophistication to your artwork. The interaction between the object with the
drop shadow and the underlying objects can create an interesting look. To add
the Drop Shadow effect to an illustration, follow these steps:
1. Select the object (or objects) to apply the drop shadow to.
If you like, you can continue using the rectangle you worked with in the
preceding section.
2. In the Appearance panel, make sure that Stroke is selected.
3. Choose Effect⇒  Stylize⇒  Drop Shadow.
4. In the Drop Shadow dialog box that appears, as shown in Figure 11-4,
select the Preview checkbox in the lower-left corner.
You now see the drop shadow applied as you make changes.
5. Choose from the following options in the dialog box:
Mode: Select a blending mode from this drop-down list to choose
how you want the selected object to interact with the objects
underneath it. The default is Multiply, which works well — the
effect is similar to coloring with a magic marker.
Opacity: Enter a value or use the drop-down list to determine how
opaque or transparent the drop shadow should be. If it’s too strong,
choose a lower amount.
Offset: Enter a value to determine how close the shadow is to the
object. If you’re working with text or small artwork, smaller values
(and shorter shadows) look best. Otherwise, the drop shadow may
look like one big, indefinable glob.
The X Offset shifts the shadow from left to right, and the Y Offset
shifts it up or down. You can enter negative or positive numbers.

Blur: Use Blur to control how fuzzy the edges of the shadow are. A
lower value makes the edge of the shadow more defined.
Color and Darkness: Select the Color radio button to choose a
custom color for the drop shadow. Select the Darkness radio button
to add more black to the drop shadow. Zero percent is the lowest
amount of black, and 100 percent is the highest.
As a default, the color of the shadow is based on the color of your
object, sort of — the Darkness option also has a play in this task.
As a default, the shadow is made up of the color in the object if it’s
solid. Multicolored objects have a gray shadow.
6. When you’re finished, click OK to close the dialog box.
Take a look at the Appearance panel, as shown in Figure 11-5, to see that
the two Effects that you applied are displayed. Notice that you can turn
off and on the visibility of the effect by selecting the Click to Toggle
Visibility icon to the left of the effect, and even edit the effect by double-
clicking on the effect in the Appearance panel.
7. Save your combination of effects as a Graphic Style.
Choose Window⇒  Graphic Styles, and while you have your rectangle
selected, choose New Graphic Style from the Panel menu.
8. Name the Style and press OK.
9. Now make another rectangle, any size, and click the thumbnail of
graphic style that you just saved in the Graphic Styles panel.
All the saved attributes are applied to this new shape.

FIGURE 11-4: The Drop Shadow dialog box gives the effect’s options and preview.
FIGURE 11-5: You can toggle the visibility and edit the effects right from the Appearance panel.
You find out more about Graphic Styles in the next section.
Saving Graphic Styles
A graphic style is a combination of all settings you choose for a particular
filter or effect in the Appearance panel. By saving this information in a
graphic style, you store these attributes so that you can quickly and easily
apply them to other objects later. If you have already created an object with
effects in a previous section, you will have the opportunity to save those
effects as a graphic style later in this section.

To apply a saved graphic style, follow these steps:
1. If the Graphic Styles panel is not visible, choose Window⇒  Graphic
Styles.
The Graphic Styles panel appears. Unless you have added your own style,
only some default styles appear in this panel.
2. Click on the Library icon in the lower left of the Graphic Styles panel
and select the Graphic Style library named Vonster Pattern Styles, as
shown in Figure 11-6.
A second window appears. It’s named Vonster Pattern Styles.
3. Create a new shape, such as a simple rectangle or an ellipse, and click
any graphic style in the Vonster Pattern Styles panel to apply it to an
active object.
Look at the Appearance panel while you click different styles to see that
you’re applying combinations of attributes, including effects, fills, and
strokes. (See Figure 11-7.)
FIGURE 11-6: Access additional graphic styles by selecting the Library icon.

FIGURE 11-7: The Graphic Styles panel stores effects and other attributes.
You can store attributes as a graphic style in several ways; we show you two
easy methods. If you already applied a combination of attributes to an object,
such as the rectangle border that you may have created in the previous
section, you can store them by completing one of these tasks:
With the object selected, Alt-click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) the
New Graphic Style button at the bottom of the Graphic Styles panel. Alt-
click (Windows) or Option-click (Mac) allows you to name the style
when it’s added.
Drag the selected object directly into the Graphic Styles panel. The panel
stores its attributes, but you have to double-click the new style to name it.
After you store a graphic style, simply select the object you want to apply the
style to and then click the saved style in the Graphic Styles panel.
You can try this by creating another rectangle and then clicking your saved
graphic style in the Graphic Styles panel.
Creating 3D Artwork
All Illustrator effects are excellent, but the 3D feature is even better because
you can not only add dimension by using the 3D effect, but you can also map
artwork (wrap artwork around a 3D object) and apply lighting to the 3D
object. You can then design a label for a jelly jar, for example, and adhere it
to the jar to show a client.
Here are the three choices for the 3D effect:
Extrude & Bevel: Uses the z-axis to extrude an object. For example, a
square becomes a cube.

Revolve: Uses the z-axis and revolves a shape around it. You can use this
option to change an arc into a ball.
Rotate: Rotates a 3D object created using the Extrude & Bevel or
Revolve effect or rotates a 2D object in 3D space. You can also adjust the
perspective of a 3D or 2D object.
To apply a 3D effect, you need to create an object appropriate for the 3D
effect. The Extrude & Bevel feature works well with shapes and text. If you
want to edit an object that already has a 3D effect applied to it, double-click
the 3D effect in the Appearance panel.
To apply a 3D effect, follow these steps:
1. Select the object you want to apply the 3D effect to.
2. Choose Effect⇒  3D⇒  Extrude & Bevel.
Options for your chosen 3D effect appear. To see the 3D Extrude & Bevel
Options dialog box, see Figure 11-8.
3. Select the Preview checkbox so that you can see results as you
experiment with these settings.
4. Click the Preview pane (which shows a cube in Figure 11-8) and drag
to rotate the object in space.
It makes selecting the proper angle (or positioning the object in space)
fun to do, or you can choose the angle from the Position drop-down list
above the preview.
 Never use the Rotate tool to rotate a 3D object, unless you want
some funky results; use the Preview pane in the 3D Extrude & Bevel
Options dialog box instead.
5. (Optional) Use the Perspective drop-down list to add perspective to
your object.
6. In the Extrude & Bevel section of the dialog box, select a depth for
your object and a cap.
The cap determines whether your shape has a solid cap on it or is hollow,
as shown in Figure 11-9.

7. Select a bevel (edge shape) from the Bevel drop-down list and set the
height using the Height drop-down list.
You have two choices to apply the bevel:
Bevel Extent Out: The bevel is added to the object.
Bevel Extent In: The bevel is subtracted from the object.
8. Select a rendering style from the Surface drop-down list or click the
More Options button for in-depth lighting options, such as changing
the direction or adding lighting.
9. Click the Map Art button.
The Map Art dialog box opens, as shown in Figure 11-10. Use this dialog
box to apply artwork to a 3D object.
10. Using the Surface arrow buttons, select the surface you want the
artwork applied to and then select a symbol from the Symbol drop-
down list.
The result is shown on the left in Figure 11-10.
11. Click OK to close the dialog box.
FIGURE 11-8: The Extrude & Bevel Options dialog box.

FIGURE 11-9: Cap on (left), cap off (right).
FIGURE 11-10: In the Map Art dialog box, you can select a surface and apply a symbol to it.
 Keep these points in mind when mapping artwork:
An object must be a symbol to be used as mapped artwork. You simply
need to select and drag to the Symbols panel the artwork you want
mapped. By doing so, you make it a selectable item in the Map Art dialog
box.
The light gray areas in the Preview pane are the visible areas based on the
object’s present position. Drag and scale the artwork in this pane to place
the artwork where you want it.
Shaded artwork (enabled by selecting the Shaded Artwork checkbox at

the bottom of the Map Art dialog box) looks good but can take a long
time to render.
Note: All 3D effects are rendered at 72 dpi (dots per inch; low resolution) so
as not to slow down the processing speed. You can determine the resolution
by either choosing Effect⇒  Document Raster Effects Settings or saving or
exporting the file. You can also select the object and choose Object⇒  
Rasterize. After you rasterize the object, you can no longer use it as an
Illustrator 3D object, so save the original!
Adding Multiple Fills and Strokes
Using the panel menu in the Appearance panel, you can add more fills and
strokes. You can use this feature to put differently colored fills on top of each
other and individually apply effects to each one, creating truly interesting and
creative results.
Just for fun, follow along to see what you can do to a single object from the
Appearance panel:
1. Create a star shape.
Neither the size of the shape nor its number of points matters — just
make the shape large enough to work with.
2. Use the Swatches panel (choose Window⇒  Swatches) to fill the shape
with yellow and give it a black stroke.
3. Choose Window⇒  Stroke to use the stroke panel to make the stroke 1
point; alternatively, select 1 from the Stroke drop-down list in the
Control panel.
Notice that the present fill and stroke are listed in the Appearance panel.
Even in its simplest form, the Appearance panel helps track basic
attributes. You can easily take advantage of the tracking to apply effects
to just a fill or a stroke.
4. Click Stroke in the Appearance panel.
If the Appearance panel isn’t visible, choose Window⇒  Appearance.
5. Choose Effect⇒  Path⇒  Offset Path.

6. In the Offset Path dialog box that appears, enter –10 pt in the Offset
text box and select the Preview checkbox, as you see in Figure 11-11.
Notice that the stroke moves into the fill rather than on the edge.
7. Change the offset to a number that works with your star shape and
click OK.
Depending on the size of your star, you may want to adjust the amount of
offset up or down.
8. From the panel menu of the Appearance panel, select Add New Fill to
add a new fill to the star shape. Click the arrow to the right of the
new fill color swatch to open the Swatches panel and change the new
fill to a different color, as shown in Figure 11-12.
In this next part, you add another fill.
9. Make sure the new Fill is selected in the Appearance panel (the top
one) and choose Effect⇒  Distort and Transform⇒  Twist.
10. In the Twist dialog box that appears, type 45 in the Angle text field
and select the Preview checkbox, as you see in Figure 11-13.
Notice how only the second fill is twisted.
11. Click OK to close the Twist dialog box.
12. Select the top fill from the Appearance panel again.
 Always be sure to select the fill or stroke you want before doing
anything meant to change just that specific fill or stroke.
13. In the Transparency panel (choose Window⇒  Transparency), select
50% from the Opacity drop-down list or simply type 50% in the
Opacity text field.
Now you can see your original shape through the new fill.
14. With the top fill still selected, change the color or choose a pattern in
the Swatches panel for a truly different appearance.
Continue playing with combinations of fills and strokes for hours if you
want. We hope that this process “clicks” and that you can take it further
on your own.

FIGURE 11-11: Select to offset just the stroke of an object.
FIGURE 11-12: Change the new fill to a different color right in the Appearance panel.

FIGURE 11-13: Choose to twist one of the fills.
Using the Perspective Grid
You can create and edit artwork based on the perspective grid feature, shown
in Figure 11-14. The grid is a huge help in creating successful perspective
illustrations.

FIGURE 11-14: Build and edit illustrations by using the Perspective Grid tool.
To show or hide the default perspective grid, press Ctrl+Shift+I (Windows) or
⌘  +Shift+I (Mac).
To select which perspective plane you wish to work with, you can click on
the plane that you wish to draw on in the circle that appears in the upper left,
as shown in Figure 11-15.
FIGURE 11-15: Click on a plane to activate it before adding a shape.
 You can use the Perspective Grid tool on the toolbar to fine-tune the
grid.

Here are some simple steps to help you start using the perspective grid:
1. Create a new document and turn on the perspective grid by pressing
Ctrl+Shift+I (Windows) or ⌘  +Shift+I (Mac).
2. Select a shape tool, such as the Ellipse, and click and drag it to create
the shape on the perspective grid.
Notice that the shape’s perspective is controlled by the grid. Remember
that you can use the circle in the upper left to change which plane you are
drawing to.
3. Select the Perspective Selection tool.
It’s the hidden tool in the Perspective Grid tool.
4. Using the Perspective Selection tool, click and drag the shape to see
that it’s adjusted in position and location using the perspective grid.
Figure 11-16 shows the result of dragging an ellipse with the Perspective
Selection tool. You can resize and clone in perspective by Alt- or Option-
dragging the selected object.
Note that you can also select and drag the grid itself by using the
Perspective Selection tool.
5. Choose View⇒  Perspective Grid, as shown in Figure 11-17, and then
select the type of perspective to apply.
In this step, you further customize your grid and choose other options to
make your illustrations more precise.

FIGURE 11-16: Click and drag to change the perspective using the Perspective Selection tool.
FIGURE 11-17: Customize settings for the perspective grid by using the View menu.

Chapter 12
Using Your Illustrator Images
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Saving Illustrator files
 Exporting files for use in other applications
 Preparing art for the web
 Flattening your transparency
 Printing in Illustrator
So you have beautiful artwork but aren’t sure how to remove it from your
screen. You could have a party and invite all interested clients to stand around
your monitor and admire it or share or sell your artwork by posting it on the
Internet or printing it.
In this chapter, you discover how to use your illustrations in a variety of
workflows, from using Illustrator files in page layout programs to exporting
files for Photoshop (and other programs) and the web. This chapter helps you
use your artwork effectively and understand the saving and flattening choices
available in Adobe Illustrator.
Saving and Exporting Illustrator Files
In this section, you discover how general choices differ in the Save As dialog
box (choose File  ⇒  Save As) and describe their benefits.
When you choose File  ⇒  Save or File  ⇒  Save As, you save your file in one of
these formats: Adobe Illustrator, EPS, PDF, AIT (Illustrator Template), SVG,
or SVG Compressed. You read about all these formats throughout this
chapter.

 If you need a file format not listed in the regular Save As dialog box,
choose File  ⇒  Export As to see additional choices. Using the File Export
command, you can choose to save your files in any format listed in Table
12-1.
TABLE 12-1 Available File Formats
File Format
Extension
AutoCAD Drawing
.dwg
AutoCAD Interchange File .dxf
BMP
.bmp
CSS
.css
Enhanced Metafile
.emf
Flash
.swf
JPEG
.jpg
Macintosh PICT
.pct
Photoshop
.psd
PNG
.png
Targa
.tga
Text Format
.txt
TIFF
.tif
Windows Metafile
.wmf
 Many formats rasterize artwork, so they no longer maintain vector
paths and the benefits of being vector. Scalability isn’t unlimited, for
example. If you think that you may want to edit your image again later,
be sure to save a copy of the file and keep the original in the .ai format.
The native Adobe Illustrator file format
If you’re working with the programs in the Creative Cloud, the best way to
save a file is as a native Illustrator .ai file. For instance, the .ai format

works with Adobe applications such as Adobe InDesign for page layout,
Adobe Dreamweaver for web page creation, Adobe Photoshop for photo
retouching, and Adobe Acrobat for cross-platform documents.
Understanding when it’s best to use the .ai format is important. Saving your
illustration as an .ai file ensures that it’s editable; it also ensures that any
transparency is retained, even if you use the file in another application.
To save and use a file in native Illustrator format, follow these steps:
1. Make an illustration with transparency (50 percent transparent, for
example) in Adobe Illustrator and choose File  ⇒  Save As.
2. Select Adobe Illustrator Document (.ai) from the Save As Type drop-
down list, name the file, and click Save.
3. Leave the Illustrator Native options at their defaults and click OK.
 After you follow the preceding step list to prepare your Illustrator
file, you can use the illustration in other Adobe applications:
Adobe Acrobat: Open the Acrobat application and choose File  ⇒  Open.
Locate the .ai file. The native Illustrator file opens within the Acrobat
application.
Adobe InDesign: Choose File  ⇒  Place. This method supports
transparency created in Adobe Illustrator, as shown in Figure 12-1.
(However, copying and pasting from Illustrator to InDesign does not
support transparency.)
Adobe Photoshop: Choose File  ⇒  Place. By placing an Illustrator file
into Adobe Photoshop, you automatically create a Photoshop smart
object. You can scale, rotate, and even apply effects to the Illustrator file
and return to the original illustration at any time. Read more about smart
objects in Photoshop in Book 3, Chapter 8.
If you want to take an Illustrator file into Photoshop for further editing,
choose File  ⇒  Export and select the Photoshop (.psd) format from the
Save As Type drop-down list. Choose a resolution from the Options

window. If you used layers, leave the Write Layers option selected.
In Photoshop, choose File  ⇒  Open, select the file you just saved in
Illustrator in .psd format, and click Open. The file opens in Photoshop
with its layers intact.
Adobe Animate: Use the integration features built in to Adobe Illustrator
to cut and paste directly into Adobe Animate. If you choose Edit  ⇒  Copy
from Adobe Illustrator, you can then switch to Adobe Animate and
choose Edit  ⇒  Paste. The Paste dialog box appears.
You can also choose File  ⇒  Import in Animate for additional import
choices. When a native Illustrator file is selected to import to the Stage,
the Import to Stage dialog box appears (directly in Animate!) so that you
can import only certain layers or sublayers and respond to warning
messages about incompatible objects.
Adobe Dreamweaver: By choosing File  ⇒  Save for Web & Devices, you
can choose to save your Illustrator document in .gif, .jpg, .png, .svg,
.swf, or .wbmp format. You can then insert images in those file formats
into Dreamweaver by choosing Insert  ⇒  Image in Adobe Dreamweaver.
Click the Image button in the Insert panel in Dreamweaver. When the
Select Image Source dialog box appears, navigate to the location where
you saved your optimized file. Select it and click OK. If your file is
located out of the root folder for the site you’re working on, an alert
window appears, offering the opportunity to save the file with your other
site assets.
FIGURE 12-1: InDesign supports transparency, even over text.

Saving Illustrator files back to previous versions
When saving an .ai or .eps file, you can choose File  ⇒  Save As, choose an
Illustrator format, and then click OK.
When the Illustrator Options dialog box appears, choose a version from the
Version drop-down list. Keep in mind that any features specific to newer
versions of Illustrator aren’t supported in older file formats, so make sure that
you save a copy and keep the original file intact. Adobe helps you understand
the risk of saving to older versions by putting a warning sign next to the
Version drop-down list and showing you specific issues with the version you
selected in the Warnings window.
The EPS file format
Encapsulated PostScript File (EPS) is the file format that most text editing
and page layout applications accept; EPS supports vector data and is
completely scalable. Because the Illustrator .eps format is based on
PostScript, you can reopen an EPS file and edit it in Illustrator at any time.
To save a file in Illustrator as an EPS, follow these steps:
1. Choose File  ⇒  Save As and select EPS from the Save As Type drop-
down list.
2. From the Version drop-down list, select the Illustrator version you’re
saving to.
3. In the EPS Options dialog box that appears (shown in Figure 12-2),
select the preview from the Format drop-down list:
8-Bit Color: A color preview for either Mac or PC
Black & White: A low-resolution, black-and-white preview
4. Select either the Transparent or Opaque radio button, depending on
whether you want the non-image areas in your artwork to be
transparent or opaque.
5. Specify your transparency settings.
These settings are grayed out if you haven’t used transparency in the file.
(See the “Flattening Transparency” section, later in this chapter, for more
about this setting.)

6. Leave the Embed Fonts (for other applications) checkbox selected to
leave fonts you used embedded in the EPS file format.
7. In the Options section, leave the Include CMYK PostScript in RGB
Files checkbox selected.
If you don’t know which Adobe PostScript level you want to save to,
leave it at the default.
8. Click OK to save your file in EPS format.

FIGURE 12-2: Select a preview and other important settings in the EPS Options dialog box.
The PDF file format
If you want to save your file in a format that supports more than a dozen
platforms and requires only Acrobat Reader, available as a free download at
www.adobe.com, choose to save your file as a PDF (Portable Document

Format) file.
If you can open an Illustrator file in Acrobat, why would you need to save a
file as a PDF? For one thing, you can compress a PDF to a smaller size; also,
the receiver can double-click the file and then Acrobat or Acrobat Reader
launches automatically.
Depending on how you save the PDF, you can allow some level of editability
in Adobe Illustrator. To save a file as a PDF, follow these steps:
1. Choose File  ⇒  Save As, select Illustrator PDF (.pdf) from the Save As
Type drop-down list, and then click Save.
2. In the Adobe PDF Options dialog box that appears, choose one of
these options from the Preset drop-down list:
Illustrator Default: Creates a PDF file in which all Illustrator data
is preserved. PDF files created using this preset can be reopened in
Illustrator with no loss of data.
High Quality Print: Creates PDF files for desktop printers and
proofers.
PDF/X-1a:2001: The least flexible, but quite powerful, delivery
method for PDF content data; requires that the color of all objects
be CMYK (Cyan, Magenta, Yellow, Black) or spot colors.
Elements in RGB (Red, Green, Blue) or Lab color spaces or tagged
with International Color Consortium (ICC) profiles are prohibited.
All fonts used in the job must be embedded in the supplied PDF
file.
PDF/X-3:2002: Has slightly more flexibility than the X-1a:2001
method (see preceding bullet) in that color managed workflows are
supported elements in Lab and attached ICC source profiles may
also be used.
PDF/X-4:2008: Based on PDF 1.4, which includes support for live
transparency and has the same color management and ICC color
specifications as PDF/X-3. You can open PDF files created for
PDF/X-4 compliance in Acrobat 7.0 and Reader 7.0 and later.
Press Quality: Creates a PDF file that can be printed to a high-
resolution output device. The file will be large but maintain all

information that a commercial printer or service provider needs in
order to print files correctly. This option automatically converts the
color mode to CMYK, embeds all fonts used in the file, prints at a
higher resolution, and uses other settings to preserve the maximum
amount of information contained in the original document.
 Before creating an Adobe PDF file by using the Press
Quality preset, check with your commercial printer to determine
the output resolution and other settings.
3. Click Save PDF to save your file in PDF format.
 If you want to be able to reopen the PDF file and edit it in
Illustrator, make sure that you leave the Preserve Illustrator Editing
Capabilities checkbox selected in the Adobe PDF Options dialog box.
In the Adobe PDF Options dialog box, to the left of the preset choices, are
options you can change to customize your settings. Skim the options to see
how to change resolution settings and even add printer’s marks. Take a look
at Book 6 to find out more about the additional Acrobat PDF options.
 Want a press-quality PDF but don’t want to convert all your colors to
CMYK? Choose the Press setting and then click the Output options. In
the Color Conversion drop-down list, select No Conversion.
Saving Your Artwork for the Web
If you need to save artwork for the web, no feature is better than Save for
Web. This dialog box opens a preview pane where you can test different file
formats before you save the file.

 Before going through the steps to save a graphic for the web, make
sure that the artboard is resized to the bounds of the graphic; otherwise,
you’ll have extra space surrounding your graphic.
To save an Illustrator file that you intend to use in a web page, just follow
these steps:
1. Choose File  ⇒   Export  ⇒  Save for Web (Legacy).
The Save for Web dialog box appears, showing your artwork on the
Optimized tab. (See Figure 12-3.)
2. Select a tabbed view: Original, Optimized, or 2-Up.
You see as a default the artwork in Optimized view, which previews the
artwork as it will appear based on the settings to the right. The best choice
is 2-Up view because it shows your original image versus the optimized
version.
3. Select a setting for your file from the options on the right.
If you want to make it easy on yourself, select a preset from the Preset
drop-down list. Keep these points in mind:
Graphics Interchange Format (GIF) is generally used for artwork
with spans of solid color. GIF isn’t a lossy format. You can make
your artwork smaller by reducing the number of colors in the
image — hence the choices, such as GIF 64 No Dither (64 colors).
The lower the number of colors, the smaller the file size. You can
also increase or decrease the number of colors in the file by
changing the preset values in the Color text field or by clicking the
arrows to the left of the Color text field.
Dithering tries to make your artwork look like it has more colors
by creating a pattern in the colors. It looks like a checkerboard
pattern up close and even far away, as shown in Figure 12-4. It also
makes a larger file size, so why use it? Many designers don’t like
the effect and choose the No Dither option.
Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPEG) is used for artwork that
has subtle gradations from one shade to another. Photographs are

often saved in this format. If you have drop shadows or blends in
your artwork, select this format. JPEG is a lossy file format — it
reduces an image to a lesser quality and can create odd artifacts in
your artwork. You have choices, such as High, Medium, and Low,
in the Settings drop-down list — choose wisely. You can also use
the Quality slider to tweak the compression.
PNG-8 is quite similar to the GIF file format. Unless you have a
certain reason for saving as PNG-8, stick with the GIF file format.
PNG-24 supports the best of two formats (GIF and JPEG). The
Portable Network Graphics (PNG) format supports not only those
nice gradients from one tonal value to another (such as JPEGs), but
also transparency (such as GIFs). With the Transparency box
checked, the PNG format allows for incremental transparency; the
GIF format, on the other hand, is either fully transparent in areas or
not.
4. When you’re satisfied with your chosen settings, click Save.
FIGURE 12-3: Use Save for the Web to optimize your images for the web.

FIGURE 12-4: The result of dithering.
 When saving illustrations for the web, keep these points in mind —
they make the whole process much easier for you and anyone who uses
your illustrations:
Keep file sizes small. Don’t forget that if you’re saving illustrations for a
web page, many other elements will also be on that page. Try to conserve
on file size to make downloading the page quicker for viewers with dial-
up connections. Visitors typically don’t wait more than ten seconds for a
page to download before giving up and moving to another website.
When you make your choices, keep an eye on the file size and the
optimized artwork in the lower-left corner of the preview window. A GIF
should be around 10K on average, and a JPEG around 15K. (Though

these rules aren’t written in stone, please don’t try to slap a 100K JPEG
on a web page.)
 You can change the download time by clicking the panel menu in
the upper-right corner of the Save for Web & Devices dialog box and
choosing Optimize to File Size. Then you can enter a final file size and
have Illustrator create your settings in the Save for Web dialog box.
Preview the file before saving it. If you want to see the artwork in a web
browser before saving it, click the Preview button at the bottom-left
corner of the Save for Web dialog box. The browser of choice appears
with your artwork in the quality level and size in which it will appear. If
no browser is selected, click the Select Browser Menu icon (to the right of
the Preview button) to choose Other and then browse to locate a browser
you want to use for previewing. Close the browser to return to the Save
for Web dialog box.
Change the size. Many misconceptions abound about the size of web
artwork. Most people generally view their browser windows in an area
measuring approximately 700 x 500 pixels. Depending on the screen
resolution, this setting may cover the entire screen on a 14-inch monitor.
Even viewers with 21-inch, high-resolution monitors often don’t want to
have their entire screens covered by a browser window, however, so their
areas still measure approximately 700 x 500 pixels. When choosing a size
for your artwork, choose one with proportions similar to these. For
example, if you want an illustration to occupy about a quarter of the
browser window’s width, make your image about 175 pixels wide (700 ÷
4 = 175). If you notice that the height of your image is more than 500
pixels, whittle the height in size as well or else viewers have to scroll to
see the whole image (and it will probably take too long to download).
Use the Image Size tab to enter new sizes. As long as the Constrain
Proportions checkbox is selected, both the height and width of the image
change proportionally. Click the Apply button to change the size, but
don’t close the Save for Web dialog box.
Finish the save. If you aren’t finished with the artwork but want to save
your settings, hold down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key and

click the Remember button. (When you aren’t holding down the Alt or
Option key, the Remember button is the Done button.) When you’re
finished, click the Save button and save your file in the appropriate
location.
Saving Multiple Assets out of
Illustrator
Perhaps you have created artwork for an interactive design such as a mobile
application. Using Illustrator’s new Assets Export feature, you can easily
collect the artwork that you need for development.
To take advantage of this feature, either use the asset.export file available
in the DummiesCCFiles folder located at www.agitraining.com/dummies or
use your own file. Then follow these steps:
1. Choose Window  ⇒  Assets Export to open the Asset Export panel.
2. At this point, simply click and drag artwork from the artboard to the
Assets Export panel, as shown in Figure 12-5.
3. Continue adding other artwork to this panel.
Note at the bottom of the panel that you have a 1X scale selected as a
default. Essentially, this means that you are set up to save every one of
your assets in the panel at 100 percent. Depending upon the platform your
assets will be used on, you may need to supply each piece of artwork in
not only 1X (100%) size, but also 2X (200%) and 3X (300%). This can be
set up easily in the Asset Export panel.
4. To add additional saved artwork in other scales, press the + Add
Scale button at the bottom of the Asset Export panel. The default 2X
and 3X scales are added, but you can choose another size or enter
your own custom size by clicking on the arrow indicated in Figure 12-
6.
5. Choose a file format for each scale by selecting a file type from the
Format drop-down menu.
6. Name your exported files by double-clicking on the default name in
the Asset Export panel. You can add a suffix in the scale attributes

section as well.
7. Select the Files you want exported. Press Export when you are ready
to export the files that you loaded into the Asset panel. A Pick
Location window appears that contains an appropriate folder in
which to save your exported files. Either create a new folder, or select
a folder and choose Select Folder (Windows) or Choose (Mac).
Your files have been exported.
FIGURE 12-5: Click and drag artwork that you want to export into the Asset Export panel.

FIGURE 12-6: Working with the Add Scale button in the Asset Export panel.
 Note: If you would like additional options, you can select the Launch
the Export for Screens button that is to the left of Export. In this dialog box,
you can choose to export only some or all of your artwork or select to export

your artboards as individual assets.
Flattening Transparency
You may find that all those cool effects you added to your illustration don’t
print correctly. When you print a file that has effects, such as drop shadows,
cool gradient blends, and feathering, Illustrator flattens them by turning into
pixels any transparent areas that overlap other objects and leaving what it can
as vectors.
To understand flattening, look at Figure 12-7 to see the difference between
the original artwork (on the left) and the flattened artwork (on the right).
Notice that in the figure, when the artwork was flattened, some areas turned
into pixels. But at what resolution? Flattening helps you determine the quality
of art — before receiving an unpleasant surprise at the outcome.
FIGURE 12-7: Artwork before and after flattening is applied.
Flattening a file
If you’ve taken advantage of transparency or effects using transparency
(which we discuss in Chapter 10 of this minibook), follow these steps to
produce the highest-quality artwork in your file:
1. Make sure that the artwork you created is in CMYK mode.
You can change the document’s color mode by choosing File  ⇒  Document
Color Mode.  ⇒  CMYK Color.

2. Choose Effect  ⇒  Document Raster Effects Settings.
The Document Raster Effects Settings dialog box appears, as shown in
Figure 12-8. Image should have CMYK as the color mode.
3. Choose the resolution you want to use by selecting an option in the
Resolution area.
Select the Screen (72 ppi) option for web graphics, Medium (150 ppi) for
desktop printers and copiers, and High (300 ppi) for graphics to be printed
on a press.
4. Choose whether you want a white or transparent background.
If you select the Transparent option, you create an alpha channel that’s
retained if the artwork is exported into Photoshop.
5. You can generally leave the items in the Options section deselected:
The Anti-Alias checkbox applies antialiasing to reduce the
appearance of jagged edges in the rasterized image. Deselect this
option to maintain the crispness of fine lines and small text.
The Create Clipping Mask checkbox creates a mask that makes the
background of the rasterized image appear transparent. You don’t
need to create a clipping mask if you select the Transparent option
for your background.
The Add __ Around Object text field adds the specified number of
pixels around the rasterized image.
The Preserve Spot Colors checkbox keeps any spot colors you have
defined intact. Leave this selected.
6. Click OK.
The next step is to set the transparency options in the Document Setup
dialog box.
7. Choose File  ⇒  Document Setup.
From the Transparency section in the middle of the dialog box, click the
Preset drop-down list and select the Low, Medium, High, or Custom
option. Select the Low option for onscreen viewing, the Medium option
for printers and copiers, or the High option for press quality. To control
more settings, click the Custom button to the right of the drop-down list.
8. Click OK.

FIGURE 12-8: Choosing the quality of rasterized artwork.
 If you customize settings regularly, choose Edit  ⇒  Transparency
Flattener Presets to create and store your own presets.

You can apply the flattening in several ways. Here are three simple methods:
Select the objects that require flattening and choose Object  ⇒  Flatten
Transparency. Select a default setting or a custom preset (that you
created) from the Preset drop-down list and click OK.
Choose File  ⇒  Print and select Advanced from the list of print options
on the left. Select a preset from the Overprint and Transparency Flattener
options. If you used the Attributes panel to create overprints (for trapping
used in high-end printing), make sure to preserve the overprints.
 Overprints aren’t preserved in areas that use transparency.
Choose File  ⇒  Save As and choose Illustrator EPS. In the Transparency
section of the EPS Options dialog box, choose a flattening setting from
the Preset drop-down list. If your transparency options are grayed out,
your file has no transparency.
Using the Flattener Preview panel
If you want to preview your flattening, open the Flattener Preview panel by
choosing Window  ⇒  Flattener Preview.
The Flattener Preview panel doesn’t apply flattening, but it shows you a
preview based on your settings. Click the Refresh button and choose Show
Options from the panel menu. Test various settings without flattening the file.
Experiment with different settings and then save your presets by selecting
Save Transparency Flattener Preset from the panel menu. You can access the
saved settings in the Preset drop-down list in the Options dialog boxes that
appear when you save a file in EPS format or in the Document Setup dialog
box.
To update the preview, click the Refresh button after making changes.
 Zoom in on artwork by clicking in the Preview pane. Scroll the
artwork in the Preview pane by holding down the spacebar and
dragging. Zoom out by Alt-clicking (Windows) or Option-clicking

(Mac).
Printing from Illustrator
Printing from Illustrator gives you lots of capabilities, such as printing
composites to separations and adding printer’s marks.
To print your illustration, follow these steps:
1. Choose File  ⇒  Print.
2. In the Print dialog box that appears, select a printer if one isn’t
already selected.
3. If the PPD isn’t selected, select one from the PPD (PostScript Printer
Description) drop-down list.
A PPD is a printer description file. Illustrator needs one in order to
determine the specifics of the PostScript printer you’re sending your file
to. This setting lets Illustrator know whether the printer can print in color,
the paper size it can handle, and its resolution, as well as many other
important details. If your printer is not a PostScript printer, this area will
be grayed out.
4. Choose from other options.
For example, use the General options section to pick pages to print. In the
Media area, select the size of the media you’re printing to. In the Options
area, choose whether you want layers to print and any options specific to
printing layers.
5. Click the Print button to print your illustration.
That’s it. Although printing illustrations can be quite simple, the following
list highlights some basic points to keep in mind as you prepare one for
printing:
Print a composite: A composite is a full-color image, where all inks are
applied to the page (and not separated onto individual pages — one
apiece for cyan, magenta, yellow, and black). To ensure that your settings
are correct, click Output in the print options pane on the left side of the
Print dialog box and select Composite from the Mode drop-down list.

Print separations: To separate colors, click Output in the print options
pane on the left side of the Print dialog box; from the Mode drop-down
list, choose the Separations (Host-Based) option. Select the In-RIP
Separations option only if your service provider or printer asks you to.
Other options to select from are described in this list:
The resolution is determined by your PPD, based on the dots per
inch (dpi) in the printer description. You may have only one option
available in the Printer Resolution drop-down list.
Select the Convert Spot Colors to Process checkbox to make your
file 4-color.
Click the printer icons to the left of the listed colors to turn off or
on the colors you want to print.
Printer’s marks and bleeds: Click Marks and Bleeds in the print options
pane on the left side of the Print dialog box to turn on all printer’s marks,
or just select the ones that you want to appear.
Specify a bleed area if you’re extending images beyond the trim area of a
page. If you don’t specify a bleed, the artwork stops at the edge of the
page and doesn’t leave a trim area for the printer.
 After you create a good set of options specific to your needs, click the
Save Preset button (which is the disk icon to the right of the Print Preset
drop-down list). Name your presets appropriately; when you want to use
a particular preset, select it from the Print Preset drop-down list at the
top of the Print dialog box for future print jobs.

Book 6
Acrobat

Contents at a Glance
Chapter 1: Discovering Essential Acrobat Information
Working with PDF Files
Knowing When to Use Adobe PDF Files
Introducing the Adobe Acrobat Workspace and Tools
Chapter 2: Creating PDF Files
Creating PDF Files from Microsoft Office
Creating PDF Files from Adobe Creative Cloud Applications
Converting Other Electronic Documents to PDF
Creating PDF Files from Paper Documents and the Web
Chapter 3: Adding Interactivity to PDF Files
Adding Bookmarks to Create Easy PDF Navigation
Adding Interactive Links
Adding Buttons to Simplify Your PDF Files
Chapter 4: Editing and Extracting Text and Graphics
Editing Text
Exporting Text and Graphics
Chapter 5: Using Commenting and Annotation Tools
Creating Comments with the Comment Panel
Managing Comments
Reviewing PDF Documents
Chapter 6: Securing Your PDF Files
Understanding Password Security
Applying Password Security to Your PDF Documents
Limiting Editing and Printing
Removing Sensitive Data

Chapter 1
Discovering Essential Acrobat
Information
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Discovering Acrobat and PDF files
 Understanding when to use PDF files
 Becoming familiar with the Acrobat workspace and tools
Adobe Acrobat Pro DC provides a variety of tools for sharing and reviewing
documents in the Portable Document Format (PDF). Adobe Creative Cloud
applications can create PDF files, and you can also use Acrobat to create PDF
files from programs that aren’t part of the Creative Cloud, such as Microsoft
Word. After you create a PDF file, you can use Acrobat to enhance it by
adding interactivity, merging it with several related documents into a single
PDF, adding comments or annotations, or applying security features that
restrict document functions, such as printing, editing, or even opening the
PDF file itself.
In this chapter, you find out why you may want to create PDF files and
acquaint yourself with the Adobe Acrobat tools and workspace. You see how
easy it is to navigate through PDF files with the navigational tools, tabs, and
viewing options in Acrobat. In the following chapters of this minibook, you
explore how to use Acrobat to create PDF files from documents produced in a
variety of programs and discover ways to enhance your PDF files with
Acrobat.
Working with PDF Files
With Adobe Acrobat, you can create, review, and modify PDF files. Because
PDF is a common file format, you can use it to share Creative Cloud files for

review, approval, or final publication, even with users who don’t have access
to Creative Cloud programs. When you use a program in the Creative Cloud,
such as Illustrator or InDesign, to create a document, others would need the
same software to open or edit the original program files. By converting your
documents to PDF, they can easily be shared with others who might not have
the same software as you. PDF files can be viewed by users on virtually all
types of computers, tablets, mobile phones, and operating systems.
PDF provides a common file format for viewing files, regardless of the
software program used to create them. Additionally, Acrobat provides
extensive tools for reviewing, commenting, and marking files so that you can
easily collaborate on a project without modifying the original document,
along with tools to make PDF files interactive, merge related documents
together, and secure files to restrict viewing or editing.
Because the software to view PDF files is free, you can be assured that those
receiving your files don’t need to purchase any special software. In fact, the
odds are quite good that most users already have some type of free PDF
viewing software, such as Adobe Reader, on their smartphone, tablet, or
computer.
PDF has become a popular way to share files because it provides a true
reproduction of an original document, which can be important for forms,
financial documents, brochures, catalogs, and other items sent to a printing
vendor. Many businesses also use PDF documents because the electronic
documents can be secured, and they accurately represent documents that have
been approved for distribution. Even scanned documents can be saved in the
PDF format and secured using Acrobat. Graphic artists even use PDF files to
send books, such as the one you’re reading now, to the printing plant.
Although PDF files provide a high-quality representation of an original file,
they’re more than just a picture of a document. PDF files retain the high-
quality appearance of text while keeping the text searchable. Logos and
illustrations created with Adobe Illustrator retain a high-quality appearance
when converted to PDF, and intricate details from bitmap images, such as
those edited with Adobe Photoshop, can also be maintained. PDF files enable
you to distribute a high-fidelity electronic document. When creating a PDF
file, you can choose settings that make the file suitable for high-quality
printing or make the file smaller and more suitable for posting to a website or

sharing as an email attachment. PDF documents can also be used to create
enhanced electronic documents and portfolios. Acrobat lets you combine
multiple PDF files together into a single portfolio for sharing.
Although Acrobat is part of the Creative Cloud, it’s not a design tool —
rather, it’s a tool for distributing documents created in other software
programs and enhancing these documents for online distribution. You
generally don’t use Acrobat to build new documents. Acrobat is a medium for
sharing files, not for creating or designing documents. With Acrobat, you can
Share documents with users who don’t have the same software or fonts
that you use.
Review and mark PDF files that others send you. With Adobe Acrobat,
you can enable a PDF file to be reviewed by users with the free Adobe
Reader software.
Combine documents created in other programs. You can use Acrobat to
merge PDF files together into one document, even files that may have
been originally created in different programs.
Create a PDF portfolio. You can combine various file formats into a
single PDF package and yet retain the files in their original file formats.
Edit Adobe PDF files to make minor changes to text or graphics.
Apply security to PDF files when you don’t want them changed or you
want to restrict viewing to certain individuals.
Add interactivity to PDF files by enhancing them with sounds, movies,
animations, and buttons.
Create interactive forms to collect information electronically, avoiding the
need for manual data collection.
We cover these capabilities throughout the rest of this minibook.
Knowing When to Use Adobe PDF
Files
So when does it make sense to use Adobe PDF files? Here are some

examples:
When you want to review a document quickly and efficiently: When
documents need to be reviewed or approved, Acrobat really shines. The
reviewers don’t need to have the Creative Cloud software — or whatever
you used to create the document. They need only a program to view PDF
files, such as the free Adobe Reader or the Apple Preview application.
Recipients can then use commenting, markup, and annotation tools to add
suggestions and edits to a file. You can even combine comments from
multiple reviewers into a single document and manage the review process
online or via email.
When you’ve created a document that you don’t want others to edit:
Your recipients may have the same software you used to build the
document, but you can keep them from editing the original file by
distributing it as a PDF file. Whether you want to secure a spreadsheet
from editing or an InDesign document from modification, Acrobat
includes security options that allow you to protect your original content.
When you’ve created a presentation that includes files from different
programs: By converting the documents to PDF, you can combine them
into a single file. For example, you can merge PowerPoint, Excel, and
InDesign files into a single PDF document. Whether you need to protect
your brand and identity by keeping documents from being edited or
simply want to ease the process of sharing files, PDF makes it easy to
share your ideas.
When you have a sensitive document: If you have a document
containing information that you don’t want unauthorized persons viewing
or you don’t want printed, you can enhance the file with security with the
Adobe Acrobat security tools. With the security options, you can require
users to enter a password to view the file, or you can limit other features,
such as the capability to print or edit the document.
Introducing the Adobe Acrobat
Workspace and Tools
To take advantage of all that Acrobat has to offer, take some time to discover

the workspace and tools so you can get around within a PDF file.
When you first launch Acrobat, you may see the Home Screen as shown in
Figure 1-1. If you don’t see it, click on the Home tab in the upper-left part of
the Acrobat window. The Home screen displays a panel on the left with a
section named Files that allows you to view recently sent and opened files.
There is also a section named Storage. Clicking on any listed storage
destinations shows you the recent locations to which you have saved files.
The center pane in the Home screen either defaults to show you recently
opened files or suggestions for tasks that you can complete using Acrobat.
FIGURE 1-1: Use the Acrobat Start screen to open recent files or create new PDF documents.
Click on the Tools tab to see shortcuts to common tools that complete popular
tasks in Acrobat, like creating new PDFs from other files, combining multiple
PDFs into one file, reorganizing pages in an existing PDF, and more. You can
click on the arrow to the right of each shortcut to remove it if you do not use
that tool frequently. Type a tool name in the Search window at the top to find
a tool that you use more frequently and add it to this shortcut list if you like.
(See Figure 1-2.)

FIGURE 1-2: You can organize shortcuts for your favorite tools in the Tools window.
To open a document, choose File⇒   Open from the menu items at the top of
the Acrobat workspace. When a PDF document is open, the menu bar and the
toolbar are visible at the top of the work area. The work area displays a
document pane in the middle, a navigation pane on the left, and a tools or task
pane on the right side.
If you open multiple PDFs you see a tabbed interface that appears at the top
of the application window. You can switch to different documents by clicking
on the named tabs. A Previous button and a Next button are displayed at the
right to navigate through the document tabs if they extend beyond the visible
area.
You can click the small arrow to open a panel that offers navigational tools,
as well as an option to see any files that might be attached to your open PDF,
as shown in Figure 1-3.

FIGURE 1-3: Click on the small arrow on the left to open a panel that offers navigation options.
When you open a PDF document with Acrobat, you enter the Document view
in which you can use the tools in the toolbar to complete tasks as well as the
navigation panel on the left to move through a PDF file. For example, a PDF
file may contain multiple pages. You can click on the arrow in the panel to
the left to open the Page Thumbnail view in Acrobat. You can then click the
Page Thumbnails to navigate from page to page, as shown in Figure 1-4.

FIGURE 1-4: Use the Page Thumbnail view to navigate from page to page.
Toolbars
The toolbars in Acrobat Pro DC are customizable, so you can display
different toolbars or change the location of existing toolbars to meet your
needs.
Less than half the toolbars and Quick Tools are visible in the default Acrobat
display. You can add more tools to the toolbar well along the top of the
Document window by positioning your cursor over an empty spot on the
toolbar well and then right-clicking (Windows) or Ctrl-clicking (Mac) to
display a list of available tools, as shown in Figure 1-5. For example, to add
the Marquee Zoom tool to the toolbar well, right-click (Windows) or Ctrl-
click (Mac) and then choose Select & Zoom⇒  Marquee Zoom to add this tool
to the toolbar well.
FIGURE 1-5: Customize your toolbar by right-clicking (Windows)/Ctrl-clicking (Mac) on an empty
spot in the toolbar.
Toolbars contain both tools for working on parts of your document and Quick
Tools for performing actions which generally impact the entire document.
Changing page magnification
Sometimes you want to see the entire page of a document; other times, you
may only need to read the text or examine a small portion of a page. Acrobat
provides several preset viewing options to help you with this, and you can
also customize the magnification to zoom in on the page.

If things are a bit too small for you to see clearly, increase the magnification
used for viewing pages with the Zoom drop-down list on the toolbar. Preset
magnification choices are available in this drop-down list. In the drop-down
list, you can also select options to fit the page in the window by choosing the
Zoom to Page Level option from the magnification drop-down list. Use the
additional choices to fit the width of the page within the Document window
or to view the document at its actual size. You can also use the minus (–) and
plus (+) symbols to the left of the current magnification level to decrease or
increase the zoom level.
In the preceding section, “Toolbars,” you discover how to add the Marquee
Zoom tool to the toolbar. You can use this tool to identify specific portions of
a page that you want to magnify. Select this tool and then click and drag
around a portion of the page to increase the magnification. You can also click
multiple times on an area with this tool to increase the page magnification,
but clicking and dragging a box with the Marquee Zoom tool is generally a
much faster way to focus on a portion of a page you want to view.
Viewing modes
Acrobat provides several viewing modes that control how the document is
displayed. For example, you can choose to display the pages of a book or
magazine side by side, or view only one page at a time. You can choose
which viewing mode is used by choosing View⇒  Page Display and selecting
the viewing option you want.
The viewing modes are
Single Page View: This mode displays only the current document page
onscreen and doesn’t show any adjoining pages. When you scroll to the
top or bottom of the current page, other pages aren’t visible at the same
time as the current page.
Enable Scrolling: With this mode, you can see the current document
page, and if you scroll to the top (or bottom) of the current page, the
adjoining page is also visible. If you reduce your page viewing
magnification, many document pages are visible.
Two-Page View: Use this mode to see pages as a spread, where you can
view both the left and right sides of adjoining pages at the same time.
When you have documents with pictures or text that spans a pair of pages,

use this option to see the pages presented side by side in Acrobat. As with
the Single Page mode, other pages that go before or fall after the spread
aren’t visible — only the one pair of pages is visible onscreen, regardless
of the magnification or scrolling.
Two-Page Scrolling: If you have a document with many pages
containing text or pictures on their adjoining pages, you can use this mode
to scroll from one pair of visible pages to the next. When the Two-Up
Scrolling view is selected, you can see adjoining page spreads. This
option is identical to the Two-Page view, but it also shows pages above or
below the spread you’re presently viewing.
If you have pages where images or text goes across pages, the Two-Page
View is useful. When displaying a magazine or catalog, the two-page pairs
often display incorrectly. For example, a magazine will display the cover
(page 1) and page 2 together, instead of displaying the cover on its own and
then pages 2 and 3 together. To correct this, choose View⇒  Page Display⇒  
Show Cover Page in TwoPage View. Additionally, the default option is for
Acrobat to display a space between pages that are displayed together in the
Two-Up mode. You can replace the space with a dotted line to divide the
adjoining pages by choosing View⇒  Page Display⇒  Show Gaps Between
Pages.
Additional viewing options
Acrobat has some additional options for changing your document display:
Full Screen mode (View⇒  Full Screen Mode): Use the Full Screen
mode if you’d like to hide all menus, toolbars, and other parts of the
Acrobat interface. This option is useful if you want to focus on the
document being displayed, not the program being used to view it. Use this
mode, for example, when you’ve converted a PowerPoint file to a PDF
document and want to deliver the presentation with Acrobat. If you’re
viewing a document in the Full Screen mode, press the Esc key to return
to the regular viewing mode.
When using the Full Screen mode, you can select Edit⇒  Preferences
(Windows) or Acrobat Pro DC⇒  Preferences (Mac) and choose Full
Screen to define attributes that change the way all files display when
using the Full Screen mode. You can set the display to advance

automatically from one page to the next at a certain interval, choose from
many page transition types, and define the background color.
 You can set a document to automatically open in Full Screen
mode. To do so, choose File⇒  Properties and then select the Open in Full
Screen mode checkbox in the Initial View panel of the Document
Properties dialog box.
Read mode (View⇒  Read Mode): The many toolbars and buttons of
Acrobat can get in the way of the document you want to review. Use Read
mode to temporarily hide all the toolbars and buttons, making it easier to
focus on the content of the PDF file.
Navigation panels
Acrobat offers a variety of panels that are helpful when navigating through
PDF documents. The navigation panels appear along the left side of your
Document window as small icons. Click an icon to make its panel visible. For
example, click the Pages icon to display thumbnail-size representations of
each page.
In the Page Thumbnails panel, click a thumbnail page to display that page in
the Document window. There are 11 panels: Articles, Attachments,
Bookmarks, Content, Destinations, Layers, Model Tree, Order, Page
Thumbnails, Signatures, and Tags. You can access any of these by choosing
View⇒  Show/Hide⇒  Navigation Panes.
Many panels have more advanced uses that are covered in later chapters of
this minibook. Here, we provide you with a brief understanding of how you
can use the Page Thumbnails panel to more easily navigate through a PDF
document. Follow these steps:
1. Make sure that the Page Thumbnails panel is visible by clicking its
panel icon.
2. In the Page Thumbnails panel, click any page thumbnail to navigate
directly to that page.
A border appears around the selected page, and a box within the Page
Thumbnails panel indicates what portion of the page is being viewed in

the Document window.
You can click the black square icon in the bottom-right corner of the small
box in the Page Thumbnails panel and drag diagonally upward to increase
the magnification on the section of the page contained within the box.
Alternatively, make the box larger by clicking and dragging down and out
to expand the size of the area being viewed. Changing the size of the
black box displayed on the page in the Page Thumbnails panel changes
the area being viewed as well as the amount it’s magnified.

Chapter 2
Creating PDF Files
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Creating PDF files from Microsoft Office documents
 Creating PDF files from other Creative Cloud applications
 Creating PDF files from all other electronic formats
 Creating PDF files from paper documents and the web
 Creating PDF portfolios
Converting documents to the Portable Document Format (PDF) is a great way
to share files when readers don’t have the same software as you or when you
want to consolidate multiple file types into a single document. Adobe
Acrobat lets you create files from all software programs, scanned documents,
and even pages from the web. Creating PDF files from other Adobe Creative
Cloud programs does not require Acrobat because the ability is already built
into the individual program. This includes Photoshop, Illustrator, and
InDesign. In this chapter, you find out how to create Adobe PDF files from a
variety of programs.
Creating PDF Files from Microsoft
Office
Adobe Acrobat includes tools that make it easy to convert Microsoft Word,
Excel, and PowerPoint files to PDF.
 These capabilities are much more robust for the Windows versions of
these programs, so Macintosh users may discover that not all these

options are available.
When you install Acrobat on your computer, it looks for Microsoft Office
programs. If Acrobat locates Word, Excel, PowerPoint, or Outlook, it installs
an add-in — the PDF Maker — to these programs that helps convert
Microsoft Office documents to PDF in a single click.
You can tell whether the PDF Maker add-in has been installed in your
Microsoft Office programs by looking for the Acrobat toolbar or the Acrobat
tab, depending upon which version of Microsoft Office you use. In the latest
versions of Office the Acrobat tab appears to the right of the View tab.
In earlier versions of Microsoft Office, the toolbar appears at the top of the
Document window.
 When you convert documents to PDF, the original file remains
unchanged, so you have both the original file and a separate PDF
document. The original document and the PDF file aren’t linked, so
changes to the original source file will not be reflected in the PDF file.
The same goes for when you edit the PDF document. The changes will
not be reflected in the original document.
PDF conversion options
PDF Maker is installed within Microsoft Office at the time you install
Acrobat. PDF Maker provides a variety of controls over how PDF files are
created from Microsoft Office programs, such as Word and Excel. For
example, you can have PDF Maker create PDF files from your Microsoft
Office documents each time you click the Create PDF button without asking
you to confirm the location and name of the file. Acrobat simply saves the
file in the same location as the original document. Similarly, you can choose
to create PDF files that balance your need for quality and file size.
PDF Maker also provides controls over the type of PDF file you create
because some PDF files may need to be of a higher quality for printing and
others may need to be smaller to allow for fast electronic distribution. For
example, you may want to post a PDF document to a website, where you
want to make the file small so that it can be downloaded quickly.

When working in Microsoft Word, Excel, or PowerPoint, you can access the
PDF Maker controls by clicking the Acrobat tab and then clicking the
Preferences button (Office 2016 or 2016) or by choosing Adobe PDF⇒  
Change Conversion Settings (in earlier versions of Microsoft Office). In the
Acrobat PDF Maker dialog box that appears, you can then choose from a
variety of settings that control how the PDF file is created. In this section, we
focus on the most useful options for Microsoft Office users.
After you click the Preferences button, the Acrobat PDFMaker dialog box
opens. (Note that on the Mac OS, a dialog about Adobe Create PDF Cloud
services may open.) In this dialog box, use the Conversion Settings drop-
down list to control how the PDF file is generated:
Standard: Select this option to create PDF files that will be printed on an
office laser printer or distributed via email. This setting meets the needs
of most users — it provides some compression of graphics, but they
remain clear onscreen and look reasonably good when printed. In
addition, this setting builds the fonts into the PDF file to maintain an
exact representation of the document, regardless of where the file is
viewed.
Smallest File Size: With this setting, you can control the file size of the
PDF documents you create. This setting provides significant compression
of images and also reduces resolution, which causes graphics within the
files to lose some clarity and perhaps appear jagged.
Unlike the Standard option, fonts aren’t embedded into the PDF files
created with this setting. If the fonts used in the document aren’t available
on a computer where a PDF created with the Smallest File Size setting is
viewed, Acrobat will use a font substitution technology to replicate the
size and shape of the fonts used in the document. This feature typically
provides a similar appearance to the original document, but it’s not
always an exact match of the original file.
Because this setting is so lossy, use it only if you need to compress a large
file to a small enough size to send as an email attachment. Make certain
the recipient has the fonts used in the document installed on his or her
computer. Otherwise, Adobe uses font substitution.
High Quality Print and Press Quality: If you need to provide PDF files
to your commercial printer or copy shop, use these settings to create a

PDF file that’s designed for high-quality print reproduction. Along with
including fonts in the PDF file, the graphics aren’t significantly
compressed, and they maintain a much higher resolution. These files tend
to be larger than others created with different settings, but the quality of
the PDF file is more important than the file size when you’re having it
professionally printed. High Quality Print is suitable for a color copier or
high-quality laser printer, whereas Press Quality is suitable for a PDF that
is sent to a commercial printer.
Several other highly technical options might be useful for you if you have a
specialized profession. For example, the PDF/X options are useful if you’re
submitting advertisements to publications that require the PDF
advertisements to adhere to the PDF/X standard.
PDF conversion options from Microsoft Word and
Excel
Although Microsoft Word and Excel are widely used, they aren’t always the
best choice for distributing documents. Formatting of Microsoft Word
documents and Excel spreadsheets changes depending on the fonts available
on users’ computers, or even the printers with which they print. PDF files, on
the other hand, are able to maintain a consistent appearance on various
computer types, regardless of fonts installed or printers being used. Microsoft
Word and Excel files can be easily edited, and users can also copy and extract
information from these files with few limitations. This differs from PDF files
that are more difficult to copy from, and offer robust security options.
Converting a Word or Excel file to a PDF file lets you distribute the file to a
wide audience, even to people who don’t have Word or Excel, without the
need to worry about the document format or layout changing. There are two
methods for converting Word or Excel documents to PDF. The method you
use depends on which version of Microsoft Office you’re using:
With Microsoft Office, convert your document from inside Microsoft
Word or Excel — make sure that the document you want to convert to a
PDF file is open and then click the Create PDF button in the Acrobat
portion of the main toolbar.
With Office 2003 or earlier, choose Adobe PDF⇒  Convert to Adobe PDF.

With a Mac Office 2016, choose File⇒  Save As and select PDF from the
File Format drop-down menu.
After you choose to create a PDF file from your Microsoft Office document,
you must specify the location of the PDF file that’s created and name the file.
 In Office 2016, click the Preferences button on the Acrobat tab, or
with earlier versions of Office, choose Acrobat⇒  Change Conversion
Settings. In the Adobe PDF Maker dialog box, deselect the Prompt for
PDF Filename option so that PDF files are generated in one step,
without inputting the PDF filename. This saves you the step of naming
the PDF file each time you create a PDF document.
You can also add more functionality into the PDF documents you create.
Click the Preference tab if you’re working in Office 2016 or choose
Acrobat⇒  Change Conversion Settings in earlier versions of Office. In the
dialog box that appears, review the following settings:
Attach Source File: Causes the original Office document to become
embedded within the PDF file as an attachment. When the PDF file is
distributed, the original source file is included within the PDF file.
Create Bookmarks: Adds interactive bookmarks that make navigating
the PDF file easy. Bookmarks are added based on Microsoft Word styles,
such as text that’s styled as Heading 1. The bookmarks appear in the
Bookmarks panel when viewing the PDF.
Add Links: Automatically converts Word links, such as web addresses,
into PDF links that you can use when viewing the file in Acrobat or
Adobe Reader. Within the PDF Maker preferences dialog box, click the
Word tab to access additional options that can be built into PDF files
created from Word.
Converting PowerPoint files to PDF
You can convert your PowerPoint presentations to Adobe PDF documents
with the PDF Maker add-in that installs with Adobe Acrobat. You can then
distribute PDF versions of your PowerPoint presentations, avoiding concerns

about your presentation file being edited or concerns that the recipient may
not have the same fonts that you used. Distributing the presentation as a PDF
ensures the document will look consistent on all computers.
From PowerPoint, click the Acrobat tab on the Ribbon and then click the
Create PDF button to save the file as a PDF file. In older versions of Office,
you can also choose Acrobat⇒  Convert to Adobe PDF from PowerPoint’s
main menu. If you’re working with a new PowerPoint file or one that you’ve
edited, you must save it before PDF Maker will convert the file.
As with Word and Excel, you can select options relating to the conversion of
your PowerPoint documents to PDF. To access the preferences, click the
Preference button in the Acrobat tab, or if you’re using an older version of
Office, choose Adobe PDF⇒  Change Conversion Settings. Along with the
conversion settings that impact the quality of the resulting PDF file, two
additional options can enhance your presentation as a PDF:
Preserve Slide Transitions: With this option, you can convert the slide
transitions created in PowerPoint into PDF transitions. They will be used
when the presentation is in the Adobe Acrobat Full Screen mode option.
Convert Multimedia: Because Adobe PDF files can contain integrated
sound and movie files, you can choose this option to have sounds and
movies, used in a PowerPoint file, converted into the PDF document.
 After you create the PDF, you can use Acrobat as the tool for
delivering your presentations that have been created using PowerPoint.
After you convert the file to PDF, open it in Acrobat and choose View⇒  
Full Screen Mode. Press Esc to stop viewing a document in the Full
Screen mode. You can even distribute the document to users with the
free Adobe Reader, then they can use the free Adobe Reader software to
view and display the PowerPoint presentation file. To distribute a
document so that it always opens in Full Screen mode, open the
document, choose File⇒  Properties, and select the Open in Full Screen
Mode checkbox under the Initial View tab.

Creating PDF Files from Adobe
Creative Cloud Applications
You can also convert Photoshop files, Illustrator files, or InDesign documents
to the PDF format. In the following sections, we show you how.
Converting Photoshop and Illustrator files to PDF
Both Adobe Photoshop CC and Adobe Illustrator CC can save documents
directly into the Adobe PDF file format. To do so, simply choose File⇒  Save
or File⇒  Save As. Then, from the File Type drop-down list, choose Adobe
PDF (Illustrator) or Photoshop PDF (Photoshop). In these programs, you can
create PDF files without Adobe Acrobat or Acrobat Distiller because PDF
creation capabilities are integrated into them.
You can use Adobe Reader or Acrobat to view PDF files created from
Photoshop or Illustrator. You can also open and edit PDF files using the same
program in which they were created — so Photoshop PDF files can be
reopened and edited using Photoshop, and the same is true for Illustrator PDF
files.
Converting InDesign documents to PDF
Like Photoshop and Illustrator, the capability to convert InDesign documents
to PDF is integrated into the application. With Adobe InDesign, you can
choose File⇒  Export and select either Adobe PDF (Interactive) or Adobe
PDF (Print) from the File Type drop-down list. Interactive PDF documents
are suitable for sharing online, such as by posting the file to a website, and
are designed primarily to incorporate interactive PDF features such as
buttons, page transitions, and multimedia elements. If you’re creating a PDF
document that will be printed, your best option is to select Adobe PDF
(Print), even if it will be posted to a website.
If you choose Adobe PDF (Print) when exporting from InDesign, you will
find many options for controlling the size and quality of the resulting PDF
file. Many of these options are similar to those available in PDF Maker for
Microsoft Office.
At the top of the Adobe InDesign Export PDF dialog box, which appears
after selecting Save in the Export dialog box, you can choose an option from

the Preset drop-down. The choices are many, but the following are the most
commonly used settings:
Smallest File Size: Creates compact Adobe PDF files that are intended
for display on the Internet or to be distributed via email. Use this setting
to create PDF files that will be viewed primarily onscreen.
High Quality Print: Creates Adobe PDF files that are intended for
desktop printers and digital copiers.
Press Quality: Use this setting to create PDF files that will be delivered
to a commercial printer for high-quality, offset print reproduction.
 When creating PDF files to be used for high-resolution printing, there
are specific settings you should use. Select Marks and Bleeds in the list
on the left of the Export Adobe PDF dialog box, as shown in Figure 2-1,
and specify the amount of space items need to extend off the page,
referred to as bleed. If you’re delivering the file to a printing firm, it can
provide you with guidance regarding the required value. A good rule to
follow is to use at least 0.125 inch if you have any items in your layout
that extend to the edge of your document pages and beyond. Specify the
value you want by entering the number in the Bleed and Slug section of
the Marks and Bleeds tab. If the amount of bleed needs to be the same
on all four sides, type the value in the Top left text box and then click the
link chain in the center of all the Bleed text boxes. In Figure 2-1, picas
has been selected as the unit of value for the bleed.

FIGURE 2-1: Setting the bleed values in the Export Adobe PDF dialog box.
Converting Other Electronic
Documents to PDF
As described earlier in this chapter, creating PDF files from Creative Cloud
applications and Microsoft Office programs is simple, but you aren’t limited
to creating PDF files just from these programs. This section explains how you
can create PDF files from many other programs.
When you installed the Adobe Creative Cloud on your computer, you also
installed a new printer — the Adobe PDF printer — which is used to convert

electronic documents to PDF files. The Adobe PDF printer captures all the
same information that’s normally sent to your printer, and, instead of printing
on paper, the information is converted into an Adobe PDF file.
To create a PDF file from any program, choose File⇒  Print. In the Print
dialog box, select Adobe PDF as the printer and click Print.
To change the type of PDF file that’s created, such as a smaller file for web
posting or a higher-quality file for delivery to a commercial printer, do this:
Windows: Click the Setup… button in the Print dialog box to open
another Print dialog box. Then select the Preferences button to open the
Printing Preferences dialog box, as shown in Figure 2-2. Here, you can
choose the Adobe PDF Conversion settings you want to use to control the
quality and size of the resulting PDF file.
Mac: To save a file as PDF on a Mac, you can choose File Save As and
then choose PDF from the File Format drop-down menu. You can then
select the radio box for either electronic distribution or print.

FIGURE 2-2: You can change conversion settings when printing to the Adobe PDF printer.
We discuss the PDF conversion settings earlier in this chapter, in the “PDF
conversion options” section.
Using the Print menu to control the quality of PDF files created from non-
Adobe programs may appear strange, but it’s the easiest way for Adobe to
capture all the same information that you’d expect to see when you print your
files. This is an easy and standard method for generating PDF files from any
program. It’s useful to have this method available as an option because it can
be used if you’re having difficulty with the Export command from an Adobe
Creative Cloud application. The Print and Export commands use different
processes for creating PDF files, so you can use one option if you have
difficulty with the other.
 Bookmarks, links, page transitions, and multimedia aren’t included if

a PDF is generated with the Print menu option. You must use the Export
or Save As option to have these items included in PDF files.
Creating PDF Files from Paper
Documents and the Web
Adobe Acrobat provides options for converting paper documents and even
web pages into PDF format. PDF can be a great way to share documents that
you’ve scanned into your computer, or web pages that may change, or that
you want to review when you aren’t connected to the Internet.
Converting paper documents to PDF
To convert paper documents into PDF, you need a scanner to digitize the
information. If you expect to scan a large number of pages into PDF, consider
purchasing a scanner with an automatic document feeder. These days, some
scanners can scan both the front and back of a document at the same time and
can even fit easily on your desk so scanning takes very little time. Some
printers now even include scanners. If you have a PC and if a scanner is
already hooked to the computer on which you use Acrobat, follow these steps
to scan in a paper document and then convert it to PDF format:
1. From the Acrobat main menu, choose File⇒  Create⇒  PDF From
Scanner.
Then choose the type of PDF document you want to create. For pages
with text, choose one of the Document options: Black and White
Document for line art or text that contains no shades of gray; Grayscale
Document for documents that contain varying shades of gray; or Color
Document for documents that contain color. For photographs, choose the
Color Photograph option.
2. Make sure that your scanner is turned on, put the document to be
scanned into the scanner, and then click the Scan button.
If necessary, continue to scan multiple pages into a single document.
When you’re done scanning, the scanned page appears in Acrobat.
If you have a PDF open and choose Create PDF from Scanner, a window
appears, giving you the opportunity to append the file (add to the existing

file) or create a new PDF file.
The scanned document opens in Acrobat.
 If the pages need to be rotated, choose View⇒  Rotate View and
select the option to rotate the view either clockwise or counterclockwise.
3. Choose File⇒  Save to save the finished document as a PDF.
 If the document you scanned contains text, the text will be fully
searchable if you use one of the Document preset choices because
Acrobat uses Optical Character Recognition (OCR) to convert the image
to text. However, if you use one of the Image preset choices, you must
manually tell Acrobat to detect the text before it will be searchable. To
do this, open a previously scanned file and use the Tools button to access
the commands. Choose Tools⇒  Content⇒  Recognize Text⇒  In This File.
This command makes previously scanned text searchable.
Converting web pages to PDFs
By converting online content to Adobe PDF, you can capture content from a
website. Because web content can change rapidly, you can capture something
that may not remain online for a long period of time. You can convert things,
such as news stories or business information, from a website into PDF.
Because PDF files can easily be combined together, you can merge a PDF
from a website with other PDF files, such as spreadsheets, word-processing
documents, and brochures.
If you enable the Acrobat Add-on in Internet Explorer you can click the
Convert Web Page to PDF button to create a single page PDF. This step
converts the current web page to a PDF.
If you want to convert more than a single web page to a PDF, follow these
steps from within Acrobat (not your web browser):
1. From the Acrobat main menu, choose File⇒  Create⇒  PDF From Web
Page.

The Create PDF from Web Page dialog box opens.
2. In the URL text box, enter the URL for the website you’re converting
to PDF.
3. To capture additional pages that are linked from the main page
you’re capturing, click the Capture Multiple Levels button and then
select one of the following:
 Select the Stay On Same Path checkbox if you want only
pages from the entered URL converted to PDF.
Select the Stay On Same Server checkbox to download only pages
that are on the same server as the entered URL.
Be cautious about selecting the Get Entire Site radio button instead of the
Get Only radio button. The Get Entire Site option may take an enormous
amount of time and not have any relevance to what you need.
4. Click the Settings button to open the Web Page Conversion Settings
dialog box and see accepted file types and change PDF settings (on
the General tab).
5. On the Page Layout tab of the Web Page Conversion Settings dialog
box, make changes to page size, orientation, and margins if the web
page requires a wider or longer layout. See Figure 2-3.
6. When you’re done making changes in the Web Page Conversion
Settings dialog box, click OK.
7. In the Create PDF from Web Page dialog box, click the Create button
to generate a PDF.
The Downloading Status window opens, showing the rate of download.

FIGURE 2-3: Changing the layout of web pages converted to PDF.
When the download is complete, the selected web page (for the entered URL)
appears as a PDF document with hyperlinks (links to other pages within the
site) intact. When you select links on the converted web page, you can choose
to open the linked page in Acrobat or the web browser.

Chapter 3
Adding Interactivity to PDF Files
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Adding interactive bookmarks
 Creating and editing links
 Using buttons for easy navigation
Because many PDF documents are viewed online, you should make them
easy for readers to navigate. With Acrobat, you can design documents that are
easier to navigate than their printed counterparts and that include rich
interactive features that simply aren’t available with paper documents.
Rather than making readers scroll through a document to find what they want,
you can add links within an index or a table of contents, or you can add links
to websites and email addresses. Acrobat also includes bookmarks, which are
an interactive table of contents. You can even add buttons that link to specific
pages within a PDF document or that cause an action to occur when clicked,
such as printing the document. We discuss all these features in this chapter.
Adding Bookmarks to Create Easy
PDF Navigation
Users have come to expect documents that involve easy-to-use navigation
and ways to quickly find what they need. You can make your PDF documents
more user-friendly by adding bookmarks, which are the equivalent of a table
of contents that’s always available, no matter what page the user is viewing in
the Document window.
Bookmarks provide a listing of contents within a PDF file or links to relevant
external content. Bookmarks sit within a panel, and when you click one,
you’re taken to a specific destination in the PDF document (or possibly to an

external file), much like a hyperlink. You can create bookmarks from existing
text, or you can use your own text to describe the content, which is useful if
the destination of the bookmark is a figure, chart, or graphic.
By default, the Bookmarks icon resides along the left side of the Acrobat
Document window in the navigation panel. Click the Bookmarks icon to
make the panel appear; click the Bookmarks icon a second time to hide it. If
the icon isn’t visible, choose View⇒  Show/Hide⇒  Navigation Panes⇒  
Bookmarks to make it appear.
Creating bookmarks that link to a page
By navigating to a page, and to a specific view on a page, you can establish
the destination of a bookmark link. With a PDF document open, follow these
steps:
1. If the Bookmark icon isn’t visible choose View⇒  Show/Hide⇒  
Navigation Panes⇒  Bookmarks.
The Bookmarks panel appears on the left of the Document window.
2. In the Document window, navigate to the page that you want as the
bookmark’s destination.
3. Set the magnification of the view that you want viewers to see when
they click the bookmark by using the Zoom In and Zoom Out buttons
in the toolbar.
The zoom level that you’re at when you create the bookmark is the view
that viewers see when they click the bookmark.
4. 
 In the Bookmarks panel, click the New Bookmark icon. (It shows a
ribbon with a plus sign.)
The new bookmark appears in the Bookmarks panel as Untitled.
5. Change the name by typing something more descriptive.
 If you leave the bookmark as Untitled but want to rename it later,
you must right-click the bookmark and then choose Rename, or you can
click the Bookmark panel menu in the upper-left corner of the panel and
choose Rename Bookmark.

6. Test your bookmark by scrolling to another page and viewing it in the
Document window; then click your saved bookmark in the Bookmark
panel.
The Document window shows the exact location and zoom that you
selected when you created the bookmark.
 Use the Selection tool to highlight text, such as a headline or a caption,
that’s part of the bookmark destination. Then choose New Bookmark, and the
selected text becomes the title of the new bookmark. You can use this
shortcut to avoid entering a new name for new bookmark titles. You can also
press Ctrl+B (Windows) or ⌘  +B (Mac) to quickly create a bookmark, and
any selected text becomes the bookmark title.
Creating bookmarks that link to a website
Although bookmarks are most commonly used to link to content within a
PDF file, you can also use bookmarks to create links to other websites or
even other documents. To create a link to an external website, follow these
steps:
1. Make sure nothing is selected. Then, choose Options⇒  New
Bookmark in the Bookmarks panel.
The Options menu looks like two circles on top of each other, found in the
upper-left corner of the Bookmarks window. On the Mac OS, it is a drop-
down menu.
2. Replace the Untitled bookmark entry that appears in the Bookmarks
panel with an appropriate name for the bookmark.
3. Choose Options⇒  Properties from the Bookmarks panel menu.
The Bookmark Properties dialog box appears. With this dialog box, you
can change a bookmark so that it links to any web address or even another
file. In this example, we use a web address, but the bookmark could be a
link to another PDF file, a Photoshop file, or even a Microsoft Excel file.
Just remember that this bookmark creates a relative link. The linked file
must travel with the PDF document in order for the link to work.
4. In the Bookmark Properties dialog box, click the Actions tab, select
Open a Web Link from the Select Action drop-down list, and then

click the Add button.
The Edit URL dialog box appears.
5. Enter the web address to which the users should be taken when they
click this bookmark. Then click OK.
The bookmarked link is created.
 You can use bookmarks to choose different actions, such as opening
another file or even playing a sound or movie.
Using bookmarks
Bookmarks are intuitive to use, which makes them an attractive option to add
to PDF files. After you click a bookmark, the action associated with it is
performed, which typically navigates you to a certain page within the PDF
file.
Unfortunately, the Bookmarks panel doesn’t open automatically with a
document, even when bookmarks are present within a file. To display the
Bookmarks panel when a file is opened, follow these steps:
1. Choose File⇒  Properties.
2. In the Document Properties dialog box that opens, select the Initial
View tab, as shown in Figure 3-1.
3. From the Navigation Tab drop-down list, select Bookmarks Panel and
Page and then click OK.
After you save and reopen the file, the Bookmarks panel displays
whenever the document is opened.

FIGURE 3-1: The Documents Properties dialog box in Adobe Acrobat.
Editing bookmarks
You can change the attributes of bookmarks so that they have a different
color, a different text style, or a link to another location. Make these changes
by selecting a bookmark and then choosing Options⇒  Properties in the
Bookmarks panel. (Remember the Options button appears in the upper-left
corner of the panel, and it’s the icon that looks like a dialog box.) In the
Bookmark Properties dialog box that opens, choose the color and font style of
the bookmark on the Appearance tab: To change the bookmark’s font style,
select a style from the Style drop-down list; to change the bookmark’s color,
click the Color box and choose a color from the Colors panel.
On the Actions tab of the Bookmark Properties dialog box, you can delete

existing actions (in the Actions section of the Actions tab) by clicking to
select an action and then clicking the Delete button. Also, you can add actions
by choosing another action from the Add Action section and then clicking the
Add button. You can add more than one action to a bookmark.
Adding Interactive Links
When viewing a PDF file in Acrobat, you can add links for email addresses,
web addresses, and references to other pages. Unlike bookmarks, which are
neatly organized in a panel, links are attached to a region of a page, which
you identify with the Link tool.
To add an interactive link to your PDF document, follow these steps:
1. Click on the Tools tab, and from the Tools Center, click on the Edit
PDF icon.
The Link tool appears in the toolbar above your document.
2. The Link tool is actually a drop-down menu, which offers options for
adding, editing, removing, appending, viewing, or auto-creating links.
Choose the Add/Edit Web or Document Link option.
3. 
 Using the Link tool, click and drag to select the region where the
user will click to activate the link.
The Create Link dialog box appears.
4. In the Link Action section of the Create Link dialog box, choose an
action that the link will perform:
Go to a Page View: This option is the default, where you’ll be able
to scroll to the page that is the destination of the link.
Open a File: Alternatively, you can choose to link to another file;
you’ll be prompted to locate the file.
Open a Web Page: If you choose this option, you’re choosing to
link to a web address. In the Edit URL text box that appears, enter
the complete address of the website to which the link should direct
viewers. To create a link to an email address, type mailto:
followed by an email address. (Note that mailto: is all one word.)
Custom Link: Use this option to choose from other types of links in

the Link Properties dialog box.
5. Set the appearance of the link, such as visible or invisible.
6. Click Next and follow the instructions in the next dialog box before
clicking OK.
The instructions have you navigate to the intended destination of the link,
which you should do before clicking OK.
 Although the Link tool is relatively simple to use, you may prefer to
create links from text using the Selection tool. To do so, click and drag
to select the text that will become a link, then right-click (Windows) or
Ctrl-click (Mac), and choose Create Link from the contextual menu that
appears.
 You can also have links transferred automatically from your original
Microsoft Office documents when using PDF Maker, or from Adobe
InDesign if you use the Hyperlinks panel within InDesign to create the
links.
You can edit links by choosing the Link tool and double-clicking the existing
link to open the Link Properties dialog box. While editing a link, you can
change how it’s presented in the Appearance tab. Make a link invisible or add
a border to the link, such as a blue border that commonly is used to define
hyperlinks. On the Actions tab of the Link Properties dialog box, you can
add, edit, or delete actions, just as you can with bookmarks (see the preceding
section).
Adding Buttons to Simplify Your PDF
Files
Along with links and bookmarks, buttons provide another way to make your
files more useful when they’re viewed online. You can create interactive

buttons entirely within Acrobat — designing their appearance and adding text
to them. Or you can import buttons created in other Adobe Creative Cloud
applications, such as Photoshop and Illustrator, and add actions to them
within Acrobat. For example, within Acrobat, a button that advances the
viewer to the next page in a document will be a simple button with text.
However, if you want an arrow icon, you can create it in Photoshop or
Illustrator and import the button icon into your PDF page using Acrobat.
 You can also create interactive buttons for a PDF document by using
InDesign. Buttons created using InDesign carry through to a PDF when
you export an interactive PDF document.
 You can add buttons directly within Acrobat by using the Add
Button tool.
To add a button to your PDF document, follow these steps:
1. Click on the Tools tab, and from the Tools Center, click on the Rich
Media icon. You’ll see the Add Button tool appear in the toolbar
above your document. Click on it, and the cursor changes to a
crosshair, which you can then use to draw the location of the button
on your PDF document. On the Mac OS you will see a box at the
crosshair.
2. Click and drag to specify the location where you want the button to
appear in the document.
3. Type in an appropriate name for your button in the Field Name
dialog box that appears.
This is not what will appear on the actual button in your layout.
4. Click the All Properties button to see the Button Properties dialog
box.
5. In the General tab, you can enter a name for the button in the Name
text box and provide a tooltip in the ToolTip text box. You can also
specify whether the button is visible only onscreen or when printing
under the Common Properties section.

A tooltip is the text that appears whenever the mouse cursor is positioned
over the button.
6. In the Appearance tab, establish how your button will look by setting
the following options:
Border Color/Fill Color: Click the square to the right of the
appropriate attribute in the Borders and Colors section of the
Appearance tab and then choose a color from the Colors panel.
Line Thickness and Style: These options don’t appear unless you
change the border color from None (red diagonal line) to another
selection.
Font Size/Font: Change the size and font of the button text by
making a selection from the Font Size and the Font drop-down
lists.
Text Color: Change the color of the text by clicking the color
square and choosing a color from the Colors panel.
7. In the Options tab, make these selections:
Layout: Use the Layout drop-down list to specify whether you
want to use a label (text that you enter in Acrobat that appears on
the face of the button) or whether you want an icon (an imported
button graphic that you may have designed in Photoshop or
Illustrator).
Behavior: Select Push from the Behavior drop-down list to create
different appearances for a button so that it changes based upon
whether the mouse cursor is positioned over the button. The button
appearance can also change when clicked.
State: To specify the different appearances (see Behavior,
discussed in the preceding paragraph), click the State on the left
side of the Options tab, and then choose the Label or Icon status
for each state.
Label: If you choose to use a label, enter the text for it in the Label
text field.
Icon: If you choose to use an icon, specify the location of the
graphic file by clicking the Choose Icon button. You can create

button icons in either Photoshop or Illustrator and save them in the
PDF format for importing as a button icon.
8. In the Actions tab, select an action from the Select Action drop-down
list and then click the Add button.
Actions are applied to buttons similar to the way in which they’re applied
to links and bookmarks:
To specify when the action occurs, click the Select Trigger drop-
down list and choose whether the mouse clicking and being
released or being moved over an area causes the action to occur.
The default trigger is Mouse Up, which causes the action to occur
when the mouse button is depressed and then released. You can
choose other actions, such as the mouse cursor merely rolling over
the button without the need to click it.
To choose actions that are a part of the menu commands, such as
printing a document, closing a file, or navigating to the next or
preceding page, click the Select Action drop-down list, choose
Execute a Menu Item, and then click Add to choose the menu
command.
9. After you make all your changes in the Button Properties dialog box,
click Close.

Chapter 4
Editing and Extracting Text and
Graphics
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Manipulating text with the Edit Text & Images tool
 Modifying graphics and page objects with the Edit Text & Images
tool
 Pulling text and graphics out of PDFs for use in other documents
You may assume that PDF files are mere pictures of your documents and
can’t be edited, but nothing is further from the truth. Adobe Acrobat includes
a variety of tools for editing both text and graphics. You can use these tools as
long as the file hasn’t been secured to prohibit editing. We introduce you to
the tools for modifying PDF documents in this chapter. We discuss security,
which allows you to limit access to these tools, in Chapter 6 of this minibook.
Editing Text
You can access the tools for editing text and graphics by clicking on the Edit
PDF icon in the Tools Center. (See Figure 4-1.)
 If you do not see the Tools Center, click on the Tools tab at the top
left of your Acrobat window.

FIGURE 4-1: The Tools Center.
 For editing objects, you have three choices in the toolbar at the top
(see Figure 4-2):
Edit Text & Images tool: Used to manipulate text and images.
Add Text tool: Used to add new text onto a PDF document page.
Add Image tool: Used to add a new image into a page within a PDF
document.

FIGURE 4-2: The Content Editing tools.
Using the Edit Text & Images tool to manipulate text
The Edit Text & Images tool is used for manipulating text. This can include
changing actual text characters or the appearance of text. You can change cat
to dog, or you can change black text to blue, or you can even change the
Helvetica font to the Times font.
 When you change a PDF file, the original source document isn’t
modified.
You have a few ways to accomplish text edits:
Choose the Edit Text & Images tool, click within the text that you want to
change to obtain an insertion point, and then start typing the new text.
Click with the Edit Text & Images tool in your text and press the
Backspace or Delete key to delete text.
With the Edit Text & Images tool, drag to highlight text and enter new
text to replace the highlighted text.

When changing text — whether you’re adding or deleting — Acrobat tries to
use the font that was specified in the original document. Sometimes, this font
is built into the PDF file, which means that it’s embedded in the file. Other
times, the font may not be available either because it hasn’t been embedded
or it’s been embedded as a subset where only some of the characters from the
font are included in the PDF file. In these cases, Acrobat may provide the
following warning message:
Warning! Since the original font is not available, a substituted font for editing
is used. Any changes to the text of the original font will place a new font
dependency upon the document.
Fortunately, you can change the font if you need to edit the text. However,
when you change the font, the text may not retain the same appearance as the
original document. In some instances, you may not have the exact same font
on your computer as the font used in the PDF document, but you may have a
similar font you can use without causing a noticeable change — most people
won’t notice the difference between Helvetica and Arial or between Times
and Times New Roman. Fonts with the same name but from different font
designers often look very similar. For example, Adobe Garamond looks
similar to ITC Garamond, even though they’re two different fonts.
To change the font that’s used for a word or a range of words, follow these
steps:
1. With the Edit Text & Images tool, drag over the text you want to
select.
You may see a Loading System Fonts message followed by another
Loading Document Fonts message. Depending on the number of fonts
installed on your system, it may take a while for this message to
disappear.
The Tools Pane is activated on the right side of the workspace. If you do
not see the Tools pane, you may access it under View⇒  Show/Hide ⇒  
Tools Pane.
2. In the Tools pane, choose the typeface you want to use from the Font
drop-down list and make any other changes you want. (See Figure 4-
3.)
In this dialog pane, you can also change the size by selecting or typing a
number into the Font Size drop-down list. In addition, you can modify the

color by clicking the Fill color swatch.
FIGURE 4-3: Text options in the Tools pane.
ADDING TEXT
You can use the Add Text tool to type anywhere on the document. Access the Add Text tool
from the toolbar when in Edit Text mode. Then position your cursor where you want to begin
typing, click, and start to type, pressing the Enter or Return key whenever you want to add a
line. The Tools pane appears after you click on a page. Use the text options in the Tools pane
to change the font or size of the text you’re adding to the page, and change the type color,
style, or alignment.
Likewise, to change the space between the lines, click on the Line Spacing pull-down menu
or enter a value. You can move or resize the text block by selecting it with the Add Text tool
and either moving or resizing the text box. Your text remains editable. So, if you’ve made a
mistake and want to correct it, or want to add or delete text, you select the Add Text tool again
and double-click in the type box.
Using the Edit Text & Images tool to edit graphics
You can use the Edit Text & Images tool to access editing software for
modifying graphics. For example, you can use the Edit Text & Images tool to
select a graphic, bring the graphic into Photoshop, and then save the modified
version back into the PDF file. In other words, you can edit the graphics used
in PDF documents, even if you don’t have access to the original graphic files.

To edit a photographic file from Acrobat in Photoshop, follow these steps:
1. Select the image with the Edit Text & Images tool, right-click
(Windows) or Control-click (Mac) on a photographic image with the
Edit Object tool, and then choose Edit Using⇒  Adobe Photoshop
from the contextual menu.
The image file opens in Adobe Photoshop.
2. Using Photoshop’s tools, make the necessary changes to the graphic
and then choose File⇒  Save.
When you return to the PDF file in Acrobat, the graphic is updated
automatically in the PDF document.
 If you have the original graphic file, it remains untouched — only the
version used within the PDF file is modified. It isn’t necessary to have
the original graphic file to perform these steps.
You can also use Acrobat to edit vector objects from within PDF files, such as
those created with Adobe Illustrator. Just follow these steps:
1. Select a piece of vector artwork with the Edit Text & Images tool,
right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac) the vector artwork, and
then choose Edit Using⇒  Adobe Illustrator from the contextual menu.
Note: Acrobat displays Edit Using in the contextual menu if it detects an
image, and you can then choose whether you want to edit the image using
either Photoshop or Illustrator (if you have these tools installed on your
computer system).
 If you’re editing a complex illustration, be sure to select all its
components by holding down the Ctrl (Windows) or ⌘   (Mac) key while
clicking them with the Edit Text & Images tool.
After choosing Edit Using⇒  Adobe Illustrator, the object opens for
editing in Adobe Illustrator.

2. After you make the necessary changes in Illustrator, choose File⇒  
Save.
The graphic is updated in the PDF document.
 If Acrobat doesn’t start Photoshop or Illustrator after choosing the
Edit with command, you may need to access preferences by choosing
Edit⇒  Preferences⇒  Content Editing (Windows) or Acrobat⇒  
Preferences⇒  Content Editing (Mac OS) and then specifying which
programs should be used for editing images or objects.
 You can also use the Edit Text & Images tool to edit the position of
text or graphic objects on a page, which includes the capability to
relocate individual lines of text or to change the position of a graphic on
a page. After you select an object with the Edit Text & Images tool, you
can simply drag it to a new location on the page. Similarly, you can
delete objects from a PDF document by selecting them and then pressing
the Delete key.
Exporting Text and Graphics
Although editing text and graphics is helpful, you may need to take text or
images from a PDF document and use them in another file. Fortunately,
Acrobat also includes tools to make this a breeze. Of course, you should
always make certain that you have the permission of the owner of a document
before reusing content that isn’t your original work.
You can export text, images, or charts from Acrobat by copying and pasting,
or by saving as a specific file type. These methods are discussed in detail in
the following sections.
Exporting text with Select, Copy, and Paste
Follow these steps to select, copy, and paste text from a PDF file:

1. With the Edit Text & Images tool, highlight the text you want to
export.
When you hold this tool over a section of your document, it turns into an
I-bar cursor, which you can drag to select the text you want to copy.
Keep in mind that this method only lets you select text within an area.
You need to switch to the Selection tool in order to select large areas of
text.
 If the Cut, Copy, and Paste commands are unavailable after
you’ve selected some text, the author of the document may have set the
security settings to disallow copying. If you can’t select the text, you may
be trying to copy text that’s part of an image. If you’re trying to select text
that’s in a single column, a sidebar, or table, press and hold the Ctrl key
(Windows) or ⌘   key (Mac) and then click and drag over the area with
text to be selected.
2. Right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac) the selected text. Then,
from the contextual menu, choose Copy to copy the text.
Being able to extract the text out of a PDF document by selecting and
copying it is useful if you don’t have access to the original source
document, but you need to use the text from a PDF file in another
document.
3. Open another text-editing program, such as Adobe InDesign or
Microsoft Word.
You can paste the copied text into a new document or a preexisting file.
4. Insert your cursor in the document at the appropriate spot and
choose Edit⇒  Paste.
The text is pasted into the document, ready for you to use.
Exporting text with Save As Other
Use the File⇒  Export To⇒  Microsoft Word or File⇒  Export To⇒  Spreadsheet
commands to export all the text in your PDF file. After choosing the location
where you want the file saved, click Save to save the Microsoft Word or
spreadsheet file.

You can also choose several other formats for exporting your PDF
documents:
Rich Text Format: Use this format to convert the text in a PDF
document to an editable RTF file that can be manipulated in common
word processing apps such as Microsoft Word.
Encapsulated PostScript and PostScript: These formats are generally
used by commercial printers or IT professionals who need PostScript
output.
HTML Web Page: This is used to attempt to convert the PDF to another
file format that can be used for viewing on the web without a PDF plug-
in. PDF files do not always convert well to HTML, so be sure to test this
option if you want to use it for any important documents.
Graphics: To save your PDF document as an image, choose File⇒  Save
As and choose from any of the various graphics formats, including JPEG,
JPEG2000, PNG, and TIFF, from the Save as Type or File Format drop-
down menu. If you choose one of these options, your text will no longer
be editable because all the PDF pages will be converted to images, with
each page in the PDF becoming a separate image file.
 Text that’s copied from a PDF file is no longer linked to the original
document. Edits made to the extracted text aren’t reflected within the
PDF file, and it’s extremely difficult to have the extracted text reinserted
into the PDF document, because the Edit Text & Images tool and Add
Text tool are rather limited in their capability to add any significant
amount of text onto a page. Think of the extraction process as a one-way
trip for the text, which can be extracted but not reinserted.
You can also export portions of text and tables so you can edit them later
using a spreadsheet program, such as Microsoft Excel, or a word processing
program such as Microsoft Word. Just follow these steps:
1. Click the Selection Tool tool and click and drag to select the text in
the table.

Depending upon how the table was created, you may also be able to
position your cursor just outside the edge of the table and then draw a box
around a table. Remember you can Ctrl-click (Windows) or ⌘  -click
(Mac) and then drag around a table to select it.
A border appears around the selected table.
2. Right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac) and choose Export
Selection As from the contextual menu.
Alternatively, you can save the table directly to a file or copy to the
Clipboard to be pasted later: If Acrobat has trouble identifying the text in
the table, it may be saved as an image file, which is not editable text.
Choose Export Selection As from the contextual menu to save the
text directly to a file.
To copy the table to the Clipboard so that you can paste it into
other documents, choose Copy with Formatting from the
contextual menu.
After opening Excel or whatever spreadsheet program you have installed
on your computer, you can paste the table into the spreadsheet.
And that’s it. You can now use that table in another program.

Chapter 5
Using Commenting and
Annotation Tools
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Adding comments and annotations to PDF files
 Working with comments
One of the great features of Acrobat is the capability to mark up PDF
documents with virtual sticky notes, mark up text to indicate changes, add
annotations, and draw comments. The Acrobat commenting tools don’t
change the original file, and you can remove the comments at any time. This
means that you can disable comments for printing or viewing when you want.
In this chapter, you discover these capabilities and we show you how to put
them to work for you.
Creating Comments with the Comment
Panel
You can easily add annotations to PDF files, including stamps, text
highlights, callouts, and electronic sticky notes by using the Comment panel,
which you can access by clicking the Comment button on the Tasks toolbar.
This opens the Comment toolbar at the top of the page and the Comment
pane on the right of the page.
The Comment toolbar, as shown in Figure 5-1, provides several tools for
adding comments to PDF documents. The Comment pane includes a
comment list to help manage and review comments. We discuss these tools in
the following sections.

FIGURE 5-1: The Acrobat Comment toolbar.
The Add Sticky Note tool
Use the Add Sticky Note tool to add electronic sticky notes to your files. Just
click the location where you want the note to appear within a PDF document,
and an icon representing the note appears, along with a window where you
can enter text. After entering text in the sticky note, close the window so that
the document isn’t hidden beneath it.
You can change the icon and color used to represent the note by right-clicking
(Windows) or Control-clicking (Mac) the note and choosing Properties from
the contextual menu. In the Properties dialog box that appears, in the
Appearance tab, make the changes to the note icon or color and then click OK
to have the changes apply to the note.
The Text Edit tools
The Text Edit tools are six separate text commenting tools. Use these tools to
indicate that selected text should be replaced or to highlight or underline
selected text, calling attention to it in the PDF file. You can also add a note to
selected text, or indicate that text should be inserted at a specific location, and
mark text for deletion.
To use Text Edit tools, follow these steps:
1. Choose the text edits tool you want to use from Comment toolbar.
2. Click and drag the selected tool over the text you want to change,
comment on, or highlight.
Your selected text edits are displayed on the PDF file.
 To use the Insert Text tool, click where you want to insert the type,
and then select the Insert Text tool. Then, after Acrobat creates an
insertion point, start to type the new text in the pop-up window to add a
comment showing the text you want added to the document.
The Add Stamp tool
You can use stamps to identify documents or to highlight a certain part of a

document. Common stamps include Confidential, Draft, Sign Here, and
Approved.
The stamps are grouped into sections, and you can access them from the
Stamp tool from the Comment toolbar. Some stamps automatically add your
default username along with the date and time you applied them to the
document; these stamps are available under the Dynamic category in the
Stamps menu. The more traditional business stamps, such as Confidential,
appear under the Standard Business category. You can access each of the
categories by clicking the arrow to the right of the Stamp tool in the
Comment toolbar, as shown in Figure 5-2.
FIGURE 5-2: Access the categories of stamps by clicking the Stamp tool in the Comment toolbar.
To apply a stamp to your document, follow these steps:
1. Select the Stamp tool by selecting Comments from the taskbar, then
clicking the Stamp tool in the Comment toolbar.
2. Click the arrow to the right of the Stamp tool and from the menu,
choose either the Dynamic or Standard Business stamp.
The first time you use the stamps, you may be asked to input your

information so Acrobat can include your identity as the user applying the
stamps. If, after you have entered your information, you click the Don’t
Show Again option when asked to enter your identity, you won’t need to
do this again.
3. Click within your document at the location where you want the stamp
to appear.
The Highlight Text tool
The Highlight Text tool works similarly to the Text Edits tools. To highlight
text, follow these steps:
1. Select the Highlight Text tool from the Comment toolbar.
2. Click and drag over the text that you want highlighted.
The text is now highlighted.
The Attach File tool
With the Attach File tool, you can attach any existing file from your computer
or computer network to a PDF document. For example, if you have an Excel
spreadsheet that relates to the PDF document, and you want to allow users to
work with the data, you could attach the Excel file to the PDF document.
Follow these steps to attach a file to your PDF document:
1. Select the Add a New Attachment⇒  Attach File tool from the
Comment toolbar, then place your cursor over the location in the
document where you want the attachment icon to be visible.
2. Click where you want the attachment noted.
The Add Attachment dialog box appears.
3. In the Add Attachment dialog box, browse to the file that you want to
attach and click the Open button (Windows) or Select button (Mac).
You can attach text, graphic, or sound files.
4. The File Attachment Properties window appears.
5. In the File Attachment Properties window, select the icon you want to
use to represent the file attachment. Then click OK.
You can choose from a paperclip, graph, pushpin, or tag. Whatever icon

you select appears on your document to denote that another file is
attached. When you roll over the icon, a little annotation appears telling
you the filename.
 You can use the Record Audio tool to share a verbal comment by
using the built-in microphone on your computer or laptop (if you have
one) to record a message directly into the PDF. The sound is added as a
comment. Follow the preceding Steps 1–5 for adding an attachment,
except use the Record Audio tool located below the Attach File tool.
 The file(s) that you attach with the Attach File and Record Audio
tools becomes embedded within the PDF file, and the size of the file
increases. When using attached files, they remain in their original file
format, even if the attached file isn’t a PDF file. For example, you can
attach an Excel spreadsheet to a PDF document, and the recipient will
need to use Excel to view or edit the attachment. Attaching a file to a
PDF document doesn’t convert the attachment to PDF.
The drawing tools
The Drawing Tools section of the Comment toolbar contains shape tools, line
tools, and other drawing tools. Use the drawing tools to add lines, ovals,
rectangles, and other shapes to your PDF file to provide feedback and
comments on a PDF document. These shapes can call attention to specific
portions of a document and make it easy to provide visual feedback on PDF
documents you are reviewing. The steps in this section show you how to
work with some of the more useful drawing tools.
To use the Cloud Shape tool, follow these steps:
1. Select the Cloud Shape tool from the Drawing Tools section of the
Comment toolbar.
2. Click in your document to begin the shape.
3. Click again in another position to set the length of the first part of the

cloud and then click again to begin shaping your cloud.
Click as often as you like to create your shape.
4. When you’re finished with your shape, double-click to close the cloud
shape, or click back at the starting point of the cloud.
 Use the Selection tool, found in the page control section of the
toolbar to click the shape you created and drag the corner points to resize,
if necessary. You can also use the Selection tool after creating a cloud
shape to change the color and thickness of the line values. To make these
changes, using the Selection tool, right-click (Windows) or Control-click
(Mac) the shape and choose Properties from the contextual menu. In the
Polygon Properties window that opens, make the desired changes to the
appearance. For example, you can use the Style drop-down list in the
Properties dialog box to change the appearance of a selected comment.
Instead of the cloud edges, you can change them to dotted lines, dashed
lines, and so on. When you’re finished changing the appearance, click
OK.
To use the rectangle- and oval-shaped drawing markup tools, follow these
steps:
1. Select either the Rectangle or Oval Shape tool from the drawing tools
in the Comment toolbar.
2. Click and drag in your document to draw the shape.
3. While the drawing tool you chose is selected, click the shape you
created and drag the corner points to resize, if necessary.
You can also use the Selection tool if you’re having difficulty adjusting
the shape or size of a previously created shape.
4. After creating the shape, right-click (Windows) or Control-click
(Mac) the shape and choose Properties from the contextual menu to
change the color and thickness of the line values.
5. When you’re finished, click OK.
As with the cloud polygon, you can also use the Style drop-down list in

the Properties dialog box to change the appearance of the shape.
The Add Text Box tool
When creating notes that you want to prominently display on a document,
you can use the Add Text Box tool to add text annotations directly onto a
PDF document. Text added using the Add Text Box tool is clearly visible on
the document without needing to open any dialog boxes or windows.
Follow these steps to add a text box containing comments:
1. Select the Add Text Box tool from the Comment toolbar. Then click
and drag on the PDF document in the location where you want to
place the comment.
A text field is placed directly on the document.
2. Add your text comment by typing directly into the text box.
A pop-up window appears with font, color, and size information.
3. To change the appearance of the text box, right-click (Windows) or
Control-click (Mac) and choose Properties from the contextual menu
to set the color of the text box that contains the note.
4. After making your choices to modify the appearance of the text box,
click OK.
 You can select the text box and move it to another position using the
Selection tool.
The Add Text Callout tool
The Add Text Callout tool creates a callout text box that points to a section of
your document with an arrow. The callout text box is made up of three parts:
the text box, the knee line, and the end point line. You can resize each part
individually to customize the callout area of your document.
To use the Callout tool, follow these steps:
1. Select the Add Text Callout tool from the Drawing Tools section of
the Comment toolbar.

2. Click where you want the arrowhead point to be located.
3. Move the cursor to the location where you want the text box to be
positioned and then click again. Begin typing your comment.
As with the other drawing markup tools, you can use the Selection tool to
relocate the text box or use the anchor points to resize the box.
4. If you want to change the color of the callout text box, right-click
(Windows) or Control-click (Mac) the callout text box (not the text)
and choose Properties from the contextual menu.
The Callout Properties window opens. You can change the size and color
of the box using the Callout Properties window. (If you want to change
the color and font characteristics of the text in the callout text box,
double-click on the text and a formatting pop-up box will open with font,
color, and size information.)
5. After modifying the appearance of the callout text box, click OK to
close the Callout Properties window.
 You can select the callout text box and move it to another position
any time you want. You can resize the text box by dragging an anchor
point.
The Draw Freeform tool
With the Draw Freeform tool, you can create freeform lines on your
documents. These lines can be useful when you’re trying to attract attention
to a specific portion of a page. Just follow these steps:
1. Select the Pencil tool from the Comment toolbar.
2. Click and drag to draw on your document.
3. You can edit the color and thickness of lines created with the Pencil
tool by right-clicking (Windows) or Control-clicking (Mac) the line
and choosing Properties from the contextual menu.
Alternatively, you can press Ctrl+E (Windows) or ⌘  +E (Mac) to access
the Properties toolbar.

4. Make your choices and click OK.
 You can use the Eraser tool to remove portions of lines that had
previously been created with the Pencil tool.
Managing Comments
One of the most powerful features of PDF commenting is the capability to
easily manage and share comments and annotations among reviewers. For
example, you can determine which comments are displayed at any time, and
you can filter the comments by author or by the type of commenting tool used
to create the comment. In addition, you can indicate a response to a comment
and track the changes that may have been made to a document based upon a
comment. Also, you can consolidate comments from multiple reviewers into
a single document.
Viewing comments
Select the Comment panel from the taskbar list to display the list of
comments that have been placed in your PDF document. The Comments List
shows all the comments in the document, and appears along the right side of
the Document window. You can see the author of each comment and any
notes entered by reviewers.
If you select a comment, there is a checkbox at the bottom that you can use to
indicate that the comment has been reviewed or to indicate that a certain
comment needs further attention. Use these checkboxes for your own
purposes; their status doesn’t export with the document if you send the file to
others, so they’re for your personal use only.
Changing a comment’s review status
Acrobat makes it easy to indicate whether a comment has been reviewed,
accepted, or has additional comments attached to it.
To change the status of a comment, follow these steps:
1. In the Comments List, right-click (Windows) or Control-click (Mac)

the comment for which you want to set the status.
2. Click Set Status and then select Accepted, Cancelled, Completed, or
Rejected, depending on what’s appropriate to your situation.
The comment you modified appears in the list, showing the new status
you assigned to it.
Replying to a comment
You can double-click a comment in the Comments List and choose Reply to
add a follow-up note to the comment. This way, new comments can be tied to
existing comments. If your documents go through multiple rounds of review,
adding a reply allows a secondary or final reviewer to expand on the
comments from an initial reviewer. This method also allows an author or
designer to clearly respond to the suggestions from an editor.
 Using the Selection tool, you can also right-click (Windows) or
Control-click (Mac) on a comment located on a document to add a reply.
The reply will also be placed in the Comments List.
Showing and hiding comments
Because the Comments List can become rather large, you can choose to
display only some comments in the list. To do so, click the Filter Comments
button in the upper-right of the Comment panel. To hide all comments,
choose the Hide All Comments option from the Filter Comments menu in the
Comments panel. This will hide all comments from the document as well as
the list.
To show all the comments within a document, select the Show All Comments
option from the Filter Comments menu in the Comments panel. You can then
choose to display only certain types of comments, such as the following:
Type of comment, such as note, line, or cross out
Reviewer, such as Bob or Jane
Status, such as accepted or rejected
Use these filtering options to view only those comments that are relevant to

your specific review situation.
 If you have filtered comments, you can always display all comments
again by choosing Show All Comments from the Filter Comments menu
in the Comments List.
Sharing comments
You can share your comments with other reviewers who have access to the
same PDF document by following these steps:
1. Make sure that the Comments panel is visible.
2. From the Comments panel, click the Options icon in the upper-right
corner of the Comments panel, and choose Export All to Data File.
The Export Comments dialog box appears. If you want to share only
selected comments, choose the comments from the Comments List and
then choose Export Selected to Data File.
3. Browse to the location where you want the comments to be saved and
give the saved file a new name.
You now have a file that includes only the comments’ information, and
not the entire PDF file.
You can share your comments data file with reviewers who have the same
PDF file, and they can choose Import Data File from the Options window
while viewing the same PDF document. You can use this method to avoid
sending entire PDF files to those who already have the document.
Summarizing comments
You can compile a list of all the comments from a PDF file into a new,
separate document. To summarize comments, follow these steps:
1. From the Comments List of the Comment panel, click the Options
icon in the upper-right corner of the Comments List and choose
Create Comment Summary.
The Create Comment Summary dialog box appears.

2. Create a listing of the comments with lines connecting them to their
locations on the page by selecting the radio button from the top —
Document and Comments with Connector Lines on Single Pages.
In the Include section, you can choose which comments should be
summarized. If you prefer to create a different summary type, such as a
list of the comments, select the option you prefer.
3. Click the Create Comment Summary button.
This step creates a new PDF document that simply lists all the comments,
as shown in Figure 5-3.
FIGURE 5-3: A new PDF document is created, listing all the comments.
Enabling commenting in Adobe Reader
Acrobat DC makes it easy to include users of the free Adobe Reader in a
review process. To include Adobe Reader users in a review, choose File⇒  
Save As Other⇒  Reader Extended PDF⇒  Enable Commenting and
Measuring. After saving the file, you can share it with users of the free Adobe
Reader, who can then use commenting and markup tools and save their
comments into the file. A user of Adobe Acrobat DC must enable
commenting in a PDF file before users of Adobe Reader can add comments
to a PDF file.

Reviewing PDF Documents
You can use Acrobat to help manage the PDF review process.
Email reviews work with some email software applications, such as Microsoft
Outlook, and allow you to send a PDF document to recipients, asking them to
add comments and then reply.
Using email reviews
Email reviews are a means of sharing comments in a PDF by attaching them
to an email message. By using this feature, you can share comments without
needing to upload the file to a server or to sign in to any service. When you
use email reviews, comments are added to individual PDF files, and then
consolidated back into a single PDF when they are returned to the originator.
To initiate an email review:
1. Open the document you wish to share with reviewers.
If the document is already open, make certain it is saved before
proceeding so any comments or edits you have made to the PDF are
captured before the document is shared.
2. Choose Send for Comments from the Tools Tab.
If this is the first time you have initiated an email review, Acrobat will ask
you to enter identifying information, then the Getting Started dialog box
opens.
3. Confirm the document to be shared and then click Next.
4. Enter the email addresses of those you want to invite to review the
document, and then click Next.
The Preview Invitation dialog box opens. Confirm the subject and
message of the email invitation are appropriate to send.
5. Click the Send Invitation button.
An invitation to join the document review is sent using your email
application. When recipients open the PDF file that you send, they will be
asked to click the Send Comments button that appears at the top of the
PDF they receive. This information is also contained in the email message
sent to the reviewers.

6. When comments on the PDF document are returned to you, open the
file you receive and click the Import Data File button in the Options
button of the Comment panel to combine the comments you received
with any comments you may have entered.
 If you receive comments on a PDF document and Acrobat is unable
to locate the original file because it has moved or been renamed, Acrobat
will ask you to browse to locate the file at the time you merge
comments.

Chapter 6
Securing Your PDF Files
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Using the security feature in Acrobat
 Using passwords
 Setting limits for editing and printing
 Removing sensitive data from PDF files
You may think that because you’ve converted your documents to PDF
(Portable Document Format) that they’re secure. This isn’t quite true because
Adobe Acrobat includes tools for changing text and images, as well as
extracting them for use in other files. For example, you can use several tools
to modify text and graphics (see Chapter 4 of this minibook) or copy a
passage of text.
Applying security provides you with control over who can view, edit, or print
the PDF documents you create and distribute. You can restrict access to files
so that users need a password to view them, or you can restrict certain
features of Acrobat, which stops most users from manipulating your files. All
Adobe applications recognize and honor security settings applied in Acrobat,
but some software ignores Adobe’s security settings or can bypass them
altogether. For this reason, you should be careful with whom you share your
most sensitive PDF documents because even secure PDF files can be
accessed by skilled or determined hackers.
In this chapter, we discuss using security protection to limit access to PDF
files and show you how to limit what users can do to the contents of your
PDF documents.
Understanding Password Security
By requiring users to enter a password to open and view your PDF files, you

limit access to those files so that only certain users can view them. You can
also apply security to limit access to certain Acrobat and Adobe Reader
features, such as copying text or graphics, editing the file, and printing.
Adobe calls this type of security password security because it requires a
password to either open the document or to change the security that’s been
applied to the document.
Apply security options to limit the opening or editing of your PDF document,
restricting these capabilities to users who have been provided the proper
password. If you have your PDF open, you do this by clicking the Protect
button in the right-hand toolbar. Then choose Encrypt⇒  Encrypt with
Password to access the Password Security Settings dialog box.
In the Password Security - Settings dialog box, choose an Acrobat version
from the Compatibility drop-down list. The higher the version of Acrobat, the
greater the level of security, but the more limited the compatibility.
Remember, not everyone has Acrobat XI. If you intend to share your file with
a broad group or if you’re uncertain which versions of Acrobat or Adobe
Reader your audience is using, you should allow everyone with Acrobat 7
and later to access your file. Your choice here is based on your needs for
security and also the version of Acrobat or Adobe Reader that your audience
uses. Lower versions of Acrobat provide more compatibility with the widest
number of viewers because they support much older versions of the free
Adobe Reader. In the following list, we explain the compatibility choices
before showing you how to enable security in later sections:
Acrobat 6 and Later or Acrobat 7 and Later: If the users who receive
your PDF files have older versions of the software, you can select
Acrobat 6 and Later or Acrobat 7 and Later from the Compatibility drop-
down list to ensure that the recipients can view the PDF file you’re
securing. This option provides compatibility for users who may not have
updated their software in many years, and secure the file with 128-bit
encryption. These security options will keep the average user from
gaining access to your files. However, they won’t deter a determined
hacker from accessing them and a sophisticated user can circumvent
them.
Acrobat X and Later: When sharing files with users who have access to
Adobe Reader or Adobe Acrobat Version X or XI, this option provides

expanded security, increasing the security level to 256-bit, which makes
the resulting PDF files more difficult for unauthorized users to access.
Applying Password Security to Your
PDF Documents
Selecting the Encrypt with Password option from the Encrypt button in the
Protect section of the Tools panel limits access to the PDF file. Only those
who know the password can open the file. However, documents are only as
secure as the passwords that protect them. To guard against discovery of a
password, use passwords that are eight or more characters in length and
include at least one number or symbol and vary the case of the characters.
Avoid using words in the dictionary and short passwords. For example, the
password Minneapolis is less secure than M1nneap0lis, which mixes
numbers and letters, and includes an uppercase character along with
lowercase characters.
To apply password security to a file, follow these steps:
1. With a PDF file open, choose Protect⇒  Encrypt⇒  Encrypt with
Password.
2. Click Yes when the Applying New Security Settings dialog box
appears, verifying that you want to apply security to this PDF.
The Password Security – Settings dialog box appears, as shown in Figure
6-1. You can select the Do Not Show This Message Again checkbox if
you do not want this message to appear every time you are securing a
PDF file using Acrobat.
3. Select Acrobat 7 and Later from the Compatibility drop-down list.
Although Acrobat XI provides more robust security, few people are using
version XI of Acrobat, making it difficult to distribute the file with this
high level of security.
4. Select the Require a Password to Open the Document checkbox.
5. Enter a password in the Document Open Password text box.
Acrobat provides you with guidance about the strength of the password
you select, letting you know whether the password can easily be

bypassed. You can also add more security settings, which we outline in
the next section. Or you can use this setting as the only security to be
applied to the document.
 If password protection is the only security measure you apply to
the document, authorized users can access the document by entering a
password. Users with the password may also be able to edit or print the
document unless you apply additional security measures. We discuss
ways to limit the editing and printing of PDF files in the next section.
6. Click OK.
7. Confirm the password and click OK again. Acrobat warns you that
Adobe software honors the security settings, but other tools may
allow you to bypass the security. Click OK again and the dialog box
closes.
8. Save, close, and then reopen the PDF file.
A password dialog box appears, asking for the password to access the
secured file. Every time a user accesses the file, he or she will be required
to enter a password.

FIGURE 6-1: Restrict what users can edit.
Limiting Editing and Printing
In addition to restricting viewing of a PDF file, you can also limit editing and
printing, restricting users from making changes to your document. This
allows users to view a file but not change it.
To limit editing and printing of your PDF document, follow these steps:
1. With a PDF file open, click Protect⇒  Encrypt⇒  Encrypt with
Password.
The Password Security – Settings dialog box opens.
2. In the Permissions area, select the checkbox labeled Restrict Editing
and Printing of the document.
You can now specify a password that will be required for readers to edit

the file or change the security settings. (See the preceding section.)
With this option selected, you can apply a password for access to features,
such as printing or editing. This password can be different than the
password used to open the document — in fact, you don’t even need to
use a document open password if you don’t want to, but it’s a good idea to
use both of these passwords for sensitive data. If you apply a document
open password without a permissions password, it’s easy for an
experienced user to bypass the security in the PDF file.
3. In the Change Permissions Password text box, enter a password.
Users who enter this permissions password when opening the document
can change the file or the security settings. The permissions password can
also be used to open the file, and it provides more privileges than the open
password.
4. Choose whether users can print the document by selecting an option
from the Printing Allowed drop-down list.
The choices include Low Resolution or High Resolution, or you can
prohibit printing by choosing None. The settings you choose here apply to
anyone who accesses the document and doesn’t know the permissions
password.
5. Select an option from the Changes Allowed drop-down list (see
Figure 6-1) to restrict editing.
For the most security, choose None.
6. Select the last two checkboxes, if desired:
Enable Copying of Text, Images, and Other Content: When
deselected, this option restricts copying and pasting of text and
graphics from a PDF file into other documents. Selecting this
option lets users extract text and images from a file by using the
simple Copy and Paste commands.
Enable Text Access for Screen Reader Devices for the Visually
Impaired: When you choose Acrobat 6 or Later from the
Compatibility drop-down list at the top of the dialog box, you can
also select this checkbox to allow visually impaired users to have
the PDF file read aloud to them.
7. When you’re satisfied with the settings, click OK.

 Choosing more advanced security settings, and choosing the latest
version of compatibility, runs the risk of your file not being visible to
many users who may not have upgraded to the most recent version of the
Adobe Reader or Acrobat. Always understand your audience members
and the software versions they’re using before distributing files.
Removing Sensitive Data
Sometimes you may want to make a PDF file accessible, but you may want to
remove certain sets of information. For example, you may want to remove a
person’s name or personal information from a PDF document. You can do
this through the process known as redaction.
To redact information in your PDF document, follow these steps:
1. With a PDF file open, choose Tools tab⇒  Scroll down to Protect &
Standardize⇒  Redact⇒  Mark for Redaction⇒  Text and Images. The
using Redaction Tools dialog box appears. Click OK.
2. Use the Mark for Redaction tool to highlight all text to be removed
from the document. A red box will appear around the highlighted
text.
3. After marking all text to be removed from the file, choose Apply in
the Redact tool bar across the top of Adobe Acrobat.
The redacted text is removed from the document.
 Note that this permanently removes all content marked for
redaction. This cannot be undone. If you are testing this capability, you
should first perform a Save As to create a copy of the document so that
you do not permanently remove content from a document unintentionally.
4. Click Yes to then remove any hidden information in the file, such as
the name of the author or the original document name.
You can also remove this later by clicking the Remove Hidden

Information option under the Redact tools panel.
 You can remove specific phrases or words by using the Find Text
option found in the Mark for Redaction drop-down of the Redact tools
panel.

Book 7
Adobe XD

Contents at a Glance
Chapter 1: Introducing the Experience Design Workspace
Understanding the Modern User Interface
Relating Objects to the Property Inspector
A Little Bit about Artboards
Keyboard Shortcuts for Navigating the Workspace
Design View versus Prototype Mode
Chapter 2: Working with Artboards
Starting Your Document and Adding an Artboard
Creating New Artboards
Resizing an Artboard
Adding a New Artboard
Using the Layers Panel
Duplicating an Artboard
Arranging Artboards in Your Pasteboard Area
Aligning and Distributing Your Artboards
Adding Scrolling Capability to an Artboard
Chapter 3: Adding Shapes, Paths, and Custom Shapes
It All Starts with a Shape
Creating a Button
Creating a Border
Using the Pen Tool
Creating Custom Shapes with the Path Tools
Chapter 4: Working with Objects
Getting a Leg Up on Layers
Transforming Objects
Aligning and Distributing
Chapter 5: Importing and Exporting from XD
Adding Imagery to Your Prototype
Working with Images in XD
Importing Vector Images into XD

Exporting Your Artwork from XD
Chapter 6: Adding Text to Your XD Project
Adding Text Right in Adobe XD
Adjusting Text Properties
Importing Text
Using the Repeat Grid Feature
Chapter 7: Taking Advantage of Symbols and UI Kits
Using Symbols
Taking Advantage of UI Kits
Chapter 8: Creating Interactivity in Adobe XD
Entering Prototype Mode
Previewing Your Artwork
Chapter 9: Sharing Your XD Project
Viewing Your App/Website on Your Desktop
Creating a Movie for Your User Story
Using the Device Preview Feature
Sharing Your XD File with Others

Chapter 1
Introducing the Experience
Design Workspace
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Exploring tools and menu items
 Creating your first screen
 Comparing Design versus Prototyping view
Adobe Experience Design (XD) is a high-fidelity prototyping tool used to
demonstrate interactive application and website designs. In this chapter, you
find out how to use XD’s UX design tools to create visual designs quickly
using features such as repeat grid, symbols, layers, and more. Keep in mind
that Adobe XD is in beta at time of print. The pace of the beta updates has
typically implemented Mac updates ahead of the Windows version of XD.
This variation will balance out as the product comes into the final stages, but
you might notice that some of the screen captures in this minibook vary from
your version of XD.
Adobe Experience Design is included in your Creative Cloud subscription. If
you do not have it already installed, launch your Creative Cloud application
and install it before trying to follow along with this minibook.
Understanding the Modern User
Interface
Adobe Experience Design has been created from scratch with the user’s
experience in mind. The UI is clean and simple. After you discover where
your primary tools are located, it will be easy for you to use them in your
production workflow.

Creating a new artboard
As with most of the other Adobe applications, you need to define an artboard
size before working in Adobe XD. You can choose from artboards that are
standard screen sizes, or create a custom-sized artboard. The size of the
artboard can be changed at any time.
1. Choose File  ⇒  New. A start screen appears that introduces you to the
XD application and offers you a choice of screen sizes. In Figure 1-1,
the iPhone 6/7 is selected.
2. Select your size from the drop-down menu and press the Return or
Enter key.
The artboard appears in the XD workspace.
The workspace includes a work area in the middle, a main menu across
the top, an application menu above the work area, a toolbar to the left, and
a Property Inspector on the right; see Figure 1-2.
FIGURE 1-1: Selecting the size of the artboard.

FIGURE 1-2: The XD workspace.
Using the tools
In XD, primitive shapes, as well as more advanced drawing tools, are
available to you on the toolbar. In addition to that, some other tools, such as
the Selection and the artboard tool, might be familiar to you if you use Adobe
Illustrator. See all tools in Figure 1-3.

FIGURE 1-3: XD tools.
Relating Objects to the Property
Inspector

In this section, you use the tools to place some objects on the artboard so that
you can see the relationship between your objects and the Property Inspector.
1. With an artboard of any size open, double-click on the artboard
name that appears at the top of the artboard to activate the textbox
and change the text to My first screen.
2. Choose the Ellipse tool and click and drag an ellipse on the screen.
 As with your other Adobe applications, you can press the Shift
key while dragging to create a perfect circle. You can also press
Alt/Option+Shift while dragging to create a circle from a center point.
When the ellipse is complete, properties now appear in the Properties
Inspector on the right, as shown in Figure 1-4.
3. The Ellipse tool is still selected. To avoid unexpectedly creating
another circle, click the Select tool.

FIGURE 1-4: When an object is selected, its properties appear in the Properties panel.
Some of the properties, such as the Align options at the top, are not relevant
when only one object is selected. (It aligns an object to the artboard if only
one is selected.) Others, such as W (width) and H (height) as well as the X, Y
coordinates, however, can be helpful.

In the Appearance section, you can change the fill and border (stroke) or
deselect either by unchecking the checkbox to the left of the attribute. In this
next step, you use the Properties Inspector to change the size, position on the
page, and the fill and border color.
1. With your ellipse selected, click the textbox to the right of W in the
Properties panel and type 100.
2. Type 100 in the textbox to the right of H.
3. The X coordinate is the horizontal value; type 138 to put your circle
close to the center.
4. Type 100 in the textbox to the right of Y.
If you used the standard iPhone 6 artboard, your screen should look
similar to the one shown in Figure 1-5.
5. With the Ellipse still selected, click the box to the left of Fill in the
Properties Inspector to open the Color Picker, as shown in Figure 1-6.
Choose any color you like. If you want a color that is not displayed,
click and drag the Hue slider to the right.
 Color, gradients, and transparency are covered in more detail in
Chapter 3 of this minibook.
6. Click the box to the left of Border in order to select any stroke color.
7. Select the width value to the right of Border and type 10 so that you
can see a 10 pt border on your ellipse.
8. As a bonus, add a drop shadow using the Properties Inspector. With
your ellipse still selected, check Shadow. The values that appear
below are the X and Y coordinates and the blur.
9. If you have been following along with this exercise, choose File ⇒  Save
now. Name the file My first screen and save to a location that you can
easily locate in case you need it. Keep the file open for the next part of
this chapter.

FIGURE 1-5: Your artboard should look similar to this example.

FIGURE 1-6: Choose a color for your fill from the color picker.
A Little Bit about Artboards
You have successfully created an object and changed its properties; now you
investigate the artboard options.
Select the artboard tool and click anywhere to create a second, same-sized
artboard. While the handles are active, click and drag to change the size.
Alternatively, you can change the size, background color, and other attributes
using the Properties Inspector. In fact, if you wanted to change the template to
an Apple Watch–sized artboard, you could even scroll down in the Properties
panel for a complete list of other templates to choose from. In this example,
you change the background color and then clone this artboard:
1. With the new artboard selected, click the box to the left of Fill and
select any color of background for your new artboard.
2. Check the box to the left of Square in the Properties Inspector in
order to display a grid that is only visible to you while working in XD,

and change the size to 20 pixels, as shown in Figure 1-7.
Now you can clone your original artboard.
3. If you do not see both artboards, press Ctrl/Command+0 (zero).
4. Click the Layers icon at the bottom of the toolbar to see your two
artboards. Click the first artboard, which is at the bottom of the list.
This selects that artboard.
 You can Ctrl/Command-click right on the artboard to select it as
well.
5. Right-click (Windows) or Ctrl-click (Mac) and select Duplicate from
the contextual menu, as shown in Figure 1-8. Double-click on the
artboard name in the Artboard list and rename it My second screen.
6. Click the Select tool and then select the ellipse on this duplicated
artboard. Change the Fill of the circle on this artboard to any other
color.
7. In this example, we still have an extra artboard that has not been
named. Double-click on the unnamed artboard and name it Home
Screen.
8. Click and drag the Home Screen artboard from inside the Artboard
panel to the top of the list.
9. Choose File ⇒  Save and keep this file open for the next section.

FIGURE 1-7: Change the background color and add a grid in the Properties panel.

FIGURE 1-8: Duplicate and rename your screen in the Artboard panel that appears when you
click the Layers icon.
Now you add some text to the Home Screen. Just follow these steps:
1. Using the Select tool, click the screen with the background color that
you named Home Screen, or select it in the Layers panel.
2. Press Ctrl+3 (Windows) or Command+3 (Mac) to zoom into the

selection. You can also use View ⇒  Zoom to Selection.
3. Select the Text tool from the toolbar and click and drag across the
middle area of the screen, as shown in Figure 1-9.
4. Type the word Welcome.
5. Using the Property Inspector, change the text size to 50, choose
Center Align, and select White for the fill color. You can see where
these properties are located by looking at Figure 1-10.
FIGURE 1-9: Click and drag to create a text area on your Home Screen.

FIGURE 1-10: Turn on the grid for your artboard and apply a color.
Keyboard Shortcuts for Navigating the
Workspace
Now that you have several artboards you can practice navigating your
workspace. Practice using the keyboard shortcuts provided in Table 1-1.
TABLE 1-1 Keyboard Shortcuts for Navigating the
Workspace
Function
Windows Shortcut Mac Shortcut
Fit all artboards in window Ctrl+0
Command+0
Zoom in
Ctrl+  + (plus sign)
or
Alt+mouse wheel
Command+  + (plus sign)
or
Option+mouse wheel
Zoom out
Ctrl+  – (minus sign)
Command+  – (minus sign)
Go to 100%
Ctrl+1
Command+1
Go to 200%
Ctrl+2
Command+2
Zoom to selection
Ctrl+3
Command+3

Full screen
N/A
Ctrl+Command+F
Scroll
Spacebar and push with mouse
Horizontal pan
Ctrl+mouse wheel
Shift+mouse wheel
Vertical pan
Mouse wheel
Mouse wheel
 On a laptop, you can simply pinch your fingers in and out on your
trackpad to zoom in and out of your artboard.
Design View versus Prototype Mode
Now that you are getting a handle on the tools, artboards, and workspace, you
can create a simple prototype. You can learn more advanced features about
prototyping in the following chapters of this minibook, but think of this as a
quick introduction to entering the prototyping mode.
1. Press Crtl+0 (Windows) or Command+0 (Mac) to make sure that you
are viewing all three of your artboards.
Notice at the top, in the Application menu, that you have been working in
the Design mode of XD. This is where you typically create your artwork.
In this next section, you enter the Prototyping mode. The Prototyping
mode is where you create the links that add interactivity to your
prototype.
2. Click Prototype in the Application menu, as shown in Figure 1-11.

FIGURE 1-11: Click Prototype to enter the mode where you can create links to other screens.
Creating your links
Creating an interactive link is done by creating a wire from one screen to
another. You now link your screens together. To do so, just follow these steps:
1. Click the Home Screen and drag to draw a wire over to the screen
called My first Screen.
2. When you release, the target for your link is displayed as well as the
transition type and duration. Leave these at the defaults.
3. Now click the circle in the artboard named My first screen and drag a
wire from the circle to the third artboard, My second screen.
4. Create a full circle by clicking the circle in the artboard named My
second screen and dragging a wire back to the Home Screen. Now
you are ready to test your interactions.

Testing your prototype
You can test your prototype by using the Desktop Preview feature:
1. Select your Home Screen.
2. Click the Desktop Preview icon in the upper right of the XD
workspace, as shown in Figure 1-12.
3. Click your screens where you designated the links to view your
interactions.
The Desktop Preview window can stay up while you work and will show
live updates, as you work, or you can close it to keep it out of view.
FIGURE 1-12: Preview your prototype by clicking the Desktop Preview button.

Chapter 2
Working with Artboards
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Adding and deleting
 Resizing
 Cloning, copying, and pasting
 Managing organization of your artboards
Artboards is a term used in many of Adobe’s applications, but in Adobe
Experience Design, artboards represent screens for your application or pages
in your website. Without screens, you have little interactivity, so it is
important that you know how to add, delete, edit the size, and organize these
artboards.
Starting Your Document and Adding
an Artboard
Throughout this chapter, lessons take you step-by-step through the process of
working with artboards in XD. You can follow along, or you can just read so
that you understand the important points you should know about artboards.
When you first launch XD, you see a Start screen that allows you to start with
an artboard sized at default sizes. This is helpful, but you can also enter your
own size by typing in values underneath the Custom selection, as seen in
Figure 2-1.

FIGURE 2-1: In the Start menu, choose from preset artboard sizes or type in custom values.
In this example, we selected the iPhone 6/7 (375 x 667) from the drop-down
menu in the iPhone 6/7 choice, as shown in Figure 2-2.
FIGURE 2-2: You have additional artboard sizes available with each selection.
Do this by clicking the arrow to the right of the iPhone 6/7 template selection
in the Start menu and selecting the iPhone 6/7 (375 x 667) option.
An artboard appears and you are ready to start working.

Creating New Artboards
In this example, several artboards with content are created so that you can
practice adding, duplicating, and deleting your own artboards.
As a default, artboards are named with the template that you selected
followed by a slash and a number in sequential order. In this next step, you
type in a custom name:
1. Double-click the Artboard name that appears on top of the artboard
in the work area and change the name to Home.
Note: To change the name, you can also select the Layers icon at the
bottom of the toolbar and double-click on the artboard name that appears
in the Layers panel.
2. Using the Text tool, click and drag to create a text area anywhere on
the initial art board that appears. Type This is my home screen — as
shown in Figure 2-3 — so that you can visually identify it while
working. You can use the Property Inspector to format it anyway that
you want.

FIGURE 2-3: Change the artboard name and add some text to the screen.
Resizing an Artboard
After you have created an artboard, you can change its size, either by
dragging handles surrounding the artboard or by entering values in the
Property Inspector.
 If your artboard becomes unselected, you can reselect it by choosing
the Select tool and then holding down the Ctrl (Windows) or Command
(Mac) key and clicking on the artboard.
Adding a New Artboard
You can easily add artboards as you work in Adobe XD. They are typically
the same size throughout an application, but might change properties such as
portrait or landscape. Here’s how:
1. Add an artboard of the same size by selecting the Artboard tool and
clicking in the pasteboard area of this document.
2. Change the orientation for this new artboard by clicking the
Landscape icon in the Properties Inspector, as you see in Figure 2-4.
3. Double-click the default name above the artboard and change the
name to Home Landscape.
4. You can also add a screen from other templates using your Property
Inspector. To do so, make sure the Artboard tool is still selected and
scroll down in the Properties panel until you see a list of available
templates. In Figure 2-5, the iPhone 6/7 option was selected, and a
new artboard was created to that size.
5. Double-click the name of this artboard and change it to Gallery.

FIGURE 2-4: Change the orientation of your artboard in the Properties panel.

FIGURE 2-5: Add a new artboard by selecting a template in the Properties panel.
Using the Layers Panel
Now that you have several screens, it makes sense to review the Layers panel.
The Layers panel is used to select and organize not only your artboards, but
also any content on your artboards. Notice in Figure 2-6 that the Layers panel
lists the three artboards in this document. They are stacked in the order they
were created, the newest artboard appearing at the top of the stack.

FIGURE 2-6: Click artboards to select them in the Layers panel.
In the following steps, you work with the Layers feature in Adobe XD. Keep
in mind that layers in XD work a little differently than they do in programs
such as Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator. In addition to changing the stacking
order and managing objects, you can also manage your artboards with the XD
layer features.
1. Click on any of the artboards listed in the Layers panel to see that
you can activate each artboard.
2. Select any artboard; in this example, the Home artboard is selected.
You will now move the artboard within the stacking order.
3. Click and drag the artboard to the top of the stack. Release when you
see a line appear above the other artboards.
Duplicating an Artboard
Perhaps you want to work with a version of an existing page. You could copy
and paste items from one artboard to another, but it would make more sense
to duplicate your artboard and then make revisions.
Duplicate an artboard using one of these methods:
Hold down Ctrl+Alt (Windows) or Command+Option (Mac) and then
drag to clone an artboard to another location on your pasteboard.
Select the artboard in the Layers panel and then right-click (Windows) or

Ctrl-click (Mac) and select Duplicate from the contextual menu that
appears.
Note that you can also use the contextual menu to copy and paste artboards,
as well as delete, rename, and export artboards in an image format.
Arranging Artboards in Your
Pasteboard Area
You can reposition an artboard within the pasteboard area by selecting it with
the Select tool and then clicking and dragging. If you would like to select
multiple artboards, use any of these methods:
Shift+click (while holding down the Ctrl key on a Mac) to add artboards
to your selection.
Click and drag a marquee around the entire artboard(s) that you want to
select, as shown in Figure 2-7.
Click and drag through the artboard names in the Layers panel.
Shift-click to add artboards to the selection in the Layers panel.
FIGURE 2-7: Click and drag to surround the entire artboard(s) that you want to select.
Aligning and Distributing Your

Artboards
If you find your pasteboard is becoming messy and unorganized, you can
align and distribute your artboards using the Properties panel. To do this,
follow these steps:
1. Select the artboards that you wish to reposition using Align and
Distribute features.
2. Locate the Align and Distribute icons, shown in Figure 2-8, and click
any Align option and any Distribute option.
FIGURE 2-8: The Align and Distribute icons.
Adding Scrolling Capability to an

Artboard
There are many times that you want to show items scrolling in your
prototype. You can simulate scrolling by changing the size of the artboard
while keeping something called the View Point at the original artboard size. If
you were following along earlier, you can use any of the artboards you have
created, or create a new file with an artboard of any size.
You will first need to create content that extends beyond your screen area. For
this, we add some easy shapes:
1. Select the Ellipse tool and click and drag to add a circle to your
artboard.
2. Choose the Selection tool. Hold down the Alt (Windows) or Option
(Mac) key and drag the circle down to clone it. Repeat this as many
times as you need to in order to have content positioned outside the
default template size, as shown in Figure 2-9.
3. Now, select the artboard either by clicking on the artboard name or
by Ctrl-clicking (Windows) or ⌘-clicking (Mac) on the artboard.
4. Make sure that Scrolling is selected in the Scrolling section of the
Properties Inspector. Note the value in the Viewport Height.
5. Click and drag the bottom-middle handle, as shown in Figure 2-10.
This extends the artboard, but if you used a default template you
should see a dotted guide where the artboard used to end. If you do
not see this dotted guide, see the following note.
Note: If you are using a default template, the Viewport Height value will
not change when you click and drag to make your artboard longer. If
Viewport Height does change, you more than likely created your artboard
with custom values. No worries; just type back in the original height into
the view box control after you extend your artboard.
6. Now you can test the scrolling by clicking on the Desktop Preview
play button in the upper right of your workspace. Note that when the
preview appears that you can scroll through your content.

FIGURE 2-9: Add content that extends beyond the viewing area so that you can see how to
implement scrolling.

FIGURE 2-10: Extend the artboard by clicking and dragging.
Now that you are familiar with the basics of creating and organizing
artboards, you are ready to start putting more content on those screens.

Chapter 3
Adding Shapes, Paths, and
Custom Shapes
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Editing shapes
 Applying fills
 Applying borders
 Customizing and saving shapes
 Using the Pen tool
 Discovering Pen tool tips and tricks
You can create your artwork, such as squares, circles, custom shapes, and
paths, right in Adobe XD. If you are familiar with Adobe Illustrator, the tools
in XD will be relatively easy for you to learn. Keep in mind that you can also
create your shapes in Illustrator and copy and paste them right into Adobe
XD as well.
It All Starts with a Shape
In this chapter, you discover how to use the Rectangle, Ellipse, Line, and Pen
tools to create custom shapes and paths. These shapes can be used for
creating UI such as buttons and menus, as well as custom shapes for creating
masks.
The basic shapes
You can create a shape such as a rectangle or ellipse simply by selecting the
tool from the Tools panel and clicking and dragging where you would like to
place the shape on your artboard. Simply by clicking and dragging from the
upper-left corner to the lower right, you can create a typical rectangle or oval.

Try any of these tips to create rectangles that are more controlled in size:
Shift-drag to make a perfect square of circle.
Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) and drag to pull the shape from the
center.
Alt+Shift (Windows) or Option+Shift (Mac) to pull a perfect square or
circle from a center point.
Determining the size
After you have created the square or circle, you can check and change the
size by using the Properties panel. In Figure 3-1, you see an active rectangle
and its W (Width) and H (Height), as well as its positioning, which is
represented in the X and Y coordinates.
FIGURE 3-1: After you have created a shape, you can see and change properties such as width,
height, and positioning.
Note: The shape tools are sticky, and the tool will remain selected until you
switch to another tool such as the Select tool. Keep this in mind because if
you try to move your shape, you may just accidently create another shape.

Creating a Button
For this section, you are directed through the steps to create a simple button
with a solid fill and some text. You will have the opportunity to learn more
about more advanced fills later in this chapter:
1. Select the Rectangle tool and click and drag to create a rectangle of
any size on an artboard.
In this example, we selected the standard iPhone 6 template.
2. With the rectangle still active, type 200 into the Width textbox and 70
into the Height textbox. Press Tab after you type each to confirm the
value.
Applying a solid fill
In this section, you add a solid fill color to your shape:
1. Make sure your rectangle is still selected. Click the white box to the
left of Fill in the Properties panel to open the color picker.
2. Scroll through the colors by clicking and dragging on the Hue slider.
After you have entered the hue color that you like, click a color in the
color panel to apply it to your rectangle.
 You can save colors that you might use often by clicking the Save
Color Swatch plus sign at the bottom of the color picker, shown in Figure
3-2.
 You can apply transparency to your fill by using the slider on the
right side of the color picker window.
3. Uncheck the checkbox to the left of Border to remove the stroke
around the rectangle.

FIGURE 3-2: Apply a color with the color picker. Save a color by clicking on the Save Color
Swatch + sign.
Rounding your corners
You can leave the corners square or follow either of these next steps to round
the corners of the shape:
You can round corners visually by clicking and dragging the corner
widgets inside the corners of the rectangles, as shown in Figure 3-3.
 Hold down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac OS) key and drag
one corner radius to make it an independent value.
You can also enter values for your corner radius entering values in the
Corner Radios textboxes in the Properties panel. Notice in Figure 3-4 that

you can enter different values for different corners.
FIGURE 3-3: Click and drag the corner widgets to round your corners.
FIGURE 3-4: Enter values into the Properties panel to add varying sizes in the corner radius.
Adding text to your button
Now you add the text to the button:
1. Select the Type tool from the Tools panel and then click inside your
button. A text cursor appears. Don’t worry about the exact placement
of the textbox because this can be moved later.
2. Type the word Submit, and then select the text by pressing Ctrl+A
(Windows) or Command+A (Mac).
3. With the word selected, change the properties in the Text area of the
Properties panel, as shown in Figure 3-5, to select a font and a type
size you like. You can also change the alignment by selecting the Left

Align, Center, or Right Align buttons.
 You can select your current font size in the Font size textbox and
press the arrow up or down to increase or decrease the font size.
4. Click on the Fill box to change the color of your text.
FIGURE 3-5: Select your type properties using the Text section in the Properties panel.
Creating a Border
A border, also known as a stroke, can be applied to any of your shapes and
paths. When you create a border, you select both the width and color.
1. If you still have your button selected, make sure the checkbox is on to
the left of the Border in the Properties panel; then click the box to the
right of the checkbox to open the color picker and select a color that
you would like to use for your border.
2. To select a width, type a value into the Width textbox.

Sampling a color using the eyedropper
Both the Fill and the Border have an eyedropper icon positioned off to the
right. You can select the Eyedropper tool in the Properties panel and then
click on any color located within your current project. This can be helpful
when you have imported images that you want to sample colors from, as
shown in Figure 3-6, or if you are trying to match controls that were created
in a different application.
FIGURE 3-6: Use the eyedropper to sample colors from your project.
Creating a gradient
Adobe XD includes advanced tools that make it simple to create gradients. To
create and use a gradient in your project, follow these steps:
1. Select a shape. At the time of writing, a gradient can only be applied
to a fill.
2. Click the box to the left of Fill in the Properties panel to open the

color picker.
3. Click Solid Fill at the top of the picker and select Gradient from the
menu that appears, as shown in Figure 3-7. A gradient ramp appears
with default colors.
4. You can either click the gradient ramp at the top of the color picker
to add colors, or click directly on the gradient annotator that appears
inside the fill of your object, as you see in Figure 3-8.
5. After you click to add a color stop, you can then use the picker to
select a color. Continue adding color stops with various colors if you
like. Click and drag the color stops to reposition them.
6. Remove any unwanted color stops by selecting one and then pressing
the Delete or Backspace key.
7. Choose a level of transparency by selecting a color stop, and then
dragging up or down in the transparency slider on the right side of
the color picker.

FIGURE 3-7: Select Gradient from the color picker.

FIGURE 3-8: Click to add color stops to your gradient.
Using the Pen Tool
Using the Pen tool in Adobe XD is very similar to the experience you would
have with the Pen tool in other Adobe applications. In this section, you are
provided with simple tips in order for you to create your own custom shapes
and paths with the Pen tool. See Chapter 4 in Book 5 for Illustrator for more
in-depth features that you can take advantage of with the Pen tool in all the
Adobe applications.
Create a straight path by clicking a start point and then Shift-clicking to
create an end point. This creates a path that is either perfectly straight, 45
degrees, or 90 degrees.
If you want to stop the Pen tool without closing a shape, in order to create
a straight line, for instance, simply press the Esc key.
When you make a mistake, press Ctrl+Z (Windows) or Command+Z

(Mac) in order to undo the step; keep the Pen tool active so you can
continue creating your path.
Create a curved, Bézier path by clicking and dragging, as shown in Figure
3-9.
Change the direction of a path by Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac)
clicking and dragging on the directional line. (See Figure 3-10.)
Create a closed shape by clicking and connecting from one point to
another. Closed shapes can be filled to create UI elements and masks, as
shown in Figure 3-11. More about images and masks is covered in
Chapter 5 of this minibook.
FIGURE 3-9: Click and drag with the Pen tool to create a custom Bézier path.

FIGURE 3-10: Hold down the Alt or Option key to change the direction of your curved Bézier path.
FIGURE 3-11: The Pen tool can be used to create custom shapes in XD.
Creating Custom Shapes with the Path
Tools
If your goal is to create a custom shape without using the Pen tool, you can
take advantage of the Object⇒Path menu items.
To use this menu, you create two or more shapes that you would like to unite
together (Add), subtract one from another (Subtract), save only the
intersection of several shapes (Intersect), exclude the overlap of several
shapes (Exclude/Overlap), or convert a shape to a path so that you can edit it

more freely using the Select tool (Convert to Path).
See Figure 3-12 for examples of examples of these path selections.
FIGURE 3-12: Examples of the Path tools in the Path menu item.

Chapter 4
Working with Objects
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Understanding layers
 Grouping and ungrouping
 Cloning and duplicating objects
 Transforming objects
 Aligning and distributing
Getting used to an unfamiliar interface can be trying. Something as simple as
selecting a single object can cause frustration if you do not have a strong
background in or an understanding of the way layers and groups work.
In this chapter, you discover how to organize, select, and group your objects
in Adobe XD. You also find out how to scale and rotate your objects, as well
as align and distribute them evenly.
Getting a Leg Up on Layers
If you are an Adobe Illustrator user, you will recognize that layer features in
Adobe XD are very similar. Essentially, layers in XD are meant to help you
organize your objects. This makes it easier to select, lock, and duplicate your
objects. In this section, you find out how layers work.
Artboards and layers
The best way to explain layers is for you to give it a try yourself. Follow
these steps in a document of your own to build confidence in how you use
layers in XD:
1. Create a new file by selecting File ⇒ New. Use any size template that
you wish.

In this example, we selected the iPhone 6/7 template.
2. Click the Layers icon in the lower-left of the window, as shown in
Figure 4-1, to see that the artboard, which was created by default, is
shown in the panel labeled Artboards. You can also use the keyboard
shortcut Ctrl+Y (Windows) or Command+Y (Mac) to toggle the view
of this panel on and off.
At first, you might be wondering why an artboard is listed in the Layers
panel, but don’t worry — it will make sense after you start adding objects
to this artboard. Note that the artboard has the default name based upon
the template you selected and the screen number that is associated with
this document. Since this is the first artboard, you see the name iPhone
6/7-1.
3. Select the Artboard tool from the Tools Panel and click anywhere in
the work area to add a second artboard.
Note that you now have two artboards listed, with the newest artboard
appearing at the top of the list and with a –2 following the template name,
as shown in Figure 4-2.
4. Keep the file that you started and experiment with some of the other
features available in the Artboards panel.
FIGURE 4-1: Click the Layers icon to reveal a panel that displays your default artboard.

FIGURE 4-2: As you add artboards, they appear at the top of the stacking order.
What can you do with your artboards inside the
Artboard panel?
Using the Layers panel that appears when you click on the Layers icon, you
can rearrange the stacking order, rename, duplicate, delete, and select
artboards.
Rearranging artboards
Click and drag up or down an artboard in the Artboard in the Layers panel in
order to move it up or down in the stacking order. If you like working with
contextual menus, you can right-click any artboard listed in the Layers panel
to see a list of features you can use, including Copy, Paste, Duplicate, Delete,
Rename, and Export. Following are other methods you can use to take
advantage of these same features.
Renaming your artboards
You can rename your artboards using one of these methods:
Double-click the Artboard name that appears directly above the artboard,
and then type a new name.
Double-click the Artboard name that appears in the Layers panel, and
type a new name, as shown in Figure 4-3.

FIGURE 4-3: Double-click the artboard name to activate the textbox and change it.
Copying or duplicating an artboard
To copy your artboard in order to paste it into another document, right-click it
and select Copy. Then open a new document or navigate to another open
document and choose Edit ⇒ Paste.
To duplicate an artboard, right-click it and select Duplicate. A new artboard
immediately appears at the top of the list and in your work area.
You can also duplicate an artboard by holding down the Alt (Windows) or
Option (Mac OS) key and dragging the artboard into the work area.
Deleting an artboard
Be careful with deleting artboards. It is very easy to do, because you only
have to select an artboard in the Layers panel and press the Delete or
Backspace key. Fortunately, this step can be undone using Ctrl+Z (Windows)
or Command+Z (Mac OS).
Selecting artboards
Before trying to select artboards, make sure that you have at least three in
your project.
To select an artboard, simply click the artboard name in the Layers panel.
You can also click on the artboard name above the artboard to select it.
To select multiple artboards, click an artboard, and then Shift-click on
another. This action selects all artboards in between in the stacking order
as well.
To select artboards that are not contiguous, select an artboard and then
hold down the Control+Shift(Windows) or Command+Shift keys and
select another.

Objects you create and layers
In the beginning of this section, you pressed an icon that stated Layers, yet
the information that has been covered thus far has been about artboards. In
this section, you see how objects that you create on these artboards
automatically create layers that you can use for organizing your artwork.
Make sure that you have a document open so that you can follow along with
these steps:
1. Select any shape and click and drag to add it to an artboard. If you
do not have your Layers panel activated, make sure to click on the
Layers icon in the lower-left side of workspace.
2. Notice that when you add an object to an artboard it becomes visible
as a layer in the Layers panel as well. In Figure 4-4, a rectangle shape
was added to the iPhone 6/7-2 artboard. In fact, you only see the
active artboard and any objects on that artboard.
Note: You only see the active artboard and any objects that are on that
artboard. If you want to see another artboard, you can either press the
back arrow to the left of the Artboard name in the Layers panel or simply
select an object on a different artboard in your work area. This either
takes you back to the entire list of artboards, or directly to the artboard
with the selected object,
FIGURE 4-4: Objects that have been added to artboards can be viewed as a list in the Layers
panel.

After you have placed an object on artboard, you can use the Layers panel to
perform many functions, including copying the selected object and pasting an
object, as well as duplicating, deleting, renaming, locking, grouping,
converting your object to a symbol (covered in Chapter 7 of this minibook),
and exporting. You can easily access these options by right-clicking on the
object in the Layers panel. If you do not have a right-clicking mouse on your
Mac, Ctrl-click to see this same contextual menu, as shown in Figure 4-5.
FIGURE 4-5: You can perform many functions with your selected object in the Layers panel.
 If you copy an object, you can use the Layers panel to paste only the
attributes of the copied object. For instance, if you copied a red circle
with a blue border and then selected a square, you could choose Paste
Appearance from the Layers panel and have only the circle’s properties
applied, such as the color and the stroke.
In this section, you have an opportunity to review these functions.
Renaming objects
To keep your files organized and make associating interactions easier,
consider naming your objects with a logical naming structure. Keep your file

names in lowercase, or with just an initial capital, with no spacing to keep it
uniform with the typical standard for naming files used in development. Most
importantly … name it something you will recognize if you try to select it
from a list.
Example might include header_nav or Submit-button.
Selecting objects
As with selecting artboards, you can switch to the Select tool and then click
on an object to select it, or you can follow these options for selecting
additional objects:
Using the Select tool, click an object listed in the Layers panel and then
Shift+click on any other. Using the Shift key to add to a selection
activates any other objects that are in between in the stacking order
displayed in the Layers panel.
Ctrl-click (Windows) or ⌘-click (Mac OS) to select noncontiguous items
in the Layers panel.
Click one object in the artboard and then Shift-click to add additional
objects into the selection. When selecting via the artboard, using the Shift
key does not select objects in between, as it does in the Layers panel.
Using the Select tool, click and drag a marquee selection across the items
that you want to select, as shown in Figure 4-6. You do not have to fully
encompass the object with the marquee … just touching it adds it to the
selection.

FIGURE 4-6: Click and drag using the Select tool to activate multiple objects.
Grouping and ungrouping objects
Now that you know how to select multiple objects, it seems a logical time to
explain grouping. By grouping object, you can keep them together so that
selecting them simultaneously is easier. This is especially important if you are

building UI made of several parts, such as a button that consists of a shape,
icon, and text, as shown in Figure 4-7.
FIGURE 4-7: In this example, there is a group named Truck inside another group named Submit.
You can group objects by selecting them in the Layers panel and then right-
clicking to select Group. You can also group by selecting the items on the
artboard and then pressing Ctrl+G (Windows) or Command+G (Mac).
Notice that when you first group items they appear as Group in the Layers
panel. You can rename this group with a more logical name so you can
identify the object(s) as you work. Do this by double-clicking the word
Group in the Layers panel and then typing a new name in the activated
textbox.
Copying and pasting
Use these features if you want to copy something from one artboard to
another or from one project to another. Use any of these options to cut and
paste:
Select an object right in the Layers panel and right-click it. In the
contextual menu that appears, select Copy, and then right-click it again to
select Paste. The object is duplicated in the same location right on the
artboard. If you prefer, you can also use the typical keyboard shorts for
copy and paste, which are Ctrl+C for copy and Ctrl+V, for paste
(Windows), or Command+C and Command+V (Mac).
As with artboards, you can duplicate an object by right-clicking it in the

Layers panel and selecting Duplicate from the contextual menu that
appears.
Right-click a selected object and choose Copy from the contextual menu;
then, go to another location in your project, right-click, and select Paste
from the contextual menu in order to duplicate the object. When you copy
and paste in XD, the object is pasted exactly on top of itself if you stay on
the same artboard. Otherwise, it recalls the exact position and uses those
same coordinates if you activate another artboard before pasting.
You can hold down the Alt (Windows) or Option (Mac) key and drag a
selected object in order to clone an object right on the artboard.
Locking an object
In order to keep other objects in position, you may want to lock them as you
complete working with them. This is a temporary feature … an object can be
unlocked at any time.
You can tell when an object is locked because a lock icon appears in the
upper-left corner of the object when it is selected, as shown in Figure 4-8.

FIGURE 4-8: When an object is locked, a lock appears in the upper-left corner.
Use any of these options to lock an object:
You can lock an object by positioning your mouse to the right of the
object’s name in the Layers panel and then clicking on the padlock icon
that appears. You can also click in that same location to unlock an object.
You can lock an item by right-clicking (Windows) or Ctrl-clicking (Mac)
and selecting Lock from the contextual menu. After an item is locked,
you can choose Unlock from the same menu.
In order to lock an item while you are working on the artboard, you can
choose Object ⇒  Lock from the menu items, or press the keyboard
shortcut Ctrl+L (Windows) or Command+L (Mac). The keyboard shortcut
is a toggle key, meaning that you can select the locked object and press
Ctrl/Command+L again to unlock it.

Hiding an object
You can hide an object to see what is behind it without moving it, or to try
various options in your design. To hide an object, follow any of these steps:
The fastest way to hide an object is to click the eye icon that appears when
you cross over the area to the right of the named object in the Layers panel.
You can see this icon in Figure 4-9.
FIGURE 4-9: Turn on and off the visibility of an object by clicking the Hide eye icon in the Layers
panel.
Additional features such as exporting and making a symbol are discussed in
Chapters 5 and 7, respectively, of this minibook.
Transforming Objects
You can scale and rotate your objects quickly and easily right on the artboard,
or you can use a more precise method by using the Properties panel.
Give it a spin
Rotate an object right from the artboard by selecting it with the Select tool
and then positioning your cursor outside any of the object’s handles. When
you see the curved arrows, shown in Figure 4-10, click and drag in the
direction you would like to rotate.

FIGURE 4-10: Click and drag outside an object’s handle in order to rotate it.
 Hold down the Shift key while dragging to jump in increments of 15
degrees.
You can also select an object and then enter a value in the Rotation textbox in
the Properties panel, shown in Figure 4-11.
FIGURE 4-11: Enter an exact rotation in the Properties panel.
Aligning and Distributing
After you start creating many objects, you need to consider the position of
those objects and how they relate to each other. In order to lessen noise in
your design, you want to keep icons and text aligned and distributed in a
clean manner. You can check your alignment in several ways, including using
a grid or using guides.
Turning on your grid
You can turn on a grid that is only visible to you by following these steps:

1. Select an artboard by clicking the artboard in the Layers panel or
clicking the Artboard name above the artboard in your work area.
2. Check the checkbox for the Grid in the lower portion of the
Properties panel, as shown in Figure 4-12.
3. If you prefer a different color for your grid, select the square to the
right of the grid checkbox and select a color from the color picker.
You can also use the Transparency slider to change the level of
opacity.
4. If you like, change the size of the grid by typing a value in the Grid
Size textbox to the right of the checkbox.
FIGURE 4-12: Turn on the Grid feature for your artboard.
Be smart about your guides
As a default, XD provides you with guides that turn on as needed. These are

called Smart Guides and should be familiar to you if you use other Adobe
Products.
To use the smart guides, simply pay attention to the lines and shaded areas
that appear as you work. Note in Figure 4-13 that when the one diamond is
dragged, a guide appears indicating that it is aligned with the diamond on the
left.
FIGURE 4-13: You can use Smart Guides for aligning objects.
Smart guides can help with distribution as well
Distribution of objects refers to the space between a bounding box created by
a first object and a last object. In Figure 4-14, you see uneven distribution of
several diamonds on the left, and even distribution of the same objects on the
right. In this example, the spacing is evenly distributed horizontally.
FIGURE 4-14: Uneven distribution on the left side and even distribution on the ride side.
When you position objects, you will see shaded areas appear that indicate
when the space between the objects is equal. This shading hint also appears
when you Alt/Option drag to clone objects, as shown in Figure 4-15.
FIGURE 4-15: Smart guides provide a hint when space is even between objects.
Using the Align and Distribute feature

The Align and Distribute feature that is available in the Object menu and in
the Properties panel can help you keep items in line and spaced evening.
If you select two items, you can take advantage of the Alignment features. If
you select three or more objects, you can also use the Distribution features.
See Figure 4-16 for a definition of which each icon in the Properties panel
represents.
FIGURE 4-16: A visual definition of the Align and Distribute features in the Properties panel.
Keep in mind the trick to determining horizontal versus vertical. The horizon
is horizontal. Anything going from left to right on your page should be
distributed horizontally. Any objects going from the top to the bottom should
be distributed vertically.

Chapter 5
Importing and Exporting from XD
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Importing raster images
 Importing vector graphics
 Importing UI elements
 Working with Illustrator files
 Using custom pen paths for masks
 Exporting an object and artboards
Using Adobe Experience Design (XD) to build your prototypes is great, but
to be able to drop in artwork from Adobe Illustrator, Photoshop, as well as
other sources, is even better. Adobe XD has some tools to create UI, but it
may lack in some advanced features that you are used to taking advantage of
in Adobe Illustrator and Photoshop.
In this chapter, you find out how to import images for your prototype,
including vector imagery that you can continue to edit, even if it was created
in Adobe Illustrator. You even discover how to mask your images into custom
shapes using the masking feature in XD.
You also locate UI kits that provide you with UI specific to styles of controls
that are themed for Windows, Apple IOS, and Google Material Design.
Adding Imagery to Your Prototype
By this point, you have discovered how to create your own UI using some of
the tools, such as the Rectangle and Ellipse tools; now you can take your
prototype to the next step by adding relevant images. If you do not have
images that you can easily access, you can obtain sample images at
www.agitraining.com/dummies.

In order to follow some of the examples in this section, you should have an
empty artboard ready to go.
There are several methods that you can use in order to bring imagery into
your XD prototype:
Browsing your file directory: You can import the following image
formats into XD: JPEG, PNG, GIF using your file directory. To import an
image using the file menu, choose File ⇒ Import and locate an image.
Drag and drop: You can drag and drop images from your file folders,
web pages, and even other applications. Simply click and drag the
imagery from the source and release your mouse when your cursor is over
the artboard. In Figure 5-1, a group of images was all dragged in at once
onto an artboard from a file folder.
Importing with cut and paste: You can copy and paste imagery from
sources, such as other websites and applications, but transparency is not
supported when images are imported in this manner.
FIGURE 5-1: You can select multiple files in a folder and drop them all into your project at once.
Working with Images in XD
After you have imported your images, you don’t have a great deal of editing

control, but you can resize and rotate images just like you would any other
shape. For a refresher on how to scale and rotate objects, review Chapter 4 of
this minibook.
You can also easily round the corners of an imported image using the corner
widgets, as shown in Figure 5-2.
FIGURE 5-2: Click and drag a corner widget in order to round the edges of an image.
Masking your images
By defining a closed shape with a shape tool or pen tool, you can define what
becomes a mask. A mask offers you the ability to put an image into a custom
shape. It also offers you the ability to crop out parts of an image that you do
not want to be visible. Follow these steps in order to create a mask:
1. Import an image on to an artboard.
2. Create a shape and size and position it over the image, as shown in
Figure 5-3. The placement over the image determines what part of
the image will show.
3. Using the Select tool, select both the shape and the image. It is

important that the shape be on top of the image; if it is not, choose
Object ⇒ Arrange ⇒ Bring to Front.
4. With both objects selected, choose Object ⇒ Mask with Shape. The
shape now contains the image, as shown in Figure 5-4.
FIGURE 5-3: Position a shape over an image to determine what part of the image you want to
show.

FIGURE 5-4: An image masked with a shape.
Note: If you would like to edit the positioning of the shape over the image,
simply double-click the masked object using the Select tool. When you are
finished repositioning your image and shape, click anywhere else on your
artboard.
Taking advantage of masks
In this chapter, the focus is on images, but you can mask any object(s) with a
shape. Perhaps you have several items that you want to keep together in a
circular shape, or you want to crop a series of repeated images. Both of these
tasks can be done by following these steps:
1. After creating your artwork, add a shape on the top, or bring a shape
that you wish to mask into to the front using Object ⇒ Arrange ⇒ 
Bring to Front.
2. Select all the objects that are to be masked in addition to the topmost
object, which is the mask, and choose Object  ⇒ Mask with Shape.
(See Figure 5-5.) If you need to edit objects in a mask independently, you
can either choose Object ⇒ Ungroup Mask, or open the Layers panel and
double-click on the icon to the left of the object named Mask Group.
When you double-click, it allows you to select individual objects.

FIGURE 5-5: You can select multiple objects and mask them into one shape.
Importing Vector Images into XD
In addition to importing images, you can also import vector images from
several sources, including the Clipboard, Illustrator, SVG (scalable vector
graphic), and Sketch (another popular prototyping tool).
Here are two methods that you can use to import editable vector objects into
Adobe XD:
Copy and paste: Select your vector object(s) in applications such as
Adobe Illustrator or Sketch and copy them. Return to XD and paste. The
vector graphics are placed and retain their editability.
Choose File  ⇒ Import: If you use File ⇒ Save to save a file from Adobe
Illustrator in the SVG format, you can use the import feature in XD to
bring in an editable copy of your artwork.
After you have imported your vector artwork into XD, you can continue
working with the files and borders using the features available to you in the
Properties panel.

Exporting Your Artwork from XD
Most of this chapter has been about getting artwork into Adobe XD; now you
find out how to get your artwork out of XD. Follow these steps to export
objects out of XD:
1. Export only selected objects from XD by locating the object(s) on the
Layers panel and then right-clicking to select Export from the
contextual menu that appears.
A Save As dialog box appears with options for saving your file into
several different types of web formats.
2. Enter a name for your artwork in the Save As textbox.
3. Navigate to a location where you want to save the exported file.
4. Select either the PNG, SVG, or PDF format from the Format drop-
down menu.
5. If you just want to export one copy, leave the Export For set to
Design. The other options, Web, iOS, and Android, offer the
capability of saving out multiple fiels at different formats.
6. Press Export.
 Export your entire project by using the Save As window. You can
choose File ⇒ Save As and choose from several different file formats that
include SnagProj (a popular screen capture software), PNG, JPG, TIFF,
GIF, and BMP.

Chapter 6
Adding Text to Your XD Project
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Reviewing importing onscreen text properties
 Adding and stylizing your text
 Importing text
 Using the Repeat Grid feature
 Importing updated text into your repeated grid
Text in Adobe Experience Design (XD) is used for UI elements such as
buttons, for navigational elements such as links to other content, and for
general content such as descriptions, directions, lists, and more. In this
chapter, you find out how to add text to your UI and control the look using
the Properties panel. You also discover how to import text from other sources
and create a repeated list of items using the Repeat Grid feature. Keep in
mind that the Adobe Experience (XD) application is continually changing
through its development, so you may see slight changes in UI.
Adding Text Right in Adobe XD
Adding text is just a matter of selecting the Text tool from the Tools panel
and then indicating where you want it placed on your artboard by either
clicking or clicking and dragging.
You can see the difference between the methods in Figure 6-1. When you
click to create a text insertion point, the text width area is undefined and will
run on in a line until you press the Return key. If you want to control the
column width, you typically would click and drag to create your text area.
The text area can be adjusted using the handles to be larger or smaller.
In Figure 6-1, the text in the top line will go off the artboard unless you create

a manual return. The text area in the bottom of the screen allows you to
control width and height of the text area with handles.
FIGURE 6-1: Comparing clicking and clicking and dragging to insert text.
Adjusting Text Properties
When you have text in your project, you can start changing the text
properties. These properties include Font Family, Font Size, Font Weight,
Alignment, Character Spacing (kerning and tracking), Line Spacing (leading),
Fill, Border (stroke), Shadow (drop shadow), and Background Blur. So let’s
review how those properties are applied.
About readability and font selections
The selection of a font is of critical importance. You may have many font
choices in your system, but only a select few will cut it as a successful choice
for onscreen reading. Some characteristics to look for in your font selection
include the following:
Serif or non-serif? In Figure 6-2, you see a font family in the serif style
on the top and one in sans serif on the bottom. Serifs have a slight
projection that finishes off a stroke of a letter. Sans serif, on the other
hand, does not have that slight projection. Sans serif typefaces tend to
look more modern and are a popular choice for interactive applications
and websites. In the past, it was believed that font families with serifs

were easier to read when there was a large amount of text. Tests
performed with eye-tracking devices have proven that there is no major
difference in readability between serif or sans-serif, so feel free to pick
either style as long as you pay attention to some of the other font
characteristics that follow.
Straight, even line widths: Because your type is going to be created
from pixels, it is best not to have lots of variation in the width of your
text. In Figure 6-3, you can see the difference, in a pixel preview, between
a font choice with variation in the width (top) and a font that is consistent
in its width.
Strong counters: Counters are the holes that you see in letters like “O,”
“B,” and “R.” Pay attention to how large those counters are as they can
also cause readability issues if they close up when displayed as pixels on
a screen. A pixel view of two different font families appears in Figure 6-4;
see how the counters look in each in comparison to each other.
Descenders and cap height: Short descenders and low cap heights are
important for readability on the screen. At the top of Figure 6-5 you see a
font family with short descenders and low cap heights; at the bottom, a
font with long descenders and high cap heights.
FIGURE 6-2: A serif typeface on the top, sans-serif on the bottom.

FIGURE 6-3: The top font has variation in the thick and thin lines that create the font; the bottom
font is consistent and easier to read onscreen.
FIGURE 6-4: Look for strong open counters in your font family selection.
FIGURE 6-5: A font family with short descenders and a low cap height is typically easier to read
onscreen.
Selecting your font family
Now that you know what makes a better font selection for readability, use the
Properties panel to select one. Things to look for when making your selection
include the following:
Font family: After you have entered some type on your screen, you can
select it and choose the Font Family drop-down menu in the Text section
of the Properties panel. If you know the font you want, simply start typing
the font’s name into the Font Family textbox, and if it is in your system, it
will be found in your list.
 Don’t forget that you have fonts available to you through Adobe
TypeKit. See Book 1, Chapter 3 for specifics of how to use this great

extra feature that comes with your subscription to the Adobe Creative
Cloud.
Font weight: After you select a font family, you can choose a weight
from the Font Weight drop-down menu. Depending upon the fonts that
you have in your system, you will have different font weight choices; see
Figure 6-6.
Font size: You can simply type a font size into the Font Size textbox, but
if you are not sure what size works best, you can position your cursor
underneath the Font Size textbox and click and drag. Look for the double-
headed arrow shown in Figure 6-7 before you drag. Dragging up
decreases the size; down increases the size.
Alignment: You can change your selected text to Align Left, Center, or
Right using the Alignment buttons in the Text section of the Properties
panel.
Character spacing: Character spacing refers to the space between
characters. This is known as tracking. In Figure 6-8, you see the result of
increasing the spacing between characters.
Note in Figure 6-9 that you can use the same click-and-drag technique
that is available in the Font Size textbox in order to visually change the
character spacing.
Line height: Line height is leading, the space between the lines of text.
This can play an important role in information design, so make sure that
you are using this consistently throughout your design. You can also
position your cursor below the Line Height textbox and click and drag up
or down to decrease and increase your line height.
Color: Change the Fill color by clicking on the box next to Fill color in
the Properties panel. You perform this task the same way you would with
any shape. Select the Fill box and select a color from the Color Picker.
You can also select transparency for your text from the Transparency slide
available on the right of the Color Picker.
Border: Applying a border puts a stroke around your text. This is not
recommended because it may cause readability issues. Use it sparingly
and perhaps only for special effects. Figure 6-10 shows an example of a
larger typeface that has a thin stroke and a white fill on a darker

background. In a situation like this, a border could work, but not with
smaller text.
FIGURE 6-6: Choose a font family and font weight.

FIGURE 6-7: Click and drag to visually change the font size.
FIGURE 6-8: Characters at normal spacing, set at 0 (zero) and then set at 150.

FIGURE 6-9: You can also visually change the size of the character spacing by clicking and
dragging.
FIGURE 6-10: A small border with a white fill on a dark background.
Importing Text

Of course, you can type directly into Adobe XD, but sometimes it is easier to
import text. This can be completed easily using two different methods:
Cut and paste: You can copy and paste text into Adobe XD from most
other applications, including Adobe applications, as well as Word, Google
Docs, text applications, and more.
Drag and drop text: You can also drag and drop .txt files right from
folders into XD. Simply select the .txt file and drag and drop it right onto
an artboard in XD. The text appears in a new textbox. In the next section,
you see how you to drag a .txt file right on top of a repeated grid and have
your text replaced instantly.
Using the Repeat Grid Feature
Repeat Grid is one of the top timesaving features in Adobe XD. The Repeat
Grid feature allows you to create a set of repeated elements with a simple
click and drag. When repeated, you can tweak one set of repeated elements
and have those changes reflected instantly throughout the rest of the
elements. The steps in this section help you experience this great feature.
It is best to follow along with this section if you can. You can find a sample
file that has an image and some text in it in the DummiesCCfiles folder at
www.agitraining.com/dummies. Open the XD folder and choose the
RepeatGrid-Sample file. Then follow these steps:
1. Open a file that has elements that you want to repeat vertically
(down) the page. As previously mentioned, you can create your own
or use the RepeatGrid-Sample file that has been provided at our site.
2. Select all the items that are to be repeated, and then press the Repeat
Grid button in the Properties panel. You could also choose to use the
keyboard shortcut, Ctrl+R (Windows) or ⌘  +R (Mac).
Handles appear on the right and bottom sides of your elements, as shown
in Figure 6-11.
3. Click and drag down on the bottom handle to see that a repeat is
created automatically as you drag, as you see in Figure 6-12. Drag
beyond the template to extend the artwork outside the bottom.

4. Go back to your original art and make a simple change. Perhaps
change the type size of the title, or scale the image a bit. Notice that as
you make changes in this first item the changes are reflected
throughout the repeat. This can be a huge timesaver, but follow along
through the next steps to see how you can easily replace the repeated
image and text.
FIGURE 6-11: Select the items that you would like to repeat and then press the Repeat Grid
button in the Properties panel.

FIGURE 6-12: Repeat selected items easily using the Repeat Grid feature.
Importing updated images into your repeated grid
After you have repeated items, you may want to demonstrate how your
application is going to work with more realistic content. The repeated
element does not provide an opportunity to show the various data that your

app may be offering. In this next section, you take a folder of images and
drop them on top of your repeated grid in order to replace your original
image. Just follow these steps:
1. Locate a folder of images in a format that XD supports, such as
JPEG, PNG, or GIF. If you are accessing the DummiesCCfiles folder
mentioned earlier, you can find a folder named Insects inside the XD
Files folder.
2. Position your XD window that contains the artboard with the repeat
so that you can see it and also the folder full of images.
3. Make sure to select all the images, and then click and drag them onto
the Repeated Grid. The images are replaced, as you can see in Figure
6-13.
FIGURE 6-13: You can drag and drop multiple images into the repeated grid to replace your
image content.

 You can drag images from the Bridge application into Adobe XD as
well.
Updating your text in your repeated grid
In this next section, you discover how to update your text in a repeated grid.
This is completed in much the same way as with images, but the .txt format is
vital to having this process work:
1. Create text in any application that can save the file in a Plain Text
format — that is, with an extension of .txt. The text can be generated
from Notepad, Word, downloaded from Google Docs as Plain Text, or
exported from many other applications. For this example, you can
use the sample text file named Bugtext.txt in the XD-Files folder on
our site.
2. Position the folder that contains the text file so that you can see the
file and the repeated grid.
3. As with the process of replacing the repeated image, click and drag
the .txt file over your repeated grid text, as shown in Figure 6-14. The
text is replaced with text from your file.
You can see the example as it appears once the imagery and text have
been replaced in Figure 6-15.
4. If you extended beyond the viewing area, make sure to click on the
artboard name above the artboard to select it.
5. Drag the bottom handle to extend to the length of your repeated grid,
as shown in Figure 6-16. This allows the screen to be scrolled in the
preview. The dotted line represents the area that previews before the
scroll.
6. Click on the Desktop Preview button and scroll to see your repeated
grid in action.

FIGURE 6-14: Click and drag a .txt file over the repeated grid to replace the text.

FIGURE 6-15: The repeated grid with new imagery and text.

FIGURE 6-16: Click and drag to extend the viewing area of your repeated grid.

Chapter 7
Taking Advantage of Symbols
and UI Kits
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Creating a symbol
 Editing existing symbols
 Using a UI kit
This chapter is all about saving time and keeping your artwork consistent. By
creating symbols, you can save an object in a form that can be dragged and
dropped right unto your artboard and dynamically updated as needed. In this
chapter, you also find out how to use UI kits. UI kits are provided so that you
can easily locate patterns for popular platforms such as iOS, Android, and
Windows.
Using Symbols
If you find that you are reusing objects in your UI, you should consider
converting them to symbols. Symbols are linked objects that can be reused
across all artboards in a document. Because they are dynamically linked,
changes to one reflect across all instances.
In this next set of steps, we use the icon artwork from the DummiesCCfiles
folder at www.agitraining.com/dummies. You can use our sample files or
one of your own.
To convert an object into a symbol, follow these steps:
1. Open a document that contains at least one artboard, an icon, and
some related text. In this example, shown in Figure 7-1, we open the
file from the DummiesCCfiles folder named delivery-symbol-sample in

Adobe XD.
2. Select an object and some text that you want to reuse. In this
example, one of the grouped Submit buttons is selected.
3. Right-click (Windows) or Ctrl-click (Mac) and select Make Symbol
from the contextual menu.
 If you like keyboard shortcuts, you can select an item and press
Ctrl+K (Windows) or ⌘  +K (Mac) to convert it into a symbol.
FIGURE 7-1: The delivery-symbol-sample file.
A couple things happen when you convert object(s) into a symbol:
If you look in the Layers panel, the object that you converted into a

symbol now has a symbol icon to the left of the name, as shown in Figure
7-2.
If you click the Symbols icon in the lower left of the XD workspace, you
see your symbol in a thumbnail view, as shown in Figure 7-3.
FIGURE 7-2: In the Layers panel, the symbol has an icon to the left, reflecting that it is a symbol.
FIGURE 7-3: The symbol appears as a thumbnail in the Symbols panel.
Using your symbol
Perhaps you want to use this symbol in another location. You can do so by
following these steps:

1. If you are using the delivery-symbol-sample file, delete the Submit
button on artboard iPhone 6/7-2 (use the Delete or Backspace keys to
delete). If you are creating your own file, this step is unnecessary.
2. Make sure the Symbols panel is open by clicking the Symbols icon in
the lower left of the XD workspace.
3. Click and drag the newly created symbol from the Symbols panel to
the second artboard. Reposition it as necessary.
 You can also Alt/Option-drag a symbol to clone it to another
location.
Making edits to your symbol
In this section, you see how edits to one instance of your symbol
instantaneously update any other instances. To see how this works, follow
these steps:
1. Click the rectangle in one of your symbol instances.
2. In the Properties panel, change the Fill to a different color, perhaps
red. Note how that change instantly occurs in both instances of the
symbol. This is the case with any property.
3. Now double-click the text in either symbol to edit it. Change the word
from Submit to Send. Notice that this change of text is not reflected in
the other instance, as shown in Figure 7-4. This makes a great
solution when you want consistency in buttons but don’t want the
same text in each one.
If the text change is something that you want reflected in all the symbol
instances, right-click and choose Update All Symbols.

FIGURE 7-4: A change in the text in your symbol is not reflected in other instances.
Removing a symbol
If you are no longer interested in keeping your symbol instances linked, you
can right-click on the symbol in the Symbols panel and select Remove
Symbol from the contextual menu. The objects on the page are not deleted,
but they are no longer linked to a symbol and can be edited independently. If
you want to remove just one symbol to change it without affecting all
instances of the symbol, select the symbol, right-click, and select Ungroup
Symbol.
Taking Advantage of UI Kits
In this section, you are introduced to UI kits. A UI kit is a collection of UI
elements that you can copy and paste to use in your designs. At the time of

writing there were three default UI kits: Apple iOS, Google Material, and
Microsoft Windows. We are sure that resourceful folks will start creating
more of these over time.
To open a UI kit, choose File⇒  Get UI Kit and select a kit from the menu.
This takes you to a website from which you can download the components
for each of the available kits. In Figure 7-5, the Google Material UI kit has
been selected.

FIGURE 7-5: The Google Material UI kit provides patterns and other UI elements.
To use these elements, you can either select the items(s) you want from the
Layers panel or use your Select tool and then choose Edit  ⇒  Copy. If you
prefer, you can use the keyboard shortcut Ctrl+C (Windows) or ⌘  +C (Mac).
Locate an artboard in a different project in which you would like to use the

items and choose Edit  ⇒  Paste. The keyboard shortcut is Ctrl+V (Windows)
or ⌘  +V (Mac).

Chapter 8
Creating Interactivity in Adobe XD
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Creating links
 Creating transitions between screens
 Previewing your prototype
Now that you have some practice creating UI elements in XD, you can start
adding interactivity in the form of links from one clickable element to a new
screen. This interactivity is created in the Prototype mode in Adobe XD. You
can use the links that you make in the Prototype mode to demonstrate your
information architecture, navigational functions, or changes to objects when
users click on them, like a change in a button or the visibility of a menu.
Entering Prototype Mode
If you have been working in XD, you might have a file ready to start working
on. If not, you can find a file to use for this chapter at
www.agitraining.com./dummies. Look for the XD-Files folder inside the
DummiesCCfiles folder. In this example, the file named BabyAnimalsApp
can be used. To enter Prototype mode, follow these steps:
1. Open a file that has multiple artboards or open the BabyAnimalsApp
that was created for this section. This sample prototype, shown in
Figure 8-1, is a simple three-screen project that offers you the
opportunity to create links from one screen to another.
2. Select Prototype from the top of the Adobe XD workspace, as shown
in Figure 8-2. If you see a dialog box explaining what the Prototype
mode is, press Got It to move on.
3. Click the Puppy button on the Home artboard, and an arrow

appears.
4. Click and drag the arrow to the Puppy artboard. A dialog box
appears that provides the target artboard name, default transition
effect, easing selection, and duration, as shown in Figure 8-3.
Here is an explanation of these options:
Target: The target is the artboard that will be visible when the user
clicks the button. The default is the artboard that you dragged to,
but you can change the target at any time with this menu.
Note: The None option allows you to undo a link.
Transition: The transition type allows you to decide how one
screen transitions, or moves, into another screen. From the drop-
down menu, you can choose options that simply dissolve or fade
into another screen or slide or push.
Note: The Slide option slides the target screen on top of the current
screen. Push pushes the current content out of the way as the new
content slides in.
Easing: Easing is an animation technique used to provide a more
realistic method of accelerating or slowing down an animation.
Ease in is when the motion begins slowly before gaining speed.
Ease out is when an object in motion slows down before coming to
a stop.
Duration: Duration determines the time you want the animation to
take to move from one screen to another.
5. Accept the changes in the dialog box by clicking your work area.
6. Test your first animation by clicking the Desktop Preview button
(right-facing arrow) in the upper right of your XD workspace.
7. If you want more practice, connect the Kitten button to the Kitten
artboard and the Home buttons on both the Puppy and Kitten
artboards back to home.

FIGURE 8-1: Use a file that has multiple screens to create links.
FIGURE 8-2: Create your interactivity in the Prototype mode.

FIGURE 8-3: Click and drag to create links from an object to another screen.
Previewing Your Artwork
As you tested in the last section, you found out that you could click the
Desktop Preview button in order to see your interactivity at work. There is
more to this preview than you might expect. It is a live preview, meaning that
you can be making changes and still see them in the preview.
 If you want to navigate your screens without links, use your left- and
right-arrow keys on your keyboard.
To test this, try moving something on your artboard while viewing that
artboard in the desktop preview. Note that the change is made
instantaneously. Note that when the cover image was repositioned in Figure
8-4, the preview was updated.

FIGURE 8-4: The desktop preview is live and updates changes immediately.

Chapter 9
Sharing Your XD Project
IN THIS CHAPTER
 Using the Desktop Preview
 Recording your prototype interactions
 Sharing online
 Embedding prototype into Behance
Your prototype exists so that you can test your app or website before you
invest lots of money in expensive coding. With XD, you can view your
preview on your desktop, as you did in the previous chapter, on a device, with
the XD app, or on a share site.
Viewing Your App/Website on Your
Desktop
This section might be a review for those of you who follow the chapters in
order, but keep reading. The Desktop Preview doesn’t only offer the ability to
test and preview your app on your desktop, but it also allows you to create a
video of you using your app in the preview mode. This is helpful when you
want to show the typical user flow, or when you want to have a demonstration
that goes along well with a user story.
You can use your own file or you can use a completed file named
BabyAnimalApp-share that is available at www.agitraining.com/dummies in
the XD-Files folder inside of the DummiesCCfiles folder. Just follow these
steps:
1. Open a file that has already had interaction applied to it, as discussed
in Chapter 8 of this minibook.

2. After the file is open, click the Desktop Preview button in the upper
right of the work area to see a preview appear. The active artboard is
the first to appear in the preview, as shown in Figure 9-1.
3. If you are using our sample file, you see that links were created on the
two main buttons that you see on the home screen. Click Puppy, you
go to the Puppy page; click Back, in the upper left, and you go back
to the home screen.
As you see, the desktop preview allows you to quickly test your links and
animations.
FIGURE 9-1: The active artboard is the first screen to appear in the preview window.
Creating a Movie for Your User Story
In this section, you record your interactions in this prototype in a movie. You
can use this movie to demonstrate a user story, post in your portfolio, or share
your ideas with others on your team.
To record a video, simply click the timer in the upper-right corner of the work
area, as shown in Figure 9-2. The Record button blinks, indicating that your
mouse movements and clicks are being recorded. You also see the timer start.

FIGURE 9-2: You can record your interactions in a movie using the Desktop Preview feature.
It is best to practice your movements prior to recording so that there are no
unexpected movements or delays.
When you have finished demonstrating your prototype, click on the timer to
stop recording. At this point, you can save your movie.

Using the Device Preview Feature
Adobe XD allows you to create a clickable prototype right on your phone or
other mobile device. To do this, you need to do two things:
Download and install the XD mobile app onto your device, iOS or
Android. You can find the app at xd.adobe.com/apps or at Google Play
or the App Store.
Hardwire your device using your USB port and connector on your
computer.
After you have completed these steps, click the Preview on Device button
that is also in the upper right of your work area, to the right of the Device
Preview button, as shown in Figure 9-3.
FIGURE 9-3: Preview your app right on your device by using the XD app.
Sharing Your XD File with Others
One of the many benefits of using Adobe XD is the ability to share your
prototype with others. By sharing your prototype, you can offer access via a
link to your client or remote members of your team. Your prototype is saved
to the Creative Cloud where others can open, test, and comment on it.

About the Author
Jennifer Smith’s expertise bridges the gap between design and development
of print, web, and interactive design.
Jennifer’s career started when she was one of the first creative directors to
push the limits of technology and its integration with design. She has since
managed and developed projects for companies such as Adobe, Microsoft,
Reebok, Hershey Foods, Hasbro, Nike, and more. Jennifer’s expertise lies in
interpreting highly technical information and presenting it in a clear and easy-
to-understand manner.
In addition to teaching and consulting, Jennifer is also a UX designer who
creates educational IOS apps, websites, and apps for Windows devices. She is
directly involved in the entire process from brainstorming to research,
prototyping, wireframing, testing, and final visual design.
Jennifer has written more than 20 books on technology and design, as well as
over 100 publications used for curricula. Her books include: Digital
Classroom: Adobe Illustrator and Photoshop CC, The Adobe Creative Cloud
For Dummies (versions CS through CC), Adobe Creative Suite Web Premium,
Adobe Illustrator Classroom in a Book, and more. Jennifer is the co–founder
of American Graphics Institute, which has classroom training centers in
Boston, New York, and Philadelphia.
Christopher Smith is president of the American Graphics Institute. He is the
author of more than ten books on web, interactive, and print publishing
technology, including many of the Adobe official training guides. Learn more
about American Graphics Institute’s training programs at
www.agitraining.com or follow them on Twitter @agitraining. You can
follow Christopher on Twitter @cgsmith.

Author’s Acknowledgments
Jennifer Smith: Thank you to the highly professional staff at American
Graphics Institute (AGItraining.com). You offered great insight into what
people need to know in order to creative projects using Adobe Creative
Cloud.
A big thanks to Kelly Walker, who helped make sure content of this book was
current and easily understood by readers of all levels.
Thanks to all at John Wiley & Sons, Inc., especially Christopher Morris, who
applied just enough pressure to help me meet my deadlines, yet was an
absolute pleasure to work with.
Thanks to Amy Fandrei for having faith.
Also, we would like to thank our technical editor, Patti Scully-Lane, for all
the extra insight and effort she put into technically reviewing this book.
Grant, Elizabeth, and Edward — thanks for putting up with our long hours in
front of the keyboard night after night.
Thanks to all of Kelly and Alex’s friends for permission to use their photos.
Christopher Smith: Thanks to our team of fellow instructors at American
Graphics Institute for their insight and support in the production of this book.

Publisher’s Acknowledgments
Acquisitions Editor: Amy Fandrei
Production Editor: Siddique Shaik
Copy Editor: Christopher Morris
Technical Editor: Patti Scully-Lane
Editorial Assistant: Owen Kaelble
Sr. Editorial Assistant: Cherie Case
Cover Image: © CasPhotography/iStockphoto





Take Dummies with you everywhere
you go!
Go to our Website
Like us on Facebook
Follow us on Twitter
Watch us on YouTube
Join us on LinkedIn
Pin us on Pinterest

Circle us on google+
Subscribe to our newsletter
Create your own Dummies book cover
Shop Online

WILEY END USER LICENSE
AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.

