
Adobe Premiere Pro CC Classroom
in a Book® 2018 release
The official training workbook from Adobe
Maxim Jago

Adobe Premiere Pro CC Classroom in a Book® (2018 release)
© 2018 Adobe. All rights reserved.
Adobe Press is an imprint of Pearson Education, Inc. For the latest on Adobe
Press books, go to www.adobepress.com. To report errors, please send a note to
errata@peachpit.com. For information regarding permissions, request forms and
the appropriate contacts within the Pearson Education Global Rights &
Permissions department, please visit www.pearsoned.com/permissions/.
If this guide is distributed with software that includes an end user license
agreement, this guide, as well as the software described in it, is furnished under
license and may be used or copied only in accordance with the terms of such
license. Except as permitted by any such license, no part of this guide may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written
permission of Adobe Systems Incorporated. Please note that the content in this
guide is protected under copyright law even if it is not distributed with software
that includes an end user license agreement.
The content of this guide is furnished for informational use only, is subject to
change without notice, and should not be construed as a commitment by Adobe
Systems Incorporated. Adobe Systems Incorporated assumes no responsibility or
liability for any errors or inaccuracies that may appear in the informational
content contained in this guide.
Please remember that existing artwork or images that you may want to include in
your project may be protected under copyright law. The unauthorized
incorporation of such material into your new work could be a violation of the
rights of the copyright owner. Please be sure to obtain any permission required
from the copyright owner.
Any references to company names in sample files are for demonstration
purposes only and are not intended to refer to any actual organization.
Adobe, the Adobe logo, After Effects, Adobe Audition, Adobe Camera Raw,
CinemaDNG, Creative Cloud, Encore, Flash, Illustrator, Lumetri, Adobe Media
Encoder, Photoshop, Prelude, Adobe Premiere Pro, SpeedGrade, Adobe Story,
and Classroom in a Book are either registered trademarks or trademarks of
Adobe Systems Incorporated in the United States and/or other countries. Adobe
product screenshots reprinted with permission from Adobe Systems
Incorporated.

Apple, Mac OS, macOS, Macintosh, and Safari are trademarks of Apple,
registered in the U.S. and other countries. Microsoft, Windows, and Internet
Explorer are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft
Corporation in the U.S. and/or other countries. All other trademarks are the
property of their respective owners.
Adobe Systems Incorporated, 345 Park Avenue, San Jose, California 95110-
2704, USA
Notice to U.S. Government End Users. The Software and Documentation are
“Commercial Items,” as that term is defined at 48 C.F.R. §2.101, consisting of
“Commercial Computer Software” and “Commercial ComputerSoftware
Documentation,” as such terms are used in 48 C.F.R. §12.212 or 48 C.F.R.
§227.7202, as applicable. Consistent with 48 C.F.R. §12.212 or 48 C.F.R.
§§227.7202-1 through 227.7202-4, as applicable, the Commercial Computer
Software and Commercial Computer Software Documentation are being licensed
to U.S. Government end users (a) only as Commercial Items and (b) with only
those rights as are granted to all other end users pursuant to the terms and
conditions herein. Unpublished-rights reserved under the copyright laws of the
United States. Adobe Systems Incorporated, 345 Park Avenue, San Jose, CA
95110-2704, USA. For U.S. Government End Users, Adobe agrees to comply
with all applicable equal opportunity laws including, if appropriate, the
provisions of Executive Order 11246, as amended, Section 402 of the Vietnam
Era Veterans Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974 (38 USC 4212), and Section
503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, and the regulations at 41
CFR Parts 60-1 through 60-60, 60-250, and 60-741. The affirmative action
clause and regulations contained in the preceding sentence shall be incorporated
by reference.
Writer: Maxim Jago
Adobe Press Executive Editor: Nancy Davis
Development Editor: Victor Gavenda
Senior Production Editor: Tracey Croom
Technical Reviewer: Jarle Leirpoll
Keystroke Reviewer: Megan Ahearn
Copyeditor: Kim Wimpsett
Proofreader: Patricia Pane
Compositor: Kim Scott, Bumpy Design
Indexer: James Minkin
Cover Designer: Eddie Yuen

Cover Illustration: Eric Van Nynatten (USA), behance.net/ericvannynatten
Interior Designer: Mimi Heft
Printed and bound in the United States of America
ISBN-13: 9780134853239
ISBN-10: 0134853237
1 18

Where are the Lesson Files?
Purchase of this Classroom in a Book in any format gives you access to the
lesson files you’ll need to complete the exercises in the book.
You’ll find the files you need on your Account page at peachpit.com on the
Registered Products tab.
1. Go to www.peachpit.com/register.
2. Sign in or create a new account.
3. Enter the ISBN: 9780134853239.
4. Answer the questions as proof of purchase.
5. The lesson files can be accessed through the Registered Products tab on your
Account page.
6. Click the Access Bonus Content link below the title of your product to
proceed to the download page. Click the lesson file links to download them
to your computer.


Acknowledgments
Producing effective learning materials for such an advanced technology is a team
effort. Friends, colleagues, fellow filmmakers, and technology experts have all
contributed to this book. There are too many names to mention, but let’s say this:
I have often joked that in Britain we don’t say “awesome.” Instead, we say
“perfectly acceptable.” On this occasion, “perfectly acceptable” isn’t enough.
Rather, I will have to say our British equivalent of “super awesome”: Those
people who make this world better by sharing, nurturing, caring, showing,
telling, demonstrating, making, and helping are all “more than acceptable.”
Everything on these pages was inspected by a team of experienced editors who
checked and corrected typos, spelling errors, naming errors, false attributions,
suspect grammar, unhelpful phrasing, and inconsistent descriptions. This
wonderful team didn’t just highlight text that needed correcting. They offered
positive alternatives that I could simply agree to, so in a literal sense, this book is
the product of many people’s contributions. I’d like to thank the whole team at
Peachpit and Adobe Press, who made it possible to produce such a beautifully
finessed work.
As each draft chapter was completed, the most amazing and highly experienced
Victor Gavenda checked over the text to make sure it was ideally accessible for
learners, and all references to the technology were run by the remarkable media
technology expert Jarle Leirpoll, who has an incredible depth of knowledge of
Premiere Pro.
An amount of the content of this book is derived from material written by
Richard Harrington, four versions back. The original table of contents was
worked out by the two of us, and though I have updated his chapters, rephrased,
and reworded them, a substantial amount remains unchanged or is significantly
informed by his original work.
Finally, let’s not forget Adobe. The passion and enthusiasm demonstrated by
those wonderful individuals, who are so committed to creatives like you and me,
qualifies as “the most acceptable of all.” They are, indeed, extraordinarily
awesome!
—Maxim Jago

Contents
GETTING STARTED
About Classroom in a Book
Prerequisites
Installing Premiere Pro CC
Optimizing performance
Using the lesson files
Relinking the lesson files
How to use these lessons
Online content
Additional resources
Adobe Authorized Training Centers
1 TOURING ADOBE PREMIERE PRO CC
Starting the lesson
Performing nonlinear editing in Premiere Pro
Expanding the workflow
Touring the Premiere Pro interface
Keyboard shortcuts
Review Questions
Review Answers
2 SETTING UP A PROJECT
Starting the lesson
Creating a project
Setting up a sequence
Review Questions
Review Answers
3 IMPORTING MEDIA

Starting the lesson
Importing assets
Working with ingest options and proxy media
Working with the Media Browser panel
Importing still image files
Using Adobe Stock
Customizing the media cache
Recording a voice-over
Review Questions
Review Answers
4 ORGANIZING MEDIA
Starting the lesson
Using the Project panel
Working with bins
Monitoring footage
Modifying clips
Review Questions
Review Answers
5 MASTERING THE ESSENTIALS OF VIDEO EDITING
Starting the lesson
Using the Source Monitor
Navigating the Timeline
Using essential editing commands
Review Questions
Review Answers
6 WORKING WITH CLIPS AND MARKERS
Starting the lesson
Using Program Monitor controls
Setting the playback resolution

Playing back VR video
Using markers
Using Sync Lock and Track Lock
Finding gaps in the Timeline
Selecting clips
Moving clips
Extracting and deleting segments
Review Questions
Review Answers
7 ADDING TRANSITIONS
Starting the lesson
What are transitions?
Using edit points and handles
Adding video transitions
Using A/B mode to fine-tune a transition
Adding audio transitions
Review Questions
Review Answers
8 ADVANCED EDITING TECHNIQUES
Starting the lesson
Performing four-point editing
Changing playback speed
Replacing clips and footage
Nesting sequences
Performing regular trimming
Performing advanced trimming
Trimming in the Program Monitor
Review Questions
Review Answers

9 PUTTING CLIPS IN MOTION
Starting the lesson
Adjusting the Motion effect
Changing clip position, size, and rotation
Working with keyframe interpolation
Using other motion-related effects
Review Questions
Review Answers
10 MULTICAMERA EDITING
Starting the lesson
Following the multicamera process
Creating a multicamera sequence
Switching multiple cameras
Finalizing multicamera editing
Review Questions
Review Answers
11 EDITING AND MIXING AUDIO
Starting the lesson
Setting up the interface to work with audio
Examining audio characteristics
Recording a voice-over track
Adjusting audio volume
Creating a split edit
Adjusting audio levels for a clip
Review Questions
Review Answers
12 SWEETENING SOUND
Starting the lesson
Sweetening sound with the Essential Sound panel

Adjusting dialogue
Review Questions
Review Answers
13 ADDING VIDEO EFFECTS
Starting the lesson
Working with effects
Working with master clip effects
Masking and tracking visual effects
Using keyframing effects
Using effect presets
Using frequently used effects
Rendering and replacing
Review Questions
Review Answers
14 IMPROVING CLIPS 
WITH COLOR CORRECTION 
AND
GRADING
Starting the lesson
Following a color-oriented workflow
Exploring the color-oriented effects
Fixing exposure problems
Fixing color balance
Using special color effects
Creating a look
Review Questions
Review Answers
15 EXPLORING COMPOSITING TECHNIQUES
Starting the lesson
What is an alpha channel?
Making compositing part of your projects
Working with the Opacity effect

Working with alpha-channel transparencies
Color keying a greenscreen shot
Masking clips
Review Questions
Review Answers
16 CREATING TITLES
Starting the lesson
Getting an overview of the Essential Graphics panel
Mastering video typography essentials
Creating titles
Styling text
Working with shapes and logos
Making text roll and crawl
Introducing captions
Review Questions
Review Answers
17 MANAGING YOUR PROJECTS
Starting the lesson
Using the File menu
Using the Project Manager
Performing the final project management steps
Browsing projects with the Media Browser panel
Managing collaboration
Using the Libraries panel
Managing your hard drives
Review Questions
Review Answers
18 EXPORTING FRAMES, CLIPS, AND SEQUENCES
Starting the lesson

Understanding the export options
Exporting single frames
Exporting a master copy
Working with Adobe Media Encoder CC
Uploading to social media
Exchanging with other editing applications
Final practice
Review Questions
Review Answers
INDEX

Getting Started
Adobe Premiere Pro CC, the essential editing tool for professionals and video
enthusiasts, is an incredibly scalable, efficient, and precise video-editing tool. It
supports a broad range of video formats from a variety of vendors and from
many different types of camera. Premiere Pro lets you work faster and more
creatively without converting your media. The complete set of powerful and
exclusive tools lets you overcome any editorial, production, and workflow
challenges to deliver the high-quality work you demand.
Importantly, Adobe has created a user experience that is intuitive, flexible, and
efficient, with unified design elements that match across multiple applications,
making it easier to explore and discover new workflows.
About Classroom in a Book
Adobe Premiere Pro CC Classroom in a Book (2018 release) is part of the
official training series for Adobe graphics and publishing and creative video
software. The lessons are designed so that you can learn at your own pace. If
you’re new to Premiere Pro, you’ll learn the fundamental concepts and features
you’ll need to use the program. This book also teaches many advanced features,
including tips and techniques for using the latest version of this software.
The lessons in this edition include opportunities for hands-on practice using
features such as chromakeying, dynamic trimming, color correction, media
management, audio and video effects, and audio mixing. You’ll also learn how
to create files for the web and mobile devices with Adobe Media Encoder.
Premiere Pro CC is available for both Windows and macOS.
Prerequisites
Before beginning to use Adobe Premiere Pro CC Classroom in a Book, make
sure your system is set up correctly and that you’ve installed the required
software and hardware. You can view updated system requirements here:
helpx.adobe.com/premiere-pro/system-requirements.html
You should have a working knowledge of your computer and operating system.
You should know how to use the mouse and standard menus and commands and
also how to open, save, and close files. If you need to review these techniques,
see the documentation included with your Windows or macOS system.

Installing Premiere Pro CC
You must purchase an Adobe Creative Cloud subscription, or obtain a trial
version, separately from this book. For system requirements and complete
instructions on installing the software, visit www.adobe.com/support. You can
purchase Adobe Creative Cloud by visiting www.adobe.com/creativecloud.
Follow the onscreen instructions. You may also want to install Adobe Photoshop
CC, Adobe After Effects CC, Audition CC, Adobe Prelude CC, and Adobe
Media Encoder CC, which are included with the full Adobe Creative Cloud
license.
Optimizing performance
Editing video places high demands on your computer processor and memory. A
fast processor and a lot of memory will make your editing experience faster and
more efficient. This translates to a more fluid and enjoyable creative experience.
Premiere Pro CC takes advantage of multicore processors (CPUs) and
multiprocessor systems. The faster the processors and the more CPU cores there
are, the better the performance you’ll experience.
The minimum system memory is 8 GB, and 16 GB or more is recommended for
ultra-high-definition (UHD) media.
The speed of the storage drives you use for video playback is also a factor. A
dedicated fast storage drive is recommended for your media. A RAID disk array
or fast solid-state disk for your media files is strongly recommended, particularly
if you’re working with 4K or higher-resolution content. Storing your media files
and program files on the same hard drive can affect performance. Keep your
media files on a separate disk, if possible, for speed and media management.
The Premiere Pro Mercury Playback Engine can use the power of your GPU,
harnessing the power of your computer’s graphics hardware to improve playback
performance. 
GPU 
acceleration 
provides 
a 
significant 
performance
improvement, and most video cards with at least 1 GB of dedicated memory will
work. You will find information about hardware and software requirements on
the Adobe website at helpx.adobe.com/premiere-pro/system-requirements.html.
Using the lesson files
The lessons in this book use supplied source files, including video clips, audio
files, photos, and image files created in Photoshop and Illustrator. To complete
the lessons in this book, you must copy all the lesson files to your computer’s

storage drive. Some lessons use files from other lessons, so you’ll need to keep
the entire collection of lesson assets on your storage drive as you work through
the book. You will need about 6.5 GB of storage space in addition to the space
needed to install Premiere Pro.
If you have purchased an ebook edition of this book, you’ll need to download
the lesson files from peachpit.com. You’ll find instructions for doing so on the
first page of the ebook, in the section “How to get your lesson files,” as well as
later in this section, in “Online content.”
If you’ve purchased the printed version, you can copy the lesson files from the
Adobe Premiere Pro CC Classroom in a Book disc (inside the back cover of this
book).
Here’s how to copy those assets from the disc to your storage drive:
1. Open the Adobe Premiere Pro CC Classroom in a Book disc in My Computer
or Windows Explorer (Windows) or in the Finder (macOS).
2. Right-click the folder called Lessons and choose Copy.
3. Navigate to the location you have chosen to store your Premiere Pro projects,
right-click, and choose Paste.
 Tip
If you don’t have dedicated storage for your video files, placing the
lesson files on your computer’s desktop will make them easy to find
and work with.
If you do not have a disc drive on your computer, see the “Online content”
section for more information about downloading the lesson files.
Relinking the lesson files
The Premiere Pro projects included with the lesson files have links to specific
media files. Because you are copying the files to a new location, those links may
need to update when you open projects for the first time.
If you open a project and Premiere Pro is unable to find a linked media file, the
Link Media dialog may open, inviting you to relink offline files. If this happens,
select an offline clip and click the Locate button, and a browse panel will appear
to locate it.
 Note

If media files were originally stored in multiple locations, you may
need to search more than once to relink all the media for a project.
Locate the Lessons folder using the navigator on the left, and click Search.
Premiere Pro will locate the media file inside the Lessons folder. To hide all
other files, making it easy to select the correct one, select the option to display
only exact name matches.
The last known file path and file name and the currently selected file path and
file name are displayed at the top of the panel for reference. Select the file and
click OK.
The option to relink other files is enabled by default, so once you’ve located one
file, the rest should reconnect automatically. For more information about
relocating offline media files, see Chapter 17, “Managing Your Projects.”
How to use these lessons
The lessons in this book include step-by-step instructions. Each lesson stands
alone, but most build on previous lessons. For this reason, the best way to learn
from this book is to proceed through the lessons one after another.
The lessons teach you new skills in the order you might normally use them. The
lessons begin with acquiring media files such as video, audio, and graphics, and
they go on to creating a rough-cut sequence, adding effects, sweetening the
audio, and ultimately exporting the project.
Many pages contain additional “sidebar” information boxes that explain a
particular technology or offer alternative workflows. It’s not necessary to read
these additional boxes, or follow the workflows, to learn Premiere Pro, but you
may find them interesting and helpful as they will deepen your understanding of
post-production.
By the end of these lessons, you’ll have a good understanding of the complete
end-to-end video post-production workflow, with the specific skills you need to
edit on your own.
Online content
Lesson files
To work through the projects in this book, you will need to copy them from the
disc (see “Using the lesson files”) or download the lesson files from

peachpit.com. You can download the files for individual lessons, or it may be
possible to download them all in a single file.
This book comes with a free Web Edition that can be accessed from any device
with a connection to the Internet. Its benefits include the following:
The complete text of the book
Hours of instructional video keyed to the text
Interactive quizzes
In addition, the Web Edition may be updated when Adobe adds significant
feature updates between major Creative Cloud releases. To accommodate the
changes, sections of the online book will be updated, or new sections will be
added.
Accessing the Web Edition
Your purchase of this Classroom in a Book in any format includes access to the
corresponding Web Edition.
If you purchased an ebook from peachpit.com or adobepress.com, your Web
Edition will automatically appear under the Digital Purchases tab on your
Account page. Click the Launch link to access the product. Continue reading to
learn how to register your product to get access to the lesson files.
If you purchased an eBook from a different vendor or you bought a print book,
you must register your purchase on peachpit.com in order to access the online
content:
1. Go to www.peachpit.com/register.
2. Sign in or create a new account.
3. Enter ISBN: 9780134853239.
4. Answer the questions as proof of purchase.
5. The Web Edition will appear on the Digital Purchases tab of your Account
page. Click the Launch link to access the product.
The Lesson Files can be accessed through the Registered Products tab on your
Account page. Click the Access Bonus Content link below the title of your
product to proceed to the download page. Click the lesson file links to download
them to your computer.
Additional resources
Adobe Premiere Pro CC Classroom in a Book (2018 release) is not meant to

replace documentation that comes with the program or to be a comprehensive
reference for every feature. Only the commands and options used in the lessons
are explained in this book. For comprehensive information about program
features and tutorials, refer to these resources, which you can reach by choosing
commands from the Help menu:
Adobe Premiere Pro CC Learn and Support: helpx.adobe.com/premiere-
pro.html is where you can find and browse Help and Support content on
Adobe.com. You can also reach that page by choosing Help > Adobe Premiere
Pro Help or by pressing F1. On the Learn & Support page, click User Guide for
documentation on individual features or visit helpx.adobe.com/premiere-
pro/user-guide.html.
Adobe Premiere Pro CC tutorials: For a wide range of interactive tutorials on
Adobe Premiere Pro CC features, choose Help > Adobe Premiere Pro Tutorials
or visit helpx.adobe.com/premiere-pro/tutorials.html.
Adobe Premiere Pro blog: theblog.adobe.com/creative-cloud/premiere-pro
brings you tutorials, product news, and inspirational articles about using Adobe
Premiere Pro CC.
Adobe Forums: forums.adobe.com lets you tap into peer-to-peer discussions,
questions, and answers on Adobe products. Visit the Adobe Premiere Pro CC
forum at forums.adobe.com/community/premiere.
Adobe Create: create.adobe.com offers thoughtful articles on design and design
issues, a gallery showcasing the work of top-notch designers, tutorials, and
more.
Adobe Creative Cloud Learn: For inspiration, key techniques, cross-product
workflows, and updates on new features, go to the Creative Cloud Learn page,
https://helpx.adobe.com/creative-cloud/learn/tutorials.html. It’s available to all.
Resources for educators: adobe.com/education and edex.adobe.com offer a
treasure trove of information for instructors who teach classes on Adobe
software. Find solutions for education at all levels, including free curricula that
use an integrated approach to teaching Adobe software and that can be used to
prepare for the Adobe Certified Associate exams.
Also, check out these useful sites:
Adobe Add-ons: exchange.adobe.com/addons is a central resource for finding
tools, services, extensions, code samples, and more to supplement and extend
your Adobe products.
Adobe Premiere Pro CC product home page: adobe.com/products/premiere

has more information about the product.
Adobe Authorized Training Centers
Adobe Authorized Training Centers offer instructor-led courses and training on
Adobe products, employing only Adobe Certified Instructors. A directory of
AATCs is available at training.adobe.com/trainingpartners.

1. Touring Adobe Premiere Pro CC
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Performing nonlinear editing
Exploring the standard digital video workflow
Enhancing the workflow with high-level features
Checking out the workspaces
Customizing workspaces
Setting keyboard shortcuts
This lesson will take about one hour to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the
Getting Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions
under “Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition. This lesson will start with a
brief overview of video editing and explain how Adobe Premiere Pro CC
functions as the hub of your post-production workflow.

Adobe Premiere Pro is a video-editing system that supports the latest technology and cameras with
powerful tools that are easy to use and that integrate perfectly with almost every video acquisition
source.
Starting the lesson
There’s enormous demand for high-quality video content, and today’s video
producers and editors work in an ever-changing landscape of old and new
technologies. Despite all this rapid change, however, the goal of video editing is
the same: You want to take your footage and shape it, guided by your original
vision, so that you can effectively communicate with your audience.
In Adobe Premiere Pro CC, you’ll find a video-editing system that supports the
latest technology and cameras with powerful tools that are easy to use. These
tools integrate perfectly with almost every type of media, as well as a wide range
of third-party plug-ins and other post-production tools.
You’ll begin by reviewing the essential post-production workflow that most
editors follow, and then you’ll learn about the main components of the Premiere

Pro interface and how to create custom workspaces.
Performing nonlinear editing in Premiere Pro
Premiere Pro is a nonlinear editing system (NLE). Like a word processing
application, Premiere Pro lets you place, replace, and move video, audio, and
images anywhere you want in your final edited work. You don’t need to make
adjustments in a particular order; you can change any part of your editing project
at any time.
You’ll combine multiple pieces of media, called clips, to create a sequence. You
can edit any part of your sequence in any order and then change the contents or
move clips so that they play earlier or later. You can blend layers of video
together, add special effects, adjust the audio mix, and more.
You can combine multiple sequences and jump to any moment in a video clip
without needing to fast-forward or rewind. It’s as easy to organize the clips
you’re working with as it is to organize files on your computer.
Premiere Pro supports both tape and tapeless media formats, including XDCAM
EX, XDCAMHD 422, DPX, DVCProHD, AVCHD (including AVCCAM and
NXCAM), AVC-Intra, DSLR video, and Canon XF. It even has native support
for the latest raw video formats, including media from RED, ARRI, Canon, and
Black-magic cameras.
 Note
The word clip comes from the days of film editing, where a section
of film would be clipped to separate it from a reel.
Premiere Pro features native support for raw media from RED cameras.

The standard digital video workflow
As you gain editing experience, you’ll develop your own preferences for the
order in which to work on the different aspects of your project. Each stage
requires a particular kind of attention and different tools. Also, some projects
call for more time spent on one stage than another.
Whether you skip through some stages with a quick mental check or spend hours
(even days!) dedicated to perfecting an aspect of your project, you’ll almost
certainly go through the following steps:
1. Acquire your media: This can mean recording original footage or gathering
assets for a project.
2. Ingest (or capture from tape) the video to your storage drive: With
tapeless media, Premiere Pro can read the media files directly, usually with
no need for conversion. If you’re working with tapeless media, be sure to
back up your files to a second location because storage drives sometimes fail
unexpectedly. With tape-based formats, Premiere Pro (with the appropriate
hardware) can convert the video into digital files.
3. Organize your clips: There can be a lot of video content to choose from in
your project. Invest the time to organize clips into special folders (called
bins) in your project. You can add color labels and other metadata (additional
information about the clips) to help keep things organized.
4. Create a sequence: Combine the parts of the video and audio clips you want
as a sequence in the Timeline panel.
5. Add transitions: Place special transition effects between clips, add video
effects, and create combined visual effects by placing clips on multiple layers
(called tracks in the Timeline panel).
6. Create or import titles and graphics: Add them to your sequence along
with your video clips.
7. Adjust the audio mix: Adjust the volume of your audio clips to get the mix
just right, and use transitions and effects on your audio clips to improve the
sound.
8. Output: Export your finished project to a file or a videotape.
Premiere Pro supports each of these steps with industry-leading tools. A large
community of creative and technical professionals is waiting to share their
experience and support your development as an editor.
Enhancing the workflow with Premiere Pro

Premiere Pro has easy-to-use tools for video editing. It also has advanced tools
for manipulating, adjusting, and fine-tuning your projects.
You may not incorporate all of the following features in your first few video
projects. However, as your experience and understanding of nonlinear editing
grow, you’ll want to expand your capabilities.
The following topics will be covered in this book:
Advanced audio editing: Premiere Pro provides audio effects and editing
unequaled by any other nonlinear editor. Create and place 5.1 surround-
sound audio channels, make sample-level edits, apply multiple audio effects
to audio clips or tracks, and use state-of-the-art plug-ins as well as third-
party Virtual Studio Technology (VST) plug-ins.
Color correction and grading: Correct and enhance the look of your
footage with advanced color-correction filters, including Lumetri, a
dedicated color correction and grading panel. You can make secondary
color-correction selections that allow you to adjust isolated colors and
adjust selected areas of an image to improve the composition.
Keyframe controls: Premiere Pro gives you the precise control you need to
fine-tune the timing of visual and motion effects without using a
compositing or motion graphics application. Keyframes use a standard
interface design; if you learn to use them in Premiere Pro, you’ll know how
to use them in all Adobe Creative Cloud products in which they’re
available.
Broad hardware support: Choose from a wide range of dedicated input
and output hardware to assemble a system that best fits your needs and
budget. Premiere Pro system specifications extend from low-cost desktop
computers and laptops for video editing up to high-performance
workstations that can easily edit 3D stereoscopic, high definition (HD), 4K,
8K, and 360 video.
GPU acceleration: The Mercury Playback Engine operates in two modes:
software-only mode and graphics processing unit (GPU) acceleration. GPU
acceleration mode requires a graphics card that meets minimum
specifications in your workstation. See http://helpx.adobe.com/premiere-
pro/system-requirements.html for a list of tested graphics cards. Most
modern cards with a minimum of 1GB of dedicated video memory will
work.
Multicamera editing: You can quickly and easily edit productions shot
with multiple cameras. Premiere Pro displays multiple camera sources in a

split-view display, and you can choose a camera view by clicking the
appropriate screen or using shortcut keys. You can automatically sync
multiple camera angles based on clip audio or timecode.
Project management: Manage your media through a single dialog box.
View, delete, move, search for, and reorganize clips and bins. Consolidate
your projects by copying just the media used in sequences to a single
location. Then reclaim storage space by deleting unused media files.
Metadata: Premiere Pro supports Adobe XMP, which stores additional
information about media as metadata that multiple applications can access.
This information can be used to locate clips or communicate important
information such as preferred takes or copyright notices.
Creative titles: Create titles and graphics with the Essential Graphics
panel. You can also use graphics created in almost any suitable software,
plus Adobe Photoshop documents can be imported as flattened images or as
separate layers that you can incorporate, combine, and animate selectively.
Advanced trimming: Use special “trimming” tools to make precise
adjustments to the start and end of clips in sequences. Premiere Pro
provides both quick, easy trimming keyboard shortcuts and advanced on-
screen trimming tools, allowing you to make complex timing adjustments
to multiple clips.
Media encoding: Export your sequence to create a video and audio file that
is perfect for your needs. Use the advanced features of Adobe Media
Encoder to create copies of your finished sequence in multiple formats,
based on presets or your own detailed preferences. Media files can be
uploaded to social media platforms in a single step.
360 video for VR headsets: Edit and post-produce stitched 360 video
footage using a special VR Video display mode that lets you see specific
regions of the picture, or view both your video and your edited clips via a
VR headset, allowing a more natural and intuitive editing experience.
Dedicated visual effects for 360 video are available.
Expanding the workflow
Although it’s possible to work with Premiere Pro as a stand-alone application, it
is also a team player. Premiere Pro is part of Adobe Creative Cloud, which
means you have access to a number of other specialized tools, including After
Effects, Audition, and Prelude. Understanding the way these software
components work together will improve your efficiency and give you more

creative freedom.
Including other applications in the editing workflow
Premiere Pro is a versatile video and audio post-production tool, but it’s just one
component of Adobe Creative Cloud—Adobe’s complete print, web, and video
environment that includes video-focused software for the following:
High-end 3D motion effects creation
Complex text animation generation
Layered graphics production
Vector artwork creation
Audio production
Media management
To incorporate one or more of these features into a production, you can use other
components of Adobe Creative Cloud. The software set has everything you need
to produce advanced, professionally finished videos.
Here’s a brief description of the other components:
Adobe After Effects CC: The highly popular tool of choice for motion
graphics, animation, and visual effects artists.
Adobe Photoshop CC: The industry-standard image-editing and graphics
creation product. You can work with photos, video, and 3D objects to
prepare them for your project.
Adobe Audition CC: A powerful tool for audio editing, audio cleanup and
sweetening, music creation and adjustment, and multitrack mix creation.
Adobe Illustrator CC: Professional vector graphics creation software for
print, video, and the Web.
Adobe Dynamic Link CC: A cross-product connection that allows you to
work in real time with media, compositions, and sequences shared between
After Effects, Audition, and Premiere Pro.
Adobe Prelude CC: A tool that allows you to ingest, transcode, and add
meta-data, markers, and tags to file-based footage. Then create rough cuts
you can share with Premiere Pro directly or with other NLEs.
Adobe Media Encoder CC: A tool that allows you to process files to
produce content for any screen directly from Premiere Pro and Adobe After
Effects.

Exploring the Adobe Creative Cloud video workflow
Your Premiere Pro and Creative Cloud workflow will vary depending on your
production needs. Here are a few scenarios:
Use Photoshop CC to touch up and apply effects to still images and layered
image compositions from a digital camera, a scanner, or a video clip. Then
use them as media in Premiere Pro.
Import and manage large numbers of media files with Prelude, adding
valuable metadata, temporal comments, and tags. Create sequences from
clips and sub-clips in Adobe Prelude and send them to Premiere Pro to
continue editing them.
Send clips directly from the Premiere Pro Timeline to Adobe Audition for
professional audio cleanup and sweetening.
Send an entire Premiere Pro sequence to Adobe Audition to complete a
professional audio mix. Premiere Pro can create an Adobe Audition session
from your edited sequence; the session can contain video so you can
compose and adjust levels in Audition based on the action.
Using Dynamic Link, open Premiere Pro video clips in After Effects. Apply
special effects, add animation, and add visual elements; then view the
results in Premiere Pro. You can play After Effects compositions in
Premiere Pro without waiting to pre-export them.
Use After Effects to create compositions containing advanced text
animation, such as an opening or closing title sequence. Use those
compositions in Premiere Pro directly thanks to Dynamic Link.
Adjustments made in After Effects appear in Premiere Pro immediately.
Use Adobe Media Encoder to export video projects in multiple resolutions
and codecs for display on websites, via social media, or for archiving, using
built-in presets and effects and integrated social media support.
Naturally, most of this book focuses on workflows involving only Premiere Pro.
However, sidebars will explain ways to include Adobe Creative Cloud
components in your workflows for powerful effects work and finishing.
Touring the Premiere Pro interface
It’s helpful to begin by getting familiar with the editing interface so you can
recognize the tools as you work with them in the following lessons. To make it
easier to configure the user interface, Premiere Pro offers workspaces.
Workspaces quickly configure the various panels and tools on-screen in ways

that are helpful for particular activities, such as editing, special effects work, or
audio mixing.
You’ll begin by taking a brief tour of the Editing workspace. In this exercise,
you’ll use a Premiere Pro project from this book’s companion DVD (or
downloaded lesson files if you are using the e-book).
1. Make sure you’ve copied all the lesson folders and contents from the DVD to
your hard drive.
2. Launch Premiere Pro.
The first time you launch Premiere Pro, you may see an extra welcome screen
with links to online training videos that will help you get started.
The first screen you see offers links to training.
If you click Skip, you’ll see the Start screen.

The Start screen gives clear instructions to get started.
If you have opened projects previously, a list will appear in the middle of the
Start screen.
At the top of the Start screen, you’ll see the words Work and Learn. Though
these just look like floating words, they’re actually buttons you can click.
Click Learn at the top of the Start screen to see links to useful tutorials.

Click Work at the top of the Start screen to return to the main options.
All Premiere Pro project files have the extension .prproj.
A Premiere Pro project file contains all of your creative decisions for a
project, links (referred to as clips) to your selected media files, sequences
made by combining those clips, special effects settings, and more. Premiere
Pro project files have the extension .prproj.
Whenever you work in Premiere Pro, you will be making adjustments to a
project file. You need to create a new project file or open an existing one to
use Premiere Pro.
That’s why the most prominent features of the Start screen are four buttons
framed in ovals and arranged in a column. To get you into a project quickly,
click the following:
New Project to create a new empty project file. You can name a
Premiere Pro project file anything you like, and it’s a good idea to

choose a name that will be easy to identify later (in other words, don’t
use New Project).
Open Project to open an existing project by browsing your storage
drive for the project file.
New Team Project or Open Team Project to use a new feature of
Premiere Pro that allows groups of people to work on a single project.
Team projects are beyond the scope of this book.
 Note
If Premiere Pro fails when opening a project, try changing the
Playback Renderer setting to a different default value. To do this,
click New Project in the Start screen and then choose an option
in the Video Rendering and Playback – Renderer menu. If you
have an AMD graphics card, you’ll probably get better
performance choosing OpenCL GPU acceleration, and if you
have an NVIDIA graphics card, you’ll probably choose CUDA.
When you click OK to create the new project, Premiere Pro will
remember the GPU acceleration setting for new and existing
projects that you open.
More subtle buttons display existing projects in a list in the middle of the
screen if you click them.
Recent shows recent projects stored locally.
CC Files lists projects stored in your Creative Cloud Files folder and
synchronized with the Creative Cloud.
Sync Settings doesn’t open projects but allows you to synchronize your
user preferences across multiple computers.
3. Click Open Project.
4. In the file navigation dialog, navigate to the Lesson 01 folder in the Lessons
folder; then double-click the Lesson 01.prproj project file to open the first
lesson.

After opening an existing project file, you may be prompted with a dialog box
asking where a particular media file is. This will happen when the original media
files are saved on a storage drive (or drive letter) different from the one you’re
using. You’ll need to tell Premiere Pro where the file is.
In the dialog box that prompts you to open the file, navigate to the
Lessons/Assets folder and select the file that is described. Premiere Pro will
remember this location for the rest of the files and open them automatically.
 Note
It’s best to copy all the lesson assets from the DVD to your
computer storage drive and leave them there until you complete this
book; some lessons refer to assets from previous lessons.
Working with workspaces
Workspaces are preset arrangements of panels, organized to make particular
tasks easier. There’s one for editing, another for working on audio, and another
for making color adjustments, for example.
Every panel is accessible from the Window menu, but workspaces are a quicker
way to access several panels, and have them laid out exactly as you need them,
in a single step.
Before you begin, make sure you’re using the default Editing workspace by
choosing the Editing workspace option in the Workspaces panel at the top of the
screen.
Then, to reset the Editing workspace, click the small panel menu icon 
 next to
the Editing option on the Workspaces panel and choose Reset To Saved Layout.
If the Workspaces panel is not visible, choose Window > Workspaces > Editing.
Then reset the Editing workspace by choosing Window > Workspaces > Reset
To Saved Layout.

Notice the various workspace names displayed in the Workspaces panel are
displayed as words you can click. Think of these words as buttons; it’s an
elegant design feature you’ll discover in a number of areas in Premiere Pro.
If you’re new to nonlinear editing, the default Editing workspace might look like
a lot of buttons and menus. Don’t worry. Things become simpler when you know
what the buttons are for. The interface is designed to make video editing easy, so
commonly used controls are immediately accessible.
Each workspace item appears in its own panel, and multiple panels can be
combined into a single frame, with the name of each panel displayed at the top.
When many panels are combined, you may not be able to see all their names. If
this is the case, a menu of additional panels is displayed. Click this menu to
access a hidden panel in a frame.
You can display any panel by choosing it from the Window menu, so if you can’t
locate a panel, just look there.
The principal elements are shown here.

The main user interface elements are as follows:
Project panel: This is where you organize the links to your media files
(referred to as clips), sequences, and graphics in bins. Bins are similar to
folders—you can place one bin inside another for more advanced
organization of your media assets.
Timeline panel: This is where you’ll do most of your editing. You view
and work on sequences (the term for video segments edited together) in the
Time-line panel. One feature of sequences is that you can nest them (place
one sequence inside another sequence). In this way, you can break up a
production into manageable chunks or create unique special effects.
Tracks: You can layer—or composite—video clips, images, graphics, and
titles on an unlimited number of tracks. Video and graphic clips on upper
video tracks cover whatever is directly below them on the Timeline.
Therefore, you need to give clips on higher tracks some form of
transparency or reduce their size if you want clips on lower tracks to show.
Monitor panels: Use the Source Monitor (on the left) to view and select
parts of clips (your original footage). To view a clip in the Source Monitor,
double-click it in the Project panel. The Program Monitor (on the right) is

for viewing your current sequence, displayed in the Timeline panel.
Media Browser: This panel allows you to browse your storage to find
media. It’s especially useful for file-based camera media and RAW files.
Libraries: This panel gives access to files you have added to your Creative
Cloud Files folder on your storage drive, to custom Lumetri color Looks,
and to shared libraries for collaboration, and this panel acts as a browser
and store for the Adobe Stock service. For more information about the
Libraries panel, go to https://helpx.adobe.com/premiere-pro/using/creative-
cloud-libraries.html.
Effects panel: This panel contains the effects you will use in your
sequences, including video filters, audio effects, and transitions. Effects are
grouped by type to make them easier to find, and there’s a search box at the
top of the panel to quickly locate an effect. Once applied, the controls for
these effects are displayed in the Effect Controls panel.
Effects panel
Audio Clip Mixer: This panel is based on audio production studio
hardware, with volume sliders and pan controls. There is one set of controls
for each audio track on the Timeline. The adjustments you make are applied
to audio clips. There’s also an Audio Track Mixer for applying audio

adjustments to tracks rather than clips.
Audio Clip Mixer
Effect Controls panel: This panel displays the controls for any effects
applied to a clip you select in a sequence or open in the Source Monitor. If
you select a visual clip in the Time-line panel, Motion, Opacity, and Time
Remapping controls are always available. Most effect parameters are
adjustable over time.

Effect Controls panel
Tools panel
Tools panel: Each icon in this panel gives access to a tool that performs a
specific function in the Timeline panel. The Selection tool is context-
sensitive, which means it changes function depending on where you click.
If your cursor doesn’t work as you expect, it might be because you have the

wrong tool selected.
Several tools have a small triangle icon, indicating a menu of additional
tools. Click and hold on one of these tools to see the menu of options.
Info panel: The Info panel displays information about any item you select
in the Project panel or any clip or transition you select in a sequence.
History panel: This panel tracks the steps you take and lets you back up
easily. It’s a kind of visual Undo list. When you select a previous step, all
steps that came after it are also undone.
The name of each panel is displayed at the top. When a panel is displayed, the
name is underlined, and a panel menu appears next to the name with options
particular to that panel.
Customizing a workspace
In addition to choosing between the default workspaces, you can adjust the
position and location of panels to create a workspace that works best for you.
You can create multiple workspaces for different tasks.
As you change the size of a frame, other frames change size to compensate.
Every panel within a frame is accessible by clicking its name.
All panels are dockable—you can drag a panel from one frame to another.
You can drag a panel out of a frame to become a separate floating panel.
In this exercise, you’ll try all these functions and save a customized workspace.
1. Click the Source Monitor panel (selecting its name if necessary) and then
position your pointer on the vertical divider between the Source Monitor and
the Program Monitor. The mouse cursor will change to a double-headed
arrow 
 when it’s in the right position. Drag left and right to change the
sizes of those frames. You can choose to have different sizes for your video
displays.

2. Now place the pointer on the horizontal divider between the Program
Monitor and the Timeline. The mouse cursor will change when it’s in the
right position. Drag up and down to change the sizes of these frames.
3. Click the name of the Effects panel, at the top, and drag it to the middle of
the Source Monitor to dock the Effects panel in that frame. Remember, if you
can’t see the Effects panel, you can select it in the Window menu.

The drop zone is displayed as a center highlight.
4. Clicking the name at the top of the Effects panel, drag the panel to a point
near the right of the Project panel to place it in its own frame.
Before you release the mouse button, the drop zone is a trapezoid that covers
the right portion of the Project panel. Release the mouse button, and your
workspace should have a new frame that contains just the Effects panel.
You can also pull panels out into their own floating frames.
 Note
When you drag a panel by clicking its name, Premiere Pro
displays a drop zone. If the panel is a rectangle, it will go into the
selected frame as an additional tab. If it’s a trapezoid, it will
create a new frame.
5. Click the Source Monitor panel name, and hold down the Control (Windows)
or Command (macOS) key while dragging it out of its frame.

6. Drop the Source Monitor anywhere, creating a floating panel. You can resize
the frame by dragging a corner or a side.
As you gain experience, you might want to create and save the layout of your
panels as a customized workspace. To do so, choose Window > Workspaces >
Save As New Workspace. Type a name, and click OK.
If you want to return a workspace to its default layout, choose Window >
Workspaces > Reset To Saved Layout.
 Note
You may need to resize a panel to see all of its controls.
 Note
You can change the font size in the Project panel by choosing
Font Size from the panel menu and then choosing Small,
Medium (Default), Large, or Extra Large from the submenu.
7. To return to a recognizable starting point, choose the preset Editing
workspace, and reset it now.

Introducing preferences
The more you edit video, the more you’ll want to customize Premiere Pro to
match your specific needs. Premiere Pro has several types of settings. For
example, panel menus, which are accessible by clicking the menu button next to
a panel name, have options that relate to each panel, and individual clips in a
sequence have settings you can access by right-clicking them.
It’s worth noting that the panel name, displayed at the top of each panel, is
usually referred to as the panel tab. This is the area of a panel you use to move
the panel, almost like a handle you can grab the panel by.
There are also application-wide preferences, all grouped into one panel for easy
access. Preferences will be covered in depth as they relate to the individual
lessons in this book. Let’s look at a simple example.
1. Choose Edit > Preferences > Appearance (Windows) or Premiere Pro >
Preferences > Appearance (macOS).
2. Drag the Brightness slider to the right to suit your preference.
The default brightness is a dark gray to help you see colors correctly (human
perception of color is influenced by surrounding colors). There are additional
options for controlling the brightness of interface highlights.
3. Experiment with the Interactive Controls and Focus Indicators brightness
sliders. The difference in the on-screen sample is subtle, but adjusting these
sliders can make quite a big difference to your editing experience.
4. Set all three settings to Default by clicking the Default buttons when you
have finished.
5. Switch to the Auto Save preferences by clicking the preference name on the

left.
Imagine if you had worked for hours and then there was a power outage. If
you hadn’t saved recently, you’d have lost a lot of work. With this dialog, you
can decide how often you would like Premiere Pro to save an automated
backup of your project and how many versions you would like to keep in
total.
Project files are small relative to media files, so it’s usually fine to increase
the number of project versions without any impact on system performance.
You’ll notice there’s an option to save a backup project to Creative Cloud.
This option creates an additional backup of your project file in your Creative
Cloud Files folder. If you suffer a total system failure while working, you can
log in to any Premiere Pro editing system with your Adobe ID to access the
backup project file and quickly carry on working.
6. Click Cancel to close the Preferences dialog without applying any changes.
Keyboard shortcuts
Premiere Pro makes extensive use of keyboard shortcuts. These are usually
faster and easier than clicking with a mouse. Many keyboard shortcuts are
shared universally by nonlinear editing systems. The spacebar, for example,
starts and stops playback—this even works on some websites.
Some standard keyboard shortcuts come from celluloid film-editing traditions.
The I and O keys, for example, are used to set In and Out marks on footage and
sequences. These special marks indicate the start and end of a desired section
and were originally drawn on celluloid directly.
Other keyboard shortcuts are available but not configured. This allows flexibility
when setting up your keyboard.
Choose Edit > Keyboard Shortcuts (Windows) or Premiere Pro CC > Keyboard
Shortcuts (macOS).

It can be a little daunting seeing the number of keyboard shortcuts available, but
by the end of this book you will recognize most of the options displayed here.
Specialized keyboards are available with shortcuts printed on them and color-
coded keys. These make it easier to remember commonly used shortcuts.
Try holding the Control (Windows) or Command (macOS) key.

The keyboard shortcut display updates to show the results of combining the
modifier key with the shortcuts. Notice there are many more keys without
shortcuts assigned when you use a modifier key.
Try combinations of modifier keys including Shift+Alt (Windows) or
Shift+Option (macOS). You can set keyboard shortcuts with any combination of
modifier keys.
If you press a shortcut key, or shortcut and modifier key combination, the
shortcut information is displayed.
The list at the bottom left of this dialog includes every option you can assign to a
key. Having found an option you would like to assign to a key, drag it from the
list onto the key in the upper part of the dialog.
To remove a shortcut, click the key and choose Clear.
Some keyboard shortcuts are specific to individual panels. You can view them
by clicking the Commands menu.
For now, click Cancel.
Moving, backing up, and syncing user settings
User preferences include a number of important options. The defaults work well
in most cases, but it’s likely you’ll want to make a few adjustments over time.

For example, you might prefer the interface to be always brighter than the
default.
Premiere Pro includes the option to share your user preferences between
multiple computers: When installing Premiere Pro, you will have entered your
Adobe ID to confirm your software license. You can use the same ID to store
your user preferences in Creative Cloud, allowing you to synchronize and update
them from any installation of Premiere Pro.
You can sync your preferences on the Start screen by choosing Sync Settings.
You can also sync your preferences while working with Premiere Pro by
choosing File > Sync Settings > Sync Settings Now (Windows) or Premiere Pro
CC > Sync Settings > Sync Settings Now (macOS).
Now close Premiere Pro by choosing File > Exit (Windows) or Premiere Pro CC
> Quit Premiere Pro (macOS).
If a dialog appears asking if you would like to save changes you have made,
click No.
Review questions
1. Why is Premiere Pro considered a nonlinear editor?
2. Describe the basic video-editing workflow.
3. What is the Media Browser used for?
4. Can you save a customized workspace?
5. What is the purpose of the Source Monitor and the Program Monitor?
6. How can you drag a panel to its own floating panel?
Review answers
1. Premiere Pro lets you place video clips, audio clips, and graphics anywhere
in a sequence; rearrange items already in a sequence; add transitions; apply
effects; and do any number of other video-editing steps in any order that suits
you.
2. Shoot your video; transfer it to your computer; create a sequence of video,
audio, and still-image clips on the Timeline; add effects and transitions; add
text and graphics; mix your audio; and export the finished product.
3. The Media Browser allows you to browse and import media files without
having to open an external file browser. It’s particularly useful when you’re
working with file-based camera footage.

4. Yes. You can save any customized workspace by choosing Window >
Workspaces > Save As New Workspace.
5. You use the monitor panels to view your original clips and your sequence.
You can view and trim your original footage in the Source Monitor and use
the Program Monitor to view the Timeline sequence as you build it.
6. Drag the panel tab (the name of the panel) with your mouse while holding
down Control (Windows) or Command (macOS).

2. Setting up a Project
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Choosing project settings
Choosing video rendering and playback settings
Choosing video and audio display settings
Creating scratch disks
Using sequence presets
Customizing sequence settings
This lesson will take about one hour to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the
Getting Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions
under “Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.”
Before you begin editing, you need to create a new project and choose some
settings for your first sequence. If you’re not familiar with video and audio
technology, you might find all the options a little overwhelming. Luckily, Adobe
Premiere Pro CC gives you easy shortcuts. Plus, the principles of video and
sound reproduction are the same no matter what you’re creating.
It’s just a question of knowing what you want to do. To help you plan and
manage your projects, this lesson contains information about formats and video
technology. You may decide to revisit this lesson later, as your familiarity with
Premiere Pro and nonlinear video editing develops.
In practice, you’re unlikely to make changes to the default settings when
creating a new project, but it’s helpful to know what the options mean.

In this lesson, you’ll learn how to create a new project and choose sequence settings that tell Premiere
Pro how to play your video and audio clips.
Starting the lesson
A Premiere Pro project file stores links to all the video, graphic, and sound files
you have imported. Each item is displayed in the Project panel as a clip. The
name clip originally described sections of celluloid film (lengths of film were
literally clipped to separate them from a roll), but these days the term refers to
any item in the project, regardless of the type of media. You could have an audio
clip or an image sequence clip, for example.
Clips displayed in the Project panel appear to be media files, but they are
actually only links to those files. It’s helpful to understand that a clip in the
Project panel and the media file it links to are two separate things. You can

delete one without affecting the other (more on this later).
When working on a project, you will create at least one sequence—that is, a
series of clips that play, one after another, with special effects, titles, and sound,
to form your completed creative work. While editing, you will choose which
parts of your clips to use and in which order they’ll play.
The beauty of nonlinear editing with Premiere Pro is that you can change your
mind about almost anything, at any time.
Sequences contain a series of clips that play, one after another.
Premiere Pro project files have the file extension .prproj.
Starting a new project is simple. You create a new project file, import media,
choose a sequence preset, and start editing.
When you create a sequence, you’ll choose playback settings (things such as
frame rate and frame size) and place multiple clips in it. It’s important to
understand how the sequence settings change the way Premiere Pro plays your
video and audio clips. To speed things up, you can use a sequence preset to
choose the settings and then make adjustments if necessary.

You need to know the kind of video and audio your camera records because your
sequence settings will usually be based on your original source footage. Most
Premiere Pro sequence presets are named after cameras. If you know which
camera was used to capture the footage and which particular video format was
recorded, you’ll know which sequence preset to choose.
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to create a new project and choose sequence
settings that tell Premiere Pro how to play your clips. You’ll also learn about
different kinds of audio tracks and what preview files are.
Creating a project
Let’s begin by creating a new project.
1. Launch Premiere Pro. The Start screen appears.
The Name heading lists previously opened projects. You should see Lesson
01 under this heading.
There are several other options in this window.

RECENT: Displays recently opened project files stored locally (this is
the default option).
CC FILES: Displays recently opened project files stored in your
Creative Cloud Files folder. These are the same as any other project files
but will automatically be stored in the cloud, in addition to your local
storage.
New Project: Click this link to open the New Project dialog box.
Open Project: Click this link to browse to and open an existing
Premiere Pro project file.
New Team Project: If you have a Creative Cloud for Teams license,
you have the option to create dynamically shared Premiere Pro projects.
Open Team Project: If you have access to a Creative Cloud for Teams
project, you can open it by clicking this option.
Magnifying glass icon: The magnifying glass icon at the top right of
the Start screen opens a search option, which will display information
from the online help system. You’ll need to be connected to the Internet
to access Adobe Premiere Pro Help.
User icon: Next to the magnifying glass is a thumbnail of your Adobe
ID profile picture. If you have just signed up, this may be a generic
thumbnail. Click the icon to manage your account online.
Search Adobe Stock: The Adobe Stock service provides access to
stock photos, videos, and animated motion graphics templates. You can
search for items at the bottom of the Start screen.
2. Click New Project to open the New Project dialog box.

Below the new project name and location options, this dialog box has three tabs:
General, Scratch Disks, and Ingest Settings. All the settings in this dialog box
can be changed later, and in most cases, you’ll want to leave them as they are.
Let’s take a look at what they mean.
Exploring video rendering and playback settings
While you’re working creatively with video clips in your sequences, it’s likely
you will apply some visual effects. Some special effects can be played
immediately, combining your original video with the effect and displaying the
results as soon as you click Play. When this happens, it’s called real-time
playback.
Real-time playback is desirable because it means you can watch the results of
your creative choices right away.
If you use lots of effects on a clip or if you use effects that are not designed for

real-time playback, your computer may not be able to display the results at the
full frame rate. That is, Premiere Pro will attempt to display your video clips,
combined with the special effects, but it will not show every single frame each
second. When this happens, it’s described as dropping frames.
Premiere Pro displays colored lines along the top of the Timeline panel to tell
you when extra work is required to play back your video. No line or a yellow
line means Premiere Pro expects to be able to play without dropping frames. A
red line means Premiere Pro may drop frames when playing that section of the
sequence.
 Note
A red line at the top of the Timeline panel doesn’t necessarily mean
frames will be dropped. It just means visual adjustments aren’t
accelerated, so on a less powerful machine dropped frames are more
likely.
If you can’t see every frame when you play your sequence, it’s OK! It won’t
affect the final results. When you’re done editing and you output your finished
sequence, it’ll be full quality, with all the frames (more on this in Lesson 18,
“Exporting Frames, Clips, and Sequences”).
Real-time playback can make a difference to your editing experience and your
ability to preview the effects you apply with confidence. There is a simple
solution if frames are being dropped: preview rendering.
You render effects in a sequence by choosing a render option from the Sequence
menu.

Many menu options display a keyboard shortcut on the right. In this case, it’s Enter (Windows) or
Return (macOS).
What do rendering and real time mean?
Think of rendering as an artist’s rendering, where something is visualized,
taking up paper and taking time to draw. Imagine you have a piece of
video that is too dark. You add a visual effect to make it brighter, but your
video-editing system is unable to both play the original video and make it
brighter. In this situation, you’d have your system render the effect,
creating a new temporary video file that looks like the original video
combined with the visual effect to make it brighter.
When your edited sequence plays, sections that are rendered display the
newly rendered video file instead of the original clip (or clips). The
process is invisible and seamless. In this example, the rendered file plays
back like the original video file but brighter.
When the part of your sequence with the brightened clip is finished, your
system invisibly and seamlessly switches back to playing your other
original video files.
The downside of rendering is that it takes up extra space on your hard
drive, and it takes time. Also, because you’re viewing a new video file
that is based on your original media, there might be some minor loss of
quality. The upside with rendering is that you can be confident your
system will be able to play the results of your effect at full quality, with all
the frames per second. This might be important if you output to tape, but
it won’t change output to a file.
Real-time playback, by contrast, is instant! When using a real-time special
effect, your system plays the original video clip combined with the special
effect right away, without waiting for it to render. The only downside with
real-time performance is that the amount you can do without rendering
depends on how powerful your system is. More effects are more work to

play back, for example. In the case of Premiere Pro, you can dramatically
improve real-time performance by using the right graphics card (see the
sidebar “The Mercury Playback Engine”). Plus, you’ll need to use effects
that are designed for GPU acceleration, and not all effects are.
When you render, Premiere Pro plays back the results of your special effects at
high quality and full frame rate, without your computer having to do any more
work than playing a regular video file.
In the New Project dialog, if the Renderer menu is available, it means you have
graphics hardware in your computer that meets the minimum requirements for
GPU acceleration and it is installed correctly.
The menu has two types of options:
Mercury Playback Engine GPU Acceleration: If you choose this option,
Premiere Pro will send many playback tasks to the graphics hardware on
your computer, giving you lots of real-time effects and easy playback of
mixed formats in your sequences. You may see an option to use CUDA,
OpenCL, or Metal for GPU acceleration, depending on your graphics
hardware.
Mercury Playback Engine Software Only: This is still a major
advancement in playback performance, giving you excellent performance
that uses all of the available power in your computer. If your system does
not have graphics hardware that can be used for GPU acceleration, only this
option will be available, and you won’t be able to open this menu.
You will almost certainly want to choose GPU acceleration and benefit from the
additional performance if you can. If you experience performance or stability
issues using GPU acceleration, choose the Software Only option in this menu.
Choose a GPU option now, if it’s available.
The Mercury Playback Engine
The Mercury Playback Engine improves playback performance, making it
faster and easier than ever to work with multiple video formats, multiple
special effects, and multiple layers of video (for effects such as picture-in-
picture).
The Mercury Playback Engine has three main features.
Playback performance: Premiere Pro plays back video files with
great efficiency, especially when working with the types of video that

are difficult to play back, such as H.264, H.265, or AVCHD. If you’re
filming with a DSLR camera, for example, chances are your media is
recorded using the H.264 codec. Thanks to the Mercury Playback
Engine, you’ll find that these files play back with ease.
64-bit and multithreading: Premiere Pro is a 64-bit application,
which means it can use all the random access memory (RAM) on your
computer. This is particularly useful when you’re working with high-
definition or ultra-high-definition video (HD, or 4K and above). The
Mercury Playback Engine is multithreaded, which means it uses all the
CPU cores in your computer. The more powerful your computer is, the
higher the performance you’ll see in Premiere Pro.
CUDA, OpenCL, Apple Metal, and Intel graphics support: If you
have powerful enough graphics hardware, Premiere Pro can send some
of the work for playing back video to the graphics card, rather than
putting the entire processing burden on the CPU in your computer. The
results are even better performance and responsiveness when working
with sequences, and many special effects will play in real time,
without dropping frames.
For 
more 
information 
about 
supported 
graphics 
cards, 
see
http://helpx.adobe.com/premiere-pro/system-requirements.html.
Setting the video and audio display formats
The next two sections of the General tab in the New Project dialog box allow
you to choose how Premiere Pro should measure time for your video and audio
clips.
In most cases, you’ll choose the default options: Timecode from the Video
Display Format menu and Audio Samples from the Audio Display Format menu.
These settings don’t change the way Premiere Pro plays video or audio clips,
only the way time is measured.
The Video Display Format menu
There are four options for Video Display Format. The correct choice for a given
project largely depends on whether you are working with video or celluloid film
as your source material. It’s rare to produce content using film, so if you are not
sure, choose Timecode.

The choices are as follows:
Timecode: This is the default option. Timecode is a universal standard for
counting hours, minutes, seconds, and individual frames of video. The same
system is used by cameras, professional video recorders, and nonlinear
editing systems all around the world.
Feet + Frames 16 mm or Feet + Frames 35 mm: If your source files are
captured from film and you intend to give your editing decisions to a lab so
they can cut the original negative to produce a finished film, you may want
to use this standard method of measuring time. Rather than measuring time
as seconds and frames, this system counts the number of feet plus the
number of frames since the last foot. It’s a bit like feet and inches but with
frames rather than inches. Because 16mm film and 35mm film have
different frame sizes (and so different numbers of frames per foot), there’s
an option for each.
Frames: This option simply counts the number of frames of video. This is
sometimes used for animation projects and is another way that labs like to
receive information about edits for film-based projects.
 Note
Many of the terms used in Adobe Premiere Pro come from film
editing, including the term bin. In traditional film editing, editors
hang film clips on hooks over large bins, with the long piece of
celluloid trailing into the bin to keep it safe.
For this exercise, leave Video Display Format set to Timecode.
The Audio Display Format menu
For audio files, time can be displayed as samples or milliseconds.

Audio Samples: When digital audio is recorded, sound level samples are
taken, as captured by the microphone, thousands of times a second. In the
case of most professional video cameras, this happens 48,000 times per
second. Premiere Pro gives you the option to display time when playing
clips and sequences as hours, minutes, seconds, and frames, or as hours,
minutes, seconds, and samples.
Milliseconds: With this mode selected, Premiere Pro can display time in
your sequences as hours, minutes, seconds, and thousandths of a second.
By default, Premiere Pro lets you zoom the Timeline enough to view individual
clip segment frames. However, you can easily switch to showing your audio
display format instead. This powerful feature lets you make the tiniest
adjustments to your audio.
For this project, leave the Audio Display Format option set to Audio Samples.
About seconds and frames
When a camera records video, it captures a series of still images of the
action. If there are enough images captured each second, it looks like
moving video when played back. Each picture is called a frame, and the
number of frames each second is usually called frames per second (fps),
or frame rate.
The fps will vary depending on your camera/video format and settings. It
could be any number, including 23.976, 24, 25, 29.97, 50, or 59.94. Most
cameras allow you to choose between more than one frame rate and more
than one frame size. It’s important to know which was chosen when
filming.
Setting the capture format
It’s most common to record video as a file you can work with immediately.
However, there may be times you need to capture from videotape.
The Capture Format menu tells Premiere Pro what videotape format you are
using when capturing video to your storage drive.
Capturing from DV and HDV cameras
Premiere Pro can capture from DV and HDV cameras using the FireWire
connection on your computer, if it has one. FireWire is also known as IEEE 1394
and i.LINK.

Capturing from third-party hardware
Not all video decks use a FireWire connection, so you may need additional third-
party hardware installed to be able to connect your video deck for capture.
 Note
The Mercury Playback Engine can share performance with video
input and output hardware for playback, thanks to a feature called
Adobe Mercury Transmit.
If you have additional hardware, you should follow the directions provided by
the manufacturer to install it. Most likely you’ll install software supplied with
your hardware. The software install will likely discover Premiere Pro on your
computer, automatically adding extra options to this menu and to others.
Follow the directions provided with your third-party equipment to configure new
Premiere Pro projects.
For more information about the video capture hardware and video formats
supported 
by 
Premiere 
Pro, 
visit 
http://helpx.adobe.com/premiere-
pro/compatibility.html.
Ignore this setting for now because you will not be capturing from a tape deck in
this exercise, and you can change the setting as needed later.
Displaying the project item names and label colors
There’s a check box at the bottom of the New Project dialog box described as
“display the project item name and label color for all instances.”
With this option enabled, when you change the color of a clip or change the clip
name, all copies of the clip used anywhere in the project will update accordingly.
If this option is not selected, only the copy you select will be changed.
Leave this deselected for now.
Setting up the scratch disks
Whenever Premiere Pro captures (records) video from tape, renders special
effects, saves backup copies of the project file, downloads content from Adobe
Stock, or imports animated motion graphics templates, new files are created on
your hard drive.

Scratch disks are the locations these files are stored. They can be physically
separate disks, as the name suggests, or any subfolder on your storage. Scratch
disks can be located all in the same place or in separate locations, depending on
your hardware and workflow requirements. If you’re working with really large
media files, you may get a performance boost by putting all your scratch disks
on physically separate hard drives.
There are generally two approaches to storage for video editing.
Project-based setup: All associated media files are stored with one project
file in the same folder (this is the default option for scratch disks and the
simplest to manage).
System-based setup: Media files associated with multiple projects are
saved to one central location (perhaps high-speed network-based storage),
and the project file is saved to another location. This might include storing
different kinds of media files in different locations.
To change the location of the scratch disk for a particular type of data, choose a
location from the menu next to the data type. The choices are:
Documents (to store the scratch disk in the Documents folder in your
system user account).
Same As Project (to store the scratch disk with the project file); this is the
default option.
[Custom] is automatically chosen if you click Browse and choose a specific
location for the scratch disk.
Below each Scratch Disk location menu, a file path shows the current setting.
Your scratch disks might be stored on local hard drives or on a network-based
storage system; any storage location your computer has access to will work.
However, the speed of your scratch disks can have a big impact on performance,
so choose fast storage if possible.
Using a project-based setup

By default, Premiere Pro keeps any newly created media together with the
project file (this is the Same As Project option). Keeping everything together this
way makes finding associated files simple.
It makes it easier to stay organized if you move media files into the same folder
before you import them. When you’re finished with your project, you can
remove everything from your system by deleting the single folder your project
file is stored in.
There’s a downside, though: Storing your media files on the same drive as your
project file means the drive has to work harder while you edit, and this can
impact playback performance.
Using a system-based setup
Some editors prefer to have all their media stored in a single location. Others
choose to store their capture folders and preview folders in a different location
from their project. This is a common choice in editing facilities where multiple
editors share several editing systems, all connected to the same storage. It’s also
common among editors who have fast hard drives for video media and slower
hard drives for everything else.
There’s a downside with this setup too: Once you finish editing, you’ll likely
want to gather everything together for archiving. This is slower and more
complex when your media files are distributed across multiple storage locations.
Typical drive setup and network-based storage
Although all file types can coexist on a single hard drive, a typical editing
system will have two hard drives: Drive 1, dedicated to the operating
system and programs, and Drive 2 (often a faster drive), dedicated to
footage items, including captured video and audio, video and audio
previews, still images, and exported media.
Some storage systems use local computer networks to share storage
between multiple systems. If this is the case for you, check with your
system administrators to make sure you have the right settings.
Setting up a Project Auto Save location
In addition to choosing where new media files are created, Premiere Pro allows
you to set a location to store automatically saved files. These are additional
backup copies of your project file that are created automatically while you work.
Choose a location from the Project Auto Save menu on the Scratch Disks tab.

Storage drives occasionally fail, and you may lose files stored on them without
warning. In fact, any computer engineer will tell you that if you have only one
copy of a file, you can’t count on having the file at all. For this reason, it’s a
great idea to set the Project Auto Save location to a physically separate drive,
just in case.
In addition to storing automatically saved files in the location you choose here,
Premiere Pro can store a backup of your project file in your Creative Cloud Files
folder. This folder is created automatically when you install Adobe Creative
Cloud. It allows you to access files in any location where Creative Cloud is
installed and you are logged in.
This useful extra safety net is available by choosing Edit > Preferences > Auto
Save (Windows) or Premiere Pro CC > Preferences > Auto Save (macOS).
CC Libraries Downloads
You can also use the Creative Cloud Files folder to store additional media files
that you can access from any system. Collaborators on a project can use the
Creative Cloud Files folder to share assets. For example, you might download
logos or graphic elements to incorporate into your sequence.
Use the Libraries panel in Premiere Pro to access these files, and when you add
items to your project in this way, Premiere Pro will create a copy of them in the
scratch disk location you choose from the CC Libraries Downloads menu.
Motion Graphics Template Media menu
Premiere Pro can import and display animated template graphics and titles
created with After Effects or Premiere Pro. When you import a motion graphics
template, a copy will be stored in the location you choose from this menu.
For this project, leave all your scratch disks set to the default option: Same As
Project.
Choosing ingest settings
Most editors describe adding media to a project as importing. However, the
process is also described as ingesting. The two words are often used

interchangeably, but the word ingest has a broader meaning than the word
import.
When you import a media file into a Premiere Pro project, a link is made to the
original media file, and you’re ready to include it in a sequence.
Depending on the scenario, selecting Ingest on the Ingest Settings tab might
mean imported media files are also copied to a new location or converted to a
new format.
When you select Ingest, you can choose from the menu what to do with your
media files.
Copy them to a new storage location
Transcode them to a new codec and/or format
Create Proxies, which converts them to lower-resolution media files that
are easier for a lower-powered computer to play back and that take up less
storage space
You’ll be exploring these settings in Lesson 3, “Importing Media.” They can be
changed at any time, so for now leave Ingest deselected.

Now that you have checked that the settings are correct for this project, let’s
finish creating it.
1. Click in the Name box, and name your new project First Project.
2. Click Browse, and browse to the Lessons/Lesson 02 folder. Click Choose to
establish this new folder as the location for the new project.
 Note
When choosing a location for your project file, you may want to
choose a recently used location from the Location menu.
3. If your project is set up correctly, the General section in the New Project
window should look similar to the screen shown here. If the settings match,
click OK to create a new project.

Setting up a sequence
In your Premiere Pro project you will create a sequence (or several sequences),
into which you’ll place video clips, audio clips, and graphics. If necessary,
Premiere Pro will automatically change video and audio clips that you add to a
sequence so they match the settings for that sequence. Frame rates and frame
sizes for clips, for example, will be converted during playback to match the
settings you choose for your sequence. This is called conforming.
Each sequence in your project can have different settings, and you’ll want to
choose settings that match your original media as precisely as possible to
minimize conforming during playback. Doing so reduces the work your system
must do to play back your clips, improves real-time performance, and maximizes
quality.
If you’re editing a mixed-format project, you may have to choose which media
to match with your sequence settings. You can mix formats easily, but playback
performance improves when the sequence settings match.
If the first clip you add to a sequence does not match the playback settings of
your sequence, Premiere Pro asks if you would like to change the sequence
settings automatically to fit.
Premiere Pro will ask you what to do if your first clip does not match your sequence.
Creating a sequence that automatically matches your source
If you’re not sure what sequence settings you should choose, don’t worry.
Premiere Pro can create a sequence based on your media.
At the bottom of the Project panel, there’s a New Item menu 
. Use this menu
to create new items, such as sequences, titles, and bins.
To automatically create a sequence that matches your media, drag and drop any
clip (or multiple clips) in the Project panel onto the New Item menu. A new
sequence will be created with the same name as the clip and a matching frame
size and frame rate.
Using this method, you can be confident your sequence settings will work with
your media. If the Timeline panel is empty, you can also drag a clip (or multiple

clips) into it to create a sequence with matching settings.
Choosing the correct preset
If you do know the settings you need, you can configure the sequence exactly. If
you’re not so sure, you can use a preset.
Click the New Item menu at the bottom-right corner of the Project panel 
,
and choose Sequence.
The New Sequence dialog has four tabs: Sequence Presets, Settings, Tracks, and
VR Video.
The Sequence Presets tab makes setting up a new sequence easier. When you
choose a preset, Premiere Pro applies settings for the new sequence that closely
match a particular video and audio format. After choosing a preset, you can

adjust these settings on the Settings tab if necessary.
You’ll find a wide range of preset configuration options for the most commonly
used and supported media types. These settings are organized based on camera
formats (with specific settings inside a folder named after the recording format).
You can click the disclosure triangle to see specific formats in a group. These are
typically designed around frame rates and frame sizes. Let’s look at an example.
1. Click the disclosure triangle next to the group Digital SLR.
You can now see three subfolders, based on frame sizes. Remember that
video cameras can often shoot video using different frame sizes, as well as
different frame rates and codecs.
2. Click the disclosure triangle next to the 1080p subgroup.
3. Choose the DSLR 1080p30 preset by clicking its name.
Formats and codecs
Video and audio files have a particular format, that is, a frame rate, frame
size, audio sample rate, and so on.
Video files such as Apple QuickTime, Microsoft AVI, and MXF are
containers that can carry many different video and audio codecs.
Codec is a shortening of the words compressor and decompressor. It’s the

way video and audio information is stored and replayed.
The media file is referred to as the wrapper, and the video and audio
inside the file are sometimes referred to as the essence.
If you output your finished sequence to a file, you’ll choose a format, a
file type, and a codec.
When you’re starting out in video editing, you may find the number of formats
available a little overwhelming. Premiere Pro can work natively with a wide
range of video and audio formats and codecs and will often play back
mismatched formats smoothly.
However, when Premiere Pro has to adjust video for playback because of
mismatched sequence settings, your editing system must work harder to play the
video, and this will impact real-time performance. It’s worth taking the time
before you start editing to make sure you have sequence settings that closely
match your original media files.
The essential factors are always the same: the number of frames per second, the
frame size (the number of pixels in the picture), and the audio format. If you
were to turn your sequence into a media file without applying a conversion, then
the frame rate, audio format, frame size, and so on, would all match the settings
you chose when creating the sequence.
When you output to a file, you can convert your sequence to any format you like
(for more on exporting, see Lesson 18, “Exporting Frames, Clips, and
Sequences”).
 Note
The Preset Description area of the Sequence Presets tab often
describes the kind of camera used to capture media in this format.
Customizing a sequence preset
Once you’ve selected the sequence preset that most closely matches your source
video, you may want to adjust the settings to meet a particular delivery
requirement or in-house workflow.
The detailed settings are accessible by selecting the Settings section of the New
Sequence dialog. Remember, Premiere Pro will automatically conform footage
you add to your Timeline so that it matches your sequence settings, giving you a
standard frame rate and frame size, regardless of the original clip format.

The Settings section gives precise control over sequence configuration.
 Tip
For now, leave the settings as they are, but examine the way the
preset is going to configure the new sequence. Look at each setting
from top to bottom to build familiarity with the choices required to
configure a sequence.
Creating a sequence preset
While the standard presets usually work, you may need to create a custom
setting. To do so, first choose a sequence preset that matches your media
closely and then make custom selections in the Settings section of the

New Sequence dialog. Having adjusted the settings, you can save your
custom preset for future use by clicking the Save Preset button near the
bottom of the Settings section.
If you save a preset, you can give your customized project settings preset
a name in the Save Settings dialog box, add notes if you want, and click
OK. The preset will appear in a Custom folder under Sequence Presets.
If your media matches one of the presets, it’s not necessary to change the
settings. In fact, it’s recommended that you use the default settings.
You’ll notice that some settings cannot be changed when you use a preset. This
is because they’re optimized for the media type you selected on the Preset tab.
For complete flexibility, change the Editing Mode menu to Custom.
Maximum Bit Depth and Maximum Render Quality settings
When editing with GPU acceleration (dedicated graphics hardware
graphics performing some of the visual effects rendering and playback),
advanced algorithms are used and effects are rendered in 32-bit color.
When working without GPU acceleration, you can enable Maximum Bit
Depth, and Premiere Pro will render special effects at the maximum
quality possible. For many effects, this means 32-bit floating-point color,
which allows for trillions of color combinations. This is the best-possible
quality for your effects but is more work for your computer, so expect less
real-time performance.
If you enable the Maximum Render Quality option or if you have GPU
acceleration enabled in the project’s settings, Premiere Pro uses a more
advanced system for scaling images. Without this option, you might see
minor artifacts or noise in the picture when making images smaller.
Without GPU acceleration, this option will impact playback performance
and file export.
Both of these options can be turned off or on at any time, so you can edit
without them to maximize performance and then turn them on when you
output your finished work. Even with both options on you can use real-
time effects and expect good performance from Premiere Pro.
Understanding audio track types
When you add a video or audio clip to a sequence, you’ll put it on a track.

Tracks are horizontal areas in the Timeline panel that hold clips in a particular
position in time. If you have more than one video track, any video clips placed
on an upper track will appear in front of clips on a lower track. For example, if
you have text or a graphic on your second video track and a video clip on your
first video track (below it), you’ll see the graphic in front of the video.
The Tracks section of the New Sequence dialog allows you to preselect the track
types for the new sequence.
All audio tracks are played at the same time, creating a complete audio mix. To
create a mix, position your audio clips on different tracks, lined up in time.
Narration, sound bites, sound effects, and music can be organized by putting
them on different tracks. You can also rename tracks, making it easier to find
your way around more complex sequences.
Premiere Pro lets you specify how many video and audio tracks will be included
when the sequence is created. You can easily add and remove tracks later, but
you can’t change your Audio Master setting. Choose Stereo for now.

 Note
The Audio Master setting configures the sequence to output audio
as stereo, 5.1, multichannel, or mono.
You can choose from several audio track types. Each track type is designed for
specific types of audio. When you choose a particular track type, Premiere Pro
gives you the right controls to make adjustments to the sound, based on the
number of audio channels. For example, stereo clips need different controls than
5.1 surround-sound clips.

The types of audio tracks available in Premiere Pro are as follows:
Standard: These tracks are for both mono and stereo audio clips.
5.1: These tracks are for audio clips with 5.1 audio (the kind used for
surround sound).
Adaptive: Adaptive tracks are for both mono and stereo audio and give you
precise control over the output routing for each audio channel. For example,
you could decide the track audio channel 3 should be output to your mix in
channel 5. This workflow is used for multilingual broadcast TV, where
precise control of audio channels is used at transmission.
Mono: This track type will accept only mono audio clips.
When you add a clip to a sequence that has both video and audio, Premiere Pro
makes sure the audio channels go to the right kind of track. You can’t
accidentally put an audio clip on the wrong kind of track; Premiere Pro will
automatically create the right kind of track if one doesn’t exist already.
You’ll explore audio more in Lesson 11, “Editing and Mixing Audio.”
VR video
Premiere Pro offers exceptional support for 360 video, often described as
VR video, where multiple cameras, or a very wide lens, are used to capture
a video image that can be viewed with a VR headset to create an
immersive experience.
In the VR Video section of the New Sequence dialog, you can specify the
angle of view captured so Premiere Pro can accurately display the image.
You will find a dedicated display mode, and special VR video visual
effects are available in Premiere Pro.
For this sequence, use the default settings. Take a moment to familiarize yourself
with the options; then do the following:
1. Click in the Sequence Name box, and name your sequence First Sequence.
2. Click OK to create the sequence.

3. Choose File > Save.
Congratulations! You have made a new project and sequence with Premiere
Pro.
If you have not already copied the media and project files to your computer,
please do so before continuing to the next lesson, as you’ll need them to follow
along. You’ll find instructions for copying the files in the “Getting Started”
section at the beginning of this book.
Review questions
1. What is the purpose of the Settings tab in the New Sequence dialog box?
2. How should you choose a sequence preset?
3. What is timecode?
4. How do you create a custom sequence preset?
5. What options are available in Premiere Pro to capture video from tape with
no additional third-party hardware?
Review answers
1. The Settings tab is used to customize an existing preset or to create a new
custom preset.
2. It’s generally best to choose a preset that matches your original footage.
Premiere Pro makes this easy by describing the presets in terms of camera
systems.
3. Timecode is the universal system for measuring time in hours, minutes,
seconds, and frames. The number of frames per second varies depending on
the recording format.
4. When you’ve selected the settings you want for your custom preset, click the
Save Preset button, give it a name and a description, and click OK.
5. Premiere Pro records DV and HDV files if you have a FireWire connection
on your computer. If you have additional connections provided by installed
third-party hardware, consult the documentation for that hardware for the
best settings.

3. Importing Media
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Using the Media Browser to load video files
Using the Import command to load graphic files
Working with proxy media
Using Adobe Stock
Choosing where to place cache files
Recording a voice-over
This lesson will take about 75 minutes to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the
Getting Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions
under “Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.”
To create a sequence, you need to import media files into your project. This
might include video footage, animation files, narration, music, atmospheric
sound, graphics, or photos. Everything you include in a sequence must be
imported before it can be used.
Any item included in a sequence must also be included in the Project panel.
Importing a clip directly to a sequence automatically adds the clip to the Project
panel, and deleting a clip in the Project panel removes it from sequences it
appears in (you’ll be given the option to cancel if you do this).
Whichever way you approach editing sequences, importing clips to the Project
panel and organizing them is the first step.

Because Adobe Premiere Pro can work with so many types of assets, there are multiple methods for
browsing and importing media.
Starting the lesson
In this lesson, you’ll learn to import media assets into Adobe Premiere Pro CC.
For most files, you’ll use the Media Browser panel, a robust asset browser that
works with many media types you’ll import into Premiere Pro. You’ll also learn
about special cases such as importing graphics or capturing from videotape.
For this lesson, you can continue to use the project file you created in Lesson 2,
“Setting Up a Project.” If you do not have the previous lesson file, you can open
the file Lesson 03.prproj from the Lesson 03 folder.
1. Continue to work with your project file from the previous lesson, or open it
from your hard drive.
2. Choose File > Save As.
3. Browse to Lessons/Lesson 03, and save the project with the name My Lesson

03.prproj.
Importing assets
When you import items into a Premiere Pro project, you are creating a link to the
original media file with a pointer that lives inside your project.
The pointer is called a clip, and you can think of a clip as a shortcut (Windows)
or alias (macOS).
When you work with a clip in Premiere Pro, you are not making a copy of the
original file or modifying it; you’re selectively playing the original media from
its current location, in a nondestructive manner.
For example, if you choose to edit only part of a clip into your sequence, you’re
not throwing away the unused media. Also, if you add an effect to a clip to
brighten the image, the effect is applied to the clip, not the media file it links to.
Media can be imported in two principal ways.
Standard importing by choosing File > Import
Using the Media Browser
Let’s explore the benefits of each.
 Tip
Another way to open the Import dialog box is to double-click an
empty area of the Project panel. You can even drag files directly
from Explorer (Windows) or Finder (macOS) into Premiere Pro to
import.
When to use the Import command
Using the Import command is straightforward (and may match your experience
in other applications). To import any file, just choose File > Import.
You can also use the keyboard shortcut Ctrl+I (Windows) or Command+I
(macOS) to open the standard Import dialog box.
This method works best for self-contained assets such as graphics and audio,
especially if you know exactly where those assets are on your drive and can
quickly navigate to them.

This importing method is not ideal for file-based camera footage, which often
uses complex folder structures with separate files for audio, video, and important
additional data, or for RAW media files. For most camera-originated media,
you’ll want to use the Media Browser panel.
When to use the Media Browser panel
The Media Browser panel is a robust tool for reviewing your media assets and
then importing them into Premiere Pro. The Media Browser shows the
fragmented files you might capture with a digital video camera as whole clips;
you’ll see each recording as a single item, with the video and audio combined,
regardless of the original recording format.
This means you can avoid dealing with complex camera folder structures and
instead work with easy-to-browse icons and metadata. Being able to see this
meta-data (which contains important information, such as clip duration,
recording date, and file type) makes it easier to select the correct clip in a long
list.

By default, in the Editing workspace, you’ll find the Media Browser in the
lower-left corner of your Premiere Pro workspace. It’s docked in the same frame
as the Project panel. You can also quickly access the Media Browser by pressing
Shift+8 (be sure to use the 8 key at the top of the keyboard).
Like any other panel, you can position the Media Browser in another frame by
dragging it using the tab (where the name of the panel is displayed).
You can also undock it to make it a floating panel by clicking the menu on the
panel tab 
 and choosing Undock Panel.
 Tip
If you want to import assets used in another Premiere Pro project,
you can browse inside that project in the Media Browser panel. Use
the Media Browser to locate the project file and double-click it to
view its contents. You can select and import clips and sequences to
your current Project panel.
Browsing for files in the Media Browser is similar to browsing with Explorer
(Windows) or Finder (macOS). The contents of your storage are displayed as
navigation folders on the left, with buttons to navigate forward and backward at
the top.
You can use arrow keys to select items.
The major benefits of the Media Browser are as follows:

Narrowing the display to a specific file type, such as JPEG, Photoshop,
XML, or ARRIRAW files.
Autosensing camera data—AVCHD, Canon XF, P2, RED, Cinema DNG,
Sony HDV, or XDCAM (EX and HD)—to correctly display the clips.
Viewing and customizing the kinds of metadata to display.
Correctly displaying media that has spanned clips across multiple camera
media cards. Premiere Pro will automatically import the files as a single
clip even if a longer video file filled a storage card and continued onto a
second.
Working with ingest options and proxy media
Premiere Pro offers excellent performance when playing back, and applying
special effects to, a broad range of media formats and codecs. However, there
may be occasions that your system hardware will struggle to play media,
especially if it’s high-resolution RAW footage.
You may decide it will be more efficient to work with low-resolution copies of
your media while you edit and to switch to the full, original resolution media just
before you check your effects and output your finished work. This is a proxy
workflow—creating low-resolution “proxy” files to use instead of your original
content.
Premiere Pro can automate creating proxy files during import, and this is part of
a more advanced approach to media ingest. If you’re happy with the
performance on your system when working with original footage, you’ll
probably skip this feature. Still, it opens up significant advantages, both for
system performance and for collaboration.
Let’s check out the options.
1. Choose File > Project Settings > Ingest Settings.

This dialog contains the original project setup options you saw when creating
the project. You can change any setting at any time.
By default, all the Ingest options are disabled. Whichever ingest option you
choose, the actions will be performed however you import media files from
now on. Files you have already imported are not affected.
2. Enable Ingest by clicking the check box, and click the first menu to see these
options:
Copy: When you import media files, Premiere Pro will copy the original
files to a location you choose in the Primary Destination menu below.
This is a valuable option if you are importing media files directly from
your camera card media, since media must be available to Premiere Pro
when your cards are not connected to the computer.
Transcode: When you import media files, Premiere Pro will convert the
files to a new format and codec based on the preset you choose and will
place the new files in a destination location you choose. This is useful if
you are working in a post-production facility that has adopted a standard
format and codec for all projects.
Create Proxies: When you import media files, Premiere Pro creates
additional copies that are lower resolution, based on the preset you
chose, and stores them in the location you choose in the Proxy
Destination menu. This is useful if you are working on a lower-powered
computer or you want to save on storage space. It’s unlikely you would
want to use these files for your final delivery, but they open up the
option to use a number of convenient special effects and collaborative
workflows.

 Note
There’s a Toggle Proxies button 
 you can add to the
Source Monitor or Program Monitor to quickly switch
between viewing proxy or original media. See Lesson 4,
“Organizing Media,” to find out how to customize the
monitor buttons.
 Note
Adobe Media Encoder does the work of transcoding files
and creating proxies in the background, so you can use your
original media right away, and as the new proxy files are
created, they’ll be used instead automatically.
Copy and Create Proxies: When you import media files, Premiere Pro
will copy the original files to a location you choose in the Primary
Destination menu and create proxies that are stored in the Proxy
Destination menu.
3. Select the option Create Proxies, open the Preset menu, and try choosing a
few options. Look at the Summary in the lower part of the dialog that
explains each option.
It’s most important that the option you choose matches the aspect ratio of your
original footage. This way, you’ll see composition elements correctly while
working with the proxy files.
If proxy media exists for clips in your project, it’s easy to switch between
displaying your original, full-quality media and your low-resolution proxy
versions. Choose Edit > Preferences > Media (Windows) or Premiere Pro CC >

Preferences > Media (macOS), and toggle the Enable Proxies option.
 Note
When you output a sequence that is set to display proxy media, the
full-quality original media is automatically used rather than the low-
resolution proxy media.
This was just an introduction to the proxy media workflow. For more
information about managing proxy files, linking proxy media, and creating new
proxy file presets, see the Adobe Premiere Pro Help. When you have finished
looking at the settings, click Cancel.
Working with the Media Browser panel
The Media Browser allows you to easily browse for files on your computer. It
can stay open, it’s fast and convenient, and it’s optimized for locating and
importing footage.
 Note
To complete this lesson, you will import files from your computer.
Be sure you have copied all the lesson files included with this book
to your computer. For more details, see the “Getting Started” section
at the beginning of the book.
Following a file-based camera workflow
Premiere Pro CC can use footage from file-based cameras without conversion,
including compressed native media from camera systems such as P2, XDCAM,
and AVCHD; RAW media from Canon, Sony, RED, and ARRI; and post-
production-friendly codecs such as Avid DNxHD, Apple ProRes, and GoPro
Cineform.
For best results, follow these guidelines (no need to follow along now):
Create a new media folder for each project.
Copy camera media to your editing storage with the existing folder
structure intact. Be sure to transfer the complete data folder directly from
the root directory of the card. For best results, consider using the transfer
application that is often included by the camera manufacturer to move your
video files. Check that all media files have been copied and that the card

and copied folder sizes match.
Clearly label the copied folder of the media with the camera information,
including card number and date of shoot.
Create a second copy of the media on a physically separate, second drive in
case of hardware failure.
Ideally, create a long-term archive copy using another backup method, such
as LTO tape (a popular long term storage system) or an external storage
drive.
 Note
Adobe Prelude makes managing the process of copying and
importing tapeless media sources easier.
Importing from Adobe Prelude
Adobe Creative Cloud CC includes Adobe Prelude, which you can use to
organize footage in a simple, streamlined interface.
Adobe Prelude is designed to allow producers or assistants to quickly and
efficiently ingest (import), log, and transcode media (convert format and
codec) for tapeless workflows.
Here’s how to send a Prelude project to Premiere Pro:
1. Launch Adobe Prelude.
2. Open the project you want to transfer, and select one or more items in
the Project panel.
Adobe Prelude has a similar appearance to Premiere Pro but with
simplified controls.
3. Choose File > Export > Project.
4. Select the Project check box.
5. Enter a name in the Name field.
6. In the Type menu, choose Premiere Pro.
7. Click OK. The Choose Folder dialog box opens.
8. Navigate to a destination for the new project, and click Choose. A new
Premiere Pro project is created.
You can open the Premiere Pro project file directly, or you can import it
into an existing project.

If both Premiere Pro and Prelude are running at the same time on the same
computer, you can also send clips from Prelude to Premiere Pro by
selecting them, right-clicking the selection, and choosing Send To
Premiere Pro.
Understanding supported video file types
It’s not unusual to work on a project with video clips from multiple cameras
using different file types, media formats, and codecs. This is no problem for
Premiere Pro because you can mix different types of clips in the same sequence.
Also, the Media Browser can display almost any media file type. It’s particularly
well suited to file-based camera formats.

If your system hardware struggles to play back high-resolution media, you may
find it helpful to use proxy files while editing.
The following are the major types of file-based media supported by Premiere
Pro:
Any DSLR camera that shoots H.264 media as a QuickTime MOV or MP4
file
Panasonic P2, DV, DVCPRO, DVCPRO 50, DVCPRO HD, AVCI, AVC

Ultra, AVC Ultra Long GOP
RED ONE, RED EPIC, RED Mysterium X, the 6K RED Dragon, the 8K
REDCODE RAW Weapon
ARRI RAW, including ARRI AMIRA
Sony XDCAM SD, XDCAM 50, XAVC, SStP, RAW, HDV (when shot on
file-based media)
AVCHD cameras
Canon XF, Canon RAW
Apple ProRes
Image sequences, including DPX,
Avid DNxHD and DNxHR MXF files
Blackmagic CinemaDNG
Phantom Cine camera
Finding assets with the Media Browser panel
The good news is that the Media Browser is self-explanatory. In many ways, it’s
like a web browser (it has Forward and Back buttons to go through your recent
navigation). It also has a list of shortcuts on the side. Finding materials is easy.
 Note
When importing media, be sure to copy the files to your local
storage, or use the project ingest options to create copies before
removing your memory cards or external drives.
 Note
When you open a project created on another computer, you may see
a message warning you about a missing renderer. It’s fine to click
OK in this message.
Continue working with your Lesson 03.prproj project.
1. Begin by resetting the workspace to the default; in the Workspaces panel,
select Editing. Then open the panel menu adjacent to the Editing option, and
choose Reset To Saved Layout.

 Note
If you can’t see the Workspaces panel, select it by choosing
Window > Workspaces (at the bottom of the menu).
2. Select the Media Browser (it should be docked with the Project panel by
default). Resize the panel to make it larger.
3. To make the Media Browser easier to see, position your mouse pointer over
the panel and then press the ` (accent grave) key (it is often in the upper-left
corner of a keyboard).
 Tip
Some keyboard layouts make it difficult to find the right key. If
so, you can double click the name of a panel to toggle it full
screen.
The Media Browser panel should now fill the screen. You may need to adjust

the width of columns to make it easier to see items.
4. Using the Media Browser, navigate to the folder Lessons/Assets/Video and
Audio Files/Theft Unexpected.
 Tip
If you have copied the lesson files to your desktop, you can
quickly browse to it by clicking the Recent Directories menu at
the top left of the Media Browser, and choosing Home Directory.
5. Click the Thumbnail View button 
 at the bottom of the Media Browser
panel, and drag the resize slider in the lower-left corner of the Media
Browser to enlarge the thumbnails of the clips. You can use any size you like.
 Note
The Media Browser filters out non-media and unsupported files,
making it easier to browse for video or audio assets.
You can hover your mouse cursor over any unselected clip thumbnail to see a
preview of the clip contents.
6. Click a clip once to select it.
You can now preview the clip using keyboard shortcuts.

7. Press the L key to play a clip.
8. To stop playback, press the K key.
9. To play backward, press the J key.
0. Experiment with playing back other clips. You should be able to hear the clip
audio during playback.
You can press the J or L key multiple times to increase the playback rate for
fast previews. Use the K key or the spacebar to pause.
1. Now you’ll import all these clips into your project. Press Ctrl+A (Windows)
or Command+A (macOS) to select all the clips.
2. Right-click one of the selected clips and choose Import.
 Tip
You can also drag selected clips onto the Project panel’s tab and
then down into the empty area to import the clips.
3. Press the ` (accent grave) key or use the panel menu to restore the panel
frame to its original size. Having imported, the Project panel opens
automatically and displays the clips you just imported.

Clips in the Project panel can be viewed as icons or as a list, with information
about each clip displayed. Switch between these two viewing modes by clicking
the List View button 
 or Icon View button 
, at the bottom left of the
project panel.
Making the most of the Media Browser
The Media Browser has a number of features that make it easy to navigate
your storage.
The Forward and Back 
 buttons work like an Internet browser,
allowing you to navigate to locations you have viewed previously.
If you expect to import files from a location often, you can add the
folder to a list of favorites at the top of the navigation panel. To create
a favorite, right-click the folder and choose Add to Favorites.
You can limit the types of files displayed to make it easier to browse
large folders by opening the File Types Displayed menu 
.
To ignore regular media file types and just display file-based media
from a particular camera system, open the Directory Viewers menu 
.
You can open multiple Media Browser panels and access the contents
of several different folders at once. To open a new Media Browser
panel, open the panel menu and choose New Media Browser Panel.
Importing still image files
Graphics are an integral part of post-production. People expect graphics to both
convey information and add to the visual style of a final edit. Premiere Pro can
import just about any image and graphic file type. Support is especially excellent
when you use the native file formats created by Adobe’s leading graphic tools,
Adobe Photoshop CC and Adobe Illustrator CC.
Anyone who works with print graphics or performs photo retouching has
probably used Adobe Photoshop. It’s the workhorse of the graphic design
industry. Adobe Photoshop is a powerful tool with great depth and versatility,
and it’s an increasingly important part of the video production world. Let’s
explore how to properly import files from Adobe Photoshop.
First, you’ll import a basic graphic.

Importing single-layer image files
Most graphics and photos you will work with will have a single layer—one flat
series of pixels that you can work with as a simple media file. Let’s import one.
1. Select the Project panel.
2. Choose File > Import, or press Ctrl+I (Windows) or Command+I (macOS).
3. Navigate to Lessons/Assets/Graphics.
4. Select the file Theft_Unexpected.png, and click Import.
This PNG graphic is a simple logo file, and it appears in the Premiere Pro
project panel.
When the Project panel is in icon view, it displays the contents of graphics as a thumbnail.
Introducing Dynamic Link
One way to work with Premiere Pro is with a suite of tools. You may be
using a version of Adobe Creative Cloud that includes other components
for related video-editing tasks. To make things easier, you’ll find several
options for speeding up your post-production workflow.
A good example is Dynamic Link. This allows you to import After Effects
compositions into a Premiere Pro project in a way that creates a live
connection between the two applications. Once added in this way, the
After Effects compositions will look and behave like any other clip in
your Premiere Pro project.
When you make changes in After Effects, they automatically update in
Premiere Pro, which is a great time-saver.
Options for Dynamic Link exist between Premiere Pro and Adobe After
Effects and between Premiere Pro and Audition.
Importing layered Adobe Photoshop files
Adobe Photoshop can create graphics with multiple layers. Layers are similar to
tracks in your Timeline and allow for separation between visual elements. You
can import Photoshop document layers into Premiere Pro individually to allow

for isolation or animation. Let’s look at the import options.
1. Double-click an empty area of the Project panel to open the Import dialog
box.
2. Navigate to Lessons/Assets/Graphics.
3. Select the file Theft_Unexpected_Layered.psd, and click Import.
4. A new dialog box appears, giving you four Import options that allow you to
selectively import layers.
 Note
There are some deselected layers in this PSD. These are layers
the designer turned off in Photoshop but did not delete. Premiere
Pro honors the layer selection automatically on import.
Merge All Layers: This option merges all layers into one, importing the
file into Premiere Pro as a single, flattened clip.
Merged Layers: This option merges only the specific layers you select
into a single, flattened clip.
Individual Layers: This option imports only the specific layers you
select, with each layer becoming a separate clip in a bin.
Sequence: This option imports only the layers you select, each as a
single clip. Premiere Pro then creates a new sequence (with its frame
size based on the imported document) containing each clip on a separate
track (matching the original stacking order).

If you choose the Sequence or Individual Layers option, you can select
one of the following options from the Footage Dimensions menu:
Document Size: This brings all the selected layers into Premiere
Pro at the size of the original Photoshop document.
Layer Size: This matches the frame size of the new Premiere Pro
clips to the frame size of their individual layers in the original
Photoshop file. Layers that do not fill the entire canvas will be
cropped tightly, as transparent areas are removed. They’ll also be
centered in the frame, losing their original relative positioning.
 Tip
There are good reasons to import individual PSD layers
with separate layer sizes. For example, some graphic
designers create multiple images for editors to incorporate
into video edits, with each image occupying a different
layer in the PSD. The PSD itself is a kind of one-stop image
store when used this way.
5. For this exercise, choose Sequence, and use the Document Size option. Click
OK.
6. Look 
in 
the 
Project 
panel 
for 
the 
newly 
created 
bin 
called
Theft_Unexpected_Layered. Double-click it to open it.
7. Inside the bin, double-click the sequence Theft_Unexpected_Layered to open
it in the Timeline panel.
If you’re unsure which item is which, hover the mouse cursor over an item
name to find out whether it is a clip or a sequence. Sequences have a unique
icon in List view 
 and displayed over their thumbnail in Icon view 
.

8. Look at the sequence in the Timeline. Try turning off and on the Toggle
Track Output option 
 for each track to see the way the two layers are
isolated.
9. Close the Theft Unexpected bin by choosing Close Panel from its panel menu
.
Image tips for Adobe Photoshop files
Here are a few tips for importing images from Adobe Photoshop:
Remember that when you import a layered Photoshop document as a
sequence, the frame size in Premiere Pro will be the pixel dimensions
of the Photoshop document.
If you don’t plan to zoom or pan, try to create files with a frame size at
least as large as the frame size of the project. Otherwise, you’ll have to
scale up the image, and it will lose some of its sharpness.
If you do plan to zoom or pan, create images so that the resulting
zoomed or panned area of the image has a frame size at least as large
as the frame size of the sequence. For example, if you were working in
full HD, which is 1920 x 1080 pixels and you wanted to do a 2X
zoom, you need 3840 x 2160 pixels.
Importing large image files uses more system memory and can slow
down your system.
If possible, use 16-bit RGB color. CMYK color is for print workflows,
while video editing uses RGB or YUV color.
Importing Adobe Illustrator files
Another graphics component in Adobe Creative Cloud is Adobe Illustrator.
Unlike Adobe Photoshop, which is primarily designed to work with pixel-based
(or raster) graphics, Adobe Illustrator is a vector-based application. Vector
graphics are mathematical descriptions of shapes rather than drawn pixels. This
means you can scale them to any size and they always look sharp.
Vector graphics are typically used for technical illustrations, line art, or complex
graphics.
Let’s import a vector graphic.
1. Double-click an empty area of the Project panel to open the Import dialog
box.

2. Navigate to Lessons/Assets/Graphics.
3. Select the file Brightlove_film_logo.ai, and click Import.
Here’s the way Premiere Pro deals with Adobe Illustrator files:
Like the Photoshop file you imported earlier, this is a layered graphic file.
However, Premiere Pro doesn’t give you the option to import Adobe
Illustrator files in separate layers. It always merges them into a single layer
clip.
Premiere Pro uses a process called rasterization to convert the vector-based
Adobe Illustrator art into the pixel-based image format used by Premiere
Pro. This conversion happens during import automatically, so be sure your
graphics are configured to be large enough in Illustrator before importing
them into Premiere Pro.
Premiere Pro automatically anti-aliases, or smooths the edges of, the Adobe
Illustrator art.
Premiere Pro sets all empty areas of Illustrator files as transparent so that
clips on lower tracks in your sequence will show through.
 Note
If you right-click Brightlove_film_logo.ai in the Project panel,
you’ll note that one option is Edit Original. If you have Illustrator
installed on your computer, choosing Edit Original will open this
graphic in Illustrator, ready to be edited. So even though the layers
are merged in Premiere Pro, you can return to Adobe Illustrator, edit
the original layered file, and save it; the changes will immediately
appear in Premiere Pro.
Importing subfolders
When you import by choosing File > Import, you don’t have to select individual
files. You can select a whole folder. If you have already organized your files into
folders and subfolders on your storage drive, when you import them, the folders
are re-created as bins in Premiere Pro.
Try this now.
1. Choose File > Import, or press Ctrl+I (Windows) or Command+I (macOS).
2. Navigate to Lessons/Assets, and select the Stills folder. Don’t browse inside
the folder; just select it.

3. Click the Import Folder (Windows) or Import (macOS) button. Premiere Pro
imports the whole folder, including two subfolders containing photos. In the
Project panel, you’ll find bins have been created to match the folders.
 Note
If you import an entire folder, it’s possible some of the files will
not be media supported by Premiere Pro. If so, an information
message will inform you that some files could not be imported.
Importing VR video
What is often referred to as VR video is really 360 video that is best
viewed using a VR headset. Premiere Pro has built-in support for 360
video, with a dedicated viewing mode, support for VR headsets, and
special effects designed for the particular needs of video footage that
surrounds the viewer.
There is no special import process for 360 video—you can use the regular
Import option, or you can use the Media Browser panel and import as you
would any other video.
Premiere Pro expects prestitched equirectangular media, so you will have
to use another application to prepare your 360 media in this way prior to
import.
The excellent 360 video workflows in Premiere Pro are beyond the scope
of this book—check the online help for more information.
Using Adobe Stock
The Libraries panel allows you to easily share design assets between projects
and users. You can also search Adobe Stock directly in the Libraries panel,
choose video clips and graphics, and use a low-resolution preview in your
project immediately.

Adobe Stock offers millions of images and videos you can easily incorporate
into your sequences via the Libraries panel.
If you’re happy with a stock item and you’d like to purchase the full-resolution
version, you can click the License And Save To shopping cart icon that appears
on the item in the Libraries panel. The full-resolution item will be downloaded
and automatically replaces the low-resolution version in your project and
sequences.
For more information about Adobe Stock, check out http://stock.adobe.com.
Customizing the media cache
When you import certain video and audio formats, Premiere Pro may need to
process and cache a version of the format. This is particularly true for highly
compressed formats, and the process is called conforming.
 Note
You may have noticed the word Conform is used to describe both
the way clip playback is adjusted to match sequence settings and the
way certain formats are processed when imported to Premiere Pro.
That’s because the principle is the same—the original is adapted to
improve performance.
If necessary, imported audio files are automatically conformed to a new CFA
file. Most MPEG files are indexed, leading to an extra .mpgindex file that makes

it easier to read the file. You’ll know that the cache is being built if you see a
small progress indicator in the lower-right corner of the screen when importing
media.
The media cache improves preview playback performance by making it easier
for your editing system to decode and play media. You can customize the cache
to further improve performance. A media cache database helps Premiere Pro
manage these cache files, which are shared between multiple Creative Cloud
applications.
To access options for the cache, choose Edit > Preferences > Media Cache
(Windows) or Premiere Pro CC > Preferences > Media Cache (macOS).
Here are the options:
To move the media cache files or the media cache database to a new
location, click the appropriate Browse button, select the desired location,
and click OK. In most cases, you should not move the media cache
database during an editing project.
You should clean the media cache database on a regular basis to remove old
conformed and indexed files that are no longer required. To do so, click the
Delete Unused button. Any connected drives will have their cache files
removed. It’s a good idea to do this after you wrap up projects because it
removes unnecessary preview render files too, saving space.
Select Save .cfa And .pek Media Cache Files Next To Original Media Files
When Possible to keep media cache files stored on the same drive as the

media. If you want to keep everything in one central folder, leave this check
box unselected. Remember, the faster the drive for the media cache, the
better the playback performance you’re likely to experience in Premiere
Pro.
The Media Cache Management options allow you to configure a degree of
automation in the management of caches files. Premiere Pro will
automatically re-create these files if they are needed, so it’s safe to enable
these options to save space.
Tape vs. tapeless workflow
Tape is still sometimes used to acquire media, and it’s fully supported by
Premiere Pro. To bring footage from tape into a Premiere Pro project, you
can capture it.
Capture digital video from tape to your storage disk before using it in a
project. Premiere Pro captures video through a digital port, such as a
FireWire or Serial Digital Interface (SDI) port (if you have third-party
hardware). Premiere Pro saves captured footage to disk as files and
imports the files into projects as clips, just as you would with file-based
camera media. There are three basic approaches.
You can capture your entire videotape as one long clip.
You can log the beginning and end of each clip (each clip’s In and Out
marks) to batch capture them later.
You can use the scene detection feature in Premiere Pro to
automatically create separate clips based on every time you pressed
Record on your camera (for some tapes).
By default, you can use DV and HDV sources with Premiere Pro if your
computer has a FireWire port. If you’d like to capture other higher-end
professional formats, you’ll need to add a third-party capture device.
These come in several form factors, including internal cards and breakout
boxes that connect via FireWire, USB 3.0, SDI, and Thunderbolt.
Third-party hardware manufacturers can take advantage of Mercury
Playback Engine features for previewing effects and video on a connected
professional monitor. You can find a detailed list of supported hardware
by visiting http://helpx.adobe.com/premiere-pro/compatibility.html.
Recording a voice-over

You may be working with a video project that includes a narration track. It’s
likely you will have the narration recorded by professionals (or at least recorded
in a location quieter than your desk), but you can record audio right into
Premiere Pro too.
This can be helpful because it will give you a sense of timing for your edits.
Try recording a scratch audio track.
1. If you’re not using a built-in microphone, make sure your external
microphone or audio mixer is properly connected to your computer. You may
need to see the documentation for your computer or sound card.
2. Choose Edit > Preferences > Audio Hardware (Windows) or Premiere Pro
CC > Preferences > Audio Hardware (macOS) to configure your microphone
so Premiere Pro can use it. Use one of the choices from the Default Input
menu, such as Built-In Microphone or audio mixer, and click OK.
 Tip
If you have multiple audio input devices connected to your
system, you can choose which will be used for voice over
recording by right-clicking the Voice-over Record button and
choosing Voice-Over Record Settings. The dialog that appears
also allows you to pre-name the new audio file.
3. Turn down your computer speakers, or use headphones to prevent feedback
or echo.
4. Open 
the 
Theft_Unexpected_Layered 
sequence, 
in 
the
Theft_Unexpected_Layered bin.
5. Every audio track has a set of buttons and options on the far left. This area is
called the track header. There’s a Voice-Over Record button 
 for each
audio track.
6. Increase the height of the A1 track.
You can increase the height by dragging the dividing line between two track
headers or by hovering the mouse cursor over the track header, holding the
Alt key (Windows) or Option key (macOS), and scrolling the mouse wheel.

7. Position the Timeline playhead at the beginning of the sequence, and click
the voice-over Record button to begin recording.
8. After a brief countdown, recording will begin. Say a few words, and press the
spacebar to stop recording.
A new audio clip is created and added to the Project panel and the current
sequence.
To access voice-over recording settings, right-click an audio track header and
choose Voice-Over Record Settings.
Review questions
1. Does Premiere Pro CC need to convert P2, XDCAM, R3D, ARRIRAW, or
AVCHD footage when it is imported?
2. What is one advantage of using the Media Browser rather than the File >
Import method to import file-based media?
3. When you’re importing a layered Photoshop file, what are the four different
ways to import the file?
4. Where can media cache files be stored?
5. How can you enable proxy media file creation when video is imported?
Review answers
1. No. Premiere Pro CC can edit P2, XDCAM, R3D, ARRIRAW, and AVCHD,
as well as many other formats, natively.
2. The Media Browser understands the complex folder structures for P2,
XDCAM, and many other formats, and it shows you the clips in a visually
friendly way.
3. You can choose Merge All Layers into a single clip or select the specific
layers you want by choosing Merged Layers. If you want layers as separate
clips, choose Individual Layers and select the layers to import, or choose
Sequence to import the selected layers and create a new sequence from them.
4. You can store media cache files in any specified location or automatically on
the same drive as the original files (when possible). The faster the storage for

your cache, the better the playback performance for previews.
5. You can enable proxy media file creation in the ingest settings. You’ll find
these in the Project Settings dialog. You can also enable proxy creation by
selecting the box at the top of the Media Browser. There’s an Ingest Settings
button there too.

4. Organizing Media
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Using the Project panel
Staying organized with bins
Adding clip metadata
Using essential playback controls
Interpreting footage
Making changes to your clips
This lesson will take about 90 minutes to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the
Getting Started section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions
under “Accessing the Lesson Files and Web Edition.”

Once you have some video and sound assets in your project, you’ll begin looking through your footage
and adding clips to a sequence. Before you do, it’s well worth spending a little time organizing the assets
you have. Doing so can save you from spending hours hunting for things later.
Starting the lesson
When you have lots of clips in your project, imported from several different
media types, it can be a challenge to stay on top of everything and always find
that magic shot when you need it.
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to organize your clips using the Project panel.
You’ll create special folders, called bins, to divide your clips into categories.
You’ll also learn about adding important metadata and labels to your clips.
You’ll begin by getting to know the Project panel and organizing your clips.
1. For this lesson, you’ll use the project file you used in Lesson 3, “Importing

Media.” Continue to work with the project file from the previous lesson.
Alternatively, open the project file Lesson 04.prproj from the
Lessons/Lesson 04 folder.
2. To begin, reset the workspace to the default. In the Workspaces panel, click
Editing. Then click the panel menu adjacent to the Editing option, and choose
Reset To Saved Layout.
3. Choose File > Save As.
4. Rename the file to Lesson 04 Working.prproj.
5. Browse to the Lessons folder, and click Save to save the project in the
Lessons > Lesson 04 folder.
Using the Project panel
Everything you import into your Adobe Premiere Pro CC project will appear in
the Project panel. As well as giving you excellent tools for browsing your clips
and working with their metadata, the Project panel has folder-like bins that you
can use to stay organized.
Anything that appears in a sequence must also be in the Project panel. If you
delete a clip in the Project panel that is already used in a sequence, the clip will
automatically be removed from the sequence. Premiere Pro will warn you if
deleting a clip will affect an existing sequence.
In addition to acting as the repository for all your clips, the Project panel gives
you important options for interpreting media. All your footage will have a frame
rate (frames per second, or fps) and a pixel aspect ratio (pixel shape), for
example. You may want to change these settings for creative reasons.

The Project panel in List view. To switch to this view, click the List View button at the bottom left of the
panel.
You could, for example, interpret video recorded at 60fps video as 30fps to
achieve a 50-percent slow-motion effect. You might receive a video file that has
the wrong pixel aspect ratio setting and want to correct it.
Premiere Pro uses metadata associated with footage to know how to play it back.
If you want to change the clip metadata, you can do so in the Project panel.
Customizing the Project panel
It’s likely that you’ll want to resize the Project panel from time to time. You’ll
alternate between looking at your clips as a list or as thumbnail icons.
Sometimes it’s quicker to resize the panel than to scroll to see more information.

The default Editing workspace is designed to keep the interface as clean as
possible so you can focus on your creative work. Part of the Project panel that’s
hidden from view by default, called the Preview Area, gives additional
information about your clips.
Let’s take a look.
1. Open the Project panel menu.
2. Choose Preview Area.
The Preview Area shows useful information about clips when you select them.
 Tip
You can access lots of clip information by scrolling the List view
or by hovering the mouse cursor over a clip name.
The Preview Area shows you several kinds of useful information about a
selected clip in the Project panel, including the frame size, pixel aspect ratio,
and duration.

Click the Poster Frame button to set the clip thumbnail displayed in the Project panel.
 Tip
There’s a quick way to toggle between seeing the Project panel
in a frame and seeing it full-screen: Hover your mouse cursor
over the panel, and press the ` (accent grave) key. You can do
this with any panel. If your keyboard does not have a ` (accent
grave) key, you can double-click the panel name.
If it’s not already selected, click the List View button 
 at the bottom left of
the Project panel. In this view, you’ll find a lot of information about each clip
in the Project panel, but you need to scroll horizontally to see it.
3. Choose Preview Area from the Project panel menu to hide it.
Finding assets in the Project panel
Working with clips is a little like working with pieces of paper at your desk. If
you have just one or two clips, it’s easy. But when you have 100 to 200, you
need an organizational system.
One way you can help make things smoother during the edit is to invest a little
time in organizing your clips at the beginning. If you rename your clips after
importing them, it will make it easier for you to locate content later (see
“Changing names” in this chapter).
1. Click the Name heading at the top of the Project panel. The items in the
Project panel are displayed in alphabetical order or reverse alphabetical order
each time you click the Name heading. A direction indicator next to the
heading shows the current sort order.

 Tip
You can scroll the Project panel view up and down using the
scroll wheel on your mouse.
If you’re searching for several clips with particular features—such as a
duration or a frame size—it can be helpful to change the order in which the
headings are displayed.
2. Scroll to the right until you can see the Media Duration heading in the Project
panel. This shows the total duration of each clip’s media file.
 Note
When you scroll to the right in the Project panel, Premiere Pro
always maintains the clip names on the left so you know which
clips you’re seeing information about.
3. Click the Media Duration heading. Premiere Pro now displays the clips in
order of media duration. Notice the direction arrow on the Media Duration
heading. Each time you click the heading, the direction arrow toggles
between showing clips in duration order and in reverse-duration order.
 Note
You may need to drag a heading divider to expand the width of a
column before you can see its sort order indicator.
4. Drag the Media Duration heading to the left until you see a blue divider
between the Frame Rate heading and the Name heading. When you release
the mouse button, the Media Duration heading will be repositioned right next
to the Name heading.
 Tip
The Project panel configuration is saved with workspaces, so if
you want to always have access to a particular setup, save it as
part of a custom workspace.

The blue divider shows where you will drop the heading.
Filtering bin content
Premiere Pro has built-in search tools to help you find your media. Even if
you’re using nondescriptive original clip names assigned in-camera, you can
search for clips based on a number of factors, such as frame size or file type.
At the top of the Project panel, you can type in the Filter Bin Content box to
display only clips with names or metadata matching the text you enter. This is a
quick way to locate a clip if you remember its name (or even part of its name).
Clips that don’t match the text you enter are hidden, and clips that do match are
revealed, even if they are inside a closed bin.
 Note
Graphic and photo files such as Photoshop PSD, JPEG, and
Illustrator AI files import with a default frame duration you set after
choosing Preferences > Timeline > Still Image Default Duration.
Try this now.
1. Click in the Filter Bin Content box, and type jo.
Premiere Pro displays only the clips with the letters jo in the name or in the
metadata. Notice that the name of the project is displayed above the text-entry
box, along with “(filtered).”
 Note

The name bin comes from film editing. The Project panel is also
effectively a bin; it can contain clips and functions like any other
bin.
2. Click the X on the right of the Find box to clear your search.
3. Type psd in the box.
Premiere Pro displays only clips that have the letters psd in their name or
metadata. In this case, it’s the Theft_Unexpected title you imported in the
previous chapter as a layered image—this is a Photoshop PSD file. Using the
Filter Bin Content box in this way, you can search for particular types of files.
Be sure to click the X on the right of the Filter Bin Content box to clear your
filter when you have found the clips you want. Do this now.
Using advanced Find
Premiere Pro also has an advanced Find option. To learn about it, you can import
a couple more clips.
Using any of the methods described in Lesson 3, “Importing Media,” import
these items:
Seattle_Skyline.mov from the Assets/Video and Audio Files/General Views
folder
Under Basket.MOV from the Assets/Video and Audio Files/Basketball
folder
At the bottom of the Project panel, click the Find button 
. Premiere Pro
displays the Find panel, which has more advanced options for locating your clip.

You can perform two searches at once with the advanced Find panel. You can
choose to display clips that match all search criteria or any search criteria. For
example, depending on the setting you choose in the Match menu, you could do
either of the following:
Search for a clip with the words dog and boat in its name.
Search for a clip with the word dog or boat in its name.
To do this, make selections from the following menus:
Column: This option lets you select from the available headings in the
Project panel. When you click Find, Premiere Pro will search using only the
heading you select.
Operator: This option gives you a set of standard search options. Use this
menu to choose whether you want to find a clip that contains, matches
exactly, begins with, or ends with whatever you search for.
Match: Choose All to find a clip with both your first and your second
search text. Choose Any to find a clip with either your first or your second
search text.
Case Sensitive: Selecting this option tells Premiere Pro whether you want
your search to exactly match the uppercase and lowercase letters you enter.
 Tip
You can find clips in sequences too. With a sequence open,
choose Edit > Find.
Find What: Type your search text here. You can add up to two sets of
search text.
When you click Find, Premiere Pro highlights a clip that matches your search
criteria. Click Find again, and Premiere Pro highlights the next clip that matches
your search criteria. Click Done to exit the Find dialog box.

Working with bins
Bins allow you to organize clips by dividing them into groups.
Just like folders on your hard drive, you can have multiple bins inside other bins,
creating a folder structure as complex as your project requires.
There’s an important difference between bins and the folders on your storage
drive: Bins exist only in your Premiere Pro project file to help organize clips.
You won’t find individual folders representing project bins on your storage
drive.
Creating bins
Let’s create a bin.
1. Click the New Bin button 
 at the bottom of the Project panel.
Premiere Pro creates a new bin and automatically highlights the name, ready
for you to rename it. It’s a good habit to name bins as soon as you create
them.
2. You have already imported some clips from a film, so let’s give them a bin.
Name the new bin Theft Unexpected.
3. You can also create a bin using the File menu. Let’s do this now: Make sure
the Project panel is active, and choose File > New > Bin.
4. Name the new bin Graphics.
5. You can also make a new bin by right-clicking a blank area in the Project
panel and choosing New Bin. Try this now.
 Note
It can be difficult to find a blank part of the Project panel to click
when it is full of clips. Try clicking just to the left of the icons,
inside the panel, or choosing Edit > Deselect All.

6. Name the new bin Illustrator Files.
One of the quickest and easiest ways to create a new bin for clips you already
have in your project is to drag and drop the clips onto the New Bin button at
the bottom of the Project panel.
7. Drag and drop the clip Seattle_Skyline.mov onto the New Bin button.
8. Name the newly created bin City Views.
9. Make sure the Project panel is active but no existing bins are selected. Press
the keyboard shortcut Ctrl+B (Windows) or Command+B (macOS) to make
another bin.
 Tip
If an existing bin is selected when you create a new bin, it will be
created inside the selected bin. Deselect first to avoid this, or
drag the new bin out of the selected bin once it appears.
0. Name the bin Sequences.
If your Project panel is set to List view, bins are displayed in alphabetical
order among the clips.
 Note
To rename a bin, right-click and choose Rename. Type the new
name, and click away from the text to apply it.

Managing media in bins
Now that you have some bins, let’s put them to use. As you move clips into bins,
use the disclosure triangles 
 to hide their contents and tidy up the view.
 Note
When you import a Photoshop file with multiple layers and choose
to import it as a sequence, Premiere Pro automatically creates a bin
for the layers and their sequence.
1. Drag the clip Brightlove_film_logo.ai into the Illustrator Files bin.
2. Drag Theft_Unexpected.png into the Graphics bin.
3. Drag the Theft_Unexpected_Layered bin (created automatically when you
imported the layered PSD file as individual layers) into the Graphics bin.
4. Drag the clip Under Basket.MOV into the City Views bin. You may need to

resize the panel or switch it to full-screen to see both the clip and the bin.
 Note
Notice the clip Under Basket.MOV has a file extension all in
caps. This makes no difference for your operating system or for
Premiere Pro.
5. Drag the sequence called First Sequence into the Sequences bin.
6. Drag all the remaining clips into the Theft Unexpected bin.
You should now have a nicely organized Project panel, with each kind of clip
in its own bin.
You can also copy and paste clips to make extra copies if this helps you stay
organized. In the Graphics bin, you have a PNG file that might be useful for
the Theft Unexpected content. Let’s make an extra copy.
7. Click the disclosure triangle for the Graphics bin to display the contents.
8. Right-click the Theft_Unexpected.png clip and choose Copy.
9. Click the disclosure triangle for the Theft Unexpected bin to display the
contents.
0. Right-click the Theft Unexpected bin and choose Paste.
Premiere Pro places a copy of the clip in the Theft Unexpected bin.
 Note
When you make copies of clips, you are not making copies of the
media files they are linked to. You can make as many copies as
you like of a clip in your Premiere Pro project. Those copies will
all link to the same original media file.
 Tip

You can make Shift-click and Ctrl-click (Windows) or
Command-click (macOS) selections in the Project panel, just like
you can with files on your hard drive.
Finding your media files
If you’re not sure where a media file is on your hard drive, right-click the
clip in the Project panel and choose Reveal In Explorer (Windows) or
Reveal In Finder (macOS).
Premiere Pro will open the folder in your storage drive that contains the
media file and highlight it. This can be useful if you are working with
media files stored on multiple hard drives or if you have renamed your
clips in Premiere Pro.
Changing bin views
Although there is a distinction between the Project panel and the bins inside it,
they have the same controls and viewing options. For all intents and purposes,
you can treat the Project panel as a bin; many Premiere Pro editors use the terms
bin and Project panel interchangeably.
Bins have two views. You choose between them by clicking the List View button
 or Icon View button 
 at the bottom left of the Project panel.
List view: This view displays your clips and bins as a list, with a significant
amount of metadata displayed. You can scroll through the metadata and use
it to sort clips by clicking column headers.
Icon view: This view displays your clips and bins as thumbnails you can
rearrange and play back.
The Project panel has a zoom control, next to the List View and Icon View
buttons, which changes the size of the clip icons or thumbnails.
1. Double-click the Theft Unexpected bin to open it in its own panel.
2. Click the Icon View button on the Theft Unexpected bin to display
thumbnails for the clips.

3. Try adjusting the zoom control.
Premiere Pro can display large thumbnails to make browsing and selecting
your clips easier.
You can also apply various kinds of sorting to clip thumbnails in Icon view
by clicking the Sort Icons 
 menu.
4. Switch to List view.
5. Try adjusting the Zoom control for the bin.
When you’re in List view, it doesn’t help that much to zoom, unless you turn
on the display of thumbnails in this view.

 Note
You can also change the font size in the Project panel by clicking
the panel menu and choosing Font Size. This is particularly
useful if you are working on a high-resolution screen.
6. Open the panel menu, and choose Thumbnails.
Premiere Pro now displays thumbnails in List view, as well as in Icon view.
7. Try adjusting the Zoom control.
The clip thumbnails show the first frame of the media. In some clips, the first
frame will not be particularly useful. Look at the clip HS Suit, for example.
The thumbnail shows the clapperboard, but it would be useful to see the
character.
8. Switch to Icon view.
In this view, you can hover the mouse cursor over clip thumbnails to preview
clips.
9. Hover the mouse cursor over the HS Suit clip. Move the mouse until you find
a frame that better represents the shot.
 Note
In addition to hovering the mouse cursor over a clip thumbnail,
you can click to select the clip, which will reveal a small timeline

control under the thumbnail. You can use this timeline to view
the contents of the clip.
0. While the frame you have chosen is displayed, press the I key.
I is the keyboard shortcut for Mark In, a command that sets the beginning of a
selection when choosing part of a clip that you intend to add to a sequence.
The same selection also sets the poster frame for a clip in a bin.
1. Switch to List view.
Premiere Pro shows your newly selected frame as the thumbnail for this clip.
2. Choose Thumbnails from the panel menu to turn off thumbnails in List view.
3. Close the Theft Unexpected bin.
 Tip
When you’ve finished using the Filter Bin Content box, be sure to
click the X on the right side to clear the filter.
Creating Search bins
When using the Filter Bin Content box to display specific clips, you have
the option to create a special kind of virtual bin, called a Search bin.
After typing in the Filter Bin Content box, click the Create New Search
Bin from Query button 
.
Search bins appear in the Project panel automatically. They display the
results of a search performed when using the Filter Bin Content box. You
can rename search bins and place them in other bins.
The contents of a Search bin will update dynamically, so if you add new
clips to a project that meet the search criteria, they’ll appear in the search
bin automatically. This can be a fantastic time-saver when working with
documentary material that changes over time as you obtain new footage.
Assigning labels

Every item in the Project panel has a label color. In List view, the Label column
shows the label color for every clip. When you add clips to a sequence, they are
displayed in the Timeline panel with this label color.
Let’s change the label color for a title.
1. Right-click Theft_Unexpected.png and choose Label > Forest.
You can change label colors for multiple clips in a single step by selecting
them and then right-clicking the selected clips to choose another label color.
2. Press Ctrl+Z (Windows) or Command+Z (macOS) to change the
Theft_Unexpected.png label color back to Lavender.
When you add a clip to a sequence, Premiere Pro creates a new instance, or
copy, of that clip. You’ll have one copy in the Project panel and one copy in the
sequence.
 Tip
Once your clips have the right label colors, you can right-click a
clip at any time and choose Label > Select Label Group to select
and highlight all visible items with the same label.
By default, when you change the label color for a clip in the Project panel or
rename a clip, it won’t update copies of the clip in sequences.
You can change this by choosing File > Project Settings > General and enabling
the option to display the project item name and label color for all instances.
Changing the available label colors
You can assign up to 16 colors as labels to items in your project. There are
seven types of items that label colors can be assigned to automatically,
which means there are nine spare label colors.
If you choose Edit > Preferences > Labels (Windows) or Premiere Pro CC
> Preferences > Labels (macOS), you’ll see the list of colors, each with a
color swatch. You can click the color swatch to change the color, and you
can click the name to rename it.
You can use the Label Defaults options to choose different default labels

for each kind of item in your project.
Changing names
Because clips in your project are separate from the media files they link to, you
can rename items in Premiere Pro and the names of your original media files on
the hard drive are left untouched. This makes it safe to rename clips—and it can
be helpful when organizing a complex project.
1. Open the Graphics bin.
2. Right-click the clip Theft_Unexpected.png and choose Rename.
3. Change the name to TU Title BW.
4. Right-click the newly renamed clip, TU Title BW, and choose Reveal In
Explorer (Windows) or Reveal In Finder (macOS).
 Tip
To rename an item in the Project panel, you can also click the item
name, wait a moment, and click again, or you can select the item
and press Enter.
The media file is displayed. Notice that the original filename has not changed.
It’s helpful to be clear about the relationship between your original media files
and the clips inside Premiere Pro because it explains much of the way the
application works.
 Note
When you change the name of a clip in Premiere Pro, the new name
is stored in the project file. Two project files can have different
names representing the same clip. In fact, so could two copies of a
clip in the same project.
Customizing bins

When set to List view, the Project panel displays a number of columns of
information about each clip heading. You can easily add or remove columns.
Depending on the clips you have and the types of metadata you are working
with, you might want to display or hide some columns.
1. Double-click to open the Theft Unexpected bin.
2. Open the panel menu, and choose Metadata Display.
The Metadata Display panel allows you to choose any kind of metadata to
display in the List view of the Project panel (and any bins). All you have to
do is select the check box for the kind of information you would like to be
included.
3. Click the disclosure triangle for Premiere Pro Project Metadata to show those
options.
4. Select the Media Type check box.
5. Click OK.
Media Type is now added as a heading for the Theft Unexpected bin only. You

can apply the change to every bin in one step by using the panel menu in the
Project panel, rather than in an individual bin.
How Metadata display settings are stored
Metadata display settings for individual bins are saved in the project file,
while Metadata display settings for the Project panel are saved with the
workspace.
Any bins without modified Metadata display settings will inherit the
settings from the project panel.
Some columns provide information only, while others can be edited directly in
the bin. The Scene column, for example, allows you to add a scene number for
each clip, while the Media Type column gives information about the media and
cannot be edited directly.
 Note
Several useful bin columns are displayed by default, including the
Good check box. Select this box for clips you prefer and then click
the column heading to sort selected shots from unwanted content.
If you add information and press the Enter (Windows) or Return (macOS) key,
Premiere Pro activates the same box for the next clip down. This way, you can
use the keyboard to quickly enter information about several clips, jumping from
one box to the next without using your mouse.
Having multiple bins open at once
Every bin panel behaves in the same way, with the same options, buttons, and
settings. By default, when you double-click a bin, it opens in a new panel, in the
same frame, with the end of the set of panels already open in the frame.
You can change this in Preferences.
To change the options, choose Edit > Preferences > General (Windows) or

Premiere Pro CC > Preferences > General (macOS).
The options allow you to choose what will happen when you double-click,
double-click with the Ctrl (Windows) or Command (macOS) key, or double-
click with the Alt (Windows) or Option (macOS) key.
Monitoring footage
The greater part of video editing is spent watching or listening to clips and
making creative choices about them.
Premiere Pro has multiple ways to perform common tasks, such as playing video
clips. You can use the keyboard, click buttons with your mouse, or use an
external device like a jog/shuttle controller.
1. Continue working in the Theft Unexpected bin.
2. Click the Icon View button at the lower-left corner of the bin, and use the
Zoom control to set the thumbnails to a size you are happy with.

3. Hover your mouse (move the pointer without clicking) across any of the
images in the bin.
Premiere Pro displays the contents of the clip as you move the mouse cursor.
The left edge of the thumbnail represents the beginning of the clip, and the
right edge represents the end. In this way, the width of the thumbnail
represents the whole clip.
4. Select a clip by clicking it once (be careful not to double-click, or the clip
will open in the Source Monitor). Hover scrubbing is now turned off, and a
mini navigator appears at the bottom of the thumbnail. Try dragging through
the clip using the playhead.
When a clip is selected, you can use the J, K, and L keys on your keyboard to
perform playback, just as you can in the Media Browser.
J: Play backward
K: Pause
L: Play forward
5. Select a clip, and use the J, K, and L keys to play the video in the thumbnail.
When you double-click a clip, not only does Premiere Pro display the clip in
the Source Monitor, but it adds it to a list of recent clips.
 Tip
If you press the J or L key multiple times, Premiere Pro will play
the video clips at multiple speeds. Pressing Shift+J or Shift+L
reduces or increases playback speed in 10% increments.
Touch-screen editing
If you are working on a touch-screen computer, you may see additional

controls on thumbnails in the Project panel.
These allow you to perform editing tasks without a mouse. To see
these controls on a non-touch-screen computer, click the panel menu
and choose Thumbnail controls for all pointing devices.
6. Double-click to open four or five clips from the Theft Unexpected bin in the
Source Monitor.
7. Open the Source Monitor panel menu to browse your recent clips.
 Tip
Notice that you have the option to close a single clip or close all
clips, clearing the menu and the monitor. Some editors like to
clear the menu and then open several clips that are part of a
scene by selecting them in the bin and dragging them into the
Source Monitor together. You can then use the Recent Items

menu to browse only the clips from that selection. You can also
toggle between open sources by pressing the Source Monitor
panel shortcut, Shift+2.
8. Open the Zoom Level menu at the bottom left of the Source Monitor.
By default, this is set to Fit, which means Premiere Pro will display the whole
frame, regardless of the original size. Change the setting to 100%.
Your clips will often be higher resolution than the monitors.
It’s likely scroll bars have appeared at the bottom and on the right of your
Source Monitor so you can view different parts of the image.
The benefit of viewing with Zoom set to 100% is that you see every pixel of
the original video, which is useful for checking the quality.
9. Choose Fit from the Zoom Level menu.
Using essential playback controls
Let’s look at the playback controls.
1. Double-click the shot Excuse Me in the Theft Unexpected bin to open it in
the Source Monitor.

2. At the bottom of the Source Monitor, you’ll find a blue playhead marker.
Drag it along the bottom of the panel to view different parts of the clip. You
can also click wherever you want the playhead to go, and it will jump to that
spot.
3. Below the time ruler and the playhead, there’s a scroll bar that doubles as a
Zoom control. Drag one end of the scroll bar to zoom in on the clip Time
Ruler. This will make it easier to navigate longer clips.
4. Click the Play/Stop button to play the clip. Click it again to stop playback.
You can also use the spacebar to play and stop playback.
 Tip
If you’re not sure which button is which, hover the mouse cursor
over each one to see the name and keyboard shortcut (in
brackets).
5. Click the Step Back 1 Frame and Step Forward 1 Frame buttons to move
through the clip one frame at a time. You can also use the Left Arrow and
Right Arrow keys on your keyboard.
6. Try using the J, K, and L keys to play your clip.
 Note
Selection is important when using keyboard shortcuts. If you

find the J, K, and L keys don’t work, double-check the Source
Monitor is selected, with a blue outline.
Lowering the playback resolution
If you have an older or slower computer processor or are working with RAW
media with large frame sizes, such as Ultra High-Definition (4K or above), your
computer may struggle to play back all the frames of your video clips. Clips will
play with the correct timing (so 10 seconds of video will still take 10 seconds),
but some frames may not be displayed.
To work with a wide variety of computer hardware configurations, from
powerful desktop workstations to lightweight portable laptops, Premiere Pro can
lower the playback resolution to make playback smoother.
The default resolution is 1/2.
You can switch the playback resolution as often as you like, using the Select
Playback Resolution menu on the Source Monitor and Program Monitor panels.
Some lower resolutions are available only when working with particular media
types.
 Tip
If you are working with a particularly powerful computer, you may
want to turn on High Quality Playback, in the monitor Settings
menu 
, which maximizes preview playback quality, particularly
for compressed media like H.264 video, graphics, and stills, at the
expense of playback performance.
Getting timecode information
At the bottom left of the Source Monitor, a timecode display shows the current
position of the playhead in hours, minutes, seconds, and frames (00:00:00:00),
according to the clip’s timecode.

For example, 00:15:10:01 is 0 hours, 15 minutes, 10 seconds, and 1 frame.
At the bottom right of the Source Monitor, a timecode display shows the
duration of your clip. By default, this shows the whole clip duration, but later
you’ll add special In and Out marks to make a partial selection. When you do,
that duration shown will change accordingly.
Displaying safe margins
Television monitors often crop the edges of the picture to achieve a clean edge.
Open the Settings menu 
 at the bottom of the Source Monitor and choose Safe
Margins to display useful white outlines over the image.
The outer box is the action-safe zone. Aim to keep important action inside this
box so that when the picture is displayed, edge cropping does not hide what’s
going on.
The inner box is the title-safe zone. Keep titles and graphics inside this box so
that even on a badly adjusted display, your audience will be able to read the
words.
Premiere Pro also has advanced overlay options that can be configured to display
useful information in the Source Monitor and Program Monitor. To enable or
disable overlays, open the monitor Settings menu 
 and choose Overlays.
You can access the specific settings for overlays and safe margins by clicking the
monitor Settings menu and choosing Overlay Settings > Settings.

You can disable Safe Margins or Overlays by choosing from the Source Monitor
or Program Monitor Settings menu again.
Customizing the monitors
To customize the way a monitor displays video, open each monitor’s Settings
menu 
.
The Source Monitor and Program Monitor have similar options. You can view
an audio waveform, which shows amplitude over time, and if your video has
fields, you can choose which fields are shown.
Make sure Composite Video is selected in the Settings menu for now.
You can also switch between viewing the clip audio waveform and the video by
selecting Drag Video Only 
 or Drag Audio Only 
. These icons are mainly
used when dragging the video-only or audio-only part of a clip into a sequence
but they also provide this useful shortcut to view the audio waveform.
 Tip
If you are working with 360 video, you can switch to a VR video
viewing mode using the Source Monitor and Program Monitor
Settings menus.
You can change the buttons displayed at the bottom of the Source Monitor and
Program Monitor.
1. Click the Button Editor 
 at the bottom right of the Source Monitor.
A special set of buttons appears on a floating panel.
2. Drag the Loop button 
 from the floating panel to a spot to the right of the
Play button on the Source Monitor, and click OK to close the Button Editor.

3. Double-click the Excuse Me clip in the Theft Unexpected bin to open it in
the Source Monitor if it isn’t open already.
4. Click the new Loop button to enable it.
5. Click the Play button to play the clip. Play the video using the spacebar or the
Play button on the Source Monitor. Stop the playback when you’ve seen the
video start again.
With Loop turned on, Premiere Pro continuously repeats playback of a clip or
sequence. If there are In and Out marks set, playback loops between them.
6. Click the Step Back 1 Frame and Step Forward 1 Frame buttons to move
through the clip one frame at a time. You can also use the Left Arrow and
Right Arrow keys on your keyboard.
Modifying clips
Premiere Pro uses metadata associated with clips to know how to play them
back. This metadata is normally added correctly by the camera, but occasionally
it might be wrong. You’ll need to tell Premiere Pro how to interpret a clip.
You can change the interpretation of clips for one file or multiple files in a single
step. All clips you have selected are affected by changes to interpretation.
Choosing audio channels
Premiere Pro has advanced audio management features. You can create complex
sound mixes and selectively target output audio channels with original clip
audio. You can work with mono, stereo, 5.1, Ambisonics, and even 32-channel
sequences with precise control over the routing of audio channels.
If you’re just starting out, you’ll probably want to produce sequences mastered
in stereo using mono or stereo source clips. In this case, the default settings are
most likely what you need.
When recording audio with a professional camera, it’s common to have one
microphone record onto one audio channel and a different microphone record
onto another audio channel. These are the same audio channels that would be
used for regular stereo audio, but they now contain completely separate sound.
Your camera adds metadata to the audio to tell Premiere Pro whether the sound
is meant to be mono (separate audio channels) or stereo (channel 1 audio and
channel 2 audio combined to produce the complete stereo mix).
You can tell Premiere Pro how to interpret audio channels when new media files
are imported by choosing Edit > Preferences > Audio > Default Audio Tracks

(Windows) or Premiere Pro CC > Preferences > Audio > Default Audio Tracks
(macOS).
If the setting was wrong when you imported your clips, it’s easy to set a different
way to interpret the audio channels in the Project panel.
1. Right-click the Reveal clip in the Theft Unexpected bin, and choose Modify
> Audio Channels.
When the Preset menu is set to Use File, as it is here, Premiere Pro will use
the file’s metadata to set the channel format for the audio.
In this case, Clip Channel Format is set to stereo, and Number of Audio Clips
is set to 1—that’s the number of audio clips that will be added to a sequence
if you edit this clip into it.
Now look at the channel matrix below those options. The Left and Right
audio channels of the source clip (described as Media Source Channel) are
both assigned to a single clip (described as Clip 1).

When you add this clip to a sequence, it will appear as one video clip and one
audio clip, with both audio channels in the same audio clip.
2. Open the Preset menu, and choose Mono.
Premiere Pro switches the Clip Channel Format menu to Mono, so the Left
and Right source channels are now linked to two separate clips.
 Tip
Be sure to use the Preset menu and not the Clip Channel Format
menu to correctly change this setting.
This means that when you add the clip to a sequence, each audio channel will
go on a separate track, as separate clips, allowing you to work on them
independently.
3. Click OK.
Merging clips
It’s common for professional video to be recorded on a camera with relatively
low-quality audio, while high-quality sound is recorded on a separate device.
When working this way, you’ll want to combine the high-quality audio with the
video by merging them in the Project panel.
The most important factor when merging video and audio files in this way is
synchronization. You will either manually define a sync point—like a
clapperboard mark—or allow Premiere Pro to sync your clips automatically
based on their original timecode information or by matching up their audio.
If you choose to sync clips using audio, Premiere Pro will analyze both the in-
camera audio and the separately captured sound and match them up.
If you don’t have matching audio in the clips you are merging, you can
manually add a marker. If you’re adding a mark, place it on a clear sync
point like a clapperboard.
Select the camera clip and the separate audio clip, right-click either item,

and choose Merge Clips.
Under Synchronize Point, choose your sync point, and click OK.
A new clip is created that combines the video and the “good” audio in a single
item.
A few tips on audio clip channel interpretation
Here are some things to keep in mind when working with audio clip
channel interpretation.
In the Modify Clip dialog box, every available audio channel will be
listed. If your source audio has channels you don’t need, you can
deselect them, and those empty channels won’t take up space in your
sequence.
You can override the original file audio channel interpretation. This
will mean a different type of audio track may be needed in a sequence.
The list of clips on the left (which may be as short as one clip) shows
how many audio clips will be added to a sequence when edited in.
Use the check boxes to choose which source audio channels are
included in each sequence audio clip. This means you can easily
combine multiple source audio channels into a single sequence clip or
separate them into different clips in any way that works for your
project.
Interpreting video footage
For Premiere Pro to play a clip correctly, it needs to know the frame rate for the
video, the pixel aspect ratio (the shape of the pixels), and, if your clip is
interlaced, the order in which to display the fields. Premiere Pro can find out this
information from the file’s metadata, but you can change the interpretation
easily.
1. Use the Media Browser panel to import RED Video.R3D from the
Lessons/Assets/Video and Audio Files/RED folder. Double-click the clip to
open it in the Source Monitor. It’s full anamorphic widescreen, which is too
wide for the intended sequence.
2. Right-click the clip in the Project panel and choose Modify > Interpret
Footage.
The option to modify audio channels is unavailable because this clip has no

audio.
3. Right now, the clip is set to use the pixel aspect ratio setting from the file:
Anamorphic 2:1. This means the pixels are twice as wide as they are tall.
4. In the Pixel Aspect Ratio section, select Conform To, and choose DVCPRO
HD (1.5) from the adjacent menu. Then click OK.
From now on, Premiere Pro will interpret the clip as having pixels that are 1.5
times wider than they are tall. This reshapes the picture to make it standard 16:9
wide-screen. You can see the result in the Source Monitor.
This won’t always work—in fact, it often introduces unwanted distortion—but it
can provide a quick fix for mismatched media (a common problem for news
editors), particularly if the image content is of natural environments without a
frame of reference like a person in the shot.
Working with raw files
Premiere Pro has special settings for .R3D files created by RED cameras, .ari
files created by ARRI cameras, and several others. These files are similar to the
Camera RAW format used by professional digital single-lens reflex (DSLR) still
cameras.
RAW files always have a layer of interpretation applied to them in order to view
them. You can change the interpretation at any time without impacting playback
performance. This means you can make changes, for example, to the colors in a
shot without requiring any extra processing power. You could achieve a similar
result using a special effect, but your computer would have to do more work to
play the clip.
The Effect Controls panel gives access to controls for clips in sequences and in
the Project panel. You also can use it to change the interpretation of RAW media
files.
1. If it isn’t already open, double-click the RED Video.R3D clip to open it in
the Source Monitor.
2. Using the panel name, drag the Effect Controls panel over the middle of the
Program Monitor, and release the mouse button. This will place the Effect

Controls panel in the same frame as the Program Monitor, so you can see
both the Source Monitor and the Effect Controls panel at the same time.
Because the RED Video.R3D clip is displayed in the Source Monitor, the
Effect Controls panel now shows the RED Source Settings options for that
clip, which change the way the RAW media is interpreted.
In many ways, this is a set of color adjustment controls, with automatic white
balance and individual adjustments for the red, green, and blue values.
3. Scroll down to the end of the list, where you’ll find Gain Settings. Increase
the Red gain to about 1.5. You can click the disclosure triangle to reveal a
slider control, drag the blue number directly, or click and type over the
number.
4. Take another look at the clip in the Source Monitor.
The picture has updated. If you had already edited this clip into a sequence, it
would update in the sequence too.

5. Scroll to the top of the list of settings in the Effect Controls panel, and click
the As Shot button to reset the appearance of the video clip.
For 
more 
information 
about 
working 
with 
RED 
media, 
go 
to
http://helpx.adobe.com/premiere-pro/compatibility.html.
Different RAW media files will give different Source Settings options in the
Effect Controls panel. There are many other ways to adjust the look of your
video clips, and you’ll be looking at some of the options in Lesson 14,
“Improving Clips with Color Correction and Grading.”
Review questions
1. How do you change the List view column headings displayed in the Project
panel?
2. How can you quickly filter the display of clips in the Project panel to make
finding a clip easier?
3. How do you create a new bin?
4. If you change the name of a clip in the Project panel, does it change the name
of the media file it links to on your hard drive?
5. What keyboard shortcuts can you use to play video and sound clips?
6. How can you change the way clip audio channels are interpreted?
Review answers
1. Open the Project panel menu, and choose Metadata Display. Select the check
box for any column heading you want to appear.
2. Click the Filter Bin Content box, and start typing the name of the clip you are

looking for. Premiere Pro hides clips that don’t match what you typed and
reveals those that do.
3. There are several ways to create a new bin: by clicking the New Bin button at
the bottom of the Project panel, by choosing File > New > Bin, by right-
clicking a blank area in the Project panel and choosing New Bin, or by
pressing Ctrl+B (Windows) or Command+B (macOS). You can also drag and
drop clips onto the New Bin button on the Project panel.
4. No. You can duplicate, rename, or delete clips in your Project panel, and
nothing will happen to your original media files.
5. The spacebar plays and stops. J, K, and L can be used like a shuttle controller
to play backward and forward, and the arrow keys can be used to move one
frame backward or one frame forward.
6. In the Project panel, right-click the clip you want to change and choose
Modify > Audio Channels. Choose the correct option (usually by selecting a
preset), and click OK.

5. Mastering the Essentials of Video
Editing
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Working with clips in the Source Monitor
Creating sequences
Using essential editing commands
Understanding tracks
This lesson will take approximately 75 minutes. Please log in to your account on
peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the “Getting
Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the instructions under
“Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.”
This lesson will teach you the core editing skills you will use again and again
when creating sequences with Adobe Premiere Pro CC.

Editing is much more than choosing shots. You’ll choose your cuts precisely, place clips in sequences at
exactly the right point in time and on the tracks you want (to create layered visual effects), add new clips
to existing sequences, and get rid of unwanted content.
Starting the lesson
No matter how you approach video editing, you’ll use a few simple techniques
time and again. Most of the practice of video editing is making partial selections
of your clips and placing them in your sequence. There are several ways of
doing this in Premiere Pro.
Before you begin, make sure you’re using the Editing workspace.
1. Open the Lesson 05.prproj project file from the Lesson 05 folder.
2. Choose File > Save As.
3. Rename the file Lesson 05 Working.prproj.
4. Choose a preferred location on your hard drive, and click Save to save the
project.
5. In the Workspaces panel, click Editing; then click the panel menu next to the

Editing option, and choose Reset To Saved Layout.
You’ll begin by learning more about the Source Monitor and how to mark your
clips to get them ready to be added to a sequence. Then you’ll learn about the
Timeline, where you’ll work on your sequences.
Using the Source Monitor
The Source Monitor is the main place you’ll go when you want to check your
assets before including them in a sequence.
 Note
Change clip interpretation by right-clicking the clip in the Project
panel and choosing Modify > Interpret Footage.
When you view video clips in the Source Monitor, you watch them in their
original format. They will play back with their frame rate, frame size, field order,
audio sample rate, and audio bit depth exactly as they were recorded, unless you
have changed the way the clip is interpreted.
However, when you add a clip to a sequence, Premiere Pro conforms it to the
sequence settings. For example, if the clip and the sequence don’t match, the clip
frame rate and audio sample rate will be adjusted so that all the clips in the
sequence play back the same way.
As well as being a viewer for multiple types of media, the Source Monitor

provides important additional functions. You can use two special kinds of
markers, called In marks and Out marks, to select part of a clip for inclusion in a
sequence. You can also add comments in the form of markers that you can refer
to later or use to remind yourself about important facts relating to a clip. You
might include a note about part of a shot you don’t have permission to use, for
example.
Loading a clip
To load a clip, do the following:
1. In the Project panel, browse to the Theft Unexpected bin. With the default
preferences, double-click the bin in the Project panel while holding the Ctrl
(Windows) or Command (macOS) key to open the bin in the existing panel.
In the same way that you would double-click a folder in Windows Explorer
(Windows) or Finder (macOS), you have navigated into the bin.
When you have finished working in a bin that you have opened in the current
panel, you can navigate back to the Project panel contents by clicking the
Navigate Up button 
 at the top left of the bin panel.
2. Double-click a video clip, or drag a clip into the Source Monitor.
Either way, the result is the same: Premiere Pro displays the clip in the Source
Monitor, ready for you to watch it and add markers.
 Tip
When selecting clips, be sure to click the icon or thumbnail,
rather than the name, to avoid accidentally renaming it.
3. Position your mouse pointer so that it is over the Source Monitor and press
the ` (grave) key. The panel fills the Premiere Pro application frame, giving
you a larger view of your video clip. Press the ` (grave) key again to restore
the Source Monitor to its original size. If your keyboard does not have a `
(grave) key, you can double-click the panel name.
 Tip
Notice that active panels have a blue outline. It’s important to
know which panel is active because menus and keyboard
shortcuts sometimes give different results depending on your
current selection. For example, if you press Shift+` (grave), the

currently selected frame will toggle to full-screen, regardless of
the location of your mouse.
Viewing video on a second monitor
If you have a second monitor connected to your computer, Premiere Pro
can use it to display full-screen video every time you press play.
Choose Edit > Preferences > Playback (Windows) or Premiere Pro CC >
Preferences > Playback (macOS), make sure Mercury Transmit is
enabled, and select the check box for the monitor you want to use for full-
screen playback.
You also have the option of playing video via a DV device, if you have
one connected, or via third-party hardware if it is installed.
Using Source Monitor controls
As well as playback controls, there are some important additional buttons in the
Source Monitor.
Add Marker: This adds a marker to the clip at the location of the playhead.
Markers can provide a simple visual reference or store comments.
Mark In: This sets the beginning of the part of the clip you intend to use in
a sequence. You can have only one In mark per clip or sequence. A new In
mark will automatically replace an existing one.
Mark Out: This sets the end of the part of the clip you intend to use in a
sequence. You can have only one Out mark. A new Out mark will
automatically replace an existing one.
Go to In: This moves the playhead to the clip In mark.
Go to Out: This moves the playhead to the clip Out mark.
Insert: This adds the clip to the sequence currently displayed in the
Timeline using the insert edit method (see “Using essential editing
commands” later in this lesson).
Overwrite: This adds the clip to the sequence currently displayed in the
Timeline using the overwrite edit method (see “Using essential editing
commands” later in this lesson).
Export Frame: This allows you to create a still image from whatever is
displayed in the monitor. See Lesson 18, “Exporting Frames, Clips, and

Sequences,” for more on this.
Selecting a range in a clip
You will usually want to include only a specific part of a clip in a sequence.
Much of an editor’s time is spent watching video clips and choosing not only
which ones to use but also which parts to use. Making a selection is easy.
1. Double-click the clip Excuse Me (not Excuse Me Tilted) in the Theft
Unexpected bin to open it in the Source monitor. It’s a shot of John nervously
asking whether he can sit down.
2. Play the clip to get an idea of the action.
John walks on-screen about halfway through the shot but takes a moment to
speak.
3. Position the playhead just before John enters the shot or just before he
speaks. Around 01:54:06:00, he pauses briefly and speaks. Note that the
timecode reference is based on the original recording and does not start at
00:00:00:00.
 Tip
If you want all of your clip timecode to be displayed as starting
at 00:00:00:00, you can choose this option in the Media
preferences.
4. Click the Mark In button. You can also press the I key on your keyboard.
Premiere Pro highlights the section of the clip that is selected. You have
excluded the first part of the clip, but you can easily reclaim this part later if
you need to do so—that’s the freedom of nonlinear editing!
 Tip

If your keyboard has a separate numerical keypad, you can use it
to enter timecode numbers directly. For example, as long as no
clips are selected, if you type 700, Premiere Pro will position the
playhead at 00:00:07:00. There’s no need to enter the leading
zeros or number separators. Be sure to use the numerical keypad,
on the right on your keyboard, and not the numbers along the top
of your keyboard (these have a different use).
5. Position the playhead just as John sits down. Around 01:54:14:00 is perfect.
6. Press the O key on your keyboard to add an Out point.
 Note
In and Out marks added to clips are persistent. That is, they will
still be present if you close and open the clip again.
Now you’ll add In and Out marks for two more clips. Double-click each clip
to open it in the Source monitor and add the marks.
 Note
Some editors prefer to go through all available clips, adding In
and Out marks as required, before building a sequence. Some

editors prefer to add In and Out marks only as they use each clip.
Your preference may depend on the kind of project you are
working on.
7. For the HS Suit clip, add an In point just after John’s line, about a quarter of
the way into the shot (01:27:00:16).
8. Add an Out point when John passes in front of the camera, blocking our view
(01:27:02:14).
9. For the Mid John clip, add an In point just as John begins to sit down
(01:39:52:00).
0. Add an Out point after he has a sip of tea (01:40:04:00).

 Tip
To help you find your way around your footage, Premiere Pro
can display timecode numbers on the Source Monitor and
Program Monitor time rulers. Toggle this option on and off by
clicking the Settings button 
 and choosing Time Ruler
Numbers.
 Tip
The tool tip that pops up if you hover your mouse cursor over a
button tells you the keyboard shortcut key in brackets after the
name of the button.
Editing from the Project panel
Because In and Out marks remain active in your project until you change
them, you can add clips to a sequence directly from the Project panel, as
well as from the Source Monitor. If you have already looked at all your
clips and chosen the parts you want, this can be a quick way to create a
rough version of a sequence. Remember, you can add In and Out marks
directly in the Project panel too.

Premiere Pro applies the same editing controls when you’re working from
the Project panel as it does when you’re using the Source Monitor, so the
experience is similar—and a few clicks quicker.
While it’s faster to work this way, there’s also a value in having one last
look at your clips in the Source Monitor before you add them to a
sequence.
Creating subclips
If you have a long clip, you might want to use several different parts in your
sequence. It can be useful to separate the sections so they can be organized in the
project panel prior to building your sequence.
This is exactly why subclips were created. Subclips are partial copies of clips.
They are commonly used when working with long clips, especially when there
are several parts of the same original clip that might be used in a sequence.
Subclips have a few notable characteristics.
They can be organized in bins, just like regular clips, though they have a
different icon 
 in the Project panel List view.
They have a limited duration based on the In and Out marks used to create
them, which makes it easier to view their contents when compared with
viewing potentially much longer original clips.
They share the same media files as the original clip they’re based on.
They can be edited to change their contents and even converted into a copy
of the original full-length clip.
Let’s make a subclip.
1. Double-click the Cutaways clip in the Theft Unexpected bin to view it in the
Source Monitor.
2. While viewing the contents of the Theft Unexpected bin, click the New Bin
button at the bottom of the panel to create a new bin. The new bin will appear
in the existing Theft Unexpected bin.
3. Name the bin Subclips and hold Ctrl (Windows) or Command (macOS)
while double-clicking the new Subclips bin to have it open in the same
frame, rather than in a new panel.
4. Choose a section of the clip to make into a subclip by marking the clip with
an In point and an Out point. The moment roughly halfway through when the
packet is removed and replaced might work well.

As with many workflows in Premiere Pro, there are several ways to create
subclips, and the outcome is always the same.
5. Try one of the following:
Right-click in the picture display of the Source Monitor and choose
Make Subclip.
With the Source Monitor active, choose Clip > Make Subclip.
With the Source Monitor active, press Ctrl+U (Windows) or
Command+U (macOS).
While holding Ctrl (Windows) or Command (macOS), drag the picture
from the Source Monitor into the Project panel bin.
6. Name the new subclip Packet Moved and click OK.
The new subclip is added to the Subclips bin, with the duration you specified
with your In and Out marks.
 Note
If you select Restrict Trims To Subclip Boundaries, you won’t be
able to access the parts of your clip that are outside your selection
when viewing the subclip. This might be exactly what you want
(and you can change this setting by right-clicking the subclip in the
bin and choosing Edit Subclip).
Navigating the Timeline
The Timeline panel is your creative canvas. In this panel, you’ll add clips to your
sequences, make editorial changes to them, add visual and audio special effects,
mix soundtracks, and add titles and graphics.
Here are a few facts about the Timeline panel:
You view and edit clips in sequences in the Timeline panel.
The Program Monitor shows the contents of the currently displayed

sequence, at the position of the playhead.
You can open multiple sequences at the same time, with each displayed in
its own Timeline panel.
The terms sequence and Timeline are often used interchangeably, as in “in
the sequence” or “on the Timeline.”
You can add any number of video tracks, limited only by your system’s
resources.
Upper video tracks play “in front” of lower ones, so you would normally
place graphics clips on tracks above background video clips.
You can add any number of audio tracks that all play at the same time to
create an audio mix. Audio tracks can be mono (1 channel), stereo (2
channels), 5.1 (6 channels), or adaptive—with up to 32 channels.
You can change the height of Timeline tracks to gain access to additional
controls and thumbnails on your video clips.
Each track has a set of controls, shown on a track header on the far left, that
change the way it functions.
Time moves from left to right on the Timeline, so when you play a
sequence, the playhead will move in that direction.
For most operations on the Timeline, you will use the standard Selection
tool 
. There are several other tools that serve different purposes, and each
tool has a keyboard shortcut. If in doubt, press the V key—this is the
keyboard shortcut for the Selection tool.

The tools panel includes a number of tools you’ll use in the Timeline panel and Program Monitor.
You can zoom in and out of the Timeline using the (equals) = and (minus) –
keys (at the top of your keyboard). Use the (backslash) \ key, if your
keyboard has one, to toggle the zoom level between your current setting
and showing your whole sequence. You can also double-click the navigator
at the bottom of the Timeline to view the whole timeline.
There are a series of buttons at the top left of the Timeline panel that give
you access to alternative modes, markers, and settings.
What is a sequence?
A sequence is a series of clips that play, one after another—sometimes with
multiple blended layers and often with special effects, titles, and audio—making
a complete film.
You can have as many sequences as you like in a project. Sequences are stored in
the Project panel, just like clips, and have their own icon.
Like clips, you can edit sequences into other sequences, in a process called
nesting. This creates a dynamically connected set of sequences for advanced
editing workflows.
 Note

You may need to click the Navigate Up button to see the Theft
Unexpected bin.
Let’s make a new sequence for the Theft Unexpected drama.
1. In the Theft Unexpected bin, drag the clip Excuse Me (not Excuse Me Tilted)
onto the New Item button at the bottom of the panel.
This is a shortcut to make a sequence that perfectly matches your media.
Premiere Pro creates a new sequence, which shares the name of the clip you
selected.
2. The sequence is highlighted in the bin, and it would be a good idea to rename
it right away. Right-click the sequence in the bin and choose Rename. Name
the sequence Theft Unexpected.
The clip might appear quite small in the sequence. To zoom in, use the navigator at the bottom of
the Timeline panel. To see a thumbnail on the clip, increase the height of the V1 track.
 Note
If you already have a sequence open, new sequences open in a
new panel in the same frame.
 Tip
You can use the Timeline panel Settings menu to choose
Minimize All Tracks, or Expand All Tracks, to change the height
of all tracks in a single step.

The sequence is automatically open, and it contains the clip you used to create it.
This works for our purposes, but if you had used a random clip to perform this
shortcut, you could select it in the sequence and delete it by pressing Backspace
(Windows) or Delete (macOS).
Close the sequence by clicking the X on its name tab in the Timeline.
Opening a sequence in the Timeline panel
To open a sequence in the Timeline panel, do one of the following:
Double-click the sequence in a bin.
Right-click the sequence in a bin and choose Open In Timeline.
Open the Theft Unexpected sequence you just created.
 Tip
You can also drag a sequence into the Source Monitor to use it as if
it were a clip. Be careful not to drag a sequence into the Timeline to
open it because this will add it to your current sequence or create a
new sequence from it instead.
Conforming
Sequences have a frame rate, a frame size, and an audio mastering format
(mono or stereo, for example). They conform, or adjust, any clips you add
to match these settings.
You can choose whether clips should be scaled to match your sequence
frame size. For example, for a sequence with a frame size of 1920x1080
(regular high-definition) and a video clip that is 4096x2160 (Cinema 4K),
you might decide to automatically scale the high-resolution clip down to
match your sequence resolution or leave it as it is, viewing only part of
the picture through the reduced “window” of the sequence.
When clips are scaled, the vertical and horizontal sizes are scaled equally
to keep the original aspect ratio. If a clip has a different aspect ratio from
your sequence, it may not completely fill the frame of your sequence
when it is scaled. For example, if your clip had a 4:3 aspect ratio and you
added it, scaled, to a 16:9 sequence, you’d see gaps at the sides.

Using the Motion controls in the Effect Controls panel (see Lesson 9,
“Putting Clips in Motion”), you can adjust which part of the picture you
see or even create a dynamic pan-and-scan effect inside the picture.
Understanding tracks
Much as railway tracks keep trains in line, sequences have video and audio
tracks that constrain the positions of clips you add to them. The simplest form of
sequence would have just one video track and perhaps one audio track. You add
clips to tracks, one after another, from left to right, and they play in the order you
place them.
Sequences can have additional video and audio tracks. They become layers of
video and additional audio channels. Since higher video tracks appear in front of
lower ones, you can combine clips on different tracks to produce layered
compositions.
For example, you might use an upper video track to add titles to a sequence or to
blend multiple layers of video using visual effects.
You might use multiple audio tracks to create a complete audio composition for
your sequence, with original source dialogue, music, spot audio effects such as
gunshots or fireworks, atmospheric sound, and voice-over.
You can scroll through clips and sequences in multiple ways, depending on the

location of your mouse cursor.
If you hover your mouse cursor over the Source Monitor or Program
Monitor, you can navigate earlier or later using the scroll wheel; trackpad
gestures work too.
You can navigate sequences in the Timeline panel this way if you choose
Horizontal Timeline Mouse Scrolling in the Timeline preferences.
If you hold Alt (Windows) or Option (macOS) while scrolling with your
mouse, the Timeline view will zoom in or out.
If you hover your mouse over a track header and scroll while holding Alt
(Windows) or Option (macOS), you’ll increase or decrease the height of the
track.
 Tip
If you hold the Ctrl (Windows) or Command (macOS) key
while you scroll to adjust track height, you’ll have finer
control.
If you hover your mouse over a video or audio track header and scroll while
holding the Shift key, you’ll increase or decrease the height of all tracks of
that type (Video or Audio tracks).
Targeting tracks
The Timeline track headers have enable/disable buttons for the tracks, which are
used when making precise selections on a per-track basis.

To the left of the track headers, you’ll see a set of buttons that look similar.
These are the Source Track selection buttons, and they represent the available
tracks for the clip currently displayed in the Source Monitor or selected in the
Project panel. They are numbered just like the Timeline tracks. This helps keep
things clear when performing more advanced edits.
If you drag a clip into a sequence, the position of the source track selection
buttons is ignored, though only content on enabled source tracks is added.
However, when you use a keyboard shortcut or the buttons on the Source
Monitor to add a clip to a sequence, source track selection buttons become
important. Their position sets the track the new clip will be added to.
In the following example, the position of the source track selection buttons
means a clip with one video track and one audio track would be added to the
Video 1 and Audio 1 tracks on the Timeline when using buttons or a keyboard
shortcut to add a clip to the current sequence.
In the following example, the source track selection buttons have been moved by
dragging them to a new position relative to the timeline track selection buttons.
In this example, the clip would be added to the Video 2 and Audio 2 tracks on
the Timeline when using buttons or a keyboard shortcut to add a clip to the
current sequence.

Click a source track indicator to enable it or disable it. A blue highlight indicates
a track is enabled. You can make advanced edits by dragging the source track
selection buttons to different tracks and selecting which tracks you have on or
off.
When performing edits in this way, the track indicator buttons don’t affect
results. Though the source and track indicator buttons look similar, they have
different functions; on the left, it’s the Source track indicator buttons, while on
the right, it’s the Timeline track indicator buttons.
 Note
Remember, Timeline track selection buttons matter when rendering
effects or making Timeline selections, but they don’t affect editing
clips into a sequence; only the source track selection buttons do.
Using In and Out marks
The In and Out marks used in the Source Monitor define the part of a clip you
will add to a sequence.
The In and Out marks you use on the Timeline have two primary purposes.
To tell Premiere Pro where a new clip should be positioned when it is added
to a sequence.
To select parts of a sequence you want to remove. You can make precise
selections to remove whole clips, or parts of clips, from specific tracks by
using In and Out marks in combination with the track indicator buttons.
The light region indicates the selected part of the sequence, defined by an In mark and an Out
mark.
Setting In and Out marks

Adding In and Out marks on the Timeline is almost the same as adding them in
the Source Monitor.
One key difference is that unlike the controls in the Source Monitor, the controls
on the Program Monitor also apply to the Timeline.
To add an In point to the Timeline at the current position of the playhead, make
sure the Timeline panel or Program Monitor is active and then press the I key or
click the Mark In button on the Program Monitor.
To add an Out point to the Timeline at the current position of the playhead, make
sure the Timeline panel or Program Monitor is active and then press the O key or
click the Mark Out button on the Program Monitor.
 Tip
You can use the (forward slash) / key to add In and Out marks to the
Timeline based on clip segments you have selected.
Clearing In and Out marks
If you open a clip that already has In and Out marks, you can change them by
adding new ones; your new marks will replace the existing ones.
You can also remove existing marks on a clip or in a sequence. You’ll use the
same technique to remove In and Out marks on the Timeline, in the Program
Monitor, and in the Source Monitor.
1. On the Timeline, select the Excuse Me clip by clicking it once.
2. Press the (forward slash) / key. This adds an In mark to the Timeline at the
start of the clip (on the left) and an Out mark at the end of the clip (on the
right). Both are added to the time ruler at the top of the Timeline.
3. Right-click the time ruler at the top of the Timeline, and take a look at the
menu options.
Select the option you need in this menu, or use one of the following keyboard
shortcuts:
Ctrl+Shift+I (Windows) or Option+I (macOS): Removes the In Mark
(Choose Clear In)
Ctrl+Shift+O (Windows) or Option+O (macOS): Removes the Out
Mark (Choose Clear Out)
Ctrl+Shift+X (Windows) or Option+X (macOS): Removes both the
In Mark and Out Mark (Choose Clear In and Out)

4. That last option is particularly useful. It’s easy to remember and quickly
removes both marks. Try it now to remove the marks you added.
Using time rulers
The time rulers at the bottom of the Source Monitor and Program Monitor, and
at the top of the Timeline, all serve the same purpose: They allow you to
navigate through your clips or sequences in time.
Time goes from left to right in Premiere Pro, and the location of the playhead
gives you a visual reference in relation to your clips.
Drag left and right in the Timeline time ruler now (that’s the time markings
along the top of the panel). The playhead moves to follow your mouse. As you
drag across the Excuse Me clip, you see the contents of the clip in the Program
Monitor. Dragging through your content in this way is called scrubbing.
Notice that the Source Monitor, Program Monitor, and Timeline all have
navigation bars at the bottom of the panel. You can zoom the time ruler by
hovering over the navigation bar and using your mouse wheel to scroll. Once
you have zoomed in, you can move through the time ruler by dragging the
navigator.
Drag the ends of the Program Monitor navigator for precise zoom control on the time ruler.
Double-click the navigator to fully zoom out.
Customizing track headers
Just as you can customize the Source Monitor and Program Monitor controls,
you can change many of the options on the Timeline track headers.
To access the options, right-click a video or audio track header and choose
Customize, or click the Timeline Settings menu 
 and choose Customize Video
Header or Customize Audio Header.

The Video track header button editor
The Audio track header button editor
To find out the name of an available button, hover your mouse over it to see the
tool tip. Some of the buttons will be familiar to you already; others will be
explained in later lessons.
To add a button to a track header, drag it from the Button Editor onto a track
header. You can remove a button from a track header by dragging it away.
All track headers update to match the one you adjust.
Experiment with this feature, and when you have finished, click the Reset
Layout button on the Button Editor to return the track header to the default
options.
Finally, click Cancel to leave the Button Editor.
Using essential editing commands
Whether you use the mouse to drag a clip into a sequence, use a button on the
Source Monitor, or use a keyboard shortcut, you’ll apply one of two kinds of
edits: an insert edit or an overwrite edit.
When a sequence has existing clips at the location where you want to add a new

clip, these two choices—insert and overwrite—will produce markedly different
results.
Performing an overwrite edit
Continue working on the Theft Unexpected sequence. So far, you have just one
clip, in which John asks if a seat is free.
First, you’ll use an overwrite edit to add a reaction shot to John’s request for a
chair.
1. Open the shot HS Suit in the Source Monitor. You added In and Out marks to
this clip earlier.
2. You’ll need to set up the Timeline carefully. This may seem like a slow
process at first, but after practice you’ll find editing is fast and easy.
Position the Timeline playhead just after John makes his request. Around
00:00:04:00 is perfect.
Unless an In or Out mark has been added to the Timeline, the playhead is
used to position new clips when editing with the keyboard or on-screen
buttons. When you use the mouse to drag a clip into a sequence, the location
of the playhead and existing In or Out marks are ignored.
3. Though the new clip has an audio track, you don’t need it. You’ll keep the
audio that is already in the Timeline. Click the source track selection button
A1 to turn it off. The button should be gray rather than blue.
 Tip
The terms shot and clip are often used interchangeably.
4. Check that your track headers look like the previous example. Only the
Source A1 and V1 track indicator buttons matter for this edit because the

other tracks in the sequence don’t have any clips on them.
5. Click the Overwrite button 
 on the Source Monitor.
The clip is added to the Timeline on the Video 1 track.
The timing might not be perfect, but you’re now editing dialogue!
 Note
The sequence will not get any longer when you perform an
overwrite edit.
By default, when you drag and drop a clip into a sequence using the mouse,
you’ll perform an overwrite edit. You can perform an insert edit by holding
down Ctrl (Windows) or Command (macOS) while you drag and drop.
Performing an insert edit
Now try an insert edit.
1. Position the Timeline playhead over the Excuse Me clip, just after John says
“Excuse me” (around 00:00:02:16).
2. Open the clip Mid Suit in the Source Monitor, add an In mark at 01:15:46:00,
and add an Out mark at 01:15:48:00. This is actually from a different part of
the action, but the audience won’t know, and it works well as a reaction shot.
3. Check that your Timeline has the source track selection buttons lined up as in
the following example.

4. Click the Insert button 
 on the Source Monitor.
 Note
When you apply an insert edit, it makes your sequence longer:
The clips already on the selected track will move later (to the
right) in the sequence to make room for the new clip.
Congratulations! You have completed an insert edit.
The clip Excuse Me, already in the sequence, has been split, with the part
after the playhead moved later to make space for the new clip.
 Note
The words sequence and edit are often used interchangeably.
5. Position the playhead at the beginning of the sequence and play through your
edit. You can use the Home key on your keyboard to jump to the beginning,
you can drag the playhead with the mouse, or you can press the Up Arrow
key to jump the playhead to earlier edits (the Down Arrow key jumps to later
edits).
6. Now open the Mid John clip in the Source Monitor. You added In and Out
marks to this clip earlier.
7. Position the Timeline playhead at the end of the sequence—on the end of the
Excuse Me clip. You can hold the Shift key to have the playhead snap to the
ends of clips.
 Note
If you have an In mark or an Out mark on the Timeline, Premiere
Pro will use it in preference to the location of the playhead when
performing an edit.
8. Click either the Insert or Overwrite button on the Source Monitor. Because

the Timeline playhead is at the end of the sequence, there are no clips in the
way, and it makes no difference which kind of edit you perform.
Now you’ll insert one more clip.
 Tip
As your sequence gets longer, you may find yourself continually
zooming in and out to get a better view of your clips.
9. Position the Timeline playhead just before John takes a sip of tea, around
00:00:14:00.
0. Open the clip Mid Suit in the Source Monitor, and use In and Out marks to
choose a part you think would go well between John sitting down and his
first sip of tea. An In mark around 01:15:55:00 and an Out mark around
01:16:00:00 might work well.
 Note
You can also edit clips into a sequence by dragging from the
Project panel or Source Monitor into the Program Monitor. Hold
the Ctrl (Windows) or Command (macOS) key to perform an
insert edit.
1. Edit the clip into the sequence using an insert edit.
The timing of the edit may not be perfect, but that’s OK; you can change your
mind about the timing later—that’s the beauty of nonlinear editing. The
important thing, to begin with, is to get the order of the clips right.

Performing three-point editing
To add a clip or part of a clip to a sequence, Premiere Pro needs to know its
duration and when and where it should be placed in the Timeline.
This means there should be four In and Out marks:
An In mark for the clip
An Out mark for the clip
An In mark for the sequence setting the beginning of the clip once it has
been added
An Out mark for the sequence setting the end of the clip once it has been
added
In fact, you only need to specify three of these marks because you can work out
the fourth automatically, based on the duration that has been selected.
Here’s an example: If you choose 4 seconds of a clip in the Source Monitor,
Premiere Pro automatically knows it will take 4 seconds of time in your
sequence. Once you have set the location for the clip to be placed, you’re ready
to perform the edit.
Because In and Out marks are often also called In and Out points, using just
three marks to perform edits in this way is called three-point editing.
When you performed your last edit, Premiere Pro aligned the In mark from the
clip (the start of the clip) with the In mark on the Timeline (the playhead).
Even though you didn’t manually add an In mark to the Timeline, you’re still
performing a three-point edit, with the duration calculated from the Source
Monitor clip.
If you add an In mark to the Timeline, Premiere Pro uses that to place the new
clip, ignoring the playhead.
You can achieve a similar result by adding an Out mark to the Timeline instead
of an In mark. In this case, Premiere Pro will align the Out mark of the clip in
the Source Monitor with the Out mark on the Timeline when you perform the
edit.
You might choose to do this if you have a piece of timed action, like a door
closing at the end of a clip in the sequence, and your new clip needs to line up in
time with it.
What happens if you use four marks?
You can use four marks to make an edit: both In and Out marks in the

Source Monitor and In and Out marks on the Timeline. If the clip duration
you select matches the sequence duration, the edit will take place as usual.
If they’re different, Premiere Pro will invite you to choose what you want
to happen.
You can stretch or compress the playback speed of the new clip to fit the
selected duration on the Timeline or selectively ignore one of your In or
Out marks.
Storyboard-style editing
The term storyboard usually describes a series of drawings that show the
intended camera angles and action for a film. Storyboards are often quite similar
to comic strips, though they usually include technical information, such as
intended camera moves, lines of dialogue, and sound effects.
You can use clip thumbnails in a bin as storyboard images.
Drag the thumbnails to arrange them in the order you want the clips to appear in
your sequence, from left to right and from top to bottom. Then drag them into
your sequence.
Using a storyboard to build an assembly edit

An assembly edit is a sequence in which the order of the clips is correct but the
timing has yet to be worked out. It’s common to build sequences as an assembly
edit first, just to make sure the structure works, and then adjust the timing later.
You can use storyboard editing to quickly get your clips in the right order.
1. Save the current project.
2. Open Lesson 05 Desert Sequence.prproj in the Lessons/Lesson 05 folder.
3. Choose File menu > Save As. Save the project as Lesson 05 Desert
Sequence Working.prproj.
 Tip
Project file names can become quite long. It’s fine to include useful
information to help you identify a project, but avoid making the
name so long it’s hard to manage the file.
This project has a Desert Montage sequence that already has music. You’ll add
some beautiful shots.
The audio track A1 has been locked (click the track padlock icon to lock and
unlock a track). This means you can make adjustments to the sequence without
risking making changes to the music track.
Arranging your storyboard
Double-click the Desert Footage bin to open it. There are beautiful shots in this
bin.
1. If necessary, click the Icon View button 
 at the bottom-left corner of the
bin to see thumbnails for the clips.
 Note
Premiere Pro has the option to sort clips in Icon view based on a
number of criteria. Click the Sort Icons button 
 for the
options. Set the menu to User Order to be able to drag and drop
the clips into a new order.
2. Drag the thumbnails in the bin to position them in the order in which you
want them to appear in the sequence, from left to right, top to bottom—just
like a comic strip or storyboard.

3. Make sure the Desert Footage bin is selected (with a blue outline). Select all
the clips in the bin by pressing Ctrl+A (Windows) or Command+A (macOS).
4. Drag the clips into the sequence, positioning them on the Video 1 track right
at the beginning of the Timeline, above the music clip.
Clips are added to the sequence in the order you originally selected them in the Project panel.
5. Play your sequence to see the result.
Setting the duration for still images
These video clips already have In and Out marks, which were used
automatically when you added them to the sequence.
Graphics and photos can have any duration in a sequence. However, they
have default In and Out marks applied as you import them.
Choose Edit > Preferences > Timeline (Windows) or Premiere Pro CC >
Preferences > Timeline (macOS) to change the duration in the Still Image
Default Duration box. The change you make applies to clips only when
you import them. It does not affect clips that are already in the project.
Still images and still image sequences (a series of images intended to play
one after another, as animation) have no timebase, that is, the number of
frames that should play each second. You can set the default timebase for
still images by choosing Edit > Preferences > Media (Windows) or
Premiere Pro > Preferences > Media (macOS) and setting an option for
Indeterminate Media Timebase.
Review questions
1. What do In and Out marks do?
2. Is the Video 2 track in front of the Video 1 track or behind it?

3. How do subclips help you stay organized?
4. How would you select a sequence time range to work with in the Timeline
panel?
5. What is the difference between an overwrite edit and an insert edit?
6. How much of your source clip will be added to a sequence if the source clip
has no In or Out marks and there are no In or Out marks in the sequence?
Review answers
1. In the Source Monitor and in the Project panel, In and Out marks define the
part of a clip you would like to use in a sequence. On the Timeline, In and
Out marks are used to define parts of your sequence you want to remove,
edit, render, or export. They can also be used to define parts of your sequence
you want to render when working with effects and used to define parts of
your Timeline you want to export to create a video file.
2. Upper video tracks are always in front of lower ones.
3. Though subclips make little difference to the way Premiere Pro plays back
video and sound, they make it easier for you to divide your footage into
different bins. For larger projects with lots of longer clips, it can make a big
difference to be able to divide content this way.
4. You’ll use In and Out marks to define parts of your sequence you want to
work with. For example, you might render when working with effects or
export parts of your sequence to export as a file.
5. Clips added to a sequence using an overwrite edit replace any content already
in the sequence where they are placed. Clips added to a sequence using an
insert edit displace existing clips, pushing them later (to the right) and
making the sequence longer.
6. If you don’t add In or Out marks to your source clip, the entire clip will be
added the sequence. Setting an In mark, an Out mark, or both, will limit the
portion of the source clip used in the edit.

6. Working with Clips and Markers
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Understanding the differences between the Program Monitor and the Source
Monitor
Playing 360 video for virtual reality (VR) headsets
Using markers
Applying sync locks and track locks
Selecting items in a sequence
Moving clips in a sequence
Removing clips from a sequence
This lesson will take approximately 75 minutes to complete. Please log in to
your account on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go
to the “Getting Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the
instructions under “Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.”
Once you have some clips in a sequence, you’re ready for the next stage of fine-
tuning. You’ll move clips around in your edit and remove the parts you don’t
want. You can also add comment markers to store information about clips and
sequences, which can be useful during your edit or when you send your
sequence to other Adobe Creative Cloud applications.

Adobe Premiere Pro CC makes it easy to fine-tune your edits with markers and advanced tools for
syncing and locking tracks when you’re editing clips in your video sequence.
Starting the lesson
The art and craft of video editing is perhaps best demonstrated during the phase
after the first version of your sequence is completed. Once you’ve chosen your
shots and put them in approximately the right order, the process of carefully
adjusting the timing of your edits begins.
In this lesson, you’ll learn about additional controls in the Program Monitor and
discover how markers help you stay organized.
You’ll also learn about working with clips that are already on the Timeline—the
“nonlinear” part of nonlinear editing with Adobe Premiere Pro CC.
Before you begin, make sure you are using the Editing workspace.
1. Open the file Lesson 06.prproj from the Lesson 06 folder.

2. Choose File > Save As.
3. Rename the file Lesson 06 Working.prproj.
4. Choose a location on your hard drive, and click Save to save the project.
5. Reset the workspace to the default; in the Workspaces panel, click Editing.
Then open the menu next to the Editing option, and choose Reset To Saved
Layout.
Using Program Monitor controls
The Program Monitor is almost identical to the Source Monitor, but there are a
small number of important differences.
What is the Program Monitor?
The Program Monitor displays the frame your sequence playhead is sitting on, or
playing. The sequence in the Timeline shows the clip segments and tracks, while
the Program Monitor shows the resulting video output. The Program Monitor
time ruler is a miniature version of the Timeline.
In the early stages of editing, you’re likely to spend a lot of time working with
the Source Monitor. Once your sequence is roughly edited together, you will
spend most of your time using the Program Monitor and the Timeline.

The Program Monitor vs. the Source Monitor
The key differences between the Program Monitor and the Source
Monitor are as follows:
The Source Monitor shows the contents of a clip; the Program Monitor
shows the contents of whichever sequence is currently displayed in the
Timeline.
The Source Monitor has Insert and Overwrite buttons for adding clips
(or parts of clips) to sequences. The Program Monitor has equivalent
Extract and Lift buttons for removing clips (or parts of clips) from
sequences.
Both monitors have a time ruler. The playhead on the Program
Monitor matches the playhead in the sequence you’re currently
viewing in the Timeline panel (the name of the current sequence is
displayed at the top left of the Program Monitor). As one playhead
moves, the other moves as well, so you can use either panel to change
the currently displayed frame.
When you work with special effects in Premiere Pro, you’ll see the
results in the Program Monitor. There’s one exception to this rule:

Master clip effects are viewed in both the Source Monitor and the
Program Monitor (for more information about effects, see Lesson 13,
“Adding Video Effects”).
The Mark In and Mark Out buttons on the Program Monitor work in
the same way as the ones on the Source Monitor. In and Out marks are
added to the currently displayed sequence when you add them in the
Program Monitor.
Adding clips to the Timeline with the Program Monitor
You’ve already learned how to make a partial clip selection with the Source
Monitor and then add the clip to a sequence by pressing a key, clicking a button,
or dragging and dropping.
You can also drag and drop a clip from the Source Monitor into the Program
Monitor to add it to the Timeline.
1. In the Sequences bin, open the Theft Unexpected sequence.
 Tip
You can use the Left Arrow and Right Arrow keys to expand and
collapse bins in the Project panel when it’s in the List view.
2. Position the Timeline playhead at the end of the sequence, just after the last
frame of the clip Mid John. You can hold the Shift key to snap the playhead
to edits, or you can press the Up Arrow and Down Arrow keys to navigate
between edits.
3. Open the clip HS Suit from the Theft Unexpected bin in the Source Monitor.
This is a clip that has already been used in the sequence, but you want a
different part.
 Tip
You can press the End key (Windows) or fn+Right Arrow key
(macOS) to move the playhead to the end of the sequence. You
can press Home (Windows) or fn+Left Arrow key (macOS) to
move the playhead to the start of the sequence.
4. Set an In mark for the clip around 01:26:49:00. There’s not much going on in
the shot, so it works well as a cutaway. Add an Out point around 01:26:52:00

so you have a little time with the man in the suit.
5. Click in the middle of the picture in the Source Monitor and drag the clip into
the Program Monitor, but don’t release the mouse yet.
 Tip
Remember that you can click the timecode display, type the
numbers without punctuation, and then press Enter to send the
playhead to that time.
Several overlay images appear in the Program Monitor, each highlighting a
drop zone that gives different options for the edit you’re about to perform.
The overlays give maximum flexibility when editing by touch, with a
computer screen that allows touch interaction. You can use the mouse to drag
clips in, as well as drag clips by touch.
As you move the cursor over each overlay, it’s highlighted to indicate the type
of edit you will apply if you release the mouse button.
Here’s the list of options:
Insert: This performs an insert edit, using the source track selection
buttons to choose the track (or tracks) the clip will land on.
Overwrite: This performs an overwrite edit, using the source track

selection buttons to choose the track (or tracks) the clip will land on.
Overlay: If you have a clip selected on the Timeline, the new clip will
be added to the next available track above the selected clip. If there’s
already a clip on the next track, the one above that is used, and so on.
Replace: The new clip will replace the clip currently under the Timeline
playhead (more on replace edits in Lesson 8, “Advanced Editing
Techniques”).
Insert After: The new clip will be inserted immediately after the clip
currently under the Timeline playhead.
 Note
When you drag a clip into your sequence using the mouse,
Premiere Pro still uses the Timeline Source Channel
Selection buttons to control which parts of the clip (video
and audio channels) are used.
Insert Before: The new clip will be inserted immediately before the clip
currently under the Timeline playhead.
For this edit, no clip is selected on the Timeline, and there are no clips in the
way to overwrite. Choose Insert—just because it’s the largest drop zone and
easier to aim for.
When you release the mouse button, the clip is edited into the sequence at the
playhead position, and your edit is complete.
Insert editing with the Program Monitor
Let’s try an insert edit into the middle of the sequence using the same technique.
1. Position the Timeline playhead on the edit at 00:00:16:01, between the Mid
Suit and Mid John shots. The continuity of movement isn’t good on this cut,
so let’s add another part of that HS Suit clip.
2. Add a new In mark and Out mark to the HS Suit clip in the Source Monitor.
Choose any part you like, selecting about 2 seconds in total. You can see the
selected duration at the lower-right corner of the Source Monitor, displayed
in white numbers.
3. Once again, drag the clip from the Source Monitor into the Program Monitor,

making sure to drop the clip onto the insert overlay. When you release the
mouse button, the clip is inserted into your sequence.
If you prefer to drag clips into your sequence, rather than using keyboard
shortcuts, clicking the Insert and Overwrite buttons on the Source Monitor, or
dragging into the Program Monitor, there’s still a way to bring in just the video
or audio part of a clip.
Let’s try a combination of techniques. You’ll set up your Timeline track headers
and then drag and drop into the Program Monitor.
 Note
Remember, only the source track selection buttons matter when
editing clips into a sequence, not the Timeline track selection
buttons.
1. Position the Timeline playhead at 00:00:25:20, just before John takes out his
pen.
2. On the Timeline track headers, drag the Source V1 track selection button
next to the Timeline Video 2 track. For the technique you’re about to use, the
track targeting is used to set the location of the clip you are adding.

3. Open the Mid Suit clip in the Source Monitor. At about 01:15:54:00, John is
wielding his pen. Add an In mark there.
4. Add an Out mark at about 01:15:56:00. You just need a quick alternative
angle.
At the bottom of the Source Monitor, you’ll see the Drag Video Only and
Drag Audio Only icons 
.
These icons serve two primary purposes.
They tell you whether your clip has video, audio, or both. If there is no
video, for example, the filmstrip icon is dimmed. If there is no audio,
the waveform is dimmed.
You can drag them with the mouse to selectively edit video or audio into
your sequence.
5. Drag the filmstrip icon from the bottom of the Source Monitor into the
Program Monitor, and release it on the Overwrite option. When you release
the mouse button, just the video part of the clip is added to the Video 2 track
on the Timeline.
This works even if both the Source Video and Source Audio selection buttons
are enabled, so it’s a quick, intuitive way to select the part of a clip you want.
You could achieve the same effect by selectively disabling Source track
selection buttons.

6. Play your sequence from the beginning.
The timing may not be perfect, but the edit is off to a good start. The clip you
just added plays in front of the end of the Mid John clip and the start of the HS
Suit clip, changing the timing. Because Premiere Pro is a nonlinear editing
system, you can adjust the timing later. You’ll learn how to do this in Lesson 8,
“Advanced Editing Techniques.”
Why are there so many ways to edit clips into a sequence?
This method may seem like yet another way to achieve the same thing, so
what’s the benefit? It’s simple: As screen resolution increases and buttons
get smaller, it’s an increasingly delicate maneuver to aim and click in the
right place.
If you prefer to use the mouse (or your finger with a touch screen) to edit
(rather than the keyboard), the Program Monitor represents a conveniently
large drop zone for you to add clips to the Timeline. It gives you accurate
placement of clips—using the track header controls and the position of the
playhead (or your In and Out marks)—while allowing you to work
intuitively.
Setting the playback resolution
The Mercury Playback Engine enables Premiere Pro to play multiple media
types, special effects, and more in real time. Mercury uses the power of your
computer hardware to boost performance. This means that the speed (and
number of cores and breadth of instruction sets) of your CPU, the amount of
RAM you have, the power of your GPU, and the speed of your storage drives are
all factors that impact playback performance.
If your system has difficulty playing back every frame of video in your sequence
(in the Program Monitor) or in your clip (in the Source Monitor), you can lower
the playback resolution to make playback smoother. If you see your video
playback stuttering, stopping, and starting, it usually indicates that your system
is unable to play the file because of a hardware limitation.
It’s worth remembering that playing high-resolution video files is hard! A single
frame of uncompressed full HD video is roughly equivalent to more than 8
million letters of text. UHD video (often described as 4K video) is four times
that!
Reducing the resolution means you won’t see every pixel in your pictures, but it

can dramatically improve performance, making creative work much easier. It’s
common for video to have a much higher resolution than can be displayed,
simply because your Source Monitor and Program Monitor are usually smaller
than the original media size. This means you may not see a difference in the
display when you lower the playback resolution.
Changing playback resolution
Let’s try adjusting playback resolution.
1. Open the clip Snow_3 from the Boston Snow bin. By default, the clip should
be displayed at half-resolution in the Source Monitor.
At the bottom right of the Source Monitor and Program Monitor, you’ll see
the Select Playback Resolution menu.
2. Play the clip to get a sense of the quality when it’s set to half-resolution.
3. Change the resolution to Full, and play it again to compare. It probably looks
similar.
4. Try reducing the resolution to 1/8. Now you might begin to see a difference

during playback. Notice that the picture is sharp when you pause playback.
This is because the pause resolution is independent of the playback resolution
(see the next section).
You’ll notice the biggest differences in picture elements like text. Compare
the detail in the tree branches, for example.
5. Try dropping the playback resolution to 1/16. Premiere Pro makes an
assessment of each kind of media you work with, and if the benefits of
reducing resolution are less than the effort it takes to drop the resolution, the
option is unavailable. In this case, the media is full 4K (4096 x 2160 pixels),
and the 1/16 option is available.
 Note
The playback resolution controls are the same (but independent)
on the Source Monitor and the Program Monitor.
6. Return the setting to 1/2, ready for the other footage in this project.
If you’re working on a powerful computer, you may want to maximize the
playback quality when previewing. There’s an extra option to do this: Choose

High Quality Playback in the Settings menu 
 for the Source Monitor or
Program Monitor.
Changing resolution when playback is paused
The playback resolution control is also available in the Settings menu on the
Source and Program Monitors.
If you look in that Settings menu on either monitor, you’ll find a second option
related to display resolution: Paused Resolution.
This menu works in the same way as the menu for playback resolution, but as
you might have guessed, it changes the resolution only when the video is paused.
Most editors choose to leave Paused Resolution set to Full. That way, during
playback you may see lower-resolution video, but when you pause, Premiere Pro
reverts to showing you full resolution. This means when working with effects,
you’ll see the video at full resolution.
If you work with third-party special effects, it’s possible you’ll find they do not
make use of your system hardware as efficiently as Premiere Pro does. As a
consequence, it might take a long time to update the picture when you make
changes to the effect settings. You can speed things up by lowering the paused
resolution.
Playing back VR video
Virtual reality headsets for the home are now commonplace, and the demand for
content is high. Premiere Pro has built-in support for 360 video, with clip
interpretation options, immersive video visual effects, desktop playback controls,
integrated VR headset playback, and Ambisonics Audio support.
Let’s try playing a 360 video clip.
What’s the difference between 360 video and virtual reality?
360 video is captured a little like a panoramic photo. Video is recorded in
multiple directions, and the different camera angles are “stitched” into a

complete sphere. The sphere is flattened into 2D video footage that’s
described as equirectangular. This is the term used to describe the way
globes showing the earth are flattened into atlases you can view in a book.
Equirectangular video looks distorted, which makes it hard to view and
follow the action. However, although the appearance is strange for human
eyes, it’s a regular video file like any other and Premiere Po can work
with it.
To view 360 video properly, it’s usually necessary to wear a virtual reality
headset. In the headset, 360 video is presented as all around you, and you
can turn your head to see different parts of the image. Because a VR
headset is required to see 360 video properly, it’s often referred to as VR
video.
True VR isn’t actually video. It’s a complete 3D environment you can
move around in, viewing things from different directions, like 360 video,
but also viewing things from different locations in the virtual reality
space.
The key difference is this: In 360 video, you can view in different angles,
but in true VR you can view from different locations within the scenario.
1. Browse into the Further Media bin, and open the clip 360 Intro.mp4 in the
Source Monitor. Play the clip.

This is an introduction to a 360 video film. The clip is in 4K resolution,
which might be difficult for your system to play back—lower the playback
resolution if you need to do so.
The center of the image is quite easy to make out, but if you look toward the
edges, it gets harder to follow what you’re looking at.
That’s because the clip is equi-rectangular video, where a spherical video
intended for VR headsets has been flattened into a 3D image. To see this
clearly, you’re going to need to switch to the VR Video mode.
2. Click the Source Monitor’s Settings menu, and choose VR Video > Enable.
Now the clip looks more like regular video, and additional controls appear in
the Source Monitor.
 Note
The Source Monitor and Program Monitor have identical VR
video playback controls.
 Tip
If you have a VR headset attached to your editing system, you’ll
find an option to view playback in the headset in the Monitor
Settings menu, under VR Video.
3. Play the clip again. This time, while it plays, click into the image, and drag to
change the angle of view.

The numbers under the image and to the right of the image allow you to
precisely control the angle of view. They’re helpful, but they take up a lot of
space.
4. Go to the Source Monitor Settings menu, and choose VR Video > Hide
Controls.
You can still click the image to change the angle of view, but now the image
is much larger in the Source Monitor.
Also in the Settings menu, you’ll find a VR Video Settings area, where you
can specify the height and width of the view in degrees to emulate different
VR headsets.
By default, the height and width are quite small. The ideal setting will match
the intended VR headset field of view.
5. For now, open the Source Monitor’s Settings menu, and choose VR Video >
Enable to deselect it.
Using markers
Sometimes it can be difficult to remember where you saw that useful part of a
shot or what you intended to do with it. Wouldn’t it be useful if you could mark
clips with comments and flag areas of interest for later?
What you need are markers.
What are markers?
Markers allow you to identify specific times in clips and sequences and add
comments to them. These temporal (time-based) markers are a fantastic aid to
help you stay organized and communicate with co-editors.

You can use markers for personal reference or for collaboration. They can be
connected to individual clips or a sequence.
By default, when you add a marker to a clip, it’s included in the metadata for the
original media file. This means you can open the clip in another Premiere Pro
project and see the same markers. You can disable this option by choosing Edit >
Preferences > Media (Windows) or Premiere Pro CC > Preferences > Media
(macOS), and deselecting Write Clip Markers To XMP.
You can export markers associated with a clip or sequence as an HTML page
with thumbnails, or a .csv (comma-separated value) file readable by spreadsheet-
editing applications. This is useful for collaboration and as a reference.
Export markers by choosing File > Export > Markers.
Exploring the types of markers
More than one type of marker is available, and like clips, each marker has a
color. You can change a marker type by double-clicking it.
Comment Marker: This is a general marker you can assign a name,
duration, and comments.
Chapter Marker: This is a marker that DVD and Blu-ray Disc design
applications can convert into a regular chapter marker.
Segmentation Marker: This marker makes it possible for certain video
servers to divide content into parts.
Web Link: Certain video formats such as QuickTime can use this marker
to automatically open a web page while the video plays. When you export
your sequence to create a supported format, web link markers are included
in the file.
Flash Cue Point: This is a marker used by Adobe Animate CC. By adding
these cue points to the Timeline in Premiere Pro, you can begin to prepare
your Animate project while still editing your sequence.
Sequence markers

Let’s add some markers.
1. Open the City Views sequence.
This is a simple assembly with a few shots from a travelogue program.
2. Set the Timeline playhead to around 00:01:12:00, and make sure no clips are
selected (you can click the background of the Timeline to deselect clips).
 Note
If a sequence clip is selected in the Timeline panel when you add
a marker, it will be added to the selected clip, rather than the
sequence.
3. Add a marker in one of the following ways:
Click the Add Marker button 
 at the top left of the Timeline.
Right-click the Timeline time ruler and choose Add Marker.
Press M.
 Note
You can add markers on the time ruler for the Timeline, Source
Monitor, or Program Monitor.
Premiere Pro adds a green marker to the Timeline, just above the playhead.
The same marker appears at the bottom of the Program Monitor.
You can use this as a simple visual reminder or go into the settings and

change it into a different kind of marker. You’ll do that in a moment, but first
let’s look at this marker in the Markers panel.
 Tip
The Markers panel has a Search box at the top that works the
same way as the Search box in the Project panel. Next to the
Search box are marker color filters options. Click one (or
several) of these to only see markers with matching colors in the
Markers panel.
4. Open the Markers panel. By default, the Markers panel is grouped with the
Project panel. If you don’t see it there, choose Window > Markers.
The Markers panel shows you a list of markers, displayed in time order. The
same panel shows you markers for a sequence or for a clip, depending on
whether the Timeline, a sequence clip, or the Source Monitor is active.
5. Double-click the thumbnail for the marker in the Markers panel. This
displays the Marker dialog box.

 Tip
You can open the Marker dialog box by double-clicking a marker
in the Markers panel or by double-clicking the marker icon.
6. Click the Duration field, and type 400. Avoid the temptation to press Enter or
Return, in which case the panel would close. Premiere Pro automatically adds
punctuation, turning this into 00:00:04:00 (4 seconds) as soon as you click
away or press the Tab key to move to the next field.
7. Click in the Name box, and type a comment, such as Replace this shot.

8. Click OK.
The marker now has a duration on the Timeline. Zoom in a little, and you’ll
see the comment you added.
The comment is also displayed in the Markers panel as the name of the
marker.
 Tip
Notice that the entries in the Markers menu have keyboard
shortcuts. Working with markers using the keyboard is generally
much faster than using the mouse.
9. Take a moment to open the Markers menu, at the top of the Premiere Pro
interface, to see the available commands.

At the bottom of the Markers menu is the Ripple Sequence Markers command.
With this enabled, sequence markers will move in sync with clips when you
insert or extract clips, which changes the sequence duration and timing. With this
option disabled, markers stay where they are when your clips move.
Clip markers
Let’s add markers to a clip.
1. Open the clip Seattle_Skyline.mov from the Further Media bin in the Source
Monitor.
2. Play the clip, and while it plays, press the M key several times to add
markers.
 Note
Markers can be added using a button or a keyboard shortcut. If
you use the keyboard shortcut, M, it’s easy to add markers that
match the beat of your music because you can add them during
playback.
3. Look in the Markers panel. If the Source Monitor is active, every marker you
added will be listed.

When clips with markers are added to a sequence, they retain their markers.
4. Make sure the Source Monitor is active by clicking it. Choose Markers >
Clear All Markers.
All the markers are removed from the clip.
 Tip
You can get to the same option to remove all markers—or a
current marker—by right-clicking in the Source Monitor, in the
Program Monitor, or on the Timeline time ruler and choosing
Clear All Markers.
You can add a marker to a clip in a sequence by selecting it before you add the
marker. Markers added to clips already edited into a sequence still appear in the
Source Monitor when you view the clip.
Interactive markers
Interactive markers are used to trigger events during video playback. When you
supply media, you may be asked to add such markers at key moments in a video.
Adding an interactive marker is as easy as adding a regular marker. Try this now.
 Tip
You can quickly add a marker and immediately display the Marker

dialog by pressing M twice, in quick succession.
1. Position the playhead anywhere you want a marker on the Timeline and click
the Add Marker button or press M. Premiere Pro adds a regular marker.
2. Double-click the marker you have added, either on the Timeline or in the
Markers panel.
3. Change the marker type to Flash Cue Point and add the Name and Value
details you need by clicking the (plus) + button at the bottom of the Marker
dialog box.
 Tip
You can use markers to quickly navigate your clips and
sequences. If you double-click a marker in the Markers panel,
you’ll access the options for that marker. If you single-click it
instead, Premiere Pro will take the playhead to the location of the
marker—a fast way to find your way around.
4. Click OK.
Adding markers with Adobe Prelude
Adobe Prelude is a logging and ingest application included with Adobe
Creative Cloud. Prelude provides excellent tools for managing large
quantities of footage and can add markers to footage that are fully
compatible with Premiere Pro.
Markers are added to clips in the form of metadata, and like the markers
you add in Premiere Pro, they will travel with your media into other
applications.
If you add markers to your footage using Adobe Prelude, those markers
will automatically appear in Premiere Pro when you view the clips. In
fact, you can even copy and paste a clip from Prelude into your Premiere
Pro project, and the markers will be included.
Finding clips in the Timeline

As well as searching for clips in the Project panel, you can search for them in a
sequence. Depending on whether you have the Project panel active or the
Timeline active, choosing Edit > Find or pressing Ctrl+F (Windows) or
Command+F (macOS) will display search options for that panel.
When clips in a sequence are found that match your search criteria, Premiere Pro
highlights them. If you choose Find All, Premiere Pro will highlight all clips that
meet the search criteria.
You can quickly find clips in a sequence using the Find dialog. In this example, clips with the name
John have been highlighted.
Using Sync Lock and Track Lock
There are two distinct ways to lock tracks on the Timeline.
You can lock clips in sync so when you use an insert edit to add a clip, other
clips stay together in time.
You can lock a track so that no changes can be made to it.

Using sync locks
Sync is not just for speech! It’s helpful to think of syncing as coordinating any
two things that are meant to happen at the same time. You might have a musical
event that happens at the same time as some climactic action or something as
simple as a lower-third title that identifies a speaker. If it happens at the same
time, it’s synchronized.
Open the Theft Unexpected sequence in the Sequences bin.
When John arrives, at the beginning of the sequence, the audience won’t know
what he’s looking at.
1. Open the Mid Suit clip, from the Theft Unexpected bin, in the Source
Monitor. Add an In mark around 01:15:35:18, and add an Out mark around
01:15:39:00.
2. Position the Timeline playhead at the beginning of the sequence, and make
sure there are no In or Out marks on the Timeline.
 Tip
You can press the Home (Windows) or fn+Left Arrow (macOS)
key to move the playhead to the beginning of the sequence.
3. Deselect Sync Lock for the Video 2 track.
4. Check that your Timeline is configured as in the following example, with the
Source V1 track patched to the Timeline V1 track. The Timeline track header
buttons are not important now, but having the right source track selection
buttons enabled is.

 Note
You may need to zoom out to see the other clips in the sequence.
Before you do anything else, take a look at the position of the Mid Suit
cutaway clip on the Video 2 track, toward the end of the sequence.
It’s just over the cut between the clips Mid John and HS Suit on Video 1.
5. Insert-edit the source clip into the sequence.
Take another look at the location of the Mid Suit cutaway clip.

The Mid Suit cutaway clip has not moved, while the other clips have moved
to the right to accommodate the new clip. This is a problem because the
cutaway is now out of position with the clips to which it relates—it no longer
covers the cut.
6. Undo by pressing Ctrl+Z (Windows) or Command+Z (macOS) and try it
again with the Video 2 track Sync Lock turned on.
7. Turn on Sync Lock for the Video 2 track, and perform the insert edit again.
This time, the cutaway clip moves with the other clips on the Timeline, even
though nothing is being edited onto the Video 2 track. This is the power of
sync locks—they keep things in sync!
 Note
Overwrite edits do not change the duration of your sequence, so
they are not affected by sync locks.
Using track locks
Track locks prevent you from making changes to a track. They are an excellent
way to avoid making accidental changes to your sequence and to fix clips on

specific tracks in place while you work.
For example, you could lock your music track while you insert different video
clips. By locking the music track, you can simply forget about it while editing
because no changes can be made to it.
Lock and unlock tracks by clicking the Toggle Track Lock button. Clips on a
locked track are highlighted with diagonal lines.
Finding gaps in the Timeline
Until now, you’ve been adding clips to a sequence. Part of the power of
nonlinear editing is in having the freedom to move clips around in a sequence
and remove the parts you don’t want.
When removing clips or parts of clips, you’ll either leave a gap by performing a
lift edit or not leave a gap by performing an extract edit.
An extract edit is a little like an insert edit but in reverse. Rather than other clips
in a sequence moving out of the way to make space for a new clip, the other
clips move in to fill the gap left behind by a clip you are removing.
When you zoom out of a complex sequence, it can be difficult to see gaps left
behind after performing an edit. To automatically locate the next gap, choose
Sequence > Go to Gap > Next In Sequence.
Once you’ve found a gap, you can remove it by selecting it and pressing Delete.
You can remove multiple gaps by choosing Sequence > Close Gap.
If you have set In and Out marks in the sequence, only gaps between the marks
will be removed.
Let’s learn a little more about working with clips on the Timeline. Continue

working with the Theft Unexpected sequence.
Selecting clips
Selection is an important part of working with Premiere Pro. For example,
depending on the panel you have selected, different menu options will be
available. You’ll want to select clips in your sequences carefully before applying
adjustments to them.
When working with clips that have video and audio, you’ll have two or more
segments for each clip: one video segment and at least one audio segment.
When the video and audio clip segments come from the same original media file,
they are automatically treated as linked. If you select one, the other is
automatically selected.
You can switch linked selections on and off on the Timeline globally by clicking
the Linked Selection button 
 at the top left of the Timeline. When Linked
Selection is on, video and audio clips in a sequence are automatically selected
together when you click them. When Linked Selection is off, clicking the video
or audio part of a clip selects only that part. If there’s more than one audio clip,
you’ll select just the one you click.
Selecting a clip or range of clips
When selecting clips in a sequence, there are two approaches.
Make time selections by using In and Out marks
Make selections by choosing clip segments
The simplest way to select a clip in a sequence is to click it. Be careful not to
double-click, which will open the clip in the Source Monitor, ready for you to
adjust the In or Out marks (these will update, live, on the Timeline).
When making selections, you’ll want to use the default Timeline tool—the
Selection tool 
. This tool has the keyboard shortcut V.
If you hold the Shift key while you click sequence clips with the Selection tool,
you can select or deselect additional clips.

You can also drag the Selection tool over multiple clips to select them. Begin by
pressing the mouse button in an empty part of the Timeline and then dragging to
create a selection box. Any clip you drag over with the selection box will be
selected.
Premiere Pro gives you the option to automatically select whichever clip the
Timeline playhead passes over. This is particularly useful for a keyboard-based
editing workflow. You can enable the option by choosing Sequence > Selection
Follows Playhead. You can also press the keyboard shortcut D to select the
current clip under the Timeline playhead.
Selecting all the clips on a track
If you want to select every clip on a track, there are two handy tools to do just
that: the Track Select Forward Tool 
, which has the keyboard shortcut A, and
the Track Select Backward Tool 
, which has the keyboard shortcut Shift+A.
Try it now. Select the Track Select Forward tool, and click any clip on the Video
1 track.
Every clip, on every track, from the one you select until the end of the sequence
is selected. This is useful if you want to add a gap to your sequence to make
space for more clips; you can drag all the selected clips to the right.
Look at the Track Select Forward tool icon in the Tools panel. Notice the tiny
triangle next to the icon—this indicates the button is also a menu. If you press
and hold on this tool, a menu appears with the Track Select Backward tool.
When you click a clip with this tool, every clip up to the one you clicked is
selected.
If you hold the Shift key while using either of the tools, you’ll select clips on
only one track.
When you have finished, switch to the Selection tool by clicking it on the Tools
panel or by pressing the V key.

Selecting audio or video only
It’s common to add a clip to a sequence and later realize you don’t need the
audio or video part of the clip. You may want to remove one or the other to keep
your Timeline tidy, and there’s an easy way to make the correct selection: If
Linked Selection is on, you can temporarily override it.
Switch to the Selection tool and try clicking some clip segments on the Timeline
while holding the Alt (Windows) or Option (macOS) key. Premiere Pro ignores
the link between video and audio parts of your clips. You can even lasso in this
way!
Splitting a clip
It’s also common to add a clip to a sequence and then realize you need it in two
parts. Perhaps you want to take just a section of a clip and use it as a cutaway, or
maybe you want to separate the beginning and the end to make space for new
clips.
You can split clips in several ways.
Use the Razor tool 
. If you hold the Shift key while clicking with the
Razor tool, you’ll split the clips on every track.
 Tip
The keyboard shortcut for the Razor tool is C.
Make sure the Timeline is selected and choose Sequence > Add Edit.
Premiere Pro adds an edit at the location of your playhead to clips on any
tracks that are enabled (with the track selection button on). If you have
selected clips in the sequence, Premiere Pro adds the edit only to the
selected clips, ignoring track selections.
If you choose Sequence > Add Edit To All Tracks, Premiere Pro adds an
edit to clips on all tracks, regardless of whether they are turned on.
Use the Add Edit keyboard shortcuts. Press Ctrl+K (Windows) or
Command+K (macOS) to add an edit to selected tracks or clips, or press
Shift+Ctrl+K (Windows) or Shift+Command+K (macOS) to add an edit to
all tracks regardless of selection.
Clips that were originally continuous will still play back seamlessly unless you
move them or make separate adjustments to different parts.
If you click the Settings button for the Timeline 
, you can select Show

Through Edits to see a special icon on edits of this kind.
You can rejoin clips that have the Through Edit icon by right-clicking the edit
and choosing Join Through Edits.
Using the Selection tool, you can also click a Through Edit icon and press
Backspace (Windows) or Delete (macOS) to rejoin the two parts of a clip.
Try it with this sequence. Be sure to use Undo to remove the new cuts you add.
Linking and unlinking clips
You can switch off and on the link between a connected video and audio
segment easily. Just select the clip or clips you want to change, right-click each
of them, and choose Unlink.
You can also use the Clip menu. You can link a clip with its original audio again
by selecting both clip segments, right-clicking one of them, and choosing Link.
There’s no harm in linking or unlinking clips—it won’t change the way Premiere
Pro plays your sequence. It just gives you the flexibility to work with clips in the
way you want.
Even if video and audio clip segments are linked, you’ll need to make sure the
Timeline Linked Selection option is enabled to select linked clips together.
Moving clips
Insert edits and overwrite edits add new clips to sequences in dramatically
different ways. Insert edits push existing clips out of the way, whereas overwrite
edits simply replace them. This theme of having two ways of working with clips
extends to the techniques you’ll employ to move clips around the Timeline and
to remove clips from the Timeline.
When moving clips using the Insert mode, you may want to ensure you have the

sync locks on for your tracks to avoid any possible loss of sync.
Let’s try a few techniques.
Dragging clips
At the top left of the Timeline, you’ll see the Snap button 
. When snapping is
enabled, clip segments snap automatically to each other’s edges. This simple but
useful feature will help you position clip segments frame-accurately.
1. Select the last clip on the Timeline, HS Suit, and drag it a little to the right.
Because there are no clips after this one, you simply introduce a gap before
the clip. No other clips are affected.
2. Make sure the Snap option is enabled, and drag the clip back to its original
position. If you move the mouse slowly, you’ll notice that the clip segment
jumps into position at the last moment. When this happens, you can be
confident it’s perfectly positioned. Notice that the clip also snaps to the end
of the cutaway shot on the Video 2 track.
3. Drag the clip left until the end of the clip snaps to the end of the previous
clip, so they are overlapping. When you release the mouse button, the clip
replaces the end of that clip.
When you drag and drop clips, the default editing mode is Overwrite.
4. Undo repeatedly until the clip is in its original position.

Nudging clips
Many editors prefer to use the keyboard as much as possible, minimizing the use
of the mouse because working with the keyboard is usually faster.
It’s common to move clip segments inside a sequence by using the arrow keys in
combination with a modifier key, nudging the selected items left and right in
time or up and down between tracks.
You won’t be able to nudge linked video and audio clips on V1 and A1 up and
down until you separate them, or unlink them, because the separator between the
video and audio tracks blocks the movement.
Default clip-nudging shortcuts
Premiere Pro includes many keyboard shortcut options, some of which are
available but not yet assigned keys. You can set these up, prioritizing the
use of available keys to suit your workflow.
Here are the shortcuts for nudging clips using the keyboard:
Nudge Clip Selection Left 1 Frame (add Shift for five frames):
Alt+Left Arrow (Windows) or Command+Left Arrow (macOS)
Nudge Clip Selection Right 1 Frame (add Shift for five frames):
Alt+Right Arrow (Windows) or Command+Right Arrow (macOS)
Nudge Clip Selection Up: Alt+Up Arrow (Windows) or Option+Up
Arrow (macOS)
Nudge Clip Selection Down: Alt+Down Arrow (Windows) or
Option+Down Arrow (macOS)
Rearranging clips in a sequence
If you hold the Ctrl (Windows) or Command (macOS) key while you drag clips
on the Timeline, Premiere Pro uses Insert mode instead of Overwrite mode to
place the clip when you release the mouse button.
The HS Suit shot around 00:00:20:00 might work better if it appeared before the
previous shot—and it might help you hide the poor continuity between the two
shots of John.
 Tip
You may need to zoom in to the Timeline to see the clips clearly and
move them easily.

1. Drag and drop that last HS Suit clip to the left of the clip before it. The left
edge of the HS Suit clip should line up with the left edge of the Mid Suit clip.
Once you have begun dragging, hold the Ctrl (Windows) or Command
(macOS) key. Release the key after you’ve dropped the clip.
2. Play the result. This creates the edit you want, but it introduces a gap where
the clip HS Suit used to be.
Let’s try that again with an additional modifier key.
3. Undo to restore the clips to their original positions.
4. Holding Ctrl+Alt (Windows) or Command+Option (macOS), drag and drop
the HS Suit clip to the beginning of the previous clip again.
 Tip
Be careful when dropping the clip into position. The ends of
clips snap to edges just as the beginnings do.
This time, no gap is left in the sequence. Play through the edit to see the result.
Using the clipboard
You can copy and paste clip segments on the Timeline just as you might copy
and paste text in a word processor.
1. In a sequence, select any clip segment (or segments) you want to copy and
then press Ctrl+C (Windows) or Command+C (macOS) to add them to the
clipboard.

2. Position your playhead where you would like to paste the clips you copied
and press Ctrl+V (Windows) or Command+V (macOS).
Premiere Pro adds copies of the clips to your sequence based on the tracks you
enable. The lowest enabled track receives the clip (or clips).
Extracting and deleting segments
Now that you know how to add clips to a sequence and how to move them
around, all that remains is to learn how to remove them. Once again, you’ll be
operating in Insert or Overwrite mode.
There are two ways to select parts of a sequence you want to remove. You can
use In and Out marks combined with track selections, or you can select clip
segments.
Performing a lift edit
A lift edit will remove the selected part of a sequence, leaving blank space. It’s
similar to an overwrite edit but in reverse.
Open the sequence Theft Unexpected 02 in the Sequences bin. This sequence
has some unwanted extra clips. They have different label colors to make them
easier to identify.
You’ll need to set In and Out marks on the Timeline to select the part that will be
removed. You can do this by positioning the playhead and pressing I or O. You
can also use a handy shortcut.
1. Position the playhead so that it’s somewhere over the first unwanted clip,
Excuse Me Tilted.
2. Make sure the Video 1 track header is turned on and that the clip is not
selected; then press X.
Premiere Pro automatically adds an In mark and an Out mark that match the
beginning and end of the clip. You’ll see a highlight that shows the selected
part of the sequence.

The correct tracks are already selected, so there’s no need to do anything else
to prepare for the lift edit. In fact, because you have selected a clip, the track
selection has no effect anyway. The edit you’re about to perform will apply to
the selected clip.
Different shortcuts to add In and Out marks
Earlier, you learned to set In and Out marks at the beginning and end
of a clip by selecting it and pressing /. This method works by simply
positioning the playhead over the clip and having the correct tracks
selected. The difference is subtle, but X is perhaps even faster than
using the selection-based / key.
3. Click the Lift button 
 at the bottom of the Program Monitor. If your
keyboard has a ; (semicolon) key, you can press it instead.
Premiere Pro removes the part of the sequence you selected, leaving a gap. This
might be fine on another occasion, but in this instance you don’t want the gap.
You could remove the gap, but for this exercise you’ll use an extract edit.
Performing an extract edit
An extract edit removes the selected part of your sequence and does not leave a
gap. It’s similar to an insert edit but in reverse.
1. Undo the last edit.
2. Click the Extract button 
 at the bottom of the Program Monitor. If your
keyboard has an ’ (apostrophe) key, you can press it.
This time, Premiere Pro removes the selected part of the sequence, and the other

clips on the Timeline move to close the gap.
Performing a delete and ripple delete edit
Just as there are two ways to remove part of a sequence based on In and Out
marks, there are also two ways to remove clips by selecting clip segments:
Delete and Ripple Delete.
Click once to select the second unwanted clip, Cutaways, and try these two
options:
Pressing the Backspace/Delete key removes the selected clip (or clips),
leaving a gap behind. This is the same as a lift edit.
Pressing Shift+Delete/Shift+Forward Delete removes the selected clip (or
clips) without leaving a gap behind. This is the same as an extract edit. If
you’re using a Mac keyboard without a dedicated Forward Delete key, you
can convert the Delete key into a Forward Delete key by pressing the
Function (fn) and Delete keys together.
The result seems similar to that achieved by using In and Out marks because you
used In and Out marks earlier to select a whole clip. However, you can use In
and Out marks to choose parts of clips, while selecting clip segments and
pressing Delete will always remove whole clips.
Disabling a clip
Just as you can turn a track output off or on, you can also turn individual clips
off or on. Clips that you disable are still in your sequence, but they cannot be
seen or heard during playback or while scrubbing.
This is a useful feature for selectively hiding parts of a complex, multilayered
sequence when you want to see background layers or compare different versions,
or different performance takes that you have placed on different tracks.
Try this on the cutaway shot on the Video 2 track, toward the end of the
sequence.
1. Right-click the Mid Suit clip on the Video 2 track, and choose Enable to
deselect it.

Play through that part of the sequence, and you’ll notice that the clip is
present, but you can no longer see it.
2. Right-click the clip again and choose Enable. This reenables the clip.
Review questions
1. When dragging clips directly into the Timeline panel, what modifier key
(Ctrl/Command, Shift, or Alt) should you use to make an insert edit rather
than an overwrite edit?
2. How do you drag just the video or audio part of a clip from the Source
Monitor into a sequence?
3. How do you reduce the playback resolution in the Source Monitor or
Program Monitor?
4. How do you add a marker to a clip or sequence?
5. What is the difference between an extract edit and a lift edit?
6. What is the difference between Delete and Ripple Delete?
Review answers
1. Hold the Ctrl (Windows) or Command (macOS) key when dragging a clip
into the Timeline to make an insert edit rather than an overwrite edit.
2. Rather than grabbing the picture in the Source Monitor, drag and drop the
filmstrip icon or the audio waveform icon to select only the video or audio
part of the clip. You can also disable the Source Patching buttons for parts
you want to exclude.
3. Use the Select Playback Resolution menu at the bottom of the monitor to
change the playback resolution.
4. To add a marker, click the Add Marker button at the bottom of the monitor or
on the Timeline, press the M key, or use the Marker menu.
5. When you extract a section of your sequence using In and Out marks, no gap
is left behind. When you lift, a gap remains.
6. When you delete a clip in a sequence, a gap is left behind. When you ripple
delete a clip, no gap is left.

7. Adding Transitions
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Understanding transitions
Understanding edit points and handles
Adding video transitions
Modifying transitions
Fine-tuning transitions
Applying transitions to multiple clips at once
Using audio transitions
This lesson will take approximately 75 minutes to complete. Please log in to
your account on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go
to the “Getting Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the
instructions under “Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.”

Transitions can help create a seamless flow between two video or audio clips. Video transitions are often
used to signify a change in time or location. Audio transitions provide a useful way to avoid abrupt edits
that jar the listener.
Starting the lesson
In this lesson, you’ll learn to use transitions between video and audio clips.
Video editors often use transitions to help an edit flow more smoothly. You’ll
learn best practices for choosing transitions selectively.
For this lesson, you’ll use a new project file.
1. Start Adobe Premiere Pro CC, and open the project Lesson 07.prproj in the
Lessons/Lesson 07 folder.
2. Save the project as Lesson 07 Working.prproj in the same folder.
3. Choose Effects in the Workspaces panel, or choose Window > Workspaces >
Effects.
This changes the workspace to the preset that was created to make it easier to

work with transitions and effects. If you have been using Premiere Pro for a
while, you may need to reset the workspace to the saved version by clicking the
menu next to the Effects option in the Workspaces panel.
 Note
If you have been using Premiere Pro for a while, there’s a small
chance your settings will prevent the Workspaces panel from being
displayed. You can always restore it by selecting the correct
workspace in the Window menu and then going back to the Window
menu and resetting the workspace there.
This workspace uses stacked panels to maximize the number of panels that can
be on-screen at a time.
Stacked panels save space—enable or disable them in the panel menu.
You can enable stacked panels for any panel group by going to the panel menu
and choosing Panel Group Settings > Stacked Panel Group. The same option
will toggle off stacked panels.
Click the name for any panel in a stack to view it. Start with the Effects panel.
What are transitions?

Adobe Premiere Pro offers several special effects and preset animations to help
you bridge neighboring clips in the Timeline. These transitions—such as
dissolves, page wipes, dips to color, and so on—provide a way to ease viewers
from one scene to the next. Occasionally, a transition can also be used to grab
viewers’ attention to signify a major jump in the story.
Adding transitions to your project is an art. Applying them starts simply enough;
drag the transition you want onto the cut between two clips. The skill comes in
their placement, length, and parameters, such as direction, motion, and start/end
locations.
You can adjust settings for transitions on the Timeline and in the Effect Controls
panel. In addition to the various options unique to each transition, the Effect
Controls panel displays an A/B timeline. This feature makes it easy to move
transitions relative to the edit point, change the transition duration, and apply
transitions to clips that don’t have sufficient head or tail frames (additional
content to provide an overlap). You can also apply a transition effect to all the

cuts in a group of clips.
VR video transitions
Though it is beyond the scope of this book, Premiere Pro includes
excellent support for 360 video and includes effects and transitions
intended for this unique format.
Unlike 2D or stereoscopic video, 360 video requires visual effects and
transitions designed to deal with wraparound video with no edges.
The techniques described here when working with effects also apply to
360 video transitions. You’ll find them in the Video Transitions >
Immersive Video category in the Effects panel.
Knowing when to use transitions
Transitions are effective when they help the viewer understand the story. For
example, you may switch from indoors to outdoors in a video, or you may jump
forward in time by several hours in the same location. An animated transition, a
fade to black, or a dissolve helps the viewer understand that time has passed or
that the location has changed.
Modern audiences have a clear understanding of the signals transitions give, and
they’re a standard storytelling tool in video editing. For example, a slow fade to
black at the end of a scene is a clear indication that the scene has finished. The
key with transitions is to be intentional—and this often means using restraint—
unless, of course, a total lack of restraint is the result you intend to show.
Only you can know what is right for your creative work. As long as it looks like
you meant to include a particular effect, your audience will tend to trust your
decision (whether or not they agree with your creative choices). It takes practice
and experience to develop sensitivity for the right time, and wrong time, to use
effects such as transitions.

Following best practices with transitions
New editors sometimes overuse transitions, perhaps because it’s an easy way to
add visual interest. You may be tempted to use a transition on every cut. Don’t!
Or at least, get them out of your system with your first edit.
 Note
Transitions are fun and interesting to add to your project. However,
overuse can make a video seem amateurish. When choosing a
transition, make sure it adds meaning to your project. Watch your
favorite movies and TV shows to learn how to use transitions
elegantly.
Most TV shows and feature films use cuts-only edits. You’ll rarely see any
transitions. Why? An effect should be used if it gives a particular additional
benefit, and most often, transition effects do not. In fact, they can be distracting.
If a news editor uses a transition effect, it’s for a purpose. The most frequent use
in newsroom editing is to take what would have been a jarring or abrupt edit—
called a jump cut—and make it more acceptable.
More dramatic transitions do have their place in storytelling. Consider the Star
Wars movies with their highly stylized transition effects, such as obvious, slow
wipes. Each of those transitions has a purpose. In this case, George Lucas
purposely created a look reminiscent of old serialized movies and TV shows.
The transition effects send a clear message: “Pay attention. We’re transitioning
across space and time.”
Using edit points and handles
To understand transition effects, you’ll need to understand edit points and
handles. An edit point is the point in your Timeline where one clip ends and the
next begins. This is often called a cut. These are easy to see because Premiere
Pro draws vertical lines to show where one clip ends and another begins (much
like two bricks next to each other).

When you edit part of a clip into a sequence, the unused sections at the
beginning and end are still available but hidden. Clip handles are those unused
sections.
When you first edited a clip into a sequence, you set In and Out marks (also
known as In and Out points) to select the part you wanted. There’s a handle
between the clip’s original beginning and the In mark you chose. There’s also a
handle between the clip’s original end and the Out mark you chose.
Of course, you may not have used In or Out marks, or you may have set just one
or other mark at the beginning or end of the clip. In this case, you would have no
unused media or unused media at one end of the clip.
On the Timeline, if you see a little triangle in the upper-right or upper-left corner
of a clip, it means you’ve reached the end of the original clip and there are no
additional frames available (referred to as handles).
In this example, the middle clip has a handle available at the start (on the left) but no handle at the end
(on the right).
For transitions to work, you need handles, because these are used to create the
overlap needed when creating a transition effect.
These unused sections of clips are not visible unless you apply a transition
effect. The transition effect automatically creates an overlap between the
outgoing clip and the incoming clip. For example, if you wanted to add a 2-
second Cross Dissolve transition centered between two video clips, you’d need
at least a 1-second handle on both clips (1 additional second each that would not
normally be visible in the Timeline).

Adding video transitions
Premiere Pro gives you multiple video transition effects to choose from. Most
options are available in the Video Transitions group in the Effects panel.
The main transitions are organized into eight effect subcategories. You’ll find
some additional transitions in the Video Effects > Transition group in the Effects
panel. Those effects are meant to be applied to an entire clip and can be used to
reveal the footage (typically between its start and end frames). This second
category works well for superimposing text or graphics.
 Note
If you’d like more transitions, check the Adobe website. Visit
http://helpx.adobe.com/premiere-pro/compatibility.html and click
the Plug-ins link. There, you’ll find several third-party effects to
explore.
Applying a single-sided transition
The easiest transition to understand is one that applies to just one end of a single
clip. This could be a fade from black on the first clip in a sequence or a dissolve
into an animated graphic that leaves the screen on its own.
 Note
You can use the Search field, at the top of the panel, to locate the
effect by name or keyword, or you can manually open the folders of
effects.
Let’s give it a try.
1. Open the sequence Transitions.

This sequence has four video clips. The clips have handles long enough for
transition effects to be applied between them.
2. In the Effects panel, open the Video Transitions > Dissolve group. Find the
Cross Dissolve effect.
3. Drag and drop the effect onto the start of the first video clip.
A highlight shows you where the transition effect will be added before you release the mouse
button.
4. Drag the Cross Dissolve effect onto the end of the last video clip.
The Dissolve icon shows the timing for the effect. For example, the effect you
just applied to the last clip in the sequence will start before the end of the clip
and complete by the time it reaches the clip’s end.
Because you’re applying the Cross Dissolve transition effect at the ends of
clips, where there is no connected clip, the picture dissolves into the
background of the Timeline (which happens to be black).
Transitions of this kind don’t extend the clip (using the handle) because the

transition doesn’t reach past the end of the clip.
5. Play the sequence to see the result.
You should see a fade from black at the start of the sequence and a fade to
black at the end.
When you apply a Cross Dissolve effect in this way, the result looks similar
to the Dip to Black effect, which transitions to black. However, in reality you
are causing the clip to become gradually transparent in front of a black
background. The difference is clearer when you work with multiple layers of
clips, with different-colored background layers.
Applying a transition between two clips
Let’s apply transitions between several clips. For the purposes of exploration,
you’ll break some artistic rules and try a few different options.
1. Continue working with the previous sequence, Transitions.
2. Move the playhead to the edit point between clip 1 and clip 2 on the Timeline
and then press the equal sign (=) key two or three times to zoom in fairly
close. If your keyboard does not have the = key, use the zoom slider control
at the bottom of the Timeline.
 Tip
It’s easy to remember that pressing the = key zooms in because it
normally has a + symbol on the same key.
3. Drag the Dip to White transition from the Dissolve group in the Effects panel
onto the edit point between clip 1 and clip 2. Be sure to line up the midpoint
of the effect with the cut, not the end of the first clip or beginning of the
second clip.
The Dip to White transition effect gradually builds to a completely white
screen, which obscures the cut between the first clip and the next.
4. Drag the Push transition from the Slide category onto the edit point between

clip 2 and clip 3.
5. Position the Timeline playhead on the edit between clip 2 and clip 3 by
pressing the down arrow on your keyboard. The Up and Down arrow keys
are shortcuts to move the Timeline playhead to the next or previous edit.
6. Click once on the Push transition effect icon on the Timeline to select it, and
open the Effect Controls panel.
7. Change the direction of the clip from West to East to East to West by clicking
the direction control on the small thumbnail, at the top right of the controls.
This changes the direction from which the next clip will appear.
8. Drag the Flip Over transition from the 3D Motion group onto the edit point
between clip 3 and clip 4.
9. Review the sequence by playing it from beginning to end.
Having watched this sequence, you can probably see why it’s a good idea to
use transitions with restraint!
Let’s try replacing an existing effect.
 Note
When you drag a new video or audio transition effect from the
Effects panel on top of an existing transition, it replaces the
existing effect. It also preserves the alignment and duration of
the previous transition. This is an easy way to swap transition
effects and experiment.
0. Drag the Split transition from the Slide category onto the existing Push
transition effect icon, between clip 2 and clip 3. The new transition effect
replaces the old one, taking the duration of the old effect.
1. Select the Split transition effect icon on the Timeline, so its settings will be

displayed in the Effect Controls panel. Using that panel, set Border Width to
7 and Anti-aliasing Quality to Medium to create a thin black border at the
edge of the wipe.
The anti-aliasing method reduces potential flicker when the line animates.
 Note
You may need to scroll down in the Effect Controls panel to
access further controls.
2. Watch the sequence to see the new transition effect.
Video transitions have a default duration, which can be set in seconds or
frames (it’s frames by default). The duration of the effect will change
depending on the sequence frame rate, unless the default duration is set in
seconds. The default transition duration can be changed in the Timeline tab of
the Preferences panel.
3. Choose Edit > Preferences > Timeline (Windows) or Premiere Pro CC >
Preferences > Timeline (macOS).
Depending on your region, you may see a default Video Transition Duration of 30 Frames or 25
Frames.
4. This is a 24-frames-per-second sequence, but this doesn’t matter if you
change the Video Transition Default Duration option to 1 second. Do so now,
and click OK.

The existing transition effects stay the same, but any future transitions you
add will have the new duration.
The duration of a transition effect can dramatically change its impact. Later in
this lesson, you’ll learn about adjusting the timing of transitions.
Applying transitions to multiple clips at once
So far, you’ve been applying transitions to video clips. However, you can also
apply transitions to still images, graphics, color mattes, and even audio, as you’ll
see in the next section of this lesson.
One common project type that editors encounter is the photo montage. Often
these montages look good with transitions between photos. Applying transitions
one at a time to 100 images would take a long time. Premiere Pro makes it easy
to automate this process by allowing the default transition effect (that you
define) to be added to any group of contiguous or noncontiguous clips.
1. In the Project panel, find and open the sequence Slideshow.
This sequence has several images edited sequentially. Notice a Constant
Power audio crossfade has already been applied to the beginning and end of
the music clip to create a fade in and out.
2. Play the Timeline by pressing the spacebar.
You’ll notice that there’s a cut between each pair of clips.
3. Press the backslash (\) key to zoom out the Timeline so the whole sequence is
visible.
4. With the Selection tool, draw a marquee around all the clips to select them.
5. Choose Sequence > Apply Default Transitions To Selection.
This applies the default transition between all the currently selected clips.
Notice that the Constant Power audio crossfade at the beginning and end of
the music clip is now shorter.

The default video transition effect is a 1-second Cross Dissolve, and the
default audio transition effect is a 1-second Constant Power Crossfade. The
shortcut you just used replaced the existing crossfades with new, shorter ones.
You can change the default transition by right-clicking an effect in the Effects
panel and choosing Set Selected As Default Transition.
 Tip
You’ll find the option to apply audio-only or video-only
transition effects in the Sequence menu too.
6. Play the Timeline to see the difference the Cross Dissolve transition makes to
the montage.
 Note
If you’re working with clips that have linked video and audio,
you can select just the video or audio portions if you Alt-drag
(Windows) or Option-drag (macOS) with the Selection tool.
Then choose Sequence > Apply Default Transitions To
Selection. Note that this command works only with double-sided
transitions.
You can also copy an existing transition effect to multiple edits using the
keyboard. To do this, select the transition effect icon on the Timeline, and press
Ctrl+C (Windows) or Command+C (macOS). Then hold the Ctrl (Windows) or
Command (macOS) key while you drag with the selection tool around multiple
other edits to select them, rather than clips.
With the edits selected, you can press Ctrl+V (Windows) or Command+V
(macOS) to paste the transition effect onto all the selected edits.
This is a great way to add transition effects with matching settings to multiple
edits.
Sequence display changes
When you add a transition to a sequence, a red or yellow horizontal line
may appear above it in the Timeline panel. A yellow line indicates that
Premiere Pro expects to be able to play the effect smoothly. A red line
means that this section of the sequence may be rendered before you can
record it to tape or view a preview without dropped frames.

Rendering happens automatically when you export your sequence as a
file, but you can choose to render at any time to make these sections
preview more smoothly on slower computers.
The easiest way to render is to press Enter (Windows) or Return (macOS).
You can also add In and Out marks to select a part of your sequence and
then render. Only the selected part will render. This is useful if you have
many effects that need to render, but you’re concerned with only one
section for now.
Premiere Pro will create a video clip of that segment (tucked away in the
Preview Files folder) and will change the line from red or yellow to green.
As long as the line is green, playback should be smooth.
Using A/B mode to fine-tune a transition
Viewing transition effect settings in the Effect Controls panel gives access to an
A/B editing mode that splits a single video track into two. What would normally
be displayed as two consecutive and contiguous clips on a single track are now
displayed as individual clips on separate tracks, giving you the option to apply a
transition between them, to manipulate their head and tail frames (or handles),
and to change other transition options.
Changing parameters in the Effect Controls panel
All transitions in Premiere Pro can be customized. Some effects have few
customizable properties (such as duration or starting point). Other effects offer
more options for direction, color, border size, and so on. The major benefit of the
Effect Controls panel is that you can see the outgoing and incoming clip handles
(unused media in the original clip). This makes it easy to adjust the position of
an effect.
Let’s modify a transition.
1. Switch back to the sequence Transitions.
2. Position the Timeline playhead over the Dip to White transition you added
between clips 1 and 2, and click the transition effect icon to select it.

3. In the Effect Controls panel, select the Show Actual Sources check box to
view frames from the actual clips.
This makes it easier to assess the changes you’ll make.
4. In the Effect Controls panel, open the Alignment menu, and choose Start At
Cut.
The transition icon switches to show the new position.
5. Click the small Play The Transition button at the top-left corner of the Effect
Controls panel to preview the transition.
6. Now change the transition duration. Click the blue numbers for the effect
Duration, type 112, and click away or press the Tab key to apply the new
number for an effect that is 1½ seconds in duration (remember, Premiere Pro
will add the correct punctuation automatically).
The Alignment menu changes to Custom Start, because there isn’t a long
enough handle to play the transition at the new duration. To make the new
transition duration fit, Premiere Pro sets the start a little later.

Play the transition to see the change.
It’s important to play through transitions to be sure you’re happy with the
newly revealed media in the handles. While it’s useful that Premiere Pro
modifies the timing of effects to compensate for missing handles, it makes it
even more important to check the effect before you move on.
Let’s customize the next effect.
7. Click the Split transition effect between clip 2 and clip 3 in the Timeline.
8. In the Effect Controls panel, hover the mouse cursor over the edit line at the
center of the transition icon. The mouse cursor changes to a red Rolling Edit
tool.
 Note
You might need to resize the Effect Controls panel to make the
tiny Show/Hide Timeline View button 
 visible. Also, the
Effect Controls Timeline may already be visible. Clicking the
Show/Hide Timeline View button in the Effect Controls panel
toggles it on and off.
That’s the edit point between the two clips. The Rolling Edit tool lets you
reposition the edit point.
9. In the Effect Controls panel, drag the Rolling Edit tool left and right, and
note that the changing Out mark of the left clip and the changing In mark of
the right clip show up in the Program Monitor as soon as you release the
mouse button. This is also called trimming.
 Tip
You can position the start time of a dissolve asymmetrically by
dragging it. This means you don’t have to settle for the Centered,
Start At Cut, and End At Cut options. You can drag the position
of a transition effect directly on the Timeline too; there’s no need

to use the Effect Controls panel.
 Note
When trimming, it’s possible to shorten a transition to a duration
of one frame. This can make it hard to grab and position the
transition effect icon, so try using the Duration and Alignment
controls. If you want to remove a transition, select it in the
sequence and press Backspace (Windows) or Delete (macOS).
You’ll explore trimming in more detail in Lesson 8, “Advanced Editing
Techniques.”
 Tip
You may need to move the playhead earlier or later to see the
edit point between two clips.
0. Move the pointer slightly to the left or right of the edit line, and notice that it
changes to the Slide tool.
Using the Slide tool changes the start and end points of the transition without
changing its overall length. The new start and end marks show up in the
Program Monitor, but unlike using the Rolling Edit tool, moving the
transition rectangle by using the Slide tool does not change the edit point

between the two sequence clips. Instead, it changes the timing of the
transition effect.
1. Use the Slide tool to drag the transition rectangle left and right and compare
the results.
Using a Morph Cut effect
Morph Cut is a special transition effect that aims to be invisible. It’s designed
specifically to help with “talking head” video interviews, where a single speaker
looks in the direction of the camera. If your subject pauses a lot or there is
inappropriate content in the footage, you may want to remove a section of the
interview.
This would normally produce a jump cut, but with the right media and a little
experimentation, the Morph Cut effect might yield an invisible transition that
seamlessly hides what you have removed. Let’s try it.
1. Open the sequence Morph Cut. Play the beginning of the sequence.
This sequence has one shot in it, with a jump cut near the start. It’s a small
jump cut but enough to jar the audience.
2. In the Effects panel, look in the Video Transitions > Dissolve group for the
Morph Cut effect. Drag this effect to the join between the two parts of the
clip.
The Morph Cut transition effect begins by analyzing the two clips in the
background. You can continue to work on your sequence while this analysis
takes place.

Depending on your media, you may achieve improved results with the Morph
Cut transition effect by experimenting with different durations.
3. Double-click the Morph Cut transition effect to display the Set Transition
Duration dialog. Change the duration to 13 frames.
4. When the analysis is complete, press Enter (Windows) or Return (macOS) to
render the effect (if your system requires it) and play a preview.
The result is not perfect, but it’s close, and it’s unlikely an audience will
notice the join.
Dealing with inadequate (or nonexistent) head or tail handles
If you try to extend a transition for a clip that doesn’t have enough frames as a
handle, the transition appears but has diagonal warning bars through it. This
means Premiere Pro is using a freeze frame to extend the duration of the clip.
You can adjust the duration and position of the transition to resolve the issue.
1. Open the sequence Handles.
2. Locate the edit between the clips.

The two clips on the Timeline have no heads or tails. You can tell this
immediately because of the little triangles in the corners of the clips; a
triangle indicates the last frame of an original clip.
3. Select the Ripple Edit tool in the Tools panel 
, and use it to drag the right
edge of the first clip to the left. Drag to shorten the duration of the first clip to
about 1:10 and then release.
A tool tip appears while you trim to show the new clip duration.
The clip after the edit point ripples to close the gap. Notice that the little
triangle at the end of the clip you have trimmed is no longer present.
4. Drag the Cross Dissolve transition effect from the Effects panel onto the edit
point between the two clips.
You can drag the transition to the right side of the edit but not the left. That’s
because there’s no handle available to create a dissolve overlapping the end
of the first clip without using freeze frames.
5. Press V to select the standard Selection tool, and click the dissolve transition
effect icon once to select it. You may need to zoom in to make it easier to

select a transition.
6. In the Effect Controls panel, set the duration of the effect to 1:12.
There aren’t enough frames of video to create this effect, and diagonal lines
on the transition, both in the Effect Controls panel and on the Timeline,
indicate still frames that have been automatically added fill the duration you
set. The result is a freeze frame wherever you see the diagonal lines.
7. Play the transition to see the result.
8. Change the alignment of the transition to Center At Cut.
9. Drag the Timeline playhead slowly through the transition and watch the
result.
For the first half of the transition (up to the edit point), the B clip is a
freeze frame, while the A clip continues to play.
At the edit point, the A clip and the B clip start to play.
After the edit, a short freeze frame is used.
There are several ways to fix this issue.
You can change the duration or alignment of the effect.
You can use the Rolling Edit tool 
, accessible by clicking and holding
on the Ripple Edit tool in the Tools panel, to reposition the transition.

Rolling Edit tool
 Note
The Rolling Edit tool lets you move the transition left or
right but does not change the overall length of the
sequence.
You can use the Ripple Edit 
 tool to shorten a clip. Ripple Edit tool
Ripple Edit tool
You’ll learn more about the Rolling Edit and Ripple Edit tools in Lesson 8,
“Advanced Editing Techniques.”
Adding audio transitions
Audio transitions can dramatically improve a sequence’s soundtrack by
removing unwanted audio pops or abrupt edits. The use of a crossfade transition
at the end of (or between) audio clips is a fast way to add a fade-in, a fade-out, or
a fade between your audio clips.

Creating a crossfade
There are three styles of crossfade.
Constant Gain:
The Constant Gain crossfade (as its name implies) transitions audio by
using a constant audio gain (volume) between the clips. Some find this
transition type useful. It can, however, create a sudden transition in the
audio as the sound of the outgoing clip fades out and the incoming clip then
fades in at an equal gain. It’s most useful in situations where you do not
want much blending between two clips but rather more of a dip out and in
between the clips.
Constant Power:
The default audio transition in Premiere Pro creates a smooth, gradual
transition between two audio clips. The Constant Power crossfade works in
a similar way to a video dissolve. The outgoing clip fades out slowly at first
and then faster toward the end of the clip. For the incoming clip, the
opposite occurs— the audio level increases quickly at the start of the
incoming clip and more slowly toward the end of the transition. This
crossfade is useful in situations where you want to blend the audio between
two clips, without a noticeable drop in level in the middle.
Exponential Fade:
This effect is similar to the Constant Power crossfade. The Exponential
Fade transition creates a fairly smooth fade between clips. It uses a
logarithmic curve to fade out and fade up audio. Some editors prefer the
Exponential Fade transition when performing a single-sided transition (such

as fading in a clip from silence at the start or end of a program).
Applying audio transitions
There are several ways to apply an audio crossfade to a sequence. You can, of
course, drag and drop an audio transition effect just as you would a video
transition effect, but there are also useful shortcuts to speed up the process.
Audio transitions have a default duration, measured in seconds or frames. You
can change the default duration by choosing Edit > Preferences > Timeline
(Windows) or Premiere Pro CC > Preferences > Timeline (macOS).
Let’s take a look at the three methods for applying audio transitions.
1. Open the sequence Audio.
The sequence has several clips with audio.
2. Open the Audio Transitions > Crossfade group in the Effects panel.
3. Drag the Exponential Fade transition to the start of the first audio clip.
4. Navigate to the end of the sequence.
5. Right-click the final edit point in the Timeline and choose Apply Default
Transitions.
New video and audio transitions are added. To add only an audio transition,
hold down Alt (Windows) or Option (macOS) when right-clicking to select
only the audio clip.
The Constant Power transition is added to the end audio clip as a transition to
create a smooth blend as the audio ends.
6. You can change the length of any transition by dragging its edge in the

Timeline. Drag to extend the audio transition you just created and listen to
the result.
7. To polish the project, add a Video Dissolve transition to the beginning of the
sequence. Move the playhead near the beginning, select the first clip, and
press Ctrl+D (Windows) or Command+D (macOS) to add the default video
transition.
You now have a fade from black at the beginning and a fade to black at the
end. Now let’s add a series of short audio dissolves to smooth out the
background sound.
8. The Alt (Windows) or Option (macOS) key lets you temporarily unlink the
audio clips from the video clips to isolate the transitions.
With the Selection tool, hold down Alt (Windows) or Option (macOS) and
lasso all the audio clips on track Audio 1, being careful not to select any
video clips—drag from below the audio clips to avoid accidentally selecting
items on the video track.
 Note
The selection of clips does not have to be contiguous. You can
Shift-click clips to select individual clips in a sequence.
9. Choose Sequence > Apply Default Transitions To Selection.
 Tip
You could choose Apply Audio Transition in the Sequence menu
to add transitions exclusively to audio clips, but if you have
already chosen audio-only clips, there’s no need as the default

transition option will have the same effect.
0. Play the sequence to see and hear the changes you made.
 Tip
Shift+Ctrl+D (Windows) or Shift+Command+D (macOS) is the
keyboard shortcut for adding the default audio transition to an
edit point near the playhead, between selected clips, or at
selected cut points. Track selection (or clip selection) is used to
work out where the effect should be applied.
It’s common for audio editors to add one- or two-frame audio transitions to
every cut in a sequence to avoid jarring pops when an audio clip begins or ends.
If you set your default duration for audio transitions to two frames, you can use
the Apply Default Transitions To Selection option in the Sequence menu to
quickly smooth your audio mix.
Review questions
1. How can you apply the default transition to multiple clips?
2. In the Effects panel, how can you locate a transition effect by name?
3. How do you replace a transition with another one?
4. Explain three ways to change the duration of a transition.
5. What is an easy way to fade audio at the beginning or end of a clip?
Review answers
1. Select clips already on the Timeline, and choose Sequence > Apply Default
Transitions To Selection.
2. Start typing the transition name in the Contains Text box in the Effects panel.
As you type, Premiere Pro displays all effects and transitions (audio and
video) which have that letter combination anywhere in their names. Type
more letters to narrow your search.
3. Drag the replacement transition on top of the transition you’re rejecting. The
new one automatically replaces the old one while adopting its timing.
4. Drag the edge of the transition icon in the Timeline, do the same thing in the
Effect Controls panel’s A/B timeline display, or change the Duration value in

the Effect Controls panel. You can also double-click the transition icon in the
Timeline panel.
5. Apply an audio-crossfade transition to the beginning or end of the clip.

8. Advanced Editing Techniques
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Performing a four-point edit
Changing the speed or duration of clips in your Timeline
Replacing a clip in a sequence
Replacing footage in a project
Creating a nested sequence
Performing basic trimming on media to refine edits
Applying slip and slide edits to refine your edit
Dynamically trimming clips
This lesson will take about 120 minutes to complete. Please log in to your
account on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to
the “Getting Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the
instructions under “Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.”

In Adobe Premiere Pro CC, the main editing commands are easy to master. More advanced techniques
take a little time to learn, but they’re worth it! They’ll accelerate your editing and provide the
understanding you’ll need to produce the highest-level professional results.
Starting the lesson
In this lesson, you’ll use several short sequences to explore advanced editing
concepts in Adobe Premiere Pro CC. The goal is to get hands-on with the
techniques you’ll need for advanced editing.
1. Open the project Lesson 08.prproj in the Lesson 08 folder.
2. Save the project as Lesson 08 Working.prproj in the Lesson 08 folder.
3. Choose Editing in the Workspaces panel, or choose Window > Workspaces >
Editing.
4. Reset the workspace to the saved version by clicking the Editing menu in the
Workspaces panel or by choosing Window > Workspaces > Reset To Saved

Layout.
Performing four-point editing
In and Out marks are also referred to as points. In previous lessons, you used the
standard technique of three-point editing. You used three In and Out marks (split
between the Source Monitor as well as the Program Monitor or Timeline) to set
the source, duration, and location of an edit.
 Tip
Professional editors often use different language to describe the
same thing—the use of marks and points is a good example. This
book uses the most common names used by editors so you’ll
recognize tools, techniques, and other items more easily.
But what happens if you have four marks defined?
The short answer is that you have to make a choice. It’s likely that the duration
you’ve marked in the Source Monitor differs from the duration you’ve marked in
the Program Monitor or on the Timeline.
In this case, when you attempt to perform the edit using a keyboard shortcut or
on-screen button, a dialog box warns you the durations don’t match and asks you
to make a decision about what to change. Most often, you’ll discard one of the
marks.
Setting editing options for four-point edits
If you perform a four-point edit, Premiere Pro opens the Fit Clip dialog to alert
you to the problem. You’ll need to choose from five options to resolve the
conflict. You can ignore one of the four points or change the speed of the clip.
 Tip
You can choose to set a default behavior when a four-point edit
occurs by making a selection and selecting Always Use This
Choice. If you change your mind, open the Premiere Pro Timeline
Preferences, and select Fit Clip dialog opens for edit range
mismatches. The Fit Clip dialog box opens for edit range
mismatches.

Change Clip Speed (Fit to Fill): The first choice assumes that you set four
points with different durations deliberately. Premiere Pro preserves the
source clip’s In and Out marks but adjusts its playback speed to match the
duration you set on the Timeline or in the Program Monitor. This is an
excellent choice if you want to precisely adjust clip playback speed to fill a
gap.
Ignore Source In Point: If you choose this option, Premiere Pro ignores
the source clip’s In point, converting your edit back to a three-point edit.
When you have an Out point and no In point in the Source Monitor, the In
point is worked out automatically based on the duration set in the Timeline
or Program Monitor (or the end of the clip). This option is available only if
the source clip is longer than the duration set in the sequence.
Ignore Source Out Point: When you select this option, the source clip’s
Out point is ignored, converting your edit back to a three-point edit. When
you have an In point and no Out point in the Source Monitor, the In point is
worked out based on the duration set in the Timeline or Program Monitor
(or the end of the clip). This option is available only if the source clip is
longer than the targeted duration.
Ignore Sequence In Point: When you select this option, the In point
you’ve set in the sequence is ignored, making this a three-point edit using
only the sequence Out point. The duration is taken from the Source
Monitor.
Ignore Sequence Out Point: This option is similar to the previous one. It
tells Premiere Pro to ignore the Out point in the sequence you set and
perform a three-point edit. Again, the duration is taken from the Source
Monitor.

Making a four-point edit
Let’s perform a four-point edit. You’ll change the playback speed of a clip to fit
a duration set in the sequence.
1. Open the sequence 01 Four Point.
2. Scroll through the sequence and locate the section with In and Out points
already set. You should see a highlighted range in the Timeline.
3. Locate the bin called Clips to Load, and open the clip called Laura_04 in the
Source Monitor.
Clip In and Out points should already be set on this clip.
4. In the Timeline, check that the source track indicator buttons are patched
correctly, with Source V1 positioned next to Timeline Video 1.
5. In the Source Monitor, click the Overwrite button to make the edit.
6. In the Fit Clip dialog box, choose the Change Clip Speed (Fit to Fill) option,
and click OK.
7. The edit is applied. Zoom in to the Timeline panel using the Navigator
controls at the bottom of the panel until you can see the name and speed
information on the Laura_04 clip you just edited into the sequence.

The percentage shows the new playback speed. The speed has been adjusted
perfectly to fit the new duration.
8. Watch the sequence now to see the effects of your edit and the speed change.
 Note
Changing the playback speed of a clip counts as a visual effect.
Notice the small “fx” badge on the clip changes color to indicate
an effect has been applied.
Changing playback speed
Slow motion is one of the most commonly used effects in video post-production.
You might change the speed of a clip for technical reasons or for artistic impact.
It can be an effective way to add drama or to give the audience more time to
experience a moment.
 Note
When changing the speed of a clip, you will usually achieve
smoother playback if the new speed is an even multiple, or fraction
of the original clip playback speed. For example, changing a 24fps
clip to play back at 25% speed will result in 6fps, and this will
usually look smoother than if the clip is set to a non-equally divided
playback speed, like 27.45%. Sometimes, you’ll get the best results
by manually changing clip playback speed and then trimming to get
the desired duration.
The Fit to Fill edit you just learned about is one way to change clip playback
speed. However, usually the best way to achieve high-quality slow motion is to
record at a higher frame rate than your sequence playback frame rate. If you play
the video at a slower frame rate than it was recorded at, you’ll see slow motion.
For example, imagine a 10-second video clip was recorded at 48 frames per

second but your sequence is set to 24 frames per second. You can set your
footage to play at 24 frames per second, matching the sequence. Playback will
be smooth, with no frame-rate conversion when the clip is added to the
sequence. However, the clip will be playing at half its original frame rate,
resulting in 50% slow motion. It will take twice as long to play back, so the clip
will now have a 20-second duration.
Overcranking
This technique is often called overcranking because early film cameras
were driven by turning a crank handle.
The faster the handle was turned, the more frames per second were
captured. Slower turning would capture fewer frames per second. This
way, when the film was played back at a regular speed, filmmakers would
achieve fast motion or slow motion.
Modern cameras often allow recording at faster frame rates to provide
excellent quality slow motion in post-production. The camera assigns a
frame rate to the clip metadata that might differ from the recorded rate
(the system frame rate is used).
This means clips may play in slow motion automatically when you import
them into Premiere Pro. Use the Interpret Footage dialog box to tell
Premiere Pro how to play clips.
Let’s try this.
1. Open the sequence 02 Laura In The Snow. Play the clip in the sequence.
The clip plays in slow motion for the following reasons:
The clip was recorded at 96 frames per second.
The clip is set to play back at 24 frames per second (this was set by the
camera).
The sequence is configured for 24 frames per second playback.
2. In the Timeline panel, right-click the clip and choose Reveal In Project.
This highlights the clip in the Project panel.
3. Right-click the clip in the Project panel and choose Modify > Interpret
Footage.

Use the Interpret Footage dialog box to tell Premiere Pro how to play back clips.
4. Select the Assume This Frame Rate option, and enter 96 in the box. This tells
Premiere Pro to play the clip at 96 frames per second. Click OK.
Look back at the Timeline panel. The clip has changed appearance.
Diagonal lines indicate absent media.
You have given the clip a faster frame rate, so the original clip duration is no
longer used. Because the clip plays faster, its duration is shorter, and diagonal
lines indicate the portion of the clip that has no media.
Premiere Pro does not change the duration of the Timeline clip segment
because doing so might change the timing of your edit. Instead, the part of the
sequence clip that has no media is empty.
5. Play the sequence again.
The clip plays at regular speed because it was originally recorded at 96
frames per second. It’s much less smooth—not because there’s anything
wrong with the clip but because the original camera work was bumpy.
 Note
If you’re using a system with slow storage, you may need to
lower the playback resolution in the Program Monitor to play the
clip at a fast frame rate without dropping frames.
6. Drag the Laura_01.mp4 clip onto the Timeline next to the first instance.

The new clip instance is shorter and matches the total playback time at the new
frame rate. If you slow down the playback speed of the clip now, it will restore
the original frames, giving better-quality slow motion.
Changing clip speed/duration of a clip
Although it’s more common to slow clips down, speeding up clips is a useful
effect as well. The Speed/Duration command in the Timeline panel can change
the playback speed for a clip in two different ways. You can set the duration of a
clip to match a certain time, or you can set the playback speed as a percentage.
For example, if you set a clip to play at 50% speed, it will play back at half-
speed; 25% would be one-quarter speed. Premiere Pro allows you to set
playback speeds up to two decimal places, so you could have 27.13% if you
wanted.
Let’s explore this technique.
1. Open the sequence 03 Speed and Duration. Play the sequence to get a sense
of the normal playback speed.
2. Right-click the Eagle_Walk clip and choose Speed/Duration. You can also
select the clip in the Timeline and choose Clip > Speed/Duration.
The Clip Speed/Duration dialog box gives you several options for controlling
the clip playback speed.
If you click the chain icon 
, you can toggle on and off keeping the clip

duration and speed ganged together. If this is on, changing one updates the
other.
Click the chain icon now so that it shows a broken link; the duration and
speed are unganged. Now, if you enter a new speed, the duration won’t
update.
Once the settings are unganged, you can also change the duration
without changing the speed. If there’s another clip immediately after this
one on the Timeline, shortening a clip will leave a gap. By default, if
you make the clip longer than the space available, the speed change will
have no effect. That’s because the clip can’t move the next clip to make
room for the new duration when you change these settings. If you select
the Ripple Edit, Shifting Trailing Clips option, you’ll enable the clip to
make space for itself.
 Note
There’s one exception to the way the chain icon works in
the Clip Speed/Duration dialog box: If a new, higher speed
reduces the duration so much that all the original clip media
is used and the result has a shorter duration than the Time-
line clip segment, then the Timeline clip will still shorten to
fit. This way, you won’t have blank video frames in your
sequence.
To play a clip backward, select the Reverse Speed option. You’ll see a
negative symbol next to the new speed displayed in the sequence.
If you’re changing the speed of a clip that has audio, consider selecting
the Maintain Audio Pitch check box. This will keep the clip’s original
pitch at the new speed. With this option disabled, the pitch will naturally
go up or down. This option is more effective for small speed changes;
dramatic resampling can produce unnatural results—consider adjusting
the audio in Adobe Audition if you need to make a more significant
speed change.
3. Make sure Speed and Duration are linked with the chain icon 
 on, then
change the speed to 50%, and finally click OK.

Play the clip in the Timeline. You may need to render the clip by pressing
Enter (Windows) or Return (macOS) to see smooth playback. Notice that the
clip is now 10 seconds long. That’s because you slowed it to 50%: Half the
playback speed means twice the original length.
4. Choose Edit > Undo or press Ctrl+Z (Windows) or Command+Z (macOS).
5. Select the clip on the Timeline and press Ctrl+R (Windows) or Command+R
(macOS) to open the Clip Speed/Duration dialog box.
6. Click the chain icon 
 to make sure the Speed and Duration settings are
unlinked 
. Then change Speed to 50%.
The clip plays back slower, with linked duration, so it’s longer on the Timeline.
7. Click OK; then play the clip.
The clip plays back slower, with unlinked duration, so it’s the same length on the Timeline.
The clip is now playing at 50% speed, so it should play for twice as long. But
because you’ve turned off the link between playback speed and duration, the
second half has been trimmed to maintain the 5-second duration in the

sequence.
 Tip
You can change the speed of multiple clips at the same time. To
do so, select multiple clips and choose Clip > Speed/Duration.
When you change the speed of multiple clips, be sure to pay
attention to the Ripple Edit, Shifting Trailing Clips option. This
will automatically close or expand gaps for all the selected clips
after the speed change.
Now try reversing playback.
8. Open the Clip Speed/Duration dialog box again.
9. Leave Speed at 50%, but this time select Reverse Speed; then click OK.
0. Play the clip. Now it plays in reverse at 50% slow motion.
Changing clip speed/duration with the Rate Stretch tool
Sometimes you’ll have a clip that has perfect content to fill a gap in your
sequence, but it is just a little too short or a little too long. This is where the Rate
Stretch tool helps.
1. Open the sequence 04 Rate Stretch.
This sequence is synchronized to music, and the clips contain the desired
content, but the first clip is too short. You can make a guess and try to make
an exact Speed/Duration adjustment, but it’s easier and faster to use the Rate
Stretch tool to drag the end of the clip to fill the gap.
2. Select the Rate Stretch tool 
 in the Tools panel by clicking and holding on
the Ripple Edit Tool icon 
.
3. Using this tool, drag the right edge of the first video clip until it meets the
second video clip.
The speed of the clip changes to fill the gap. The contents haven’t changed;
the clip is playing more slowly.

4. Using the same tool, drag the right edge of the second clip until it meets the
third clip.
5. Drag the right edge of the third clip until it matches the end of the audio.
Notice that you must drag somewhere other than the transition effect icon to
be able to change the duration this way.
 Tip
If you change your mind about a change made with the Rate
Stretch tool, you can always use it to stretch a clip back.
Alternatively, you can use the Speed/Duration command and
enter a Speed value of 100% to restore the clip to its default
speed.
6. Play the Timeline to view the result.
7. Press the V key or click the Selection tool to select it.
8. Right-click the third clip and choose Time Interpolation > Optical Flow. This
smooths playback when changing clip speed. This is a more advanced system
for rendering motion changes and takes longer to render and preview.
 Note
Using Optical Flow to render a new playback speed can produce
visual artifacts, particularly footage that has motion blur as a
result of a slow camera shutter speed.

9. Render and play the sequence to see the result.
Recognizing the downstream effects of changing time
If you change the speed of a clip at the beginning of the Timeline after
assembling many clips in your sequence, it’s important to understand the
way this will affect the rest of the sequence “downstream.” You might
cause the following:
Unwanted gaps caused by clips growing shorter because they are
playing faster than they did originally.
Unwanted duration changes to the overall sequence because of the
Ripple Edit option.
Potential audio problems created by changes in speed—including
changing pitch.
When you’re making speed or duration changes, be careful to view the
overall impact on the sequence. You may want to change the zoom level
of the Timeline to view the entire sequence or segment at once.
Replacing clips and footage
During the editing process, it’s common to swap one clip in a sequence for
another as you try different versions of an edit.
This might mean making a global replacement, such as replacing one version of
an animated logo with a newer file. You might also want to swap out one clip in
your sequence for another that you have in a bin. Depending on the task at hand,
you’ll use different methods.
Dragging in a replacement clip
You can drag a new shot onto the existing sequence clip you’d like to replace.
Let’s try it.
1. Open the 05 Replace Clip sequence.
2. Play back the Timeline.

Clips 2 and 3 in the sequence are actually the same SHOT4 clip repeated. The
clip has motion keyframes applied to make it spin onto the screen and spin off
again. You’ll learn how to create these kinds of animation effects in the next
lesson.
Let’s replace the first instance of the clip (SHOT4) in the V2 track with a new
clip called Boat Replacement. You don’t want to have to re-create the effects
and animation, as these are already set perfectly. This is an ideal scenario for
replacing a sequence clip.
3. From the Clips to Load bin, drag the Boat Replacement clip straight from the
Project panel over the first instance of the SHOT4 clip on the Timeline, but
don’t release the mouse button yet.
For this technique, it’s not necessary to position the cursor precisely; just make sure the pointer is
over the clip you want to replace.
The clip is longer than the existing clip that you intend to replace.
4. Hold the Alt (Windows) or Option (macOS) key.
Notice the mouse cursor changes to indicate you’re about to perform a replace edit.
While you’re holding this modifier key, the replacement clip snaps to fit the
exact length of the clip it’s replacing. Release the mouse button to replace the
clip.
5. Play the Timeline. All the picture-in-picture clips have the same effect
applied to different footage. The new clip inherits the settings and effects
from the clip it replaced. This is a quick and easy way to try different shots in

a sequence.
Performing a synchronized replace edit
When you drag and drop to replace a sequence clip, Premiere Pro synchronizes
the first frame (or In point) of the replacement clip with the first visible frame of
the existing clip in the sequence. This is often fine, but what if you need to
synchronize a particular moment in the action, such as hands clapping or a door
closing?
If you’d like to have more control over a replace edit, you can use the Replace
Edit command. This allows you to synchronize a particular frame of the
replacement clip with a particular frame of the clip it’s replacing.
1. Open the sequence 06 Replace Edit.
This is the same sequence you previously fixed, but this time you’ll position
the replacement clip precisely.
2. Position the playhead in the sequence at approximately 00:00:06:00. The
playhead will be the sync point for the edit you are about to perform.
3. Click the first instance of the SHOT4 clip in the sequence to select it.
4. From the Clips to Load bin, open the clip Boat Replacement in the Source
Monitor.
5. In the Source Monitor, position the playhead to choose a good piece of action
for the replacement. There’s a marker on the clip for guidance.

6. Make sure the Timeline is active, with the first instance of SHOT4.mov
selected, and choose Clip > Replace With Clip > From Source Monitor,
Match Frame.
The clip is replaced.
7. Play the newly edited sequence to check the edit.
The playhead position in the Source Monitor and Program Monitor was
synchronized. The sequence clip duration, effects, and settings are all applied
to the replacement clip. This technique can be a huge time-saver!
Using the Replace Footage feature
While a replace edit replaces a clip in a sequence, the Replace Footage feature
replaces footage in the Project panel so that the clip links to a different media
file. This can be of great benefit when you need to replace a clip that occurs
several times in a sequence or in multiple sequences. You might use this to
update an animated logo or a piece of music.
When you replace footage in the Project panel, all instances of the clip you

replace are changed anywhere the clip was used.
1. Load the sequence 07 Replace Footage.
2. Play the sequence.
Let’s replace the graphic on the fourth video track with something more
interesting.
3. In the Clips to Load bin, click to select the clip DRAGON_LOGO.psd in the
Project panel.
4. Choose Clip > Replace Footage, or right-click the clip and choose Replace
Footage.
5. Navigate 
to 
the 
Lessons/Assets/Graphics 
folder, 
and 
choose 
the
DRAGON_LOGO_FIX.psd file. Double-click to select it.
The Replace Footage command updates the clip name to match the new media file.
6. Play the Timeline. The graphic has been updated throughout the sequence
and project. Even the clip name in the Project panel has updated to match the
new file.

 Note
The Replace Footage command cannot be undone. To switch
back to the original clip, choose Clip > Replace Footage again to
navigate to and relink the original file.
Nesting sequences
A nested sequence is a sequence contained within another sequence. You can
break up a long project into more manageable parts by creating separate
sequences for each section. Then, you can drag each sequence—with all its clips,
graphics, layers, multiple audio/video tracks, and effects—into another, “master”
sequence. Nested sequences look and behave like single audio/video clips, but
you can edit their contents and see the changes update inside the master
sequence.
Nested sequences have many potential uses.
They simplify editing by allowing you to create complex sequences in
separate parts. This can help you avoid running into conflicts or
accidentally moving clips and ruining your edit.
They allow you to apply an effect to a group of clips in a single step.
They let you use sequences as a source in multiple other sequences. You
can create one intro sequence for a multipart series and add it to each

episode. If you need to change the intro sequence, you can do so once and
see the results update everywhere it’s nested.
They allow you to organize your work in the same way you might create
sub-folders in the Project panel.
They allow you to apply transitions to a group of clips as a single item.
When editing one sequence into another, an important button in the upper-left
corner of the Timeline panel lets you choose between adding the contents of the
sequence 
or nesting it 
.
Adding a nested sequence
One reason to use a nest is to reuse an existing edited sequence. Let’s add an
edited opening title into a sequence now.
 Tip
A quick way to create a nested sequence is to drag a sequence from
the Project panel into the appropriate track or tracks of the currently
active sequence. You can also drag a sequence into the Source
Monitor, apply In and Out points, and perform insert and overwrite
edits to add it to another sequence.
1. Open the sequence 08 Bike Race, and make sure the option is set to nest
sequences 
.
2. Set an In point at the start of the sequence.
3. Make sure that source track V1 is patched to the Video 1 track in the
Timeline. You may need to select a clip in the Project panel to see the source
track enable buttons. In this example, select the sequence 09 Race Open.
4. Drag the sequence 09 Race Open into the Program Monitor (rather than the
Timeline), dropping the clip onto the Insert option.

This performs an insert edit.
5. Play the 08 Bike Race sequence to see the result.
The 09 Race Open sequence is added as a single clip, even though it contains
multiple video tracks and audio clips.
6. Undo that last edit by pressing Control+Z (Windows) or Command+Z
(macOS).
7. Turn off sequence nesting.
 Tip
If you need to make a change to a nested sequence, double-click
it, and it will open in a new Timeline panel.
8. Drag the sequence 09 Race Open into the Program Monitor again.
The clips in the Race Open sequence are added to the current sequence.
Performing regular trimming
You can adjust the part of a clip used in a sequence in several ways. This process
is generally called trimming. When you trim, you can make the selected part of
the original clip shorter or longer. Some trimming types affect a single clip, and
others adjust the relationship between two adjacent clips.

Trimming in the Source Monitor
A clip edited into a sequence is a separate instance from the original clip in the
Project panel. You can view a sequence clip in the Source Monitor by double-
clicking it. Once it’s open in the Source Monitor, you can adjust its In and Out
marks, and the clip will update in the sequence.
By default, when you open a sequence clip in the Source Monitor, the Source
Monitor navigator will be set to zoom in to the existing selection.
You may need to adjust the navigator zoom to easily explore all of the available
content in the clip.
There are two basic ways of changing existing In and Out points in the Source
Monitor.
Add new In and Out marks: In the Source Monitor, set new In or Out
marks. If the clip has another clip adjacent to it in the Timeline, you can
only make the current clip shorter, leaving a gap on the side where you
made the trim.
Drag In and Out points: Position your mouse cursor over an In or Out
mark in the mini Timeline at the bottom of the Source Monitor. The cursor
changes into a red-and-black icon, indicating that a trim can be performed.
Now you can drag left or right to change the In or Out mark.
Once again, if the clip has another clip adjacent to it on the Timeline, you
can only make it shorter, and a gap will appear after making a trim.
Trimming in a sequence
Another, faster way to trim clips is directly on the Timeline. Making a single clip
shorter or longer is called a regular trim, and it’s fairly easy.
1. Open the sequence 10 Regular Trim.
2. Play the sequence.
The last shot is cut off, and it needs to be extended to match the end of the
music.
3. Make sure you have the Selection tool selected 
.

 Tip
The keyboard shortcut for the Selection tool is V.
4. Position the mouse cursor over the Out point of the last clip in the sequence.
The pointer changes into the red Trim In cursor (head side) or Trim Out
cursor (tail side) with directional arrows. Precisely hovering the mouse cursor
over the edge of a clip changes it between trimming the Out point (open to
the left) and trimming the In point (open to the right) of a clip.
 Note
A regular trim is also referred to as a single-sided or overwrite
trim.
This clip has a transition effect applied to the end. You may need to zoom in
to make it easier to trim the clip and not retime the transition effect.
 Note
If you make a clip shorter, it will leave a gap between it and any
adjacent clips. Later in this lesson you’ll learn to use the Ripple
Edit tool to automatically remove any gaps or push clips later in
a sequence to avoid overwriting them.
5. Drag an edge to the right until it meets the end of the audio file.

A tool tip shows you how much you’ve trimmed.
6. Release the mouse button to apply the trim.
Performing advanced trimming
The trimming methods you’ve learned so far have their limitations. They can
leave unwanted gaps in the Timeline caused by shortening a clip. They can also
prevent you from lengthening a shot if there’s an adjacent clip.
Fortunately, Premiere Pro offers several more ways of trimming.
Making ripple edits
You can avoid introducing gaps when trimming by using the Ripple Edit tool 
rather than the Selection tool.
You use the Ripple Edit tool to trim a clip in the same way you use the Selection
tool. When you use the Ripple Edit tool to change the duration of a clip, the
adjustment ripples through the sequence. That is, clips after the clip you adjust
slide to the left to fill the gap, or they slide to the right to make room for the
longer clip.
 Note
When performing a ripple edit, you might shift items on other tracks
out of sync. Use the sync locks when ripple trimming to avoid this.
Let’s try it.
1. Open the sequence 11 Ripple Edit.
2. Select the Ripple Edit tool.

 Tip
The keyboard shortcut for the Ripple Edit tool is B.
3. Hover the Ripple Edit tool cursor over the inside-right edge of the seventh
clip (SHOT7) until it turns into a yellow, left-facing bracket and arrow.
The shot is too short, so let’s add some more footage from the clip handle.
4. Drag to the right until the timecode in the tool tip reads +00:00:01:10.
Notice that while you’re using the Ripple Edit tool, the Program Monitor
displays the last frame of the clip on the left side of the edit, and the first
frame of the clip on the right side. The image updates dynamically while you
trim.
5. Release the mouse button to complete the edit.

The clip you have trimmed expands, and the clip to its right slides along with
it. Play that portion of the sequence to see whether the edit works smoothly.
6. Trim again—this time add 2 seconds to the SHOT7 clip.
This time, the trim has exposed a slight on-camera shake that you’ll work on
next.
 Tip
You can temporarily use the Selection tool as a Ripple Edit tool by
holding Ctrl (Windows) or Command (macOS). Be sure to click to
one side of the edit to avoid performing a rolling edit (described
next).
Making ripple edits with keyboard shortcuts
Though the Ripple Edit tool gives fine control when trimming, there are
two useful keyboard shortcuts that apply the same type of trim
adjustment, based on the location of the Timeline panel playhead.
For these shortcuts to work, the correct Timeline Track Indicators must be
enabled. Whichever tracks are enabled will be trimmed.
Position the Timeline playhead over a clip (or multiple layers of clips),
and press one of the follow shortcuts:
Q: Ripple trims clips from their current start to the Playhead position.
W: Ripple trims clips from their current end to the Playhead position.
This can be a very fast way to trim clips, particularly in the early stages of
editing, when you may simply want to “top and tail” (remove unwanted
content at the start or end) your clips.
Making rolling edits
When you use the Ripple Edit tool, it makes changes to the overall length of the
sequence. This is because one clip gets longer or shorter while the rest of the
sequence moves to close the gap (or moves out of the way).
 Note
A rolling edit trim is sometimes referred to as a double-roller or
dual-roller trim.

There’s another way to change the timing of an edit: a rolling edit.
With a rolling edit, the overall length of the sequence does not change. Instead, a
rolling edit shortens one clip and lengthens another at the same time, adjusting
them by the same number of frames.
 Tip
Zoom in to the Timeline to make more accurate adjustments.
For example, if you use the Rolling Edit tool to extend a clip by 2 seconds, you
will also shorten the adjacent clip by 2 seconds.
1. Continue working with the sequence 11 Ripple Edit.
Several clips are already on the Timeline, with enough leftover handle frames
to allow the edits you’re about to perform.
 Note
When trimming, it’s possible to trim a clip to a 0 (zero) duration
(removing it from the Timeline).
2. Select the Rolling Edit tool 
 in the Tools panel by clicking and holding on
the Ripple Edit tool 
.
 Tip
The keyboard shortcut for the Rolling Edit tool is N.
3. Drag the edit point between SHOT7 and SHOT8 (the last two clips on the
Timeline). Use the Program Monitor split screen to find a better-matching
edit between the two shots.
Drag the edit left to remove the camera shake.
Try rolling the edit to the left 1 second and 20 frames (–01:20). You can use

the Program Monitor timecode or the pop-up timecode in the Timeline to find
the edit, and if you pre-position the Timeline playhead, the edit will snap to it
as you drag.
 Note
You can use the Selection tool with the Ctrl (Windows) or
Command (macOS) key as a shortcut for the Ripple Edit tool or
Rolling Edit tool.
Making slip edits
A slip trim changes both the In point and Out point of a sequence clip at the
same time, by the same amount, rolling the visible contents into position.
Because a slip trim changes the beginning and end by equal amounts, it doesn’t
change the duration of your sequence. In this way, it’s the same as a rolling trim.
Slip trims change only the clip you select; adjacent clips before or after the clip
you adjust are not affected. Using the Slip tool to adjust a clip is a little like
moving a conveyor belt: The visible part of the original clip changes inside the
Timeline clip segment without changing the length of the clip or the sequence.
1. Continue working with the sequence 11 Ripple Edit.
2. Select the Slip tool (Y) 
.
3. Drag SHOT5 left and right.
4. Take a look at the Program Monitor while you perform the slip edit.

The Slip tool changes the contents of a clip in position.
The two top images are the Out point and In point of SHOT4 and SHOT6,
before and after the clip you are adjusting; they don’t change. The two larger
images are the In point and Out point of SHOT5; these edit points do change.
The Slip Trim tool is well worth taking time to get to grips with. It can be the
fastest tool for adjusting timing when cutting action.
Making slide edits
The Slide tool works by leaving the duration of the clip you’re sliding
unchanged. Instead, the Out point of the clip to the left and the In point of the
clip to the right are changed by equal amounts, in opposite directions. It’s
another form of dual-roller trim.
Because you’re changing the other clip durations by an equal number of frames,
the length of the sequence doesn’t change.
1. Continue working with the sequence 11 Ripple Edit.
2. Select the Slide tool (the keyboard shortcut is U) 
.
3. Position the Slide tool over the middle of the second clip in the sequence,
SHOT2.
4. Drag the clip left or right.
5. Take a look at the Program Monitor as you perform the slide edit.

The Slide tool moves a clip over two adjacent clips.
The two top images are the In point and Out point of SHOT2—the clip you are
dragging. They do not change because you are not changing the selected part of
SHOT2.
The two larger images are the Out point and In point of the previous and next
clips. These edit points change as you slide the selected clip over those adjacent
clips.
Trimming in the Program Monitor
If you’d like to trim with more control, you can use the Program Monitor Trim
mode. This allows you to see both the outgoing and incoming frames of the trim
you’re working on and has dedicated buttons for making precise adjustments.
When the Program Monitor is set to Trim mode, playback loops appear around
the edit you have selected until you stop playback. This means you can
continually adjust the timing of an edit and view the result immediately.
You can perform three types of trim using the Program Monitor Trim mode
controls. You learned about each of these earlier in this lesson.
Regular trim: This basic type of trim moves the edge of the selected clip.
This method trims only one side of the edit point. It moves the selected edit
point either forward or backward in the Timeline, but it doesn’t shift any of
the other clips.
Roll trim: The roll trim moves the tail of one clip and the head of the
adjacent clip. It lets you adjust an edit point (provided there are handles).
No gap is created, and the sequence duration doesn’t change.
Ripple trim: This moves the selected edge of the edit either earlier or later.

Clips after the edit shift to close a gap or make room for a longer clip.
Using Trim mode in the Program Monitor
When you’re in Trim mode, some of the Program Monitor controls change to
make it easier to focus on trimming. To use Trim mode, you need to activate it
by selecting an edit point between two clips. There are three ways to do this.
Double-click an edit point on the Timeline with a selection tool or trimming
tool.
With the correct Timeline track indicator enabled, press Shift+T. The
playhead will move to the nearest edit point, and Trim mode will open in
the Program Monitor.
Drag around one or more edits using the Ripple Edit tool or Rolling Edit
tool to select them and open the Program Monitor to Trim mode.
When invoked, Trim mode shows two video clips. The box on the left shows the
outgoing clip (also called A side). The box on the right shows the incoming clip
(also called B side). Below the frames are five buttons and two indicators.
A Out Shift counter: This shows how many frames the Out point for the A side
has changed.
B Trim Backward Many: This performs the selected trim, adjusting by
multiple frames earlier. The size of the adjustment depends on the Large Trim

Offset option in the Trim Preferences tab of Preferences.
C Trim Backward: This performs the selected trim, adjusting by one frame at a
time earlier.
D Apply Default Transitions to Selection: This applies the default transition
(usually a dissolve) to video and audio tracks that have their edit points
selected.
E Trim Forward: This is like Trim Backward except it adjusts the edit one
frame later.
F Trim Forward Many: This is like Trim Backward Many except it adjusts the
edit multiple frames later.
G In Shift counter: This shows how many frames the In point for the B side
has changed.
Choosing a trimming method in the Program Monitor
You’ve already learned about the three types of trims you can perform (regular,
roll, and ripple). Using Trim mode in the Program Monitor makes the process
easier because it provides rich visual feedback. It also provides subtle control
when dragging, regardless of the Timeline view scale: Even if the Timeline is
zoomed a long way out, you’ll be able to make frame-accurate trim adjustments
in the Program Monitor Trim view.
1. Open the sequence 12 Trim View.
2. With the Selection tool (keyboard shortcut V), hold down Alt (Windows) or
Option (macOS) and double-click the video edit between the first clip and the
second clip in the sequence. Holding this modifier key selects just the video
edits and leaves the audio tracks untouched.
3. In the Program Monitor, hover the mouse cursor over the A and B clip
images.
As you move the cursor from left to right, you’ll see the tool change from
Trim Out (left side) to Roll (center) to Trim In (right).
4. Drag in between both clips in the Program Monitor to perform a rolling edit
trim.
Adjust the timing until the time display on the lower-right side of the
Program Monitor reads 01:26:59:01.

5. Press the Down Arrow key three times to jump between edits until you have
selected the edit between the third and fourth clips.
The outgoing shot is too long and shows the actor sitting down twice.
6. Change your trimming method to a ripple edit for the outgoing clip (drag on
the left in the Trim view).
 Note
Clicking the A or B side will switch which side is being trimmed.
Clicking in the center will switch to a rolling edit.
You’ve selected a ripple edit when the Trim tool shows a yellow trim arrow.
7. Drag to the left for the outgoing clip (on the left) to make the clip shorter.
Make sure the time display on the left reads 01:54:12:18.

 Note
The type of trim that’s used by default may seem random, but it’s
not. The initial setting is chosen by the type of tool that was used
to select the edit point. If you click with the Selection tool,
Premiere Pro chooses a regular Trim In or Trim Out. If you click
with the Ripple Edit tool, then the Ripple In or Ripple Out trim is
chosen. In both cases, cycling the roller will result in a rolling
trim. If you use the keyboard shortcut T, you’ll always select a
rolling edit.
8. Play the edit by pressing the spacebar. Notice playback loops over the edit to
allow you to review it.
9. Exit Trim mode by clicking a blank space in the Timeline panel.
Modifier keys
You can use multiple modifier keys to refine a trim selection.
Hold down Alt (Windows) or Option (macOS) when selecting clips to
temporarily unlink audio and video. This makes it easier to select just
the audio or video portion of a clip.
Hold down the Shift key to select multiple edit points. You can trim
multiple tracks or even multiple clips at the same time. Wherever you
see a trim “handle,” adjustments will be made when you apply a trim.
Combine these two modifier keys to make advanced selections for
trimming.
Performing dynamic trimming
Much of the trimming work you will perform will be to tune the rhythm of an

edit. In many ways, achieving perfect timing for a cut is the point at which the
craft of editing becomes the art.
The Trim mode looping playback makes it easier to get a feel for the timing of
an edit, but you can also update a trim using keyboard shortcuts or buttons while
the sequence plays back in real time.
 Note
To control the pre-roll and post-roll durations, go to Premiere Pro
Preferences and select the Playback category. You can set the
duration in seconds. Most editors find a duration of 2 to 5 seconds
most useful.
1. Continue working with the sequence 12 Trim View.
2. Press the Down Arrow key to move to the next video edit point, between the
fourth and fifth video clips. Set the trim type to a rolling trim.
You can stay in Trim mode while switching between edit points.
3. Press the spacebar to loop playback.
You’ll see a playback loop lasting a few seconds, with the shot before and
after the cut playing back. This helps you get a feel for the content of the edit.
4. Try adjusting the trim using the methods you’ve learned while the playback
loops.
The Trim Forward and Trim Backward buttons at the bottom of Trim mode
view work well and can adjust the edit while the clip plays back.
Now let’s try using the keyboard for more dynamic control. The same J, K,
and L keys you use to control playback can also be used to control trimming.
5. Click Stop or press the spacebar to stop the playback loop.
6. Press the L key to shuttle the trim to the right.

Pressing once trims in real time. You can tap the L key multiple times to trim
faster.
7. Press the K key to stop trimming.
Let’s refine and trim back a little earlier.
8. Hold down the K key and press the J key to shuttle left in slow motion.
 Note
The Timeline clip duration updates when you press K to stop
trimming.
9. Release both keys to stop the trim.
0. Exit Trim mode, by clicking away from the edit on the Timeline to deselect
the edit.
 Tip
You can also use the Deselect All keyboard shortcut to leave Trim
mode, which is Ctrl+Shift+A (Windows) or Command+Shift+A
(macOS).
Trimming with the keyboard
Here are some of the most useful keyboard shortcuts to use when trimming.
Trimming in the Timeline
MAC
WINDOWS
Trim Backward:
Option+Left Arrow
Trim Backward:
Ctrl+Left Arrow
Trim Backward Many:
Option+Shift+Left Arrow
Trim Backward Many:
Ctrl+Shift+Left Arrow
Trim Forward:
Option+Right Arrow
Trim Forward:
Ctrl+Right Arrow
Trim Forward Many:
Option+Shift+Right Arrow
Trim Forward Many:
Ctrl+Shift+Right Arrow

Slide Clip Selection Left Five
Frames:
Option+Shift+, (comma)
Slide Clip Selection Left Five
Frames:
Alt+Shift+, (comma)
Slide Clip Selection Left One
Frame:
Option+, (comma)
Slide Clip Selection Left One
Frame:
Alt+, (comma)
Slide Clip Selection Right Five
Frames:
Option+Shift+. (period)
Slide Clip Selection Right Five
Frames:
Alt+Shift+. (period)
Slide Clip Selection Right One
Frame:
Option+. (period)
Slide Clip Selection Right One
Frame:
Alt+. (period)
Slip Clip Selection Left Five
Frames:
Command+Option+Shift+Left Arrow
Slip Clip Selection Left Five
Frames:
Ctrl+Alt+Shift+Left Arrow
Slip Clip Selection Left One Frame:
Command+Option+Left Arrow
Slip Clip Selection Left One Frame:
Ctrl+Alt+Left Arrow
Slip Clip Selection Right Five
Frames:
Command+Option+Shift+Right
Arrow
Slip Clip Selection Right Five
Frames:
Ctrl+Alt+Shift+Right Arrow
Slip Clip Selection Right One
Frame:
Command+Option+Right Arrow
Slip Clip Selection Right One
Frame:
Ctrl+Alt+Right Arrow
Review questions
1. If you change the playback speed of a clip to 50%, what effect will this have
on the clip duration?
2. Which tool allows you to stretch a sequence clip to change its playback
speed?
3. What’s the difference between a slide edit and a slip edit?

4. What is the difference between replacing a clip and replacing footage?
Review answers
1. The clip will be twice as long. Reducing a clip’s speed causes the clip to
become longer, unless the Speed and Duration parameters are unlinked in the
Clip Speed/Duration dialog box or the clip is blocked by another clip.
2. The Rate Stretch tool allows you to adjust playback speed as if you were
trimming. This is useful when you need to fill a small extra amount of time in
a sequence.
3. You slide a clip over adjacent clips, retaining the selected clip’s original In
and Out points. You slip a clip under adjacent clips, changing the selected
clip’s In and Out points.
4. Replacing a clip replaces a single sequence clip on the Timeline with a new
clip from the Project panel. Replacing footage replaces a clip in the Project
panel with a new source clip. Any instance of the clip in any sequence in the
project is replaced. In both cases, effects applied to the replaced clip are
maintained.

9. Putting Clips in Motion
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Adjusting the Motion effect for clips
Changing clip size and adding rotation
Adjusting the anchor point to refine rotation
Working with keyframe interpolation
Enhancing motion with shadows and beveled edges
This lesson will take about 75 minutes to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the
“Getting Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the
instructions under “Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.”

The Motion effect controls can add movement to a clip. You can animate a graphic or resize and
reposition a video clip within the frame. You can animate an object’s position using keyframes and
enhance that animation by controlling the way those keyframes are interpreted.
Starting the lesson
Video projects are often motion graphics-oriented, and it’s common to see
multiple shots combined as complex compositions. These are often put into
motion. Perhaps you’ll see multiple video clips streaming past in floating boxes,
or you’ll see a video clip shrunk down and placed next to an on-camera host.
You can create those effects (and more) in Premiere Pro using the Motion
settings or a number of clip-based effects that offer Motion settings.
The Motion effect controls allow you to position, rotate, or change the size of a
clip within the frame. Some adjustments can be made directly in the Program
Monitor. It’s important to be clear that the adjustments you make in the Effect
Controls panel relate exclusively to the clip you have selected and not to the
sequence it is in. The sequence settings, in the Sequence menu, can be
considered the output settings.

A keyframe is a special kind of marker that defines settings at a particular point
in time. If you use two (or more) keyframes, Premiere Pro can automatically
animate the settings for an adjustment between them. You can use advanced
controls to control the timing of that animation using different types of
keyframes.
Adjusting the Motion effect
Every visual clip in a Premiere Pro sequence automatically has a number of
effects applied as fixed effects (also sometimes called intrinsic effects). Motion
is the name of one of these effects.
To adjust the effect, select the clip in a sequence and look in the Effect Controls
panel. Expand the Motion effect to adjust the settings.
 Tip
Unlike other effect controls, if you expand or collapse the settings
for the Motion effect, the settings will remain expanded or collapsed
for all clips.
The Motion effect allows you to adjust the position, scale, or rotation of a clip.
Let’s look at the way this effect has been used to reposition a clip in a sequence.
1. Open Lesson 09.prproj in the Lesson 09 folder.
2. Save the project as Lesson 09 Working.prproj.
3. Choose Effects in the Workspaces panel, or choose Window > Workspaces >
Effects.
This workspace was created to make it easier to work with transitions and
effects. If you have been using Premiere Pro for a while, you may need to
reset the workspace to the saved version by clicking the menu next to the
Effects option in the Workspaces panel.
 Tip
As you have been saving projects with new names while
working on them, you can go back to earlier lessons and
experiment again with a fresh copy of the original project file.
4. Open the sequence 01 Floating.

5. Make sure the Select Zoom Level menu in the Program Monitor is set to Fit.
It’s important to see the whole composition when setting up visual effects.
6. Play the sequence.
This clip’s Position, Scale, and Rotation properties have been changed.
Keyframes have been added, with different settings at different points in time,
so the clip animates.
Understanding Motion settings
Though these controls are called Motion, there’s no movement until you add it.
By default, clips are displayed at 100% scale in the center of the Program
Monitor.
Select a single clip in a sequence, and expand the Motion controls to view them.
Here are the options:
Position: This places the clip along the x-axis (horizontal) and y-axis
(vertical). Coordinates are calculated based on the pixel position of an
anchor point (covered later in this list) from the upper-left corner of the
image. So, the default position for a 1280x720 clip would be 640, 360, that
is, the exact center.

Scale (Scale Height, when Uniform Scale is deselected): Clips are set to
their full size by default (100%). To shrink a clip, reduce this number. You
can scale up to 10,000%—though be warned, scaling up will make images
pixelated and soft.
Scale Width: Deselect Uniform Scale to make Scale Width available. This
lets you change the clip width and height independently.
Rotation: You can rotate an image along the z-axis—a flat spin (as if
viewing a spinning turntable or carousel from above). You can enter
degrees or a number of rotations. For example, 450 is the same as 1x90 (the
1 counts as one full 360-degree turn). Positive numbers give clockwise
rotation, and negative numbers give counterclockwise rotation.
Anchor Point: Rotation and position adjustments are all based on the
anchor point, which is a point at the center of a clip by default. This can be
changed to any point, including one of the clip’s corners or even a point
outside the clip.
For example, if you set the anchor point to the corner of the clip, when you
adjust the Rotation setting, the clip will rotate around that corner rather than
around the center of the image. If you change the anchor point in relation to
the image, you may have to reposition the clip in the frame to compensate
for the adjustment.
 Tip
The Anchor point position can be animated, just like every
other Motion control, for more complex motion.
Anti-flicker Filter: This feature is useful for interlaced video clips and for
images that contain high detail, such as fine lines, hard edges, or parallel
lines (that can cause moiré problems). These high-detail images can flicker
during motion. To add some blurring and reduce flicker, use 1.00.
 Note
If the frame containing the Effect Controls panel is too narrow,
some of the controls will overlap, making it difficult to interact
with them. If this is the case, make the frame wider before
working with the Effect Controls panel.
Let’s look closer at the animated clip, continuing to work with the sequence 01

Floating.
1. Click once on the clip on the Timeline to make sure it is selected.
2. Make sure the Effect Controls panel is visible. It should have appeared when
you reset the Effects workspace, but if you can’t find it, look for it in the
Window menu.
3. In the Effect Controls panel, expand the Motion effect controls by clicking
the disclosure triangle 
 next to the word Motion.
4. At the upper right of the Effect Controls panel settings, to the right of the
master clip name and sequence clip name (these can be different if you
choose), a small triangle 
 toggles the display of an integrated Timeline.
Make sure the Effect Controls Timeline is visible.
If it isn’t, click the triangle to show it. The Timeline in the Effect Controls
panel displays keyframes.
5. Click the Go To Previous Keyframe or Go To Next Keyframe arrows to jump
between existing keyframes. Each control has its own keyframes.

 Note
It can be difficult to line up the playhead with an existing
keyframe. Using the Previous/Next Keyframe buttons helps you
avoid adding unwanted keyframes.
Now that you know how to view an existing animation, let’s reset the clip.
You’ll animate from a clip’s position later in this lesson.
6. Click the Toggle Animation stopwatch button for the Position property to
turn off its keyframes.
7. Click OK in the dialog warning that all keyframes will be deleted; that’s what
you want.
 Note
Each control has its own Reset button. If you reset the whole
effect, every control is returned to its default state.
8. Turn off keyframes for the Scale and Rotation properties in the same way.
9. Click the curved-arrow Reset Parameter button to the right of the Motion
effect heading in the Effect Controls panel.
Now the Motion settings are all set to their default settings.
 Note
When the Toggle Animation button is on, clicking the Reset
button will not change any existing keyframes. Instead, a new
keyframe is added with default settings. It’s important to turn off
animation before resetting the effect to avoid this.
Examining Motion properties
The Position, Scale, and Rotation properties are spatial. That means the changes
you make are easy to see because the object will change in size and position.
You can adjust these properties by entering numerical values, by using the
scrubbable text, or by dragging the Transform controls.

1. Open the sequence 02 Motion.
2. In the Program Monitor, make sure the zoom level is set to 25% or 50% (or a
zoom amount that allows you to see space around the active frame).
Setting the zoom small like this makes it easy to position items outside the
frame.
3. Drag the Timeline playhead anywhere in the clip so you can see the video in
the Program Monitor.
4. Click the clip in the Timeline so it’s selected, with its settings displayed in
the Effect Controls panel. If necessary, expand the Motion settings.
5. Click the Motion effect heading in the Effect Controls panel to select it.
When you select the motion effect, a bounding box with a crosshair and
handles appears around the clip in the Program Monitor.
6. Click inside the clip bounding box in the Program Monitor, avoiding the
cross-hair, and drag the clip around.
Position values in the Effect Controls panel update as you move the clip.
7. Position the clip so that it’s centered on the upper-left corner of the screen.
Use the guides 
 to line up the clip with the edge of the picture.

That crosshair is the anchor point, which is used for position and rotation
controls. Be careful not to click the anchor point, or you’ll move it in relation
to the image.
 Note
Several effects, like the Motion effect, have a Transform icon 
to indicate that you can use direct manipulation in the Program
Monitor when you select the effect heading. Try this with Corner
Pin, Crop, Mirror, Transform, and Twirl.
You’ll see that the Position settings in the Effect Controls panel are 0, 0 (or
close to that, depending on where you placed the center of the clip).
This is a 720p sequence, so the lower-right corner of the screen is 1280, 720.
 Note
Premiere Pro uses a coordinate system that has the upper-left
corner of the screen as 0, 0. All x and y values, respectively, to
the left of and above that point are negative. All x and y values to
the right of and below that point are positive.
8. Click the Reset button for the motion settings to restore the clip to its default
position.
9. Drag the blue number for the Rotation setting in the Effect Controls panel.
As you drag left or right, the clip rotates.
 Tip
Hold Shift while dragging numbers and they’ll change ten times
faster, for a more dramatic adjustment. Hold Control (Windows)

or Command (macOS) and they’ll change ten times slower, for a
more precise adjustment.
0. Click the Reset button for the Motion heading in the Effect Controls panel to
restore the clip to its default position.
Changing clip position, size, and rotation
Sliding a clip around the screen only begins to exploit the possibilities of the
Motion effect controls. One feature that makes the Motion effect so useful is the
ability to change the scale of the clip as well as rotate it. In the next example,
you’ll build a simple intro segment for a behind-the-scenes featurette.
Changing position
Let’s begin by using keyframes to animate the position of a layer. For this
exercise, the first thing you’ll do is change the clip position. The picture will
start off-screen and then move across the screen from right to left.
1. Open the sequence 03 Montage.
The sequence has several tracks, some of which are currently disabled. You’ll
use them later.
2. Position the playhead to the start of the sequence.
3. Set the Program Monitor zoom level to Fit.
4. Click once to select the first video clip on track V3.
You might want to make the track taller to see it better.

The clip’s controls appear in the Effect Controls panel.
5. In the Effect Controls panel, click the Toggle Animation stopwatch button for
Position. This turns on keyframing for that setting and automatically adds a
keyframe at the playhead position.
From now on, when you change the setting, Premiere Pro will add (or update)
a keyframe automatically.
6. The Position control has two numbers. The first is the x-axis, and the second
is the y-axis. Enter a Position setting of –640 into the x-axis (the first
number) as a starting position.
The clip moves off-screen to the left, revealing the clips on the V1 and V2
tracks.

The clip Map.jpg on track V1 is revealed when the selected clip is moved off-screen.
7. Drag the playhead to the last frame of the clip (00:00:4:23). You can do this
in the Timeline panel or in the Effect Controls panel.
8. Enter 1920 for the position x-axis. The clip moves off the right edge of the
screen.
Where there are two numbers for a control, they often represent the x-axis and y-axis.
9. Play the sequence from the beginning. The clip moves from off-screen left to
off-screen right.
The second clip on V3 pops up suddenly. You’ll animate this clip and others
next.
Reusing Motion settings
Now that you’ve applied keyframes and effects to a clip, you can save time by
reusing them on other clips. It’s as easy as copying and pasting to apply effects
from one clip to one or more other clips. In this example, you’ll apply the same
left-to-right floating animation to other clips in the project.
There are several methods for reusing effects. Let’s try one now.
1. In the Timeline panel, select the clip you just animated. It’s the first clip on
V3.

2. Choose Edit > Copy.
The clip and its effects and settings are now temporarily stored on your
computer’s clipboard.
3. With the Selection tool (V), drag from right to left to select the five other
clips on the V2 and V3 tracks (you may need to zoom out a little to see all
the clips). You could also hold the Shift key and select the first and last of the
five clips.
4. Choose Edit > Paste Attributes.
The Paste Attributes dialog opens, letting you selectively apply effects and
keyframes copied from another clip.
 Note
As an alternative to selecting a clip in the Timeline, you can
always select one or more specific effect headings in the Effect
Controls panel. Ctrl-click (Windows) or Command-click
(macOS) to select multiple noncontiguous effects, and choose

Edit > Copy. You can then select another clip (or clips) and
choose Edit > Paste to paste the effects onto other clips.
5. Leave the check boxes with their default values, and click OK.
6. Play the sequence to see the result.
Adding rotation and changing the anchor point
Moving clips around the screen can be effective, but you can really bring things
to life using two more properties. Let’s start with Rotation.
The Rotation property revolves a clip around its anchor point on the z-axis. By
default, the anchor point is in the center of the image. However, you can change
the relationship between the anchor point and the image for more interesting
animation.
Let’s add some rotation to a clip.
1. On the Timeline, ensure the Toggle Track Output button for V6 
 to enable
it 
. The clip on the track is a graphic that reads Behind The Scenes.
2. Move the playhead to the start of the graphic clip (00:00:01:13). Try holding
the Shift key while you drag the playhead to do this.
3. Select the graphic clip in the Timeline.
The clip’s controls appear in the Effect Controls panel.
4. Select the Motion effect heading to see the anchor point and bounding-box

controls in the Program Monitor. Notice the position of the anchor point, in
the center of the title.
The anchor point is a small circle with a cross.
Let’s adjust the Rotation property in the Effect Controls panel and see the
effect it has.
5. Enter a value of 90.0 into the Rotation field.
The title rotates in the center of the screen.
6. Choose Edit > Undo.
7. Make sure the Motion settings heading is still selected in the Effect Controls
panel.
8. In the Program Monitor, drag the anchor point until the crosshair sits on the
upper-left corner of the letter B in the first word.
The Position settings control the anchor point, and now that you have moved
it in the image, the settings have updated automatically.
9. Your playhead should still be on the first frame of the clip. Click the Toggle
Animation stopwatch button for Rotation to toggle on animation. This adds a
keyframe automatically.
0. Set the rotation to 90.0. This updates the keyframe you just added.

1. Move the playhead forward to 00:00:06:00, and set the clip rotation to 0.0 in
the Effect Controls panel. This adds another keyframe automatically.
2. Play the sequence to see your animation.
Changing clip size
There are a few approaches to changing the size of items in a sequence. By
default, items added to a sequence come in at 100% of their original size.
However, you can choose to manually adjust the size or let Premiere Pro do it for
you automatically.
You can choose from these methods:
Use the Scale property of the Motion effect in the Effect Controls panel.
If the clip has a different frame size compared to your sequence, right-click
the clip on the Timeline and choose Set To Frame Size. This automatically
adjusts the Scale property of the Motion effect to match the frame size of
the clip with the size of the sequence.

If the clip has a different frame size compared to your sequence, right-click
the clip on the Timeline and choose Scale To Frame Size. This has a similar
result to the Set To Frame Size option, but Premiere Pro resamples the
image at the new (often lower) resolution. If you scale back up now using
the Motion > Scale setting, the image might look soft, even if the original
clip was very high resolution.
You can also select Scale To Frame Size or Set To Frame Size automatically
by choosing Edit > Preferences > Media > Default Media Scaling
(Windows) or Premiere Pro CC > Preferences > Media > Default Media
Scaling (macOS). The setting is applied to assets as you import them.
For maximum flexibility, use the first or second method so you can scale as
needed without sacrificing quality. Let’s try this.
1. Open the sequence 04 Scale.
2. Scrub through the sequence to view the clips.
The second and third clips on the V1 track are much larger than the first two.
In fact, your system may struggle to play those clips without dropping
frames, and they are dramatically cropped by the edge of the frame.
3. Move the Timeline playhead over the last clip in the sequence, on the V1
track. Right-click this clip, and choose Scale To Frame Size.

This conveniently scales the image to fit the sequence resolution, though it
resamples the image, losing the original picture quality. However, there’s an
issue: The clip is full 4K, with a resolution of 4096x2160, and that is not a
perfect 16:9 image. It doesn’t fit the aspect ratio of the sequence, and black
bars are introduced at the top and bottom of the image. These bars are often
called letterboxing.
This is a common outcome when working with content that has a different
aspect ratio than your sequence, and there is no easy way around it. You’ll
need to make a manual adjustment.
4. Right-click the clip again and select Scale To Frame Size again to deselect it.
This is an option you can turn off and on at any time.
5. With the clip selected, open the Effect Controls panel.
6. Use the Scale setting to adjust the frame size until the clip image fits the
sequence frame without showing letterboxing; a setting of roughly 34%
should work. You can choose any framing and adjust the Position settings to
reframe the shot if necessary.

When you scale an image to avoid letterboxing, you’ll have to crop the sides.
When aspect ratios don’t match, you have to choose between letterboxing,
cropping, or changing the aspect ratio of the image by deselecting the
Uniform Scale option in the Effect Controls panel.
Animating clip size changes
In the previous example, the clip image has a different aspect ratio compared to
the sequence.
Let’s try a different example and animate the adjustment.
1. Position the Timeline playhead over the first frame of the second clip in the
04 Scale sequence, at 00:00:05:00.
 Note
The settings in the Effect Controls panel don’t show if they are
pixels, percentages, or degrees. This can take a little getting used
to, but you’ll find with experience the controls do make sense for
each setting.
This clip is 3840x2160-pixel ultra-high definition (UHD), which is the same
image aspect ratio as the sequence, which is 1280x720. It’s also the same
aspect ratio as full HD, at 1920x1080. This makes shooting UHD content
convenient if you intend to include it in an HD production.

2. Select the clip and open the Effect Controls panel. The scale is set to 100%.
3. Right-click the clip in the Timeline panel and choose Set To Frame Size.
When you select Set To Frame Size, Premiere Pro resizes the clip using the
Scale setting so that it fits inside the frame of the sequence. The amount of
adjustment varies depending on the image size of the clip and the resolution
of the sequence.
This clip scales down to 33.3% to fit the image. You now know you can scale
this clip between 33.3% and 100% and maintain quality, while still filling the
frame.
4. Turn on keyframing for Scale by clicking the Toggle Animation stopwatch
button 
 for Scale in the Effect Controls panel.
5. Position the playhead over the last frame of the clip.
6. Click the reset button 
 for the Scale setting in the Effect Controls panel.

7. Scrub through the clip to see the result.
This creates an animated zoom effect for the clip. Because the clip never
scales to more than 100%, it maintains full quality.
8. Turn on the Track Output option for the V2 track.
This track has an adjustment layer clip on it. Adjustment layers apply effects
to all footage on lower video tracks.
9. Select the Adjustment Layer clip to display its values in the Effect Controls
panel.

You’ll see that two visual effects have been added: a Black and White effect,
which removes color saturation, and a Brightness & Contrast effect, which
increases contrast. You’ll learn more about adjustment layers in Lesson 13,
“Adding Video Effects.”
0. Play the sequence.
You may need to render the sequence to see smooth playback because some
of the clips are high resolution and will take a lot of computer processing
power to play. To render the sequence, choose Sequence > Render In To Out.
Working with keyframe interpolation
Throughout this lesson you’ve been using keyframes to define your animation.
The term keyframe originates from traditional animation, where the lead artist
would draw the key frames (or major poses) and then assistant animators would
animate the frames in between. When animating in Premiere Pro, you’re the
master animator, and the computer does the rest of the work as it interpolates
values in between the keyframes you set.
Using different keyframe interpolation methods
While you’ve already used keyframes to animate, you’ve only touched on their
power. One of the most useful yet least utilized features of keyframes is their
interpolation method. This is a fancy way of saying how to get from point A to
point B. Think of it as describing the sharp ramp-up as a runner takes off from
the starting line and the gradual slowdown after they cross the finish line.
Premiere Pro has five interpolation methods. Changing the method can create a
very different animation. You can access the available interpolation methods by
right-clicking a keyframe to see the options (some effects have both spatial and
temporal options).
 Linear: This is the default method of keyframe interpolation. This
method gives a uniform rate of change between keyframes. Changes begin
instantly at the first keyframe and continue to the next keyframe at a
constant speed. At the second keyframe, the rate of change switches
instantly to the rate between it and the third keyframe, and so on. This can
be effective, but it can also look a little mechanical.

 Bezier: This gives the most control over keyframe interpolation. Bezier
keyframes (named after the French engineer Pierre Bézier) provide manual
handles you can adjust to change the shape of the value graph or motion
path on either side of the keyframe. By dragging the Bezier handles that
appear when the keyframe is selected, you can create smooth curved
adjustments or sharp angles. For example, you could have an object move
smoothly to a position on-screen and then sharply take off in another
direction.
 Tip
If you are familiar with Adobe Illustrator or Adobe Photoshop,
you will recognize Bezier handles—they work the same way.
 Auto Bezier: Auto Bezier keyframes create a smooth rate of change
through the keyframe. They automatically update as you change settings.
This is a good quick-fix version of Bezier keyframes.
 Continuous Bezier: This option is similar to the Auto Bezier option,
but it provides some manual control. The motion or value path will always
have smooth transitions, but you can adjust the shape of the Bezier curve on
both sides of the keyframe with a control handle.
 Hold: This is available only for temporal (time-based) properties. Hold-
style keyframes hold their value across time, without a gradual transition.
This is useful if you want to create staccato-type movements or make an
object suddenly disappear. When the Hold style is used, the value of the

first keyframe will hold until the next hold keyframe is encountered, and
then the value will change instantly.
Temporal vs. spatial interpolation
Some properties and effects offer a choice of temporal and spatial
interpolation methods for transitioning between keyframes. You’ll find
that all properties have temporal controls (which relate to time). Some
properties also offer spatial interpolation (which refers to space or
movement).
Here’s what you need to know about each method:
Temporal interpolation: Temporal interpolation deals with changes
in time. It’s an effective way to determine the speed at which an object
moves. For example, you can add acceleration and deceleration with
special kinds of keyframes called Ease or Bezier.
Spatial interpolation: The spatial method deals with changes in an
object’s position. It’s an effective way to control the shape of the path
an object takes across the screen. That path is called a motion path. For
example, does an object create hard angular ricochets as it moves from
one keyframe to the next, or does it have a more sloping movement
with round corners?
Adding Ease to Motion
A quick way to add a feeling of inertia to clip motion is to use a keyframe preset.
For example, you can create a ramp-up effect for speed by right-clicking a
keyframe and choosing Ease In or Ease Out. Ease In is used for approaching a
keyframe, and Ease Out is used when leaving a keyframe.

Continue working with the 04 Scale sequence.
1. Select the second video clip in the sequence.
2. In the Effect Controls panel, locate the Rotation and Scale properties.
3. Click the disclosure icon next to the Scale property, and select the Scale
property heading to reveal the control handles and velocity graphs.
You might want to increase the height of the Effect Controls panel to make
room for the extra controls.
Don’t be overwhelmed by the next numbers and graphs. Once you understand
one of these, you’ll understand them all because they all use a common
design.
The graph makes it easier to view the effects of keyframe interpolation. A
straight line means essentially no change in speed or acceleration.
4. Right-click the first Scale keyframe, displayed in the Effect Controls panel
mini Timeline, and choose Ease Out.

5. Right-click the second Scale keyframe and choose Ease In.
The graph now shows a curved line, which translates as a gradual
acceleration and deceleration of the animation.
6. Play the sequence to see your animation.
7. Experiment by dragging the blue Bezier handles in the Effect Controls panel
to see their effects on speed and ramping.
The steeper the curve you create, the more sharply the animation’s movement
or speed increases. After experimenting, you can choose Edit > Undo

repeatedly if you don’t like the changes.
Using other motion-related effects
Premiere Pro offers a number of other effects to control motion. While the
Motion effect is the most intuitive, you may find yourself wanting more.
The Transform and Basic 3D effects are also useful and give more control over
an object (including 3D rotation).
Adding a drop shadow
A drop shadow creates perspective by adding a small shadow behind an object.
This is often used to help create a sense of separation between foreground and
background elements.
Try adding a drop shadow.
1. Open the sequence 05 Enhance.
2. Make sure the Program Monitor zoom level is set to Fit.
3. In the Effects panel, browse into Video Effects > Perspective.
4. Drag the Drop Shadow effect onto the Journey to New York Title clip on the
V3 track.
5. Experiment with the Drop Shadow settings in the Effect Controls panel. You
may need to scroll down to see them. When you have finished
experimenting, choose the following settings:
Set Distance to 15 so the shadow is further offset from the clip.
Drag the Direction value to about 320° to see the shadow’s angle
change.
Darken the shadow by changing Opacity to 85%.
Set Softness to 25 to soften the edges of the shadow. Generally, the
greater the Distance setting, the more softness you should apply.

6. Play the sequence to watch your animation.
 Note
To make shadows fall away from a light source, add or subtract
180° from a perceived light source direction to get the correct
direction for the shadow to fall.
Adding a bevel
Another way to enhance the edges of a clip is to add a bevel. This type of effect
is useful on a picture-in-picture effect or on text. There are two bevels to choose
from. The Bevel Edges effect is useful when the object is simply a standard
video clip. The Bevel Alpha effect works better for text or logos because it
detects the complex transparent areas in the image before applying the beveled
edge.
 Note
The Bevel Edges effect produces slightly harder edges than the
Bevel Alpha effect. Both effects work well on rectangular clips, but
the Bevel Alpha effect is better suited to text or logos.
Let’s enhance the title a little.
1. Continue working with the 05 Enhance sequence.
2. Select the Journey to New York Title clip on V3 to see its controls in the
Effect Controls panel.

3. In the Effects panel, choose Video Effects > Perspective and drag the Bevel
Alpha effect into the Effect Controls panel, under the Drop Shadow effect.
The edges of the text should appear slightly beveled.
4. In the Effect Controls panel, increase Bevel Alpha Edge Thickness to 10 to
make the edge more pronounced. You might need to scroll down in the Effect
Controls panel to see all the settings.
 Tip
You can apply effects by dragging them onto clips, by dragging
them into the Effect Controls panel when a clip is selected, or by
double-clicking them in the Effects panel after selecting one or
more clips.
5. Increase Light Intensity to 0.80 to see a brighter edge effect.
The effect is looking pretty good, but it’s currently applied to both the text
and the drop shadow. This is because the effect is below the drop shadow in
the Effect Controls panel (the stacking order matters).
6. In the Effect Controls panel, drag the Bevel Alpha effect heading up, until it’s
just above the Drop Shadow effect. You’ll see a black line where the effect
will be placed. This changes the rendering order.

 Note
If you’re not getting the look you want when applying multiple
effects to a clip, drag the order around and see whether that
produces a better result.
7. Reduce the Edge Thickness amount to 8.
8. Examine the subtle differences in the bevel.
9. Play the sequence to see your animation.
 Note
You may need to render the sequence to see smooth playback

because of the high-resolution clips and nonaccelerated effect.
Adding motion with the Transform effect
An alternative to the Motion effect settings is the Transform effect. These two
effects offer similar controls, but there are two key differences.
The Transform effect processes changes to a clip’s Anchor Point, Position,
Scale, and Opacity settings in the stack with other effects, unlike the
Motion settings. This means effects such as drop shadows and bevels can
behave differently.
The Transform effect includes Skew, Skew Axis, and Shuttle Angle settings
to allow a visual angular transformation to clips.
Let’s compare the two effects using a prebuilt sequence.
1. Open the sequence 06 Motion and Transform.
2. Play the sequence to familiarize yourself with it.
There are two sections in the sequence. Each has a picture-in-picture (PIP),
rotating twice over a background clip, while moving from left to right. Look
carefully at the position of the shadow on each pair of clips.
In the first example, the shadow follows the bottom edge of the PIP and
appears on all four sides of the clip as it rotates, which obviously isn’t
realistic because the light source producing the shadow wouldn’t be
moving.
In the second example, the shadow stays on the lower right of the PIP,
which is more realistic.
3. Click the first clip on the V2 track, and view the effects applied in the Effect
Controls panel: the Motion effect and the Drop Shadow effect.

4. Now click the second clip on the V2 track. The Transform effect is producing
the motion this time, with the Drop Shadow effect again producing the
shadow.

The Transform effect has many of the same options as the Motion effect, with
the addition of Skew, Skew Axis, and Shutter Angle. As you can see, the
Transform effect also works more realistically with the Drop Shadow effect
than the Motion effect because of the order in which the effects are applied;
the Motion effect is always applied after other effects.
Manipulating clips in 3D space with Basic 3D
Another option for creating movement is the Basic 3D effect, which can
manipulate a clip in 3D space. It allows you to rotate the image around
horizontal and vertical axes as well as move it toward or away from you. You’ll
also find an option to enable a specular highlight, which creates the appearance
of light reflecting off the rotating surface.
Let’s explore the effect using a prebuilt sequence.
1. Open the sequence 07 Basic 3D.
2. Drag the playhead over the sequence Timeline (scrub) to view the contents.

The light that follows the motion comes from above, from behind, and from
the left of the viewer. Since the light comes from above, you won’t see the
effect until the image is tilted backward to catch the reflection. Specular
highlights of this kind can be used to enhance the realism of a 3D effect.
The following are four major properties of the Basic 3D effect:
Swivel: This controls the rotation around the vertical y-axis. If you
rotate past 90°, you’ll see the back of the image, which is a mirror of the
front.
Tilt: This controls the rotation around a horizontal x-axis. If you rotate
beyond 90°, the back will also be visible.
Distance to Image: This moves the image along the z-axis to simulate
depth. As the distance value gets larger, the image moves farther away.
Specular Highlight: This adds a glint of light that reflects off the
surface of the rotated image, as though an overhead light were shining
on the surface. This option is either on or off.
3. Experiment with the Basic 3D options.

Review questions
1. Which fixed effect will move a clip in the frame?
2. You want a clip to appear full-screen for a few seconds and then spin away.
How do you make the Motion effect’s Rotation feature start within a clip
rather than at the beginning?
3. How can you start an object rotating gradually and have it stop rotating
slowly?
4. If you want to add a drop shadow to a clip, why might you choose to use a
different motion-related effect from the Motion fixed effect?
Review answers
1. The Motion effect lets you set a new position for a clip. If keyframes are
used, the effect can be animated.
2. Position the playhead where you want the rotation to begin, and click the
Add/Remove Keyframe button or the stopwatch icon. Then move to where
you want the spinning to end and change the Rotation parameter; another
keyframe will appear.
3. Use the Ease Out and Ease In options to change the keyframe interpolation to
be gradual rather than sudden.
4. The Motion effect is the last effect applied to a clip. Motion takes whatever
effects you apply before it (including Drop Shadow) and spins the entire
assemblage as a single unit. To create a realistic drop shadow on a spinning
object, use Transform or Basic 3D and then place a Drop Shadow below that
in the Effect Controls panel.

10. Multicamera Editing
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Synchronizing clips based on audio
Adding clips to a sequence
Creating a multicamera target sequence
Switching between multiple cameras
Recording a multicamera edit
Finalizing a multicamera editing project
This lesson will take approximately 60 minutes to complete. Please log in to
your account on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go
to the “Getting Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the
instructions under “Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.”

The process of multicamera editing begins with synchronizing multiple camera angles. You can do this
using timecode or a common sync point (such as the closing of a clapboard or a common audio track).
Once your clips are synced, you can seamlessly cut between multiple angles in Adobe Premiere Pro CC.
Starting the lesson
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to quickly edit multiple angles of footage that
were shot simultaneously. Because the clips were shot at the same time, Adobe
Premiere Pro CC makes it possible to cut seamlessly from one angle to another.
The multicamera production and post-production processes are more advanced
than setting up and managing the media from a single camera. You may not use
the techniques explored in this chapter. Still, it’s useful to understand the way
Premiere Pro approaches multicamera source material and automated
synchronization.
Even if you don’t work with lots of cameras capturing an event from multiple
angles, you might find it useful to use two cameras: one set close and the other
set wide.

The workflow described in this chapter applies just as well to two cameras as it
does to six or more.
The Premiere Pro multicamera editing feature is a tremendous time-saver when
you’re editing footage from a shoot or event captured with multiple cameras.
1. Open the project Lesson 10.prproj.
2. Save the project as Lesson 10 Working.prproj.
3. In the Workspaces panel, select Editing. Then open the menu adjacent to
Editing and choose Reset To Saved Layout.
This project has five camera angles of a musical performance and a
synchronized audio track.
You’ll use an automated workflow to create a synchronized multicamera
sequence that can be edited “on the fly” during playback.
Following the multicamera process
While the workflow can seem complex the first time you perform a multicamera
edit, once you know how to do it, it’s really straightforward.
 Tip
When recording multicamera content, avoid pausing and restarting
recording when possible, as you are likely to have to synchronize
your shots in post-production every time you restart the recording.
There are six stages.
Import your footage: Ideally, the cameras will be closely matched in frame
rate and frame size, but you can mix and match if needed.
Determine your sync points: The goal is to keep the multiple angles
running in sync with each other so you can seamlessly switch between
them. You’ll need to identify a point in time that exists in all angles to

synchronize or use matching timecode. Alternatively, you can automatically
sync if all the clips have the same audio.
Create a multicamera source sequence: The clips are added to a
specialized sequence type called a multicamera source sequence. This is
essentially a sequence that contains multiple video angles stacked on
different video tracks.
Add the multicamera sequence to another sequence for editing: Editing
one sequence into another is called nesting. This new sequence is the
multicamera master sequence in which you will perform edits. Your
original multicamera sequence is now effectively a multilayered source
clip.
Record multicamera edits: A special Multi-Camera view in the Program
Monitor lets you switch between camera angles during playback, adding an
edit each time you switch.
Adjust and refine edits: Once the edit is roughed out, you can refine the
sequence with standard Timeline editing and trimming commands.
Who uses multicamera editing?
The popularity of multicamera editing has grown immensely as prices for
high-quality cameras have fallen. There are many potential uses for a
multicamera shoot and edit, ranging from simple fiction dialogue to large-
scale reality TV series.
Visual and special effects: Because of the expense associated with
many special-effects shots, it’s common practice to cover the shot with
multiple angles. This means less cost associated with the staging of the
shot and allows for greater flexibility during editing.
Action scenes: For scenes that involve a lot of action, producers often
use multiple cameras. Doing so can reduce the number of times that
stunts or dangerous action needs to be performed.
Once-in-a-lifetime events: Events such as weddings and sporting
competitions rely heavily on multiple angles of coverage to ensure that
the shooters capture all the critical elements of the event.
Musical and theatrical performances: If you’ve watched a concert
film, you’re used to multiple camera angles being used to show the
performance. Multi-camera editing can improve the pacing of
theatrical performances as well.

Talk-show formats: Interview-driven segments often cut between the
interviewer and subject, as well as to a wide shot to show both subjects
at the same time. Not only does this maintain visual interest, but it
makes it easier to edit an interview to a shorter run time.
Presentations to camera: If you present to camera, recording on two
cameras gives you another angle to cut to when covering up a repeat
take or when removing content. It also adds visual interest.
Creating a multicamera sequence
You can play multiple camera angles at the same time; the only limiting factor is
the computing power required to play back your clips. If your computer and
storage drives are fast enough, you should be able to play back several streams
in real time.
Determining the sync points
Decide how you want to synchronize the multiple angles of footage when
creating the multicamera sequence. You can select from five options for the sync
references. The method you choose will be partly a matter of personal choice
and partly how the footage was shot.
In points: If you have a common starting point, you can set an In mark
(generally referred to as an “In point” in this workflow) on all clips you
want to use. This method is effective as long as all cameras are rolling
before the critical action starts.
Out points: This method is similar to syncing with an In mark but instead
uses a common Out mark (generally referred to as an “Out point” in this
workflow). Out-point syncing is ideal when all cameras capture the ending
of critical action (such as crossing the finish line) but were started at
different times.
Timecode: Many professional cameras allow timecode to be synchronized
across multiple cameras. You can sync cameras by connecting them to a
common sync source. In some cases, the Hours number is offset to identify
the camera number. For example, camera 1 would start at 1:00:00:00, and
camera 2 would start at 2:00:00:00. For this reason, you can choose to
ignore the Hours number when syncing with timecode.
This will always be the fastest way to sync. It requires more preparation,
and potentially different hardware for production, but can save a

considerable amount of work in post-production.
Clip marker: In and Out points can be accidentally removed from a clip. If
you’d like to mark a clip in a more robust fashion, you can use a marker to
identify a common sync point. Markers are more difficult to accidentally
remove from a clip. They can also be based on any part of the action,
perhaps an event partway through the recording that all cameras captured. If
you don’t have sync timecode or audio, a marker is probably the most
efficient way to work.
 Tip
If you don’t have a good visual clue in the video to sync
multiple clips to, look for a clap or loud noise in the audio
track. It’s often easier to sync clips by looking for a common
spike in the audio waveform. Add a marker at each point and
then use the markers to sync.
Audio: If every camera recorded audio (even if it’s just poor-quality
reference audio from a camera-mounted shotgun or even an integrated
microphone), Premiere Pro may be able to synchronize the clips
automatically. The results with this method depend on your audio being
reasonably clean.
Syncing with markers
Consider a scenario where you have four clips that recorded the same bike
race from four different camera angles but the four cameras started
recording at different times. Your first task is to find the same point in
time for all four clips so they will be in sync.
This can be accomplished by using a common event (such as the firing of
a starter’s pistol or a camera flash). Simply load each clip into the Source
Monitor and add a marker (M) for each instance of the event. You can
then use these markers to synchronize the clips.
Adding clips to a multicamera source sequence
Once you’ve identified the clips you want to use (as well as a common sync
point), you can create a multicamera source sequence, the specialized type of
sequence for multicamera editing.

The order in which you select the clips is the order in which they will be added
to the sequence—and by extension, this sets the camera angle number.
By holding Ctrl (Windows) or Command (macOS), you can select one clip after
another to define them as specific camera angles. For example, if you click to
select clips 1, then 2, then 3, they’ll become Camera Angle 1, then 2, then 3.
If you select clips 1, then 3, then 2, they’ll become Camera Angle 1, then 2, then
3. You can easily change this later, of course.
Let’s try this.
1. Select all the clips in the Multicam Media bin.
For this example, Ctrl-click (Windows) or Command-click (macOS) the clips
in their numerical order. It doesn’t matter when you select the audio-only clip.
When an audio-only clip is present, Premiere Pro automatically uses it as the
audio for the multicamera sequence.
2. Right-click one of the selected clips and choose Create Multi-Camera Source
Sequence. You can also choose Clip > Create Multi-Camera Source
Sequence.
A new dialog box opens, asking how you want to create the multicamera
source sequence.

3. Under Synchronize Point, select Audio, and leave Track Channel set to 1.
 Tip
If you’re not sure which clip audio is clear for syncing purposes,
choose Mix Down in the Track Channel menu. This will use all
audio channels to sync.
4. Leave the Sequence Preset menu set to Automatic. The newly created
sequence will match the media files you are using. All available sequence
presets are listed here, so you can choose a particular option if you prefer.
5. Leave the Audio > Sequence Settings menu set to Camera 1. In fact, because
one of the clips is audio-only, it will automatically be used as the audio for

the newly created multicamera sequence. If you didn’t have that audio-only
clip, Premiere Pro would use the first selected shot.
Another approach is to place a dedicated audio recording on another track
and sync it. Alternatively, choose Switch Audio from the Audio > Sequence
Settings menu to sync the audio changes to the video angle that’s chosen as
you edit.
6. The clips have useful names that you can use as Camera Angle names. Under
Camera Names, select Use Clip Names, and click OK.
Premiere Pro analyzes the clips and creates a new multicamera source
sequence.
7. Double-click the new multicamera source sequence to view it in the Source
Monitor.
8. Drag the Source Monitor playhead through the clip to view the multiple
angles.
The clips are displayed in a grid to show you all the angles at once. Some
angles start in black because the cameras began recording at different times.
 Note

Premiere Pro automatically adjusts the multicamera grid to
accommodate the number of angles in use. For example, if you have
up to four clips, you would see a 2x2 grid. If you used between five
and nine clips, you’d see a 3x3 grid; if you used 16 angles, the grid
would be 4x4; and so on.
In this workflow, you’re using an automated option in the Project panel to create
a multicamera sequence. You could also manually create a multicamera
sequence, giving you more control but taking more time. Explore the Adobe
Premiere Pro Learn and Support website for more information about
multicamera editing (choose Help > Adobe Premiere Pro Help)
Creating the multicamera target sequence
Once you’ve made the multicamera source sequence, you need to place it in
another sequence, nesting it. The nested sequence will behave like any other clip
in your master sequence. However, this clip has multiple angles of footage to
choose from as you edit.
1. Locate the multicamera source sequence you just created. It should be named
something like C1_Master.mp4Multicam.
2. Right-click the multicamera source sequence and choose New Sequence
From Clip, or drag the clip onto the New Item menu at the bottom of the
Project panel.
 Note
Creating a new sequence from a multicamera source sequence in
this way will result in a multichannel audio mastering setting,
which may not result in ideal panning (depending on your source
audio). You can also manually create a new stereo sequence and
drag the new multicamera sequence into it, producing mono
audio panning, equally balanced between the left and right audio
output.
You now have a ready-to-use multicamera target sequence.

3. Right-click the nested multicamera sequence on the Timeline, and look at the
Multi-Camera options.
For a multicamera sequence clip to work, the Multi-Camera option must be
enabled.
Multi-Camera mode is automatically enabled for this clip because of the way
you created it. You can turn this option off or on at any time.
4. A camera angle is already selected. Try choosing another angle in this menu,
and see the Program Monitor update. The clip name updates in the sequence
too.
 Tip
To view the contents of a multicamera sequence, hold Ctrl
(Windows) or Command (macOS) and double-click it. You can
edit the contents of the sequence as you would any other.
Changes you make will update in the target sequence, which you
can return to by clicking its name in the Timeline panel.
Switching multiple cameras
Once you’ve built the multicamera source sequence and added it to a
multicamera target sequence, you’re ready to edit. You can do this in real time
using the Multi-Camera view in the Program Monitor. You can switch between

the different angles by clicking in the Program Monitor or using a keyboard
shortcut.
Performing a multicamera edit
Multicamera editing works by selecting camera angles for the current clip on the
Timeline using a special Multi-Camera mode in the Program Monitor.
If playback is stopped, you can click an angle on the left of the Program
Monitor, and the current clip in the sequence will update to match.
During playback, when you click an angle in the Program Monitor, the sequence
clip updates, and an edit is applied to the clip, separating the previous camera
angle from the newly selected angle. The edits are not displayed until after
playback stops.
Let’s try it now.
1. Open the Settings menu on the Program Monitor, and choose Multi-Camera.
2. Play the sequence to get familiar with it.
Featured track, used with permission: “That Summer,” by Jason Masi (www.jasonmasi.com)
3. Hover your mouse over the Program Monitor and press the ` (grave) key to
maximize the panel. If your keyboard doesn’t have a ` (grave) key, double-
click the panel name.
4. Set the playhead at the start of the sequence, and press the spacebar to start
playback.

 Note
The first nine camera angles are assigned to keys 1–9 along the
top of your keyboard (not the numerical keypad) by default. For
example, press the 1 key to select Camera 1, press the 2 key to
select Camera 2, and so on.
The first few seconds are silent until the click track begins. You will hear a
series of short beeps followed by the professionally recorded track.
5. Click the images on the left to switch between the multiple camera angles
during playback. You can also use the keyboard shortcuts, 1–5, that
correspond to the camera angle you want to select.
When the sequence finishes playback or you stop playback, it will have
multiple edits. Each separated clip’s label starts with a number that represents
the camera angle used for that clip.
6. Press the ` (grave) key, or double-click the panel name, to restore the
Program Monitor panel to normal size.
 Note
If you have effects applied to your clips, these are displayed as
usual in the Program Monitor. This is helpful if you have applied
color adjustments to match different angles.
7. Play the sequence and review your edit.
Imagine the director on this production decides the audio is too loud for the
planned distribution medium.
8. Right-click the audio track and choose Audio Gain.
A new dialog box opens.
9. In the Adjust Gain By field, enter –8 and click OK to lower the audio.
Re-recording multicamera edits
The first time you record a multicamera edit, it’s possible you will miss a few
edits. Perhaps you cut too late (or too early) to an angle. You also may decide

that you like one angle better than another. This is easy to correct.
 Note
After making your edits, you can always change them in the Multi-
Camera view of the Program Monitor or on the Timeline. You can
even trim parts of the multicamera sequence as you would any other
clip.
1. Move the playhead to the start of the Timeline panel.
2. Click the Play button in the Multi-Camera view to start playback.
The angles in the Multi-Camera view switch to match the existing edits in
your Timeline.
3. When the playhead reaches the spot you want to change, switch the active
camera.
If your keyboard has the keys, you can press one of the shortcuts (in this case,
1–5), or you can click your preferred angle in the Multi-Camera view of the
Program Monitor.

4. When you finish editing, stop playback by pressing the spacebar.
5. Open the Program Monitor Settings menu and choose Composite Video to
return to a regular viewing mode.
Finalizing multicamera editing
Once you’ve performed a multicamera edit in the Multi-Camera view, you can
refine and then finalize it. The resulting sequence is like any other sequence
you’ve built, so you can use any of the editing or trimming techniques you’ve
learned so far. There are some additional options available, however.
Switching an angle
If you’re happy with the timing of an edit but not the angle you chose, you can
always swap the angle for another. There are a few ways to do this.
Right-click a clip, choose Multi-Camera, and specify an angle.
Use the Multi-Camera view of the Program Monitor (as you did earlier in
the lesson).
If the correct track is enabled or a nested multicamera sequence clip is
selected, use the shortcuts 1–9 along the top of the keyboard.
Flattening a multicamera edit
You can flatten a multicamera edit to reduce the amount of processing power

needed for playback and to simplify the sequence. When you flatten the edit, the
nested multicamera sequence clips are replaced with the original selected camera
angle clips.
 Note
If you flatten your multicamera sequence, audio adjustments are
lost. Leave audio work until later.
The process is simple.
1. Select all the multicamera clips you’d like to flatten.
2. Right-click any clip and choose Multi-Camera > Flatten.
Once the clips are flattened, the process cannot be reversed, other than by
choosing Edit > Undo.
Review questions
1. Describe five kinds of sync points for multicamera clips.
2. Identify two ways to have the multicamera source and multicamera target
sequences match settings.
3. Name two ways to switch between angles in the Multi-Camera view.
4. How can you choose a different angle after closing the Multi-Camera view?
Review answers

1. The five ways are In points, Out points, timecode, audio, and markers.
2. You can either right-click the multicamera source sequence and choose New
Sequence From Clip or drag the multicamera source sequence into an empty
sequence and let it autoconform the settings.
3. To switch angles, you can either click the preview angle in the Program
Monitor or, if your keyboard has the keys, use the corresponding shortcut key
(1–9 along the top of the keyboard) for each angle.
4. You can use any of the standard trimming tools in the Timeline to adjust the
edit points for an angle. If you want to swap the camera angle, right-click it
in the Timeline, choose Multi-Camera from the context menu, and choose the
camera angle you want to use, or press the corresponding keyboard shortcut,
1–9.

11. Editing and Mixing Audio
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Working in the Audio workspace
Understanding audio characteristics
Adjusting clip audio volume
Adjusting audio levels in a sequence
Using the Audio Clip Mixer
This lesson will take about 75 minutes to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the
“Getting Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the
instructions under “Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.”
In this lesson, you’ll learn some audio-mixing fundamentals using the powerful
tools provided by Adobe Premiere Pro CC. Believe it or not, good sound will
often make the pictures look better.

Until now, our focus has been primarily on working with visuals. No doubt about it, the pictures count,
but professional editors generally agree that sound is at least as important as the images on the screen—
sometimes more important!
Starting the lesson
It’s rare to have audio recorded on-camera that is perfect for your final output.
There are several things you might want to do with sound in Premiere Pro.
Set Premiere Pro to interpret recorded audio channels differently from the
way they were recorded in-camera. For example, audio recorded as stereo
can be interpreted as separate mono tracks.
Clean up background sound. Whether it’s system hum or the sound of an
air-conditioning unit, Premiere Pro has tools for adjusting and tuning your
audio.
Adjust the volume of different frequencies in your clips (different tones)
using EQ effects.
Adjust the volume level on clips in the bin and on clip segments in your

sequence. The adjustments you make on the Timeline can vary over time,
creating a complete sound mix.
Add music and mix levels between music clips.
Add audio spot effects, such as explosions, door slams, or atmospheric
environmental sound.
Consider the difference it makes if you turn the sound off when watching a
horror movie. Without an ominous soundtrack, scenes that were scary a moment
ago can seem like comedy.
Music works around many of our critical faculties and directly influences our
emotions. In fact, your body reacts to sound whether you want it to or not. For
example, it’s normal for your heart rate to be influenced by the beat of the music
you’re listening to. Fast music tends to raise your heart rate, and slow music
tends to lower your heart rate. Powerful stuff!
In this lesson, you’ll begin by learning how to use the audio tools in Premiere
Pro and then make adjustments to clips and a sequence. You’ll also use the
Audio Mixer to make changes to your volume “on the fly” while your sequence
plays.
Setting up the interface to work with audio
Let’s begin by switching to the Audio workspace.
1. Open Lesson 11.prproj.
2. Save the project as Lesson 11 Working.prproj.
3. In the Workspaces panel, click Audio. Then open the menu adjacent to the
Audio option, and choose Reset To Saved Layout.

Working in the Audio workspace
You’ll recognize most of the components of the Audio workspace from the
video-editing workspaces you’ve used. One obvious difference is that the Audio
Clip Mixer is displayed in place of the Source Monitor. The Source Monitor is
still in the frame; it’s just hidden, grouped with the Audio Clip Mixer.
You can modify the appearance of the Timeline track headers to include an audio
meter for each track, along with track-based level and pan controls.
To add audio meters to your tracks, follow these steps:
1. Open the Timeline Settings menu 
, and choose Customize Audio Header.
The Audio Header Button Editor appears.

2. Drag the Track Meter button 
 onto a Timeline audio header, and click OK.
When you click OK, the audio track headers return to their previous size. You
may need to resize an audio header vertically and horizontally to see the new
meter.
Now every audio track will have a small built-in audio meter.
It’s important to understand the key differences between the Audio Clip Mixer
panel and the Audio Track Mixer panel.
They look similar but apply different adjustments.
Audio Clip Mixer: This provides controls to adjust the audio level and pan
of sequence clips. As you play your sequence, you can make adjustments,
and Premiere Pro will add keyframes to clips as the Timeline playhead
moves over them.
Audio Track Mixer: This adjusts audio level and pan on tracks rather than
clips.

Clip adjustments and track adjustments are combined for final output. So, if
you reduce the clip audio level by –3 dB and then also reduce the track
audio level by –3 dB, you’ll have a total drop of –6 dB. The Audio Track
Mixer is more advanced and also offers track-based audio effects and
submixes, which allow you to combine the outputs from multiple tracks.
You can apply clip-based audio effects and modify their settings in the Effect
Controls panel.
Clip-based audio adjustments and effects are applied before track-based
adjustments and effects.
Defining master track output
When you create a new sequence, you define the number of audio channels it
outputs by choosing an audio master setting. It’s easiest to think of your
sequence as a media file. It will have a frame rate, frame size, audio sample rate,
and audio channel configuration.
The audio master setting is the number of audio channels the sequence would
have if it were a file.
The default audio mastering setting is Stereo.
Stereo has two audio channels: Left and Right.
5.1 has six audio channels: Middle, Front-Left, Front-Right, Rear-Left,
Rear-Right, and Low Frequency Effects (LFE)—that’s the sound that gets
played through the subwoofer.
Multichannel has between 1 and 32 audio channels—you can choose.
Mono has one audio channel.
What is an audio channel?
It’s common to think that Left and Right audio channels are in some way
identifiably different. In fact, they are both simply mono audio channels
designated as Left or Right. When recording sound, it’s the standard
configuration to have Audio Channel 1 as Left and Audio Channel 2 as

Right.
What makes Audio Channel 1 Left is simply the following:
It’s recorded from a microphone pointing left.
It’s interpreted as Left in Premiere Pro.
It’s output to a speaker positioned on the left.
None of these factors changes the fact that it is still a single mono
channel. They are nothing more than conventions.
If you perform the same recording from a microphone pointing right (but
with Audio Channel 2), then you have stereo audio. They are, in fact, two
mono audio channels.
You can change most sequence settings later, but not the audio master setting.
This means that, with the exception of multichannel sequences, you cannot
change the number of channels that your sequence will output.
You can add or remove audio tracks at any time, but the audio master setting is
fixed. If you need to change your audio master setting, you can easily copy and
paste clips from a sequence with one setting to a new sequence with a different
setting.
Using the audio meters
The primary function of the audio meters is to give you the overall mix output
volume for your sequence. As your sequence plays, you’ll see the level meter
dynamically change to reflect the volume.

To view the audio meters:
If the audio meters are not already displayed, choose Window > Audio
Meters. In the default Audio workspace, the audio meters are displayed, but
they are relatively narrow. You may want to make the panel wider when
working with them.
There are Solo buttons at the bottom of the audio meters, which allow you
to exclusively hear the channel you select. If the Solo buttons are displayed
as small circles, drag the left edge of the panel a little to make the meters
wider. Larger Solo buttons will be displayed.
 Note
The Solo buttons are not displayed when using the more
advanced multichannel audio mastering option.
If you right-click the audio meters, you can choose a different display scale.
The default is a range from 0 dB to –60 dB, which clearly shows the main
level information you’ll want to see.
You can also choose between static and dynamic peaks. When you get a loud
“spike” in audio levels that makes you glance at the meters, the sound is gone by
the time you look. With static peaks, the highest peak is marked and maintained
in the meters so you can see what the loudest level was during playback up to
that point.
You can click the audio meters to reset the peak. With dynamic peaks, the peak
level will continually update; keep watching to check the levels.

About audio level
The scale displayed on the audio meters is decibels, denoted by dB. The
decibel scale is a little unusual in that the highest volume is designated as
0 dB. Lower volumes become larger and larger negative numbers until
they reach negative infinity.
If a recorded sound is too quiet, it might get lost in the background noise.
Background noise might be environmental, such as an air-conditioning
system making a hum. It also might be system noise, such as the quiet hiss
you hear from your speakers when no sound is playing.
When you increase the overall volume of your audio, background noise
gets louder too. When you decrease the overall volume, background noise
gets quieter. This means it’s often better to record audio at a higher level
than you need (while avoiding over-driving) and then reduce the volume
later to remove (or at least reduce) the background noise.
Depending on your audio hardware, you may have a bigger or smaller
signal-to-noise ratio; that’s the difference between the sound you want to
hear (the signal) and the sound you don’t want to hear (the background
noise). Signal-to-noise ratio is often shown as SNR, also measured in dB.
Viewing samples
In this exercise, you’ll look at an audio sample.
1. In the Project panel, open the Music bin, and double-click the clip Cooking
Montage.mp3 to open it in the Source Monitor.
Because this clip has no video, Premiere Pro displays the waveforms for the
two audio channels.

At the bottom of the Source Monitor and Program Monitor, the time ruler
represents the total duration of the clip.
2. Click the Source Monitor Settings menu, and choose Time Ruler Numbers.
The time ruler now shows timecode indicators on the time ruler. Try zooming
in to the time ruler using the navigator. The maximum zoom shows you an
individual frame.
3. Click the Source Monitor Settings menu again, and choose Show Audio Time
Units.
This time, you’ll see individual audio samples counted on the time ruler. Try
zooming in a little more. Now you can zoom in to an individual audio sample
— in this case, one 48,000th of a second.
 Note
The audio sample rate is the number of times per second the
recorded sound source is sampled. It’s common for professional
camera audio to take a sample 48,000 times per second.

The Timeline panel has the same option to view audio samples in the panel
menu (rather than the Timeline Settings menu).
4. For now, switch off the Time Ruler Numbers option and the Show Audio
Time Units option in the Source Monitor using the Settings menu.
Showing audio waveforms
When you open a clip in the Source Monitor that has only audio (no video),
Premiere Pro automatically shows the audio waveforms.
When you use the waveform display option in the Source Monitor or Program
Monitor, you’ll see an extra navigator zoom control for each channel. These
controls work in a way that’s similar to the navigator zoom control at the bottom
of the panel. You can resize the vertical navigator to see the waveforms larger or
smaller, which is useful if your audio is quiet.
 Note
This option is great if you are trying to locate some specific
dialogue and you are not so concerned about the visuals.
You can choose to display audio waveforms for any clip that has audio by
choosing Audio Waveform in the Source Monitor and Program Monitor Settings
menus.
If a clip has video as well as audio, the video will be displayed in the Source
Monitor by default. You can switch to viewing the audio waveform by clicking
the Drag Audio Only button 
.

Let’s look at some waveforms.
1. Open the clip HS John from the Theft Unexpected bin.
2. Click the Source Monitor Settings menu, and choose Audio Waveform.
You can easily see where the dialogue begins and ends.
3. Switch back to viewing the composite video using the Source Monitor
Settings menu.
You can also turn off and on the display of waveforms for clip segments on
the Timeline.
4. Open the Theft Unexpected sequence in the Master Sequences bin.

5. Click the Timeline Settings menu, and make sure the Show Audio Waveform
option is enabled.
6. Resize the Audio 1 track to make sure the waveform is fully visible. Notice
that two audio channels are displayed on one audio track in this sequence:
The clips have stereo audio.
The audio waveform on these clips looks a little different from the waveforms
in the Source Monitor. That’s because it’s a Rectified audio waveform, which
makes it easier to see lower-volume audio, like the dialogue in this scene.
You can switch between Rectified and regular audio waveforms.
7. Open the Timeline panel menu (not the settings menu), and choose Rectified
Audio Waveforms to deselect it.
The regular waveform display works well for louder audio, but notice the
quieter parts of the speech; it’s much harder to follow the level changes.
8. Open the Timeline panel menu, and restore the Rectified Audio Waveforms
option.
Working with standard audio tracks
The standard audio track type can accommodate both mono audio clips and
stereo audio clips. The controls in the Effect Controls panel, the Audio Clip
Mixer, and the Audio Track Mixer work with both kinds of media.
If you’re working with a combination of mono and stereo clips, you’ll find it
more convenient to use the standard track type than the traditional separate mono
or stereo tracks.

This standard audio track has a mix of stereo and mono clips.
Monitoring audio
You can choose which sequence audio channels you hear when monitoring.
Let’s try this with a sequence.
1. Open the Desert Montage sequence.
2. Play the sequence, and while you do, try clicking each of the Solo buttons at
the bottom of the audio meters.
Each Solo button allows you to hear only the channel you select. You can solo
multiple channels to hear a specific combination—though in this example it
wouldn’t help much as you have only two channels to choose between. When
working with multichannel sequences, you’ll solo output channels more often.
Soloing is particularly useful if you’re working with audio where the sound from
different microphones is recorded onto different tracks. This is common with
professionally recorded location sound.

The number of channels and associated Solo buttons you’ll see depends on your
current sequence audio master setting.
You can also use the track header Mute button 
 or Solo button 
 for
individual audio tracks in the Timeline panel. This gives you precise control over
what’s included or excluded in your mix.
Examining audio characteristics
When you open a clip in the Source Monitor and view the waveform, you’re
seeing each channel displayed. The taller the waveform is, the louder the audio
for that channel will be.
Three factors affect the way audio sounds to your ears. Consider them in terms
of a television speaker.
Frequency: This refers to how fast the surface of the speaker moves. The
number of times the surface of the speaker beats the air per second is
measured as Hertz (Hz). Human hearing ranges from approximately 20 Hz
to 20,000 Hz. Many factors, including age, affect the frequency range you
can hear. The higher the frequency, the higher the perceived tone.
Amplitude: This is how far the speaker moves. The bigger the movement,
the louder the sound will be because it produces a higher air pressure wave,
which carries more energy to your ears.
Phase: This is the precise timing with which the surface of the speaker
moves out and in. If two speakers push out air and pull in air in sync, they
are considered “in phase.” If they move out of sync, they become “out of
phase,” and this can produce problems with sound reproduction. One
speaker can reduce the air pressure at exactly the moment the other speaker
is attempting to increase it. The result is that you may not hear parts of the
sound.
The movement of the surface of a speaker as it emits sound provides a simple
example of the way sound is generated, but, of course, the same rules apply to all
sound sources.
What are audio characteristics?
Imagine the surface of a speaker moving as it beats the air. As it moves, it
creates a high- and low-pressure wave that moves through the air until it
arrives at your ear in much the way that surface ripples move across a
pond.

As the pressure wave hits your ear, it makes a tiny part of it move, and
that movement is converted into energy that is passed to your brain and
interpreted as sound. This happens with extraordinary precision, and since
you have two ears, your brain does an impressive job of balancing the two
sets of sound information to produce an overall sense of what you can
hear.
Much of the way you hear is active, not passive. That is, your brain is
constantly filtering out sounds it decides are irrelevant and identifying
patterns so you can focus your attention on things that matter. For
example, you have probably had the experience of being at a party where
the general hubbub of conversation sounds like a wall of noise until
someone across the room mentions your name. You perhaps didn’t realize
your brain was listening to the conversation the whole time because you
were concentrating on listening to the person standing next to you.
There’s a body of research on this subject that broadly falls under the title
psycho-acoustics. For these exercises, we’ll be focusing on the mechanics
of sound more than on the psychology, though it’s a fascinating subject
worthy of further study.
Recording equipment makes no such subtle discrimination, which is part
of the reason why it’s so important to listen to location sound with
headphones and to take care to get the best possible recorded sound. It’s
usual practice to try to record location sound with no background noise at
all. The background noise is added in post-production at precisely the
right level to add atmosphere to the scene but not drown out the dialogue.
Recording a voice-over track
If you have a microphone set up, you can record audio directly to the Timeline
using the Audio Track Mixer or a special Voice-over Record button on each
audio track header. To record audio in this way, check that your Audio Hardware
preferences are set up to allow input. You can check your audio hardware input
and output settings by choosing Edit > Preferences > Audio Hardware
(Windows) or Premiere Pro CC > Preferences > Audio Hardware (macOS).
Try the Voice-over Record button by following these steps:
1. Open the Voice Over sequence in the Master Sequences bin. This is a simple
sequence with visuals only; you’ll add the voice-over.
2. Take a look at header for the A1 track. You should already be able to see the

Voice-over Record button 
.
3. Mute your speakers or wear headphones while recording voice-over to avoid
getting microphone feedback.
4. Position the playhead at the beginning of the sequence, and click the Voice-
over Record button. The Program Monitor gives a short countdown, and you
can begin. Describe the shots that come up to create an accompanying voice-
over.
As you record, the Program Monitor shows you’re recording, and the audio
meter shows the input level.
5. When you’re finished recording, press the spacebar, or click the Voice-over
Record button to stop.
The new audio appears on the Timeline, and an associated clip appears in the
Project panel. Premiere Pro will create a new audio file in the location
specified in the Scratch Disks settings in the project settings. By default, this

is the same location as your project file.
You can use this technique to record professional-quality audio using a studio
microphone and sound booth. Or you can use it with the built-in microphone
on a laptop to record guide-track voice-over while on your way back from a
shoot. That voice-over can form the basis for an outline edit, saving
significant time later.
Adjusting audio volume
There are several ways to adjust the volume of clips with Premiere Pro, and they
are all nondestructive. Changes you make don’t affect your original media files,
so you can experiment freely.
Adjusting audio in the Effect Controls panel
Earlier, you used the Effect Controls panel to make adjustments to the scale and
position of clips in a sequence. You can also use the Effect Controls panel to
adjust volume.
1. Open the Excuse Me sequence from the Master Sequences bin.
This is a simple sequence with two clips in it. In fact, it’s the same clip added
to the sequence twice. One version has been interpreted as stereo, and the
other has been interpreted as mono channels.
2. Click the first clip to select it, and open the Effect Controls panel.
3. In the Effect Controls panel, expand the Volume, Channel Volume, and
Panner controls.
Each control gives the right options for the type of audio you have selected.
Volume adjusts the combined volume of all the audio channels in the
selected clip.

Channel Volume allows you to adjust the audio level for individual
channels in the selected clip.
Panner gives you overall stereo left/right output balance control for the
selected clip.
Notice that the keyframe toggle stopwatch icon is automatically enabled for
all the controls. This means every change you make will add a keyframe.
However, if you add only one keyframe and use it to set the audio level, the
adjustment will apply to the whole clip.
4. Position the Timeline playhead over the clip where you would like to add a
keyframe (it doesn’t make too much difference if you intend to make only
one adjustment).
5. Click the Timeline panel Settings menu, and make sure Show Audio
Keyframes is selected.
6. Increase the height of the Audio 1 track so you can see the waveform and
special thin white line for adding keyframes, often referred to as a rubber
band.
7. In the Effect Controls panel, drag left on the blue number that sets the
volume level.
Premiere Pro adds a keyframe, and the rubber band moves down to show the
reduced volume. The difference is subtle, but as you become more familiar
with the Premiere Pro interface, it’ll stand out more and more clearly.
Before
After (the difference is subtle)

8. Now select the second version of the Excuse Me clip in the sequence.
 Note
The rubber band uses the entire height of the audio clip to adjust
the volume.
You’ll notice you have similar controls available in the Effect Controls panel,
but now there is no Channel Volume option. This is because each channel is
its own clip segment, so the Volume control for each channel is already an
individual one.
9. Experiment with adjusting the volume for these two independent clips.
Adjusting audio gain
Most music is created with the loudest possible signal to maximize the
difference between the signal and the background noise. This is too loud to use
in most video sequences. To address this issue, you need to adjust the clip’s
audio gain.
1. Open the clip Cooking Montage.mp3 from the Music bin. Notice the size of
the waveform.

 Note
You may need to adjust the zoom level on the Source Monitor to
see the waveform.
2. Right-click the clip in the bin and choose Audio Gain.
There are two options in the Audio Gain dialog box that you should learn
about now.
Set Gain To: Use this option to specify a particular adjustment for your
clip.
Adjust Gain By: Use this option to specify an incremental adjustment
for your clip.
For example, if you apply –3 dB, this will adjust the Set Gain To amount to –
3 dB. If you go into this menu a second time and apply another –3 dB

adjustment, the Set Gain To amount will change to –6 dB, and so on.
3. Select Set Gain To and set the gain to –12 dB, and click OK.
Right away, you’ll see the waveform change in the Source Monitor.
 Note
None of the changes you make to the volume of your clips will
change the original media files. You can make a change to the
overall gain here, in the bin, or on the Timeline, in addition to
any changes you make using the Effect Controls panel, and your
original media files will remain unmodified.
Changes like this, where you are adjusting the audio gain in the bin, will not
update clips already edited into a sequence. However, you can right-click one or
more clips in a sequence, choose Audio Gain, and make the same kind of
adjustment there.
Normalizing audio
Normalizing audio is similar to adjusting gain. In fact, normalization results in

an adjustment to the clip gain. The difference is that normalization is based on
automated analysis rather than on your subjective judgment.
When you normalize a clip, Premiere Pro analyzes the audio to identify the
single highest peak, in other words, the loudest part of the audio. The gain for
the clip is then adjusted automatically so that the highest peak matches a level
you specify.
You can have Premiere Pro adjust the volume for multiple clips so that they
match any perceived volume you like.
Imagine working with multiple clips of a voice-over, recorded over several days.
Perhaps because of different recording setups or working with different
microphones, several clips might have different volumes. You can select all the
clips and, in a single step, have Premiere Pro automatically set their volumes to
match. This saves significant time you would have spent manually going through
each clip, one by one, to make adjustments.
Try normalizing some clips by following these steps:
1. Open the Journey to New York sequence.
2. Play the sequence, and watch the level on the audio meters.
 Note
You may need to adjust the track size to see the audio
waveforms. Do this by dragging the divider on the track header.
The voice level varies quite a lot, particularly in the third and fourth clips.
3. Select all the voice-over clips in the sequence on Track A1. To do so, you can
lasso them or make an item-by-item selection.
4. Right-click any of the selected clips and choose Audio Gain, or press the G
key.
5. Enter –8 for Normalize All Peaks To, and click OK. Listen again.

Every selected clip is adjusted so that the loudest peaks are at –8 dB.
 Tip
You can apply normalization in the bin too. Just select all the
clips you want to automatically adjust, go to the Clip menu, and
choose Audio Options > Audio Gain, or you can select the clips
and press the G key.
Notice the way the waveforms for the clips level out. If you choose
Normalize Max Peak To, rather than Normalize All Peaks To, Premiere Pro
will make an adjustment based on the loudest moment of all the clips
combined, as if they were one clip.
Before
After
Sending audio to Adobe Audition CC
While Premiere Pro has advanced tools to help you achieve most audio-
editing tasks, it can’t compete with Adobe Audition, which is a dedicated
audio post-production application.
Audition is a component of Adobe Creative Cloud. It integrates neatly
into your workflow when editing with Premiere Pro.
You can send your current sequence to Adobe Audition automatically,

bringing all your clips and a video file based on your sequence, to produce
an audio mix that follows along with the pictures.
To send your sequence to Adobe Audition, follow these steps:
1. Open the sequence you want to send to Adobe Audition.
2. Choose Edit > Edit in Adobe Audition > Sequence.
3. You’ll be creating new files to work with in Adobe Audition to keep
your original media unchanged, so choose a name and browse for a
location, then choose the remaining options as you prefer, and finally
click OK.
4. In the Video menu, you can choose Send Through Dynamic Link to
view the video part of your Premiere Pro sequence live in Audition.
Adobe Audition has fantastic tools for working with sound. It has a
special spectral display that helps you identify and remove unwanted
noises, a high-performance multitrack editor, and advanced audio effects
and controls.
It’s also easy to send an individual clip to Audition to benefit from its
superior audio cleanup, editing, and adjustment features. To send a clip to
Audition, right-click the clip in your Premiere Pro sequence and choose
Edit Clip in Adobe Audition.
Premiere Pro duplicates the audio clip, replaces the current sequence clip
with the duplicate, and opens the duplicate in Audition, ready to work on
it.
From now on, every time you save changes you have made to the clip in
Audition, they’ll automatically update in Premiere Pro.
For 
more 
information 
about 
Adobe 
Audition, 
go 
to
www.adobe.com/products/audition.html.
Creating a split edit
A split edit is a simple, classic editing technique that offsets the cut point for
audio and video. The audio from one clip is played with the visuals from
another, carrying the feeling of one scene into another.
Adding a J-cut
The J-cut gets its name from the shape of the edit. Picture the letter J over an
edit. The lower part (the audio cut) is to the left of the upper part (the video cut).

1. Open the Theft Unexpected sequence.
2. Play the last cut in the sequence. The join in the audio between the last two
clips is rather abrupt. You may need to turn up your speaker volume to hear
the join. You’ll improve things by adjusting the timing of the audio cut.
3. Select the Rolling Edit tool 
, accessible by clicking and holding on the
Ripple Edit Tool icon 
.
4. While holding Alt (Windows) or Option (macOS), click the audio segment
edit (not the video), and drag a little to the left. Congratulations! You’ve
created a J-cut!
 Tip
With the default Premiere Pro preferences, you can apply a
rolling edit using the Selection tool if you hold Ctrl (Windows)
or Command (macOS).
5. Play through the edit.
You might want to experiment with the timing to make the cut seem more
natural, but for practical purposes the J-cut works. You can smooth it over
and improve it further with an audio crossfade later.
Remember to switch back to the Selection tool (V).
Adding an L-cut

An L-cut works in the same way as a J-cut but in reverse. Repeat the steps in the
previous exercise, but try holding Alt (Windows) or Option (macOS) as you drag
the audio segment edit a little to the right. Play through the edit and see what you
think.
 Note
Holding Alt (Windows) or Option (macOS) temporarily overrides
linked selections, so you can adjust just the video or just the audio
segment of a linked clip.
Adjusting audio levels for a clip
As well as adjusting clip gain, you can use the rubber band to change the volume
of clips in a sequence. You can also change the volume for tracks, and the two
volume adjustments will combine to produce an overall output level.
If anything, using rubber bands to adjust volume is more convenient than
adjusting gain because you can make incremental adjustments at any time, with
immediate visual feedback.
The result of adjusting the rubber bands on a clip is the same as adjusting the
volume using the Effect Controls panel. In fact, one control automatically
updates the other.
Adjusting overall clip levels
Try this now.
1. Open the Desert Montage sequence in the Master Sequences bin.
 Tip
You can find many more available keyboard shortcuts by
choosing Edit > Keyboard Shortcuts (Windows) or Premiere Pro
CC > Keyboard Shortcuts (macOS). Existing shortcuts are
displayed on an illustrated keyboard layout.

The music already fades up and down at the beginning and end. Let’s adjust
the volume between those fades.
2. Use the Selection tool to drag down at the bottom of the A1 track header, or
hover the mouse cursor over the track header and scroll to make the track
taller. This will make it easier to apply fine adjustments to the volume.
3. The music is a little too loud. Click the middle part of the rubber band on the
music clip in the sequence, and drag down a little.
As you drag, a tool tip appears, displaying the amount of adjustment you are
making.
Because you’re dragging a segment of the rubber band rather than a keyframe,
you’re adjusting the overall level for the segment between the two existing
keyframes. If the clip did not have existing keyframes, you’d be adjusting the
overall level for the entire length of the clip.
Changing clip volume with keyboard shortcuts
If the Timeline playhead is over a clip, you can also raise and lower clip
volume using keyboard shortcuts. The result is the same, although you
won’t see a tool tip informing you about the amount of adjustment. These
are particularly convenient shortcuts for quick, precise audio level
adjustments:
Use the [ key to decrease clip volume by 1 dB.
Use the ] key to increase clip volume by 1 dB.
Use Shift + [ to decrease clip volume by 6 dB.
Use Shift + ] to increase clip volume by 6 dB.
If your keyboard does not have square bracket keys, and you would like to
use these shortcuts, choose Edit > Keyboard Shortcuts (Windows) or
Premiere Pro CC > Keyboard Shortcuts (macOS) to set alternative keys.

Keyframing volume changes
If you use the Selection tool to drag an existing keyframe, you’ll adjust it. This is
the same as making adjustments to visual effects using keyframes.
The Pen tool 
 adds keyframes to rubber bands. You can also use it to adjust
existing keyframes or to lasso lots of keyframes to adjust them together.
You don’t need to use the Pen tool, though. If you want to add a keyframe where
there is none, you can hold Ctrl (Windows) or Command (macOS) when you
click the rubber band.
 Tip
If you adjust the clip audio gain, Premiere Pro combines the effect
with the keyframe adjustments dynamically. You can change either
at any time.
The result of adding and adjusting the position of keyframes up or down on
audio clip segments is that the rubber band is reshaped. Just as before, the higher
the rubber band, the louder the sound.
Add a few keyframes with dramatic level adjustments to the music now and
listen to the results.
Smoothing volume between keyframes
The adjustments you made in the previous exercise are probably pretty
overwhelming. You might want to smooth the adjustments over time, and this is
easy to do.
To do so, right-click any of your keyframes. You’ll see a range of standard
options, including Ease In, Ease Out, and Delete. If you use the Pen tool, you
can lasso multiple keyframes and then right-click any one of them to apply a

change to them all.
The best way to learn about the different kinds of keyframes is to select each
kind, make some adjustments, and see or listen to the results.
Using clip vs. track keyframes
Until now, you’ve made all your keyframe adjustments to sequence clip
segments. Premiere Pro has similar controls available for the audio tracks those
clips are placed onto. Track-based keyframes work in the same way as the clip-
based ones. The difference is that they don’t move with the clips.
 Note
Adjustments you make to your clips are applied before adjustments
you make to your tracks.
This means you can set up keyframes for your audio level using track controls
and then try different music clips. Each time you put new music into your
sequence, you’ll hear it via the adjustments you have made to your track.
As you develop your editing skills with Premiere Pro and create more complex
audio mixes, explore the flexibility offered by combining clip and track
keyframe adjustments.
Working with the Audio Clip Mixer
The Audio Clip Mixer provides intuitive controls to adjust clip volume and pan
keyframes over time.
Each sequence audio track is represented by a set of controls. You can mute or
solo a track, and you can enable the option to write keyframes to clips during
playback by dragging a fader.
What’s a fader? Faders are industry-standard controls based on real-world audio-
mixing decks. You move the fader up to increase the volume and move it down
to decrease the volume. You can also use the volume faders to add keyframes to
your clip audio rubber band while you play the sequence.
Try this now.
1. Continue working with the Desert Montage sequence. Make sure the Audio 1
track is set to show audio keyframes, using the Timeline Settings menu.

2. Open the Audio Clip Mixer (not the Audio Track Mixer), and play the
sequence.
Because you already added keyframes to this clip, the Audio Clip Mixer fader
moves up and down during playback.
3. Position the Timeline playhead at the beginning of the sequence.
4. In the Audio Clip Mixer, enable the Write Keyframes button 
 for Audio 1.
5. Play the sequence, and while it plays, make some adjustments to the Audio 1
fader. When you stop playback, you’ll see the new keyframes that you added.
6. If you repeat the process, you’ll notice that the fader follows existing
keyframes until you make a manual adjustment.
 Note
You won’t see new keyframes until you stop playback.
You can adjust keyframes you have created this way just as you would adjust
keyframes that were created using the Selection tool or the Pen tool.
 Tip

You can adjust pan in the same way as you would adjust volume
using the Audio Clip Mixer. Simply play your sequence, and make
adjustments using the Audio Clip Mixer’s Pan control.
The difference between Pan and Balance
Mono and stereo audio clips have different Panner controls to set the level
for each output when producing a stereo or 5.1 audio sequence:
Mono audio clips have a Pan control, which allows you to distribute
the single audio channel between available output channels. In the case
of a stereo sequence, this would mean choosing how much of the
audio is in the left or right side of the mix.
Stereo audio clips have a Balance control, which allows you to
distribute the combined output of multiple audio channels in a clip
between available output channels.
The controls displayed vary depending on your sequence audio mastering
setting, and the available audio in each clip you select.
You have now discovered several ways to add and adjust keyframes in Premiere
Pro. There’s no right or wrong way to work with keyframes; it’s entirely a matter
of personal preference or the needs of a particular project.
Review questions
1. How can you isolate an individual sequence audio channel to hear only that
channel?
2. What is the difference between mono and stereo audio?
3. How can you view the waveforms for any clip that has audio in the Source
Monitor?
4. What is the difference between normalization and gain?
5. What is the difference between a J-cut and an L-cut?
6. Which option in the Audio Clip Mixer must be enabled before you can use
the fader controls to add keyframes to sequence clips during playback?
Review answers
1. Use the Solo buttons at the bottom of the audio meters to selectively hear an

audio channel.
2. Stereo audio has two audio channels, and mono audio has one. It is the
universal standard to record audio from a Left microphone as Channel 1 and
audio from a Right microphone as Channel 2 when recording stereo sound.
3. Use the Settings menu on the Source Monitor to choose Audio Waveform.
You can do the same with the Program Monitor, but you probably won’t need
to; clips can display waveforms on the Timeline. You can also click the Drag
Audio Only button at the bottom of the Source Monitor.
4. Normalization automatically adjusts the Gain setting for a clip based on the
original peak amplitude. You use the Gain setting to make manual
adjustments.
5. The sound for the next clip begins before the visuals when using a J-cut
(sometimes described as “audio leads video”). With L-cuts, the sound from
the previous clip remains until after the visuals begin (sometimes described
as “video leads audio”).
6. Enable the Write Keyframes option for each track you would like to add
keyframes to.

12. Sweetening Sound
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Working with the Essential Sound panel
Improving the sound of speech
Cleaning up noisy audio
This lesson will take about 75 minutes to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the
“Getting Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the
instructions under “Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.” In this lesson,
you’ll learn some quick, easy ways to improve the quality of your sound mix.

Audio effects in Adobe Premiere Pro CC can dramatically change the feel of your project. To take your
sound to a higher level, leverage the integration and power of Adobe Audition CC.
Starting the lesson
You’ll find many audio effects in Adobe Premiere Pro CC. These effects can be
used to change pitch, create an echo, add reverb, and remove tape hiss. You can
set keyframes for effects and adjust their settings over time.
1. Open the project Lesson 12.prproj.
2. Save the project as Lesson 12 Working.prproj.
3. In the Workspaces panel, click Audio. Then open the menu adjacent to the
Audio option and choose Reset To Saved Layout.

Sweetening sound with the Essential Sound panel
Ideally, your audio would come in perfectly. Unfortunately, video production is
rarely an ideal process. At some point, you’ll need to turn to audio effects to fix
problems.
 Note
Expand your knowledge about audio effects in Premiere Pro by
experimenting. These effects are nondestructive, which means they
do not change your original audio files. You can add any number of
effects to a clip, change settings, and then delete them and start
again.
Not all audio hardware plays all audio frequencies evenly. For example, listening
to deep bass notes on a laptop is never the same as listening on larger speakers.

The Essential Sound panel offers several methods to adjust, clean up, and improve your soundtrack.
It’s important to listen to your audio using high-quality headphones or studio
monitor speakers to avoid accidentally compensating for a flaw in your playback
hardware as you adjust the sound. Professional audio-monitoring hardware is
carefully calibrated to ensure that all frequencies play evenly, giving you
confidence you’ll produce a consistent sound for your listeners.
Premiere Pro offers a variety of helpful effects, including the following, all of
which are available in the Effects panel:

Parametric Equalizer: This effect allows you to make subtle and precise
adjustments to the audio level at different frequencies.
Studio Reverb: This can increase the “presence” in the recording with
reverb. Use it to simulate the sound of a larger room.
Delay: This effect can add a slight (or pronounced) echo to your audio
track.
Bass: This effect can amplify the low-end frequencies of a clip. It works
well on narration clips, particularly for male voices.
Treble: This effect adjusts the higher-range frequencies in an audio clip.
Apply effects by dragging them from the Effects panel onto clips. You’ll find
their controls in the Effect Controls panel, with several presets to help you get a
feel for the ways you can use them.
You can remove effects in the Effect Controls panel by selecting them and
pressing Backspace (Windows) or Delete (macOS).
Use the 01 Effects sequence to experiment with these effects. The types of clips
in this sequence will make it easy to hear the effects.
This lesson focuses on the Essential Sound panel, which offers a range of easy-
to-apply professional adjustments and effects that are based on common
workflows for standard media types like dialogue and music.
You are likely to find the Essential Sound panel is your go-to set of options for
audio cleanup and improvement.

Adjusting dialogue
The Essential Sound panel has a comprehensive list of features to help you work
with dialogue audio.
To use the Essential Sound panel, select one or more clips in a sequence, and
choose the type of media.
Each option displays different tools that are suitable for that type of media.
There are more options for dialogue audio than any other—and for good reason!
Your dialogue sound is probably the most important, and music, preprepared
special effects (SFX), and ambient sound files are probably already mixed and
ready to use.
In the following exercises, you’ll try several of the adjustments available in the
Essential Sound panel. All of the options you set can be stored as a preset,
accessible at the top of the Essential Sound panel.

You can apply a preset without first assigning the media type. To create a preset,
choose the media type, apply some settings, and click the Save Preset 
 button
at the top of the Essential Sound panel.
Presets are not fixed—you can easily apply one and make changes to the settings
—and even create a new preset based on the adjustments you have made.
If you expect to use some settings often, for a lot of the clips in your project,
consider creating a preset. Any time you know you’ll do something more than
five times, try making a preset.
Setting loudness
The Essential Sound panel makes it easy to set the audio level for multiple clips
to an appropriate volume for broadcast television.
Let’s try this.
1. Open the sequence 02 Loudness.
This is the same sequence you worked with previously when learning about
normalization.
2. Increase the height of the Audio 1 track, and zoom in a little so you can see
the voice-over clips clearly.

3. Play the sequence to hear the different levels for the voice-over clips.
4. Select all of the voice-over clips. The easiest way is to lasso across them,
being careful not to select any of the other clips in the sequence.
5. In the Essential Sound panel, click the Dialogue button. This assigns the
Dialogue audio type to these clips.
6. Click the title of the Loudness category to display the Loudness options.
Clicking a category in this way is a little like clicking a disclosure triangle in
the Effect Controls panel—options are displayed or hidden when you click.
7. Click Auto-Match.
Each clip is automatically analyzed and adjusted to match a standard level for
broadcast television dialogue.
As with normalization, which adjusts clip gain, this adjustment updates the
waveforms for the clips.
8. Play the sequence to hear the adjustment.
About the Loudness scale
Until now, we have been describing audio level in decibels (dB). You’ll
find the decibel scale a useful reference all throughout production and
post-production.
Peak level (the loudest moment of a clip’s audio level) is often used to set
limits for broadcast television soundtracks. Each broadcast television

station will have its own official limit for audio level.
While peak level is a useful reference, it doesn’t account for the overall
energy in a soundtrack, and it’s common to produce a mix that sets every
part of the soundtrack louder than is natural. A whisper, for example, can
sound as loud as a shout, as long as the peak level is within prescribed
limits.
This is why so many commercials sound as loud as they do—the peak
level is no louder than any other content but even the very quiet sections
of the soundtrack are also often loud.
The newer Loudness scale is intended to resolve this issue. It measures
the total energy over time. When a Loudness limit is used, it’s OK for
content to have loud sections, but overall the total amount of energy in the
soundtrack can’t rise above the level set. This forces content creators to
produce more natural ranges of volume.
If you are producing content for broadcast television, you will almost
certainly be delivering your content using the Loudness scale.
Repairing audio
However hard you try to capture clean audio on location, it’s likely some of your
footage will have unwanted background noise.
The Essential Sound panel has a number of ways to clean up dialogue clips.
Reduce Noise: Reduce the level of unwanted noises in the background, like
the sound of an air-conditioning unit, rustling clothes, or clicks.

Reduce Rumble: Reduce low-frequency sound below 80Hz, such as
engine noise or some wind noise.
DeHum: Reduce electrical interference hum. In North and South America,
this is in the 60Hz range, while in Europe, Asia, and Africa, it’s in the 50Hz
range. If your microphone cable was lying next to a power cable, you may
have this intrusive but easy-to-remove unwanted sound.
DeEss: Reduce harsh, high-frequency “ess”-like sounds common in the
sibilance part of voice recordings.
Different clips are likely to benefit from one or more of these cleanup features,
and often you will use a combination.
Let’s try cleaning up some power hum.
1. Open the sequence 03 Noise Reduction.
2. Play the sequence to listen to the voice-over.
This is a simple sequence, with voice-over accompanying some visuals.
There’s a loud electrical interference power hum in the audio.
3. Select the voice-over clip.
This clip has already been designated as dialogue, so the dialogue audio
options are displayed in the Essential Sound panel.
4. If it’s not open already, click the Repair heading in the Essential Sound panel
to display the options. Enable DeHum by selecting the check box.
5. Play the sequence to hear the difference.
The impact is significant. The electrical interference hum was loud but at a
specific frequency, which makes removing it relatively straightforward.
On the right side of the Essential Sound panel, the amount of adjustment is
shown in decibels.
This clip has 60Hz hum, so the default option of 60Hz is suitable. If the default

option doesn’t work, try switching to 50Hz.
For more challenging audio cleanup, where the repair options in Premiere Pro
don’t give you a result that is clean enough, try Adobe Audition, which has
advanced noise reduction features.
For more information on working with Audition, see the sidebar “Removing
background noise with Adobe Audition.”
Improving clarity
The Clarity tool in the Dialogue section of the Essential Sound panel gives you
three quick and easy ways to improve the quality of speech audio.
Dynamics: Increases or decreases the dynamic range of the audio—that is,
the range of volume in the quietest and loudest parts of the recording.
EQ: Applies different amplitude (volume) adjustments at different
frequencies. A list of presets makes selecting useful settings easy.
Enhance Speech: Improves clarity at different frequencies, depending on
your selection of a male or female voice.
It’s worth experimenting with all three controls, as you’ll find dialogue
recordings will benefit from different combinations of settings.
Let’s try these settings.

1. Open the sequence 04 Clarity.
This sequence has the same content as the last, but there are two versions of
the voice-over. The first version is cleaner and louder than the second, which
is the same as the version you just worked on, with the DeHum effect already
applied.
2. Listen to the first voice-over clip.
3. Select the first voice-over clip, and in the Essential Sound panel, expand the
Clarity options.
4. Enable Dynamics, and experiment with different levels of adjustment. You
can play the sequence while making adjustments in the Essential Sound
panel, and the effect will be applied “live.”
5. Enable EQ, and experiment with the Preset options.
Vocal Presence EQ preset
When you apply an EQ preset, a diagram illustrating the adjustment appears.
This diagram is based on a Parametric EQ effect (see the “Using the
Parametric Equalizer effect” section for more on this effect). You can adjust
the Amount slider to add more or less of the effect.
6. Play the second voice-over clip.
7. Select the second voice-over clip, and in the Essential Sound panel enable the
Enhance Speech option in the Clarity section, set to Female.
8. Play the second voice-over clip. Try enabling and disabling the Enhance
Speech option during playback.
The difference is subtle. In fact, you may need headphones or good-quality
studio monitors to clearly detect the improvement. This option clarifies speech to
make it more apprehensible, and in some cases this means reducing the power in
the lower frequencies.
Making creative adjustments

Below the Clarity section of the Essential Sound panel is the Creative section.
This has just one adjustment, Reverb. The effect can be similar to recording in a
large room with lots of reflective surfaces, or it can be more subtle.
Experiment with this effect on the first voice-over clip in the 04 Clarity
sequence.
Just a small amount of reverb can “thicken” a voice to give it more presence.
Adjusting volume
In addition to adjusting the gain for clips in the Project panel, setting the volume
level for clips in a sequence, and applying an automated Loudness adjustment,
there’s an option to set the clip level at the bottom of the Essential Sound panel.
It’s curious that this additional option exists—especially considering the number
of ways you can already adjust the volume of your clips.
But there’s something special about this volume control: No matter how much
you change the playback volume of your clips with this control, the level will
not override. That is, they won’t become so loud that they distort.
Try this now.
1. Open the sequence 05 Level.
This sequence simply contains a reasonably loud version of the voice-over

clip you have heard already.
2. Play the sequence, and use the Clip Volume Level adjustment to increase and
decrease the playback level.
3. Try increasing the level to the maximum +15dB.
No matter how much you adjust the audio level, it won’t override. Even if
you combine a clip gain increase with a clip volume increase (using the
rubber band) and then apply this adjustment, the clip will not override.
This makes the Essential Sound panel the easiest way to adjust audio level
without risking distortion.
4. Reset the Clip Volume Level adjustment by double-clicking the slider.
 Note
Any control in the Essential Sound panel can be reset to its
default value by double-clicking it. Knowing this, you don’t need
to worry about remembering the default settings.
Using additional audio effects
As mentioned at the beginning of this lesson, there are many additional audio
effects available in the Effects panel, and a few of them are important enough to
be worthy of exploration right away.
In fact, most of the adjustments you have made until now with the Essential
Sound panel have actually been the result of regular audio effects that were
added to clips automatically as you worked.
In most cases, the Essential Sound panel makes adjustments by applying and
then configuring regular audio effects—all of which are available in the Effects
panel.
Setting up effects in this way is quicker because all of the Essential Sound panel
adjustments work like presets—as soon as you have set things the way you want
them in the Essential Sound panel, the effects are set up appropriately in the
Effect Controls panel.

Take a look now at the Effect Controls panel, with the last clip you worked on
selected.
When you made a Clip Volume Level adjustment in the Essential Sound panel, a
Hard Limiter effect was applied to the clip, with settings to match the change
you set.
If you click the Edit button in the Effect Controls panel (Hard Limiter > Custom
Setup), you’ll discover all of the settings for this advanced effect are available in
case you’d like to change them.
In most cases, the settings applied by the Essential Sound panel will be correct,
but the option to make further subtle changes will always be available.
Let’s look at some of the other useful audio effects.
Using the Parametric Equalizer effect
While the Essential Sound panel offers many useful audio adjustments and
effects, there are also a significant number of effects available in the Effects
panel.
Effects listed in the Effects panel can be applied to clips by dragging them onto a
clip, or multiple selected clips in a sequence.
The Parametric Equalizer effect is a good example of a popular effect. It offers a
nuanced and intuitive interface for precise audio-level adjustment.
It includes a graphic interface you can use to drag level adjustments that are
linked together.
Let’s try this effect.
1. Open the sequence 06 Full Parametric EQ. This sequence has one musical
clip.

2. Locate the Parametric Equalizer effect in the Effects panel (try using the Find
box at the top of the window), and drag it onto the clip.
3. In the Effect Controls panel, click the Edit button to access the Custom Setup
controls for the Parametric Equalizer effect.
The bottom edge of the graphic control area indicates frequency, while the
vertical edge on the right shows amplitude. The blue line across the middle of
the graph represents any adjustments you have made, and you can reshape the
line directly. Wherever the blue line is higher or lower in the display,
adjustments are made to audio level at those frequencies.
You can drag any of the five control points directly, as well as the Low Pass
and High Pass controls at the ends.
On the left is an overall Master Gain level adjustment, which offers a quick
fix if the changes you make result in audio that is too loud or too quiet
overall.
4. Play the clip to get familiar with its sound.

5. Drag Control Point 1 quite a long way down in the graph to reduce the audio
level at low frequencies. Listen to the music again.
What’s special about this interface is that changes you make to one area of
the blue line impact surrounding frequencies, resulting in a more natural
sound.
The control points you drag have a range of influence that is defined by their
Q setting.
In the previous example, Control Point 1 has been set to 57Hz (which is very
low frequency), with a gain adjustment of –26.8dB (which is a big gain
reduction) and a Q of 2 (which is quite wide).
6. Change the Q factor for Control Point 1 from 2 to 7. You can click the 2 and
type in a new setting directly.

The line has a much sharper curve, so the adjustment you have made now
applies to fewer frequencies.
7. Play the sequence to hear the changes.
Let’s refine the vocals.
8. Drag Control Point 3 down to about –20dB, and set the Q factor to 1 for a
very broad adjustment.
9. Play the sequence to hear the changes—the vocals are much quieter.
0. Drag Control Point 4 to around 1500Hz, with a gain of +6.0dB. Adjust the Q
factor to 3 for more precise adjustment on the EQ adjustment.
1. Play the sequence to hear the changes.
2. Drag the High frequency filter (the H control), and set its gain to around –
8.0dB to make the highest frequencies quieter.

 Tip
Another way to use the Parametric EQ effect is to target a
specific frequency and either boost it or cut it. You can use this
effect to cut a particular frequency, like a high-frequency noise
or a low hum.
 Note
Avoid setting the volume too high (the Peak meter line will turn
red, and the peak monitors will light up). This can lead to
distortion.
3. Use the Master Gain control to adjust the overall level. You may need to see
your audio meters to find out whether your mix is right.
4. Close the Parametric Equalizer settings.
5. Play the sequence to hear the changes.
 Note
Listing all the attributes of all the audio effects in Premiere Pro is
beyond the scope of this book. To learn more about audio effects,
search Premiere Pro Help.
 Tip
If your audio meters are not displayed, you can access them by
choosing Window > Audio Meters.
These are dramatic changes intended to illustrate a technique. In general use,

you’ll usually make subtler adjustments.
Audio adjustments and effects can be modified during playback. You might want
to enable looping playback in the Program Monitor rather than clicking
repeatedly to play a clip or sequence.
Enable looping playback in the Program Monitor by clicking the Settings menu
and choosing Loop.
There are also useful additional buttons available in the Program Monitor button
editor:
Loop: Toggles looped playback on and off.
Play Video In To Out: If you have set In and Out marks, the sequence will
play just between those mark.
The combination of looped playback and the Play Video In to Out option make it
easier to repeat playback of an individual clip, or group of clips in a sequence.
Audio Plug-in Manager
It’s easy to install third-party plug-ins. Choose Edit > Preferences > Audio
(Windows) or Premiere Pro CC > Preferences > Audio (macOS). Then
click the button for the Audio Plug-in Manager.
1. Click the Add button to add any directories that contain AU or VST plug-ins.
AU plug-ins are Mac only.
2. If needed, click the Scan For Plug-Ins button to find all available plug-ins.
3. Use the Enable All button or the individual enable check boxes to activate a
plug-in.
4. Click OK to commit your changes.
Using the Notch effect
The Notch effect removes frequencies near a specified value. The effect targets a
frequency range and eliminates those sounds. The effect works well for
removing power-line hum and other electrical interference. In this clip, you can
hear the sounds of fluorescent light bulbs buzzing overhead.
1. Open the sequence 07 Notch Filter.
2. Play the sequence, and listen for the electrical hum.
3. In the Effects panel, locate the Notch Filter effect (not the Simple Notch
Filter effect) and apply it to your clip.

4. In the Effect Controls panel, click the Edit button for the Notch filter.
The Notch Filter effect looks a lot like the Parametric Equalizer effect and
functions in a similar way. However, you will notice there’s no Q control,
which sets the sharpness of the curve. By default each adjustment is
extremely acute, and a Notch Width menu allows you to adjust the curves.
5. While playing the sequence, experiment with presets, and listen to the results.
The presets usually apply multiple adjustments. This is because signal
interference is often found in multiple harmonics.
6. Choose 60Hz And Octaves from the Presets menu.
7. Listen to the sequence again.
Even though the interference was at precise frequencies, it made it difficult to

take in the vocals. Now it’s removed, and everything sounds much clearer.
When you used the Essential Sound panel to apply the DeHum option, a
similar effect was applied to the clip—the DeHummer.
The Notch Filter effect has slightly more advanced controls, so if you don’t
get the result you need using the Essential Sound panel, try this instead.
Removing background noise with Adobe Audition
Adobe Audition offers advanced mixing and effects to improve your
overall sound. If you have Audition installed, you can try the following:
1. In Premiere Pro, open the sequence 08 Send to Audition from the Project
panel.
2. Right-click the Noisy Audio.aif clip in the Timeline and choose Edit Clip In
Adobe Audition. A new copy of the audio clip is created and added to your
project.
Audition opens, along with the new clip.
3. Switch to Audition.
4. The stereo clip should be visible in the Editor panel. Audition shows a large
waveform for the clip. To use Audition’s advanced noise reduction tools, you
need to identify part of the clip that’s just the noise so Audition knows what
to remove.
5. If you don’t see Spectral Frequency Display under the waveform, choose
View > Show Spectral Frequency Display. Play the clip. The beginning
contains a few seconds of just noise, which is perfect for making a selection.
6. Using the Time Selection tool (the I-bar tool in the toolbar), drag to highlight
the section of noise you just identified.

7. With the selection active, choose Effects > Noise Reduction/Restoration >
Capture Noise Print. You can also press Shift+P. If a dialog appears
informing you that the noise print will be captured, click OK to confirm.
8. Choose Edit > Select > Select All to select the entire clip.
9. Choose Effects > Noise Reduction/Restoration > Noise Reduction (process).
You can also press Shift+Ctrl+P (Windows) or Shift+Command+P (Mac OS).
A new panel opens so you can process the noise.

0. Select the Output Noise Only check box. This option allows you to hear only
the noise you’re removing, which helps you make an accurate selection so
you don’t accidentally remove too much of the audio you want to keep.
1. Click the Play button at the bottom of the window, and adjust the Noise
Reduction and Reduce By sliders to remove noise from the clip. Try not to
pull down much or any of the voice.
2. Deselect the Output Noise Only check box and listen to your cleaned-up
audio.

3. Sometimes noise reduction results in distortion in vocals. In the Advanced
section, there are a number of controls for refining the noise reduction.
Experiment with the following:
Reduce the Spectral Decay Rate option (this will shorten the delay
between reducing noise and allowing it to be heard).
Increase Precision Factor (this will take longer to process but improve
results).
Increase Smoothing (this will soften the adjustment from no noise
reduction to full noise reduction based on an automatic selection of
specific frequencies).
Increase Transition Width, which allows some variation in level without
applying full noise reduction.
4. When you’re happy with the results, click the Apply button to apply the
cleanup.
5. Choose File > Close, and save your changes.
6. Saving in Audition automatically updates the clip in Premiere Pro. Switch
back to Premiere Pro, where you can listen to the cleaned-up audio clip.
Using the Loudness Radar effect
If you are producing content for broadcast television, it’s likely you will be
supplying media files according to strict delivery requirements.
One of those requirements will relate to the maximum volume for the audio—
and there is more than one approach to this.
As described earlier, a popular modern way of measuring the audio level for
broadcast is called the Loudness scale, and there’s a way to measure your
sequence audio using this scale.
You can measure the loudness for clips, for tracks, or for whole sequences. The
precise settings you’ll require for your audio should be given to you as part of
your delivery specifications.
To measure the loudness for a whole sequence, follow these steps—you can try
this with the 08 Send to Audition sequence:
1. Switch to the Audio Track Mixer panel (rather than the Audio Clip Mixer).
You may need to resize the frame to see all the controls in the Audio Track
Mixer.
The Audio Track Mixer allows you to add effects to tracks, rather than clips,

and the Master output track is no exception. Unlike the Audio Clip Mixer, the
Audio Track Mixer includes the Master track, and this is the part of the
interface you want.
2. The controls in the Audio Track Mixer are arranged in columns, one column
per track plus the Master track at the right. At the top of the Master control,
click the tiny triangle to open the Effect Selection menu and choose Special >
Loudness Radar.
3. The effect appears at the top of the stack, with controls at the bottom.
4. Right-click the Loudness Radar effect in the Audio Track Mixer and choose
Post-Fader.
The Fader controls on the Audio Track Mixer adjust the audio level for the
track. It’s important that the Loudness Radar analyzes the audio level after
any Fader adjustments because otherwise adjustments made with the fader
are ignored.

5. Double-click the name of the effect at the top of the interface to get access to
full controls.
6. Press the spacebar to play, or click Play on the Program Monitor. During
playback, the Loudness Radar monitors loudness and displays it as a range of
values illustrated in blue, green, and yellow (there’s also a peak indicator).
For more information about the Loudness Rader, see Premiere Pro Help.
The goal is to keep loudness generally within the green band on the Loudness
Radar, though what that level will be depends on the standard you are working
to, and this will be defined by your broadcast specifications.
The Loudness Radar won’t change the audio level. It gives you a precise
measure of Loudness that you can use to guide changes you’ll make to the mix.
You can change the measurement levels indicated by the various bands in the
Loudness Radar by clicking Settings. You can also use a preset, based on widely
used standards, by choosing the Presets menu.
Review questions
1. How would you use the Essential Sound panel to set an industry-standard
audio level for dialogue clips?
2. What’s a quick, easy way to remove electrical interference hum from clips?
3. Where can you find the more detailed controls for the options you set using

the Essential Sound panel?
4. How can you send a clip to Adobe Audition directly from the Premiere Pro
timeline?
Review answers
1. Select the clips you want to adjust. In the Essential Sound panel, choose
Dialogue as the audio type. Then, in the Loudness section, click Auto-Match.
2. Use the DeHum option in the Essential Sound panel to remove electrical
interference hum. Try the 60Hz or 50Hz option, depending on the origin of
your source footage.
3. Most adjustments you make using the Essential Sound panel are applied as
effects to clips. You can find the detailed controls by selecting a clip and
looking in the Effect Controls panel.
4. It’s easy to send a clip to Audition. Right-click the clip and choose Edit Clip
In Adobe Audition.

13. Adding Video Effects
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Working with fixed effects
Browsing effects with the Effects panel
Applying and removing effects
Using effect presets
Masking and tracking visual effects
Using keyframing effects
Exploring frequently used effects
Using special VR video effects
Rendering effects
This lesson will take about 120 minutes to complete. Please log in to your
account on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to
the “Getting Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the
instructions under “Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.”
In this lesson, you’ll learn some more advanced visual effects, as well as the
main skills you’ll use to work with all kinds of effects in Premiere Pro.

Adobe Premiere Pro CC features more than 100 video effects. Most effects come with an array of
parameters, all of which you can animate (have them change over time) by using precise keyframe
controls.
Starting the lesson
You might use video effects for many reasons. They can solve problems with
image quality, such as exposure or color balance. They can create complex
visual effects through compositing with techniques such as chromakey. They can
also help solve a number of production problems, such as camera shake and
rolling shutter.
Effects can also serve stylistic purposes. You can alter the color or distort
footage, and you can animate the size and position of a clip within the frame.
The challenge can be knowing when to use effects and when to keep it simple.
Standard effects can be constrained to elliptical or polygon masks, and these
masks can automatically track your footage. For example, you might blur

someone’s face to hide their identity and have the blur follow them as they move
through the shot.
Working with effects
Adobe Premiere Pro makes working with effects easy. You can drag a visual
effect onto a clip, as you have already done with audio effects, or you can select
the clip and double-click the effect in the Effects panel. In fact, you already
know how to apply effects and change their settings. You can combine as many
effects as you want on a single clip, which can produce surprising results.
Moreover, you can use an adjustment layer to add the same effects to a
collection of clips.
When it comes to deciding which video effects to use, the number of choices in
Premiere Pro can be a bit overwhelming. Many additional effects are also

available from third-party manufacturers for sale or free download.
While the range of effects and their controls can be complex, the techniques
you’ll use to apply, adjust, and remove effects are always straightforward.
Modifying fixed effects
If you add a clip to a sequence, it will automatically have a few effects applied.
These effects are called fixed effects, or intrinsic effects, and you can think of
them as controls for the usual geometric, opacity, speed, and audio properties
that every clip should have. You can modify all fixed effects using the Effect
Controls panel.
1. Open Lesson 13.prproj.
2. Save the project as Lesson 13 Working.prproj.
3. Open the sequence 01 Fixed Effects, and single click the first clip in the
Timeline to select it.
4. Switch to the Effects workspace by clicking Effects on the Workspaces panel
or by choosing Window > Workspaces > Effects.
5. Reset the workspace by opening the menu next to the Effects option on the
Workspaces panel and choosing Reset To Saved Layout or by choosing
Window > Workspaces > Reset To Saved Layout.
6. In the Effect Controls panel, look at the fixed effects applied to this clip.
Fixed effects are automatically applied to every clip in a sequence, but they
don’t change anything until you modify the settings.
7. You may need to click the disclosure triangle 
 next to a heading or an
individual control to display its properties.
Motion: The Motion effect allows you to animate, rotate, and scale a

clip. You can also use the Anti-flicker Filter control to decrease
shimmering edges for an animated object. This comes in handy when
you scale a high-resolution source and Premiere Pro must resample the
image.
Opacity: The Opacity effect lets you control how opaque or transparent
a clip is. You can also access special blend modes to create visual effects
from multiple layers of video. You’ll explore this more in Lesson 15,
“Exploring Compositing Techniques.”
Time Remapping: This effect lets you slow down, speed up, or reverse
playback, and it even lets you freeze a frame. You learned about time
remapping in Lesson 8, “Advanced Editing Techniques.”
Audio Effects: If a clip has audio, Premiere Pro displays its Volume,
Channel Volume, and Panner controls. You learned about these in
Lesson 11, “Editing and Mixing Audio.”
8. Click to select the second clip in the Timeline, and look at the Effect Controls
panel.
These effects have keyframes, meaning that their settings change over time.
In this case, a small Scale and Pan were applied to the clip to create a digital
zoom that didn’t exist before and to recompose the shot.

You’ll explore keyframes later in this lesson.
9. Press Play to watch the current sequence and compare the two shots.
Using the Effects panel
In addition to the fixed video effects, Premiere Pro has standard effects, which
change a clip’s appearance. Because there are so many to choose from, effects
are organized into 17 categories. If you install third-party effects, you may have
more choices.
There’s an additional category of Obsolete effects. These effects have been
replaced with newer, better-designed versions, but they have been kept in
Premiere Pro to ensure compatibility with older project files.
Effects are grouped into functions, including Distort, Keying, and Time, to make
it easier to navigate them.
Each category has its own bin in the Effects panel.
1. Open the Effects panel.
 Tip
The keyboard shortcut to display the Effects panel is Shift+7.

2. In the Effects panel, expand Video Effects.
3. Click the New Custom Bin button 
 at the bottom of the panel.
 Note
With so many Video Effect subfolders, it’s sometimes tricky to
locate the effect you want. If you know part or all of an effect’s
name, start typing it in the Find box at the top of the Effects
panel. Premiere Pro will display all effects and transitions that
contain that letter combination, narrowing the search as you type.
The new custom bin appears in the Effects panel at the bottom of the list (you
may need to scroll down to see it). Let’s rename it.
4. Click once to select the bin.
5. Click once more, directly on the bin’s name (Custom Bin 01), to highlight it
and change it.
6. Change its name to something like Favorite Effects.
7. Open any Video Effects folder, and drag a few effects to copy them into your
custom bin. You may need to resize the panel to make it easier to drag and
drop effects. Choose any effects that sound interesting to you. You can add or
remove effects from a custom bin whenever you like.
 Note
When you add effects to a custom bin in the Effects panel,
you’re making a copy. Effects also remain in their original folder.
You can use custom bins to create effect categories to suit your
work style.
As you browse the video effects, you’ll notice icons next to many of the
effect names. Understanding these icons might influence your choices when

working with effects.
 Tip
You can select any of the three effect type icons at the top of the
Effects panel to only display effects with those features.
Accelerated effects
The Accelerated effect icon 
 indicates that the effect can be accelerated by
your graphics processing unit (GPU). The GPU (often called the video card or
graphics card) can greatly enhance the Premiere Pro’s performance. The range
of cards supported by the Mercury Playback Engine is broad, and with the right
card installed, these effects often offer accelerated or even real-time performance
and need rendering only on final export. You’ll find a list of recommended cards
on the Premiere Pro product page.
32-bit color (high-bit-depth) effects
Effects with the 32-bit color support icon 
 can process in a 32-bits-per-
channel mode, which is also called high-bit-depth or float processing.
You should use high-bit-depth effects in the following situations:
When you’re working with video shot with 10- or 12-bits-per-channel
codecs, such as RED, ARRIRAW, or AVC-Intra 100, or 10-bit DNxHD,
ProRes, or GoPro CineForm
When you want to maintain greater image fidelity after applying multiple
effects to any footage
 Note
When using any 32-bit effects on a clip, try to use only
combinations of 32-bit effects for maximum quality. If you mix and
match effects, the non-32-bit effects switch processing back to 8-bit
space for that clip.

Also, 16-bit photos or Adobe After Effects files rendered in 16- or 32-bits-per-
channel color space can take advantage of high-bit-depth effects.
If you are editing without GPU acceleration, in Software mode, take advantage
of high-bit-depth effects by making sure your sequence settings have the
Maximum Bit Depth video-rendering option selected.
YUV effects
Effects with the YUV icon 
 process color in YUV. This is important if you’re
adjusting clip color. Effects without the YUV icon are processed in the
computer’s native RGB space, which might make adjusting exposure and color
less accurate.
 Note
To learn more about YUV effects, be sure to read the article at
http://bit.ly/yuvexplained.
YUV effects break down the video into a Y (or luminance) channel and two
channels for color information, which is how most video footage is structured
natively. These filters make it easy to adjust contrast and exposure without
shifting color.
Applying effects
Virtually all the video effect settings are accessible in the Effect Controls panel.
You can add keyframes to nearly every setting, making it easy to apply changes
over time (just look for settings with a stopwatch icon). In addition, you can use
Bézier curves to adjust the velocity and acceleration of those changes.
1. Open the sequence 02 Browse.

2. Type white into the Effects panel Find box to narrow the results. Locate the
Black & White video effect.
 Tip
If you type black instead of white into the Effects panel Find
box, you’ll see a fantastic list of presets for lens distortion
removal, because they relate to a particular camera with the word
“black” in the name. Typing the word white instead displays a
shorter list of effects to scroll through.
3. Drag the Black & White video effect onto the Run Past clip in the Timeline.

This effect immediately converts your full-color footage to black and white
or, more accurately, grayscale.
4. Make sure the Run Past clip is selected in the Timeline panel, and open the
Effect Controls panel.
5. Toggle the Black & White effect off and on by clicking the “fx” button 
next to the effect name in the Effect Controls panel. Be sure the sequence
playhead is over this footage clip to view the effect.
Toggling an effect on and off is a good way to see how it works with other
effects.
6. Make sure the clip is selected so its settings are displayed in the Effect
Controls panel. Click the Black & White effect heading to select it, and press
the Delete key.
This removes the effect.
7. Type direction into the Effects panel search box to locate the Directional
Blur video effect.
8. In the Effects panel, double-click the Directional Blur effect to apply it to the
selected clip.
9. In the Effect Controls panel, expand the Directional Blur effect’s controls.
0. Set Direction to 75.0 degrees and Blur Length to 45.

 Note
Remember, if you have a clip selected, you can apply effects by
double-clicking them in the Effects panel or by dragging them
into the Effect Controls panel directly.
1. Click the disclosure triangle to expand the Blur Length control, and move the
slider to reduce the strength of the effect.
 Tip
The slider limit may be smaller than the number you can enter by
typing.
As you change the setting, the result is displayed in the Program Monitor.
2. Click the panel menu for the Effect Controls panel, and choose Remove
Effects.
 Note
You won’t always use visual effects to create dramatic results.
Sometimes effects are intended to look like in-camera results.
3. Click OK in the dialog that pops up asking which effects you want to

remove; you want to remove them all. This is an easy way to start fresh.
 Tip
Fixed effects in Premiere Pro are processed in a particular order,
which can lead to unwanted scaling or resizing. You can’t
reorder fixed effects, but you can bypass them and use other,
similar effects. For example, you can use the Transform effect
instead of the Motion fixed effect, or you can use the Alpha
Adjust effect instead of the Opacity fixed effect. These effects
are not identical, but they’re a close match, they behave
similarly, and they can be placed in any order you choose.
Other ways to apply effects
To make working with effects more flexible, there are three ways to reuse
an effect you have already configured.
You can select an effect from the Effect Controls panel, choose Edit >
Copy, select a destination clip (or several clips), and choose Edit >
Paste.
You can copy all the effects from one clip so you can paste them onto
another clip, select the clip in the Timeline and choose Edit > Copy,
select the destination clip (or clips), and choose Edit > Paste
Attributes.
You can create an effect preset to store a particular effect (or multiple
effects) with settings for reuse later. You’ll learn about this technique
later in this lesson.
Using adjustment layers
Sometimes you’ll want to apply an effect to multiple clips. One easy way to do
this is to use an adjustment layer. The concept is simple: Create an adjustment
layer clip that can hold effects, and position it above other clips on the Timeline.
Everything beneath the adjustment layer clip is viewed through it, receiving any
effects it has.
You can easily adjust the duration and opacity of an adjustment layer clip, as you
would adjust any graphics clip, making it easy to control which other clips are
seen through it. Adjustment layers make it faster to work with effects because
you can change the settings on it (a single item) to influence the appearance of

several other clips.
Let’s add an adjustment layer to a sequence that’s already been edited.
1. Open the sequence 03 Multiple Effects.
2. At the bottom of the Project panel, click the New Item menu, and choose
Adjustment Layer.
The Adjustment Layer dialog allows you to specify settings for the new item
you’re creating. The settings in the dialog box will reflect the settings in the
current sequence.
3. Click OK.
Premiere Pro adds a new adjustment layer to the Project panel.
4. Drag the adjustment layer to the beginning of the Video 2 track in the current
Timeline.
5. Drag to trim the right edge of the adjustment layer so it extends to the end of
the sequence.

The adjustment layer should look like this.
Let’s create a more nuanced look by using effects and then modifying the
opacity of the adjustment layer.
6. In the Effects panel, search for and locate the Gaussian Blur effect.
7. Drag the effect onto the adjustment layer.
8. Move the playhead position to 27:00 to have a good close-up shot to use
when designing the effect.
9. In the Effect Controls panel, set Blurriness to a heavy value, like 25.0 pixels.
Select the Repeat Edge Pixels option to apply the effect evenly.
Let’s blend the adjustment layer with the clips beneath it using a blend mode
to create the film look. Blend modes let you mix two layers together based on
their brightness and color values. You’ll learn more about them in Lesson 15,
“Exploring Compositing Techniques.”
0. With the adjustment layer still selected in the sequence, click the disclosure
triangle next to the Opacity control in the Effect Controls panel.
1. Change the blend mode to Soft Light to create a gentle blend with the
footage.

2. Set Opacity to 75% to reduce the effect.
You can enable and disable the visibility icon for the Video 2 track 
 in the
Timeline panel to see the before and after states of the effect.
Sending a clip to Adobe After Effects
If you’re working with a computer that also has Adobe After Effects
installed, you can easily send clips back and forth between Premiere Pro
and After Effects. Thanks to the close relationship between Premiere Pro
and After Effects, you can seamlessly integrate the two applications more
easily than with any other editing platform. This is a useful way to
significantly extend the effects capabilities of your editing workflow.
You certainly don’t need to learn to use After Effects to get the most out
of Premiere Pro. Still, many editors find working with both applications
expands their creative toolset in exciting ways.
The process you use to share clips is called Dynamic Link. With Dynamic
Link you can seamlessly exchange clips with no unnecessary rendering.
If you’d like to try this, follow these steps:
1. Open the sequence AE Dynamic Link.

2. Right-click the clip in the sequence and choose Replace With After Effects
Composition.
3. If it’s not running already, After Effects launches. If the After Effects Save
As dialog appears, enter a name and location for the After Effects project.
Name the project Lesson 13-01.aep and save it to a new folder inside the
Lessons folder.
After Effects creates a new composition, which inherits the sequence settings
from Premiere Pro. The new composition is named based on the Premiere Pro
project name, followed by “Linked Comp.”
After Effects compositions are analogous to Premiere Pro sequences.
Clips become layers in After Effects compositions to make it easier to work
with advanced controls on the Timeline panel.
There are lots of ways to apply effects with After Effects. To keep things
simple, let’s work with animation presets. For more on effects workflows, see
Adobe After Effects CC Classroom in a Book.
4. If the composition isn’t already open, look for it in the After Effects project
panel, and double-click to load it. It should be called Lesson 13 Linked
Comp 01 (the number may be higher if you have tried this workflow before).
Click the Laura_02.mp4 layer in the Timeline panel to select it.
5. Locate the Effects & Presets panel (you can find this in the Window menu if
it’s not on-screen already). Click the disclosure triangle to expand the
*Animation Presets category.

The animation presets in After Effects use standard built-in effects to achieve
impressive results. They are an excellent shortcut to producing a professional
finish for your work.
6. Expand the Image – Creative folder. You may need to resize the panel a little
to read the full preset names.
7. Double-click the Contrast – Saturation preset to apply it to the selected layer.
8. Click to select the clip on the Timeline, and press the E key to view any
applied effects. You can click the disclosure triangles for each effect to see
the controls, right inside the Timeline panel.
The Contrast – Saturation preset actually uses an effect with a different name,
Calculations, to make changes to the appearance of the clip.
9. Now look at the Effect Controls panel. The same effect is displayed here.

0. Press the spacebar to play the clip.
After Effects displays the clip, with the effect applied, as fast as possible
(depending on the power of your editing system). The green line at the top of
the Timeline panel indicates a temporary preview has been created. Playback
of the highlighted section of the timeline will be smooth.
The effect is subtle but gives richer color saturation and stronger contrast to a
shot that would otherwise be a little flat.
1. Choose File > Save to capture your changes.
2. Switch back to Premiere Pro and play the sequence to view the results.
3. Quit After Effects.
The original clip on the Timeline in Premiere Pro has been replaced with the
dynamically linked After Effects composition.
The frames are processed in the background and handed off from After
Effects to Premiere Pro. To improve preview playback performance in
Premiere Pro, you can select the clip in the Timeline and choose Sequence >
Render Effects In To Out.

Working with master clip effects
While all the effects work you have performed so far has been applied to clips on
the Timeline, Premiere Pro also allows you to apply effects to master clips in the
Project panel. You use the same visual effects and work with them in the same
way. With master clips, any instance of a clip you add to a sequence will inherit
the effects you have applied.
For example, you could add a color adjustment to a clip in the Project panel so
that it matches other camera angles in a scene. Each time you use that clip or
part of that clip in a sequence, the adjustment will already be applied.
Try working with a master clip effect now.
1. Open the sequence 04 Master Clip Effects.
This has one clip, Laura_02.mp4, edited five times into the same sequence.
The copies of the clip are divided by a series of other, similar shots.
2. Locate the clip Laura_02.mp4 in the Project panel.
3. In the Project panel, double-click the Laura_02.mp4 clip to view it in the
Source Monitor. Don’t double-click the clip in the sequence because this will
open the wrong instance for master clip effects.
 Note
If you want to open the Project panel instance of a clip you are
viewing on the Timeline, position the playhead over the clip,
select it, and press the F key. This is the keyboard shortcut for
Match Frame, which opens the original master clip in the Source
Monitor at the same frame as that displayed in the Program
Monitor.
You now have the same clip open in the Source Monitor and displayed in the
Program Monitor, so you can see the changes as you apply them in both
monitors.

4. In the Effects panel, type 100 in the Find box to quickly locate the Cinespace
100 Lumetri Look effect preset.
5. Drag the Cinespace 100 effect into the Source Monitor.
This applies the effect to the master clip.
6. Click the Source Monitor to make sure it’s the active panel, and go to the
Effect Controls panel to see the effect options.
 Note
Selection is critical in Premiere Pro. Clicking to activate the
Source Monitor before going to the Effect Controls panel is
necessary to see the correct options.
 Tip
You can also apply an effect to a master clip by dragging the
effect onto the clip directly in the Project panel, or by selecting a

clip in a sequence and clicking the Master clip name at the top
left of the Effect Controls panel, and dragging the effect into that
panel.
Because you applied the effect to the clip in the Source Monitor and then
selected the Source Monitor to make it active, the Effect Controls panel
shows the effect applied to the master clip, rather than the Timeline instance
of the clip.
This is a Lumetri Color effect, and you will be learning a lot more about these
in Lesson 14, “Improving Clips with Color Correction and Grading.”
Because the effect has been applied to the master clip, every instance of the
clip in the sequence shows the results.
7. Play some of the sequence to see the effect is applied to every copy of the
Laura_02 clip.
The result of the effect is displayed in the Source Monitor and the Program
Monitor because sequence clips inherit their master clip effects.
From now on, any time you use this clip, or part of it, in a sequence, Premiere
Pro will include the same effect.
However, none of the Timeline instances of the clip (the sequence clips) has
the effect applied.
8. Click once on one of the sequence instances of the Laura_02 clip on the
Timeline to select it, and look in the Effect Controls panel—no Lumetri
Color effect, just the usual fixed effects (which are applicable only to
sequence clips, not clips in the Project panel).

 Tip
You can often tell if you’re looking at Source effect settings or
sequence clip effect settings by seeing whether the Fixed effect
controls are displayed.
At the top of the Effect Controls panel there are two tabs. The tab on the left
shows the name of the master clip. The tab on the right shows the name of the
sequence followed by the name of the clip.
Because you selected the clip in the sequence, the tab on the right is
highlighted in blue, showing that you’re working on that instance of the clip.
There’s no Lumetri Color effect displayed because you haven’t applied the
effect to the Timeline instance of the clip.
9. In the Effect Controls panel, click the tab at the top that shows the clip name.
You’ll see the effect options again.
0. Experiment with the controls for the Lumetri Color effect and then play the
sequence to see that the changes you have made are applied to every clip in
the sequence.

Working with master clips is a powerful way to manage effects in Premiere Pro.
You may need to experiment a little to make the most of them. You use the same
visual effects as you would use on the Timeline, so the techniques you’re
learning in this book will work the same way, but the planning is a little
different.
You can tell a master clip effect is applied to a clip because the “fx” badge has a
red underline 
.
Masking and tracking visual effects
All standard visual effects can be constrained to elliptical, polygon, or custom
masks, which you can manually animate using keyframes. Premiere Pro can also
motion-track your shots to animate the position of the masks you create,
following the action with the constrained special effect.
Masking and tracking effects are great ways to hide a detail like a face or logo
behind a blur. You can also use the technique to apply subtle creative effects or
modify the lighting in a shot.
Continue working with the 04 Master Clip Effects sequence.
1. Position the playhead over the second clip in the sequence, Evening Smile.

This clip shows the actress Andrea Sweeney. It looks good, but it would
benefit from a stronger light on the subject to help separate the foreground
from the background.
2. Search the Effects panel for the Brightness & Contrast effect.
3. Apply this effect to the clip.
4. In the Effect Controls panel, scroll down to the Brightness & Contrast
controls. Choose the following settings:
Brightness 35.
Contrast 25.
 Note
This example uses a vivid adjustment to illustrate a technique.
You will usually make subtler adjustments.
You can set these levels by clicking the blue numbers and typing the new
setting, by dragging the blue numbers, or by expanding the controls and using
the sliders.

This effect changes the entire picture. You’re going to constrain the effect to
just one area of the shot.
Just under the name of the Brightness & Contrast effect in the Effect Controls
panel, you’ll see three buttons that allow you to add a mask to the effect.
5. Click the first button to add an elliptical mask.
Immediately, the effect is constrained to the mask you just created. You can
add multiple masks to an effect. If you select a mask in the Effect Controls
panel, you can click and modify the shape in the Program Monitor.
6. Position the playhead at the start of the clip, and use the mask handles to
reposition the mask so it covers Andrea’s face and hair. You may find it
helpful to adjust the Zoom level for the Program Monitor to see beyond the
edges of the image.

7. Feathering softens the edge of the mask. Set Mask Feather to about 240.
If you deselect the mask in the Effect Controls panel, you’ll see that you have
lifted the area around the Andrea’s face, with a natural return to regular
lighting in the rest of the picture. Now you just need to track the picture.
8. Make sure the playhead is still on the first frame of the clip. Click the Track
Selected Mask Forward button 
 in the Effect Controls panel, just under the
mask name, Mask (1).
The movement is quite subtle, so it should be easy for Premiere Pro to follow
the action. If the mask stops following the clip, click Stop, reposition the
mask, and begin again.
9. Deselect the mask by clicking the background of the Effect Controls panel, or
an empty track in the Timeline panel, and play the sequence to view the
result.
Premiere Pro can also track backward so that you can select an item partway
through a clip and then track in both directions to create a natural path for the
mask to follow.
Using keyframing effects
When you add keyframes to an effect, you’re setting particular values at that
moment in time. One keyframe will keep information for one setting. If, for

example, you were intending to keyframe Position, Scale, and Rotation, you
would need three separate keyframes.
 Note
Be sure to move the playhead over the clip you’re working with
when applying effects so you can view your changes as you work.
Selecting the clip alone will not make it visible in the Program
Monitor.
Set keyframes at precise moments where you need a particular setting and let
Premiere Pro work out how to animate the controls between them.
Adding keyframes
You can change almost all parameters for all video effects over time using
keyframes. For example, you can have a clip gradually change out of focus,
change color, or lengthen its shadow.
1. Open the sequence 05 Keyframes.
2. View the sequence to get familiar with the footage and then position the
Timeline playhead over the first frame of the clip.
3. In the Effects panel, locate the Lens Flare effect and apply it to the clip in the
sequence.
4. In the Effect Controls panel, select the Lens Flare effect heading. With the
effect selected, the Program Monitor displays a small control handle. Use the
handle to reposition the lens flare to match the following figure so that the
center of the effect is at the top of the waterfall.

5. Make sure the Effect Controls panel Timeline is visible. If it isn’t, click the
Show/Hide Timeline View button 
 at the top right of the panel to toggle
the display.
6. Click the stopwatch icons to toggle animation for the Flare Center and Flare
Brightness properties.
Clicking the Stopwatch icon enables keyframing and adds a keyframe at the current location with
the current settings.
7. Move the playhead to the end of the clip.
You can drag the playhead directly in the Effect Controls panel. Make sure
you see the last frame of video and not black.
8. Adjust Flare Center and Flare Brightness settings so the flare drifts across the
screen with the camera pan and gets brighter. Use the following figure for
guidance.

9. Play the sequence to watch the effect animate over time.
 Tip
Be sure to use the Next Keyframe and Previous Keyframe
buttons to move between keyframes efficiently. This will keep
you from adding unwanted keyframes.
Adding keyframe interpolation and velocity
Keyframe interpolation changes the behavior of an effect setting as it moves
between keyframes with different settings. The default behavior you’ve seen so
far is linear; in other words, you have a constant change between keyframes.
What generally works better is something that mirrors your experience or
exaggerates it, such as a gradual acceleration or deceleration.
Premiere Pro offers a way to control those changes: keyframe interpolation and
the Velocity graph. Keyframe interpolation is easy (two clicks), whereas
tweaking the Velocity graph can be challenging. Getting a handle on this feature
will take some time and practice.
1. Open the sequence 06 Interpolation.
2. Position the playhead at the beginning of the clip, and select the clip.
A Lens Flare effect has already been applied to this clip and is currently
animated. However, the movement begins before the camera, which isn’t very
natural-looking.
3. Toggle the Lens Flare effect off and on by clicking the “fx” button 
 next to
the effect name in the Effect Controls panel so you can see the result.

4. In the Timeline view of the Effect Controls panel, right-click the first
keyframe for the Flare Center property.
5. Choose the Temporal Interpolation > Ease Out method to create a gentle
transition into the move from the keyframe.
6. Right-click the second keyframe for the Flare Center property and choose
Temporal Interpolation > Ease In. This creates a gentle transition from the
stationary position of the last keyframe.
Let’s modify the Flare Brightness property.
7. Click the first keyframe for Flare Brightness and then hold down the Shift
key and click the second keyframe so both are active.
8. Right-click either Flare Brightness keyframe and choose Auto Bézier to
create a gentle animation between the two properties.
 Note
When working with position-related parameters, the context
menu for a keyframe will offer two types of interpolation: spatial
(related to location) and temporal (related to time). You can
make spatial adjustments in the Program Monitor as well as in
the Effect Controls panel if you select the effect. You can make

temporal adjustments on the clip in the Timeline and in the
Effect Controls panel. These motion-related topics are covered in
Lesson 9, “Putting Clips in Motion.”
9. Play back the animation to watch the changes you’ve made.
Let’s further refine the keyframes with the Velocity graph.
0. Hover the mouse cursor over the Effect Controls panel and then, if your
keyboard has the key, press ` (grave) to maximize the panel full-screen; or,
double-click the panel name. This will give you a clearer view of the
keyframe controls.
1. If necessary, click the disclosure triangles next to the Flare Center and Flare
Brightness properties to show the adjustable properties.
The Velocity graph shows the velocity between keyframes. The sudden drops
or jumps represent sudden changes in acceleration—jerks, in physics
parlance. The farther the point or line is from the center, the greater the
velocity.
2. Select a keyframe and then adjust its extended handle to change the steepness
of the velocity curve.
3. Press the ` (grave) key, or double-click the panel name to restore the Effect
Controls panel.
4. Play back your sequence to see the impact of your changes. Experiment some
more until you have the hang of keyframes and interpolation.
Understanding interpolation methods
Here’s a rundown of the keyframe interpolation methods available in
Premiere Pro:
Linear: This is the default behavior and creates a uniform rate of
change between keyframes.

Bézier: This lets you manually adjust the shape of the graph on either
side of a keyframe. Béziers allow for sudden or smooth acceleration
into or out of a keyframe.
Continuous Bézier: This method creates a smooth rate of change
through a keyframe. Unlike regular Bézier keyframes, if you adjust
one handle of a Continuous Bézier keyframe, the handle on the other
side moves equally to maintain a smooth transition through the
keyframe.
Auto Bézier: This method creates a smooth rate of change through a
keyframe even if you change the keyframe value. If you choose to
manually adjust the keyframe’s handles, it changes to a Continuous
Bézier point, retaining the smooth transition through the keyframe.
The Auto Bézier option can occasionally produce unwanted motion, so
try one of the other options first.
Hold: This method changes a property value without a gradual
transition (a sudden effect change). The graph following a keyframe
with the Hold interpolation applied appears as a horizontal straight
line.
Ease In: This method slows down the value changes entering a
keyframe and converts it to a Bézier keyframe.
Ease Out: This method gradually accelerates the value changes
leaving a keyframe and converts it to a Bézier keyframe.
Using effect presets
To save time on repeated tasks, Premiere Pro supports effect presets. You’ll find
that there are several prebuilt presets included for specific tasks already, but the
true power of effects lies in creating your own presets to solve repetitive tasks. A
single preset can contain more than one effect and can even include keyframes
for animation.
Using built-in presets
The effect presets provided with Premiere Pro are useful for tasks such as
beveling, picture-in-picture (PIP) effects, and stylized transitions.
1. Open the sequence 07 Presets.
This sequence has a slow start—the emphasis is on the texture of the
background. Let’s use a preset to add visual interest to the opening of the

shot.
2. In the Effects panel, browse inside the Presets > Solarizes category to find
the Solarize In preset.
3. Drag the Solarize In preset onto the clip in the sequence.
4. Play back the sequence to watch the Solarize effect transform the opening.
5. Click the clip, and view its controls in the Effect Controls panel.
6. Experiment with adjusting the position of the second keyframe in the Effect
Controls panel to customize the effect. If you extend the timing of the effect,
it creates a more pleasing start to the shot.
Saving effect presets
Although there are several built-in effect presets to choose from, creating your
own is also easy. You can also import and export presets to share them between
editing systems.
1. Open the sequence 08 Creating Presets.
This Timeline has two clips, each with an adjustment layer, and two instances
of an opening title.
2. Play the sequence to watch the initial animation.

3. Select the first instance of the “Laura in the snow” title clip on V3.
4. Click in the Effect Controls panel to make it active, and choose Edit > Select
All to select all the effects applied to the clip.
You can also select individual effects if you want to include only some of
them in the preset.
5. Right-click any of the selected effects in the Effect Controls panel and choose
Save Preset.
6. In the Save Preset dialog, name the effect Title Animation.
There are three options for the way keyframes in the preset will be adapted
for new clips with differing durations:
Scale: Proportionally scales the source keyframes to the length of the
target clip. Any existing keyframes on the original clip are deleted.
Anchor To In Point: Preserves the position of the first keyframe as well

as the relationship of other keyframes in a clip. Other keyframes are
added to the clip relative to its In point. Use this option for this exercise.
Anchor To Out Point: Preserves the position of the last keyframe as
well as the relationship of other keyframes in a clip. Other keyframes
are added to the clip relative to its Out point.
7. For this preset, choose Anchor To In Point so the timing matches at the start
of each clip the preset is applied to.
8. Click OK to store the effects and keyframes as a new preset.
9. In the Effects panel, locate the Presets category and the newly created Title
Animation preset.
 Tip
Effect presets can be exported and imported, so they can be
shared. 
You’ll 
find 
a 
number 
of 
free 
presets 
at
https://premierepro.net/jarles-premiere-pro-presets-version-4/.
0. Drag the new Title Animation preset onto the second instance of the “Laura
in the snow” title clip on the V3 track in the Timeline.
1. Watch the sequence play back to see the newly applied title animation.
Using multiple GPUs
If you’d like to speed up the rendering of effects or the export of clips,
consider adding an additional GPU card. If you’re using a tower or
workstation, you may have an additional slot that can support a second
graphics card. An additional GPU won’t improve playback performance
when previewing real-time effects or displaying multiple layers of video,
but Premiere Pro takes full advantage of computers with multiple GPU
cards to significantly accelerate render and export times. You can find
additional details about supported cards on the Adobe website.
Using frequently used effects
In this lesson, you’ve explored several effects. Although it’s beyond the scope of
this book to explore all the options, here are a few additional effects that are

useful in many editing situations.
Applying image stabilization and rolling shutter reduction
The Warp Stabilizer effect can remove jitter caused by camera movement (which
is more and more common with today’s lightweight cameras). The effect is
useful because it can remove unstable parallax-type movements (where images
appear to shift on planes).
Let’s explore the effect.
1. Open the sequence 09 Warp Stabilizer.
2. Play the first clip in the sequence to see the wobbly shot.
3. In the Effects panel, locate the Warp Stabilizer VFX effect and apply it to the
shot.
The clip is analyzed.
A banner across the footage lets you know you’ll need to wait before working
with the effect. There’s also a detailed progress indicator in the Effect
Controls panel. The analysis takes place in the background, so you can carry
on working while waiting for it to complete.
4. Once the analysis has completed, you can adjust settings in the Effect
Controls panel to improve results by choosing options that better suit the
shot.
Result: You can choose Smooth Motion to retain the general camera
movement (albeit stabilized), or you can choose No Motion to attempt
to remove all camera movement. For this exercise, choose Smooth
Motion.
Method: You can use the four methods available. The two most

powerful, because they warp and process the image more heavily, are
Perspective and Subspace Warp. If either method creates too much
distortion, you can try switching to Position, Scale, Rotation or just to
Position.
Smoothness: This option specifies how much of the original camera
movement should be retained for Smooth Motion. Use a higher value to
smooth out the shot the most. Experiment with this shot until you’re
happy with its stability.
 Tip
If you notice that some of the details in the shot appear to
wobble, you may be able to improve the overall effect. In the
Advanced section, choose Detailed Analysis. This makes the
Analysis phase do extra work to find elements to track. You can
also use the Enhanced Reduction option from the Rolling Shutter
Ripple option in the Advanced category. These options are
slower to calculate but produce superior results.
5. Play back the clip.
The impact is pretty dramatic.
6. Repeat the process for the second clip in the sequence. This time, set the
Warp Stabilizer Result menu to No Motion.
This is a common example of a shot that was intended to be static but, being
handheld, has a little wobble. Warp Stabilizer is effective at locking these
kinds of shots in position.
Using the Timecode and Clip Name effects
If you need to send a review copy of a sequence to a client or colleague, the
Time-code and Clip Name effects are useful. You can apply the Timecode effect
to an adjustment layer and have it generate a visible timecode for the entire
sequence. You can enable a similar timecode overlay when exporting media, but
the effect has more options.
 Note
If you work with multiple sequences with different settings in a
single project, it’s worth naming adjustment layers to make it easier
to identify their resolution.

This is helpful because it allows others to make specific feedback based on a
unique point in time. You can control the display of position, size, opacity, the
timecode itself, and its format and source.
1. Open the sequence 10 Timecode Burn-In.
2. At the bottom of the Project panel, click the New Item menu, and choose
Adjustment Layer. Click OK.
A new adjustment layer is added to the Project panel, with settings that match
your current sequence.
3. Drag the adjustment layer to the beginning of track V2 in the current
sequence.
4. Drag the right edge of the new adjustment layer to the right to trim it to the
end of the sequence. The adjustment layer should cover all three clips.
5. In the Effects panel, locate the Timecode effect. Drag it onto the adjustment
layer to apply it.
6. In the Effect Controls panel, make sure Time Display is set to 24 to match the
frame rate of the sequence.
7. Choose a timecode source. In this case, use the Generate option, set the
Starting Timecode option to 01:00:00:00 to match the sequence, and deselect
the Field Symbol option (this footage is progressive, so it does not have
fields).

8. Adjust the Position and Size options to your preference.
It’s a good idea to move the timecode window so it’s not blocking critical
action in the scene or obscuring any graphics. If you plan to post the video to
the web for review, be sure to size the time-code burn-in so it’s easy to read.
Now let’s apply an effect that will display the name of each clip in the
exported movie. This will make it easier to get specific feedback from a client
or collaborator.
9. In the Effects panel, search for the Clip Name effect.
0. Apply the Clip Name effect to the adjustment layer clip.
By default, the clip name appears in the same location on-screen as the time-
code. It also shows the name of the clip you applied it to, which in this case is
Adjustment Layer—not very useful!
1. In the Effect Controls panel, set the Clip Name effect Source Track menu to
Video 1. Now the clip names from the V1 track are displayed.
2. Use the Clip Name effect Position controls to place the displayed name
somewhere different than the existing Timecode effect.
3. Clear the Effects panel find box by clicking the X.

 Tip
You can click the Timecode or Clip Name effect heading in the
Effect Controls panel and then drag the displayed information
directly in the Program Monitor to reposition it.
Using immersive video effects
Premiere Pro includes comprehensive tools and effects for equirectangular 360
video (often referred to as VR video or immersive video).
The effects workflow for 360 video is similar to the workflow for any other kind
of video. However, there are dedicated effects available that take into account
the wraparound nature of 360 video.
The fact that 360 video seamlessly surrounds the viewer and can connect on all
sides (depending on the configuration) does not impact most visual effects. The
exception is any effect that generates changes to surrounding pixels, such as
blurs and glows. These effects make changes to multiple pixels, and only effects
specially designed to work with seamless 360 video images will result in an
image without a visible join along the original edges.
Let’s try this.
1. Open the sequence 11 Immersive Video.
This is equirectangular 360 video, so let’s switch to the VR video viewing
mode in the Program Monitor.
2. Use the Program Monitor Settings menu to enable VR video.

3. The viewing angle is a little narrow by default. Go to the Program Monitor
Settings menu, and choose VR Video > Settings.
4. Set the Monitor View Horizontal to 150, and click OK.
5. In the Effects panel, find the VR Glow effect, in the Video Effects >
Immersive Video category. Add the effect to the video clip in the sequence.
This is a processing-intensive effect, and you may find the preview is slower
to update than when working with other effects.
6. Try dragging the image in the Program Monitor to see different views.

The original video clip has some minor “stitching” errors, where the overlap between sections of the
image is visible. However, the glow effect is seamless.
7. Like other effects, you’ll find settings for the VR Glow effect in the Effect
Controls panel. Experiment with the VR Glow settings.
8. When you have finished, use the Program Monitor Settings menu to disable
VR video mode.
Removing lens distortion
Action and point-of-view (POV) cameras such as the GoPro and DJI Phantom
are very popular, especially with the advent of affordable aerial camera mounts.
While the results can be amazing, the wide-angle lenses can introduce unwanted
distortion.
The Lens Distortion effect can be used to introduce the appearance of lens
distortion as a creative look. It can also be used to correct lens distortion.
Premiere Pro has a number of built-in presets intended to correct distortion from
popular cameras. You’ll find the presets in the Effects panel, under Lens
Distortion Removal.

Remember, you can make a preset from any effect, so if you are working with a
camera that has no existing preset, you can always create your own.
Rendering all sequences
If you have several sequences with effects you want to render, you can render
them all as a batch, without opening each sequence to render it individually.
Simply select the sequences you would like to render in the Project panel and
choose Sequence > Render Effects In To Out.
All effects that need to render in the selected sequences will be rendered.
Rendering and replacing
If you are working on a low-powered system and your media is high resolution,
you may find media tends not to preview without dropping frames. You may also
see dropped frames when working with dynamically linked After Effects
compositions or complex third-party visual effects that don’t support GPU
acceleration.
If all your media is high resolution, you may decide to use the proxy workflow.
However, if just one or two clips are difficult to play back, you also have the
option to render the clips as a new media file and replace the original item in a
sequence quickly and easily.
To replace a sequence clip segment with a version that’s easier to play back,
right-click the clip and choose Render And Replace.

The Render And Replace dialog has similar options to the proxy workflow. Here
are the main settings:
Source: Create a new media file that matches the frame rate and frame size
of the sequence or of the original media, or use a preset.
Format: Specify your preferred file type. Different formats give access to
different encoders.
Preset: While you can use a custom preset created with Adobe Media
Encoder, several are included by default—choose one here.
Once you have chosen a preset and a location for the new file, click OK and the
sequence clip is replaced.
A rendered and replaced clip is no longer directly linked to the original media—
it’s a new media file. This means, for example, changes made to a dynamically
linked After Effect composition will not update in Premiere Pro. To restore the
link to the original item, right-click the clip and choose Restore Unrendered.
Review questions
1. What are two ways to apply an effect to a clip?
2. List three ways to add a keyframe.
3. Dragging an effect onto a clip turns on its parameters in the Effect Controls
panel, but you don’t see the effect in the Program Monitor. Why not?
4. Describe how you can apply one effect to a range of clips.
5. Describe how to save multiple effects to a custom preset.
Review answers
1. Drag the effect to the clip, or select the clip and double-click the effect in the
Effects panel.
2. Move the playhead in the Effect Controls panel to where you want a

keyframe and activate keyframing by clicking the “Toggle animation” button;
move the playhead and click the Add/Remove Keyframe button; and with
keyframing activated, move the playhead to a position and change a
parameter.
3. You need to move the Timeline playhead to the selected clip to see it in the
Program Monitor. Selecting a clip does not move the playhead to that clip.
4. You can add an adjustment layer above the clips you want to affect. You can
then apply an effect that will modify all the clips below the layer. You can
also select the clips you would like to apply the effect to and then drag the
effect onto the group, or double-click the effect in the Effects panel.
5. You can click the Effect Controls panel and choose Edit > Select All. You
can also Ctrl-click (Windows) or Command-click (macOS) multiple effects
in the Effect Controls panel. Once the effects are selected, choose the Save
Preset command from the Effect Controls panel menu.

14. 
Improving 
Clips 
with 
Color
Correction and Grading
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Working in the Color workspace
Using the Lumetri Color panel
Using vectorscopes and waveforms
Using color correction effects
Fixing exposure and color balance problems
Working with special color effects
Creating a look
This lesson will take about 120 minutes to complete. Please log in to your
account on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to
the “Getting Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the
instructions under “Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.”
In this lesson, you’ll learn some key techniques for improving the look of your
clips. Industry professionals use these techniques every day to give television
programs and films the “pop” and atmosphere that set them apart. This chapter is
not a “deep dive” into color theory but should get you up and running with some
of the powerful tools available to you in Adobe Premiere Pro CC.

Editing your clips together is just the first part of the creative process. Now it’s time to work with color.
Starting the lesson
Until now you’ve been organizing your clips, building sequences, and applying
special effects. All of these skills come together when working with color
correction.
Consider the way your eyes register color and light, the way cameras record it,
and the way your computer screen, a television screen, a video projector, or a
cinema screen displays it. There are a great many factors when considering the
final look of your production.
Premiere Pro has multiple color correction tools and makes it easy to create your
own presets. In this lesson, you’ll begin by learning some fundamental color
correction skills and then meet some of the most popular color correction special
effects, before using them to deal with some common color correction

challenges.
1. Open Lesson 14.prproj in the Lesson 14 folder.
2. Save the project as Lesson 14 Working.prproj.
3. Choose Color in the Workspaces panel, or choose Window > Workspaces >
Color, to switch to the Color workspace.
4. Choose Window > Workspaces > Reset To Saved Layout to reset the
workspace to its default layout.
This changes the workspace to the preset that was created to make it easier to
work with color correction effects and, in particular, the Lumetri Color panel
and Lumetri Scopes panel.
The subject of color science requires ongoing learning and development, but you
can get by with a basic understanding of key concepts.
About 8-bit video
Eight-bit video works on a scale from 0 to 255. That means each pixel has
red, green, and blue (RGB) values somewhere on that scale, which
combine to produce a particular color. You can think of 0 as 0% and 255
as 100%. A pixel that has a red value of 127 is equivalent to having a red
value of 50%.
However, we’re talking about RGB images, and broadcast video uses a
similar but different range, with a color system called YUV.
If you compare the YUV scale with RGB scale, when the waveform scope
is set to show 8 Bit, you’ll find that 8-bit YUV pixel values range from 16
to 235, while RGB values range from 0 to 255.
TVs usually use YUV color, not RGB. However, your computer screen is
RGB. If you are producing video for broadcast television, this can create
issues because you are looking at your video footage on a different kind of
screen than the kind it will ultimately be viewed on. There is only one
sure way of overcoming the uncertainty this creates: Connect a TV or
broadcast monitor to your editing system and view your footage on that
screen.
The difference is a little like comparing a photograph you view on-screen
with a printed version. The printer and your computer screen use different
color systems, and it’s an imperfect translation from one to the other.
Sometimes you will view footage with visible detail on an RGB screen

like your computer display that disappears when viewed on a TV screen.
You’ll need to make adjustments to the color to bring those details into the
TV screen range.
Some TVs give you the option to display color as RGB, using a range of
names such as Game Mode or Photo Color Space. If your screen is set up
this way, you may see the full 0 to 255 RGB range.
Following a color-oriented workflow
Now that you’ve switched to a new workspace, it’s a good time to switch to a
different kind of thinking. With your clips in place, it’s time to look at them less
in terms of the action and more in terms of whether they fit together and have the
right look.
There are two main phases to working with color.
Make sure clips in each scene have matching colors, brightness, and
contrast so they look like they were shot at the same time, in the same
place, and with the same camera.
Give everything a “look,” in other words, a particular tonality or color tint.
You’ll use the same tools to achieve both of these goals, but it’s common to
approach them in this order, separately. If two clips from the same scene don’t
have matching colors, it creates a jarring continuity problem.
Color correction and color grading
You’ve probably heard of both color correction and color grading. There
is often confusion about the difference. In fact, both types of color work
use the same tools, but there’s a difference of approach.

Color correction is usually aimed at standardizing the shots to make sure
they fit together and to improve the appearance in general to give brighter
highlights and stronger shadows or to correct a color bias captured in-
camera. This is more craft than art.
Color grading is aimed at achieving a look that conveys the atmosphere
of the story more completely. This is more art than craft.
There is, of course, a debate about where one ends and the other begins.
Working with the Color workspace
The Color workspace displays the Lumetri Color panel, which has a number of
sections offering color adjustment controls, and places the Lumetri Scopes panel
behind the Source Monitor. The Lumetri Scopes are a set of image analysis
tools.
The remaining screen area is devoted to the Program Monitor, Timeline, and
Project panels. The Timeline shrinks to accommodate the Lumetri Color panel.
Remember, you can open and close any panel at any time, but this workspace
focuses on finishing work, rather than organizing or editing your project.
While the Lumetri Color panel is displayed, clips on the Timeline are selected
automatically as the playhead moves over them. Only clips on tracks that have
the track selection button enabled will be selected.

This feature is important because adjustments made with the Lumetri Color
panel are always applied to the selected clip. You can apply an adjustment and
move the playhead along the Timeline to select the next clip and work on it.
You can enable or disable automatic clip selection by choosing Sequence >
Selection Follows Playhead.
Getting an overview of the Lumetri Color panel
There is an effect available in the Effects panel called Lumetri Color, which
provides all the controls and options available in the Lumetri Color panel. Like
any other effect, its controls are displayed in the Effect Controls panel.

When you make adjustments using the Lumetri Color panel, a Lumetri Color
effect is applied if there isn’t one added to the clip already, and the settings are
updated.
This means the Lumetri Color panel is actually a kind of control panel for the
Lumetri Color effect settings in the Effect Controls panel. Like any other effect,
you can create presets, copy and paste Lumetri Color effects from one clip to
another, and change the settings in the Effect Controls panel.
The Lumetri Color panel is divided into six sections. You can browse color
adjustment controls selectively or work from the top downward.
 Note
You can expand or collapse a section in the Lumetri Color panel by
clicking its heading.

Each section provides a group of controls with different approaches to color
adjustment. Let’s take a look at each section.
Basic Correction
This section provides you with simple controls to apply quick fixes to your clips.
You can apply a preset adjustment to your media in the form of an Input LUT
file, which makes standard adjustments to media that might otherwise look quite
flat.
If you’re familiar with Adobe Lightroom, you’ll recognize the list of simple
controls in the Basic section. You can work your way down the list making
adjustments to improve the look of your footage, or you can click the Auto
button to let Premiere Pro work out some settings for you.
Creative
As the name suggests, the Creative section allows you to go a little further into
developing a look for your media.
A number of creative looks are included, with a preview based on your current
clip.

You can make subtle adjustments to the color intensity, and there are color
wheels configured to adjust the color for the shadow (darker) pixels or highlight
(lighter) pixels in the image.
Curves
Curves allow quick but precise adjustments to visuals and make it easier to
achieve more natural-looking results with just a few clicks.
 Tip
You can reset most controls in the Lumetri Color panel by double-
clicking a blank area of the control.
These are some of the more advanced controls, providing nuanced adjustments
to the luminance, red, green, and blue pixels.
In addition to a traditional RGB curve control, the Curves section includes a
special Hue Saturation Curves control.
This gives precise control over color saturation based on hue range, without
introducing a color bias.

Color Wheels
This section provides precise control over the shadow, midtone, and highlight
pixels in the image. Simply drag the control puck from the center of a wheel
toward the edge to apply an adjustment.
Each color wheel also has a luminance control slider, which allows you to make
simple adjustments to the brightness and, by appropriate adjustment, the contrast
of your footage.
HSL Secondary
The HSL Secondary setting is a color adjustment made to specific areas of an
image, selected using Hue, Saturation, and Luminance ranges.
This is the section of the Lumetri Color panel you would use to make a blue sky
even bluer, or make a field of grass a deeper green, without affecting other areas
of the picture.

Vignette
It’s surprising how much difference a simple vignette effect can make to a
picture.
A vignette was originally caused by camera lenses darkening the edge of frame,
but modern lenses rarely have this issue.
Instead, a vignette is commonly used to bring attention to the center of an image,
and it can be highly effective, even when the adjustment is subtle.
The Lumetri Color panel in action
When you make adjustments using the Lumetri Color panel, they are added
collectively as a regular Premiere Pro effect applied to the selected clip. You can
enable and disable the effect in the Effect Controls panel, or you can create an
effect preset. The controls are repeated in the Effect Controls panel too.
Let’s try some prebuilt looks.
1. Open the sequence Jolie’s Garden in the Sequences bin.

This is a simple sequence with a series of clips that have a good range of
color and contrast.
2. Position the Timeline playhead over the first clip in the sequence. The clip
should highlight automatically.
3. Click the Creative section heading in the Lumetri Color panel to reveal its
controls.
4. Browse through several prebuilt looks by clicking the arrow on the right side
of the preview display. When you see a look you like, click the preview
image to apply it.
5. Try adjusting the Intensity slider to vary the amount of adjustment.
This is a good time to experiment with the other controls in the Lumetri Color
panel. Some controls will make sense immediately, while others will take time to
master. Use the clips in this sequence as a testing ground to learn about the
Lumetri Color panel through experimentation; just drag all the controls from one
extreme to the other to see the result. You’ll learn about many of these controls
in detail later in this lesson.
Understanding Lumetri Scopes essentials

You might have wondered why the Premiere Pro interface is so gray. There’s a
good reason: Vision is highly subjective. In fact, it’s also highly relative.
If you see two colors next to each other, the way you see one is changed by the
presence of the other. To prevent the Premiere Pro interface from influencing the
way you perceive colors in your sequence, Adobe has made the interface almost
entirely gray. If you’ve ever seen a professional color-grading suite, where artists
provide the finishing touches to films and television programs, you’ve probably
noticed that most of the room is gray. Colorists sometimes have a large gray
piece of card, or a section of a wall, that they can look at for a few moments to
“reset” their vision before checking a shot.
The combination of your subjective vision and the variation that can occur in the
way computer monitors and television monitors display color and brightness
creates a need for an objective measurement.
Video scopes provide just that. And they’re used throughout the media industry;
learn them once, and you’ll be able to use them everywhere.
1. Open the sequence Lady Walking.
2. Position the Timeline playhead so that it’s over the clip in the sequence.
3. The Lumetri Scopes panel should be sharing the frame with the Source
Monitor. Click to select the panel and make it active, or select it in the
Window menu.
4. Click the Lumetri Scopes panel Settings menu 
 and choose Presets >
Premiere 4 Scope YUV (float, no clamp).

You should see the lady walking in the street in your Program Monitor, along
with the synchronized display in the Lumetri Scopes panel.
Working with the Lumetri Scopes panel
The Lumetri Scopes panel displays an array of industry-standard meters to get an
objective view of your media.
The full complement of displays can be a little overwhelming at first, plus you’ll
have smaller graphs. You can turn individual items off and on by opening the
Settings menu and choosing items on the list.
You can also specify whether you are working to an ITU Rec. 2020 (UHD), ITU
Rec. 709 (HD), or ITU Rec. 601 (SD) color space. If you’re producing content
for broadcast television, you will almost certainly be working to one of these
standards. If not or if you’re not sure, you will probably be happy with Rec. 709.
Check with your ingest department for confirmation.
You can choose the color space in the Settings menu.

You can also choose to display 8 Bit, the default float (which is 32-bit floating-
point color), or even HDR. HDR refers to High Dynamic Range, which has a
much higher range between the darkest and brightest parts of the picture.
Though HDR is beyond the scope of these lessons, it’s an important new
technology and one that will be increasingly relevant as new cameras and
displays support it.
Let’s simplify the view.
Use the Lumetri Scopes settings menu to click each of the selected items to
deselect them and remove them from the display.
 Tip
You can also access the Lumetri Scopes Settings menu by right-
clicking anywhere in the panel.
Right-click in the panel and choose Presets > Waveform RGB.
Let’s take a look at two of the main components in the Lumetri Scopes panel.
Waveform
If you’re new to waveforms, they can look a little strange, but they’re actually

simple. They show you the brightness and color saturation of your images.
Every pixel in the current frame is displayed in the waveform. The brighter the
pixel, the higher it appears. The pixels have their correct horizontal position (that
is, a pixel halfway across the screen will be displayed halfway across the
waveform), but the vertical position is not based on the image at all.
Instead, the vertical position indicates brightness or color intensity; the
brightness and color intensity waveforms are displayed together in this version
of the Waveform, using different colors.
0, at the bottom of the scale, represents no luminance at all and/or no color
intensity.
100, at the top of the scale, represents a pixel that is fully bright. On the
RGB scale, this value would be 255 (you can see this scale on the right side
of the waveform display).
This all might sound rather technical, but in practice it’s straightforward. There’s
a visible baseline that represents “no brightness” and a top level that represents
“fully bright.” The numbers on the edge of the graph might change depending on
your settings, but the use is essentially always the same.
You can view the waveform in several ways. To access each type, open the
Lumetri Scopes Settings menu, and choose Waveform Type, followed by one of
these options:
RGB: Shows the Red, Green, and Blue pixels in their own colors.

Luma: Shows the IRE value of pixels, from 0 to 100, against a scale of –20
to 120. This allows for precise analysis of bright spots and contrast ratio.
YC: Shows the image luminance (brightness) in green and the chrominance
(color intensity) in blue.
YC no Chroma: Shows the luminance with no chrominance.
Why YC?
The letter C, for chrominance, makes simple sense, but the letter Y, for
luminance, takes a little explaining. It comes from a way of measuring
color information that uses x-, y-, and z-axes, where Y represents the
luminance. The idea was originally to create a simple system for
recording color, and the use of Y to represent brightness, or luminance,
stuck.
Let’s test this display a little.
1. Continue using the Lady Walking sequence. Set the Timeline playhead to
00:00:07:00 so you can see the lady against the smoky background.
2. Set the waveform display to YC No Chroma. This is a brightness-only
waveform, with no color information, that shows a full range, with no limits
set for broadcast television. This would be suitable for online videos.

The smoky parts of the image have little contrast and are displayed as a
relatively flat line in the waveform display. The lady’s head and shoulders are
darker than the smoky background. They’re around the middle of the image,
and they are clearly visible in the middle area of the waveform display.
3. Expand the Basic Correction section of the Lumetri Color panel.
4. Experiment with the Exposure, Contrast, Highlights, Shadows, Whites, and
Blacks controls. As you adjust the controls, watch the waveform display to
see the result.
 Tip
You can double-click any part of a slider control in the Lumetri
Color panel to reset it.
If you make an adjustment to the image and then wait a few seconds, your eyes
will adjust to the new appearance, and it will seem normal. Make another
adjustment, and a few seconds later the new appearance seems normal too.
Which is correct?
Ultimately, the answer is based on perceived quality. If you like what you see,
it’s right. However, the waveform display will give you objective information
about how dark or bright pixels are or how much color is in the shot, which is
useful when attempting to meet standards.
You should be able to see the parts of the picture where the smoky background
of the image is displayed, toward the left and right (with some ridges where

there is a pattern in the background). You should also be able to see a darker
section, in the middle, where the lady is. If you scrub through the sequence or
play the sequence, you’ll see the waveform display update live.
 Tip
It can sometimes seem as if the waveform display is showing an
image. Remember, the vertical position of the pixels in your images
is not used in a waveform display.
The waveform display is useful for showing how much contrast you have in
your images and for checking whether you are working on video that has “legal”
levels (that is, the minimum and maximum brightness or color saturation
permitted by a broadcaster). Broadcasters adopt their own standards for legal
levels, so you will need to find out for each case where your work will be
broadcast.
You can see right away that you do not have great contrast in this shot. There are
some strong shadows but few highlights in the upper part of the waveform
display.
YUV Vectorscope
Whereas the Luma waveform shows luminance in terms of the vertical position
of pixels displayed, with brighter pixels displayed at the top and darker pixels
displayed at the bottom, the vectorscope shows only color.
1. Open the sequence Skyline.
2. Click the Lumetri Scopes Settings menu, and select Vectorscope YUV; then

go to the Settings menu again, and choose Waveform (YC no Chroma) to
disable it.
 Note
The HLS vectorscope is sometimes used by film-grading artists in
preference to the YUV vectorscope. It has no guiding overlay and is
a little harder to read if you are not already familiar with it.
Pixels in the image are displayed in the vectorscope. If a pixel appears in the
center of the circle, it has no color saturation. The closer to the edge of the circle,
the more color a pixel has.
If you look closely at the vectorscope, you’ll see a series of targets indicating
primary colors.
R = Red
G = Green
B = Blue

There are two boxes for each target. The smaller, inner box is at 75% saturation,
the YUV color limit, while the larger, outer box is at 100% saturation, the RGB
color limit. RGB color extends to a greater level of saturation than YUV. The
thin line between the inner boxes shows the YUV color gamut (the range of
YUV colors).
You’ll also see a series of targets indicating secondary colors.
YL = Yellow
CY = Cyan
MG = Magenta
The closer a pixel is to one of these targets, the more of that color it has. While
the waveform display indicates where a pixel is in the picture, thanks to the
horizontal positioning, there is no position information in the vectorscope.
About primary and secondary colors
Red, green, and blue are primary colors. It’s common for display systems,
including television screens and your computer monitor, to combine these
three colors in varying relative amounts to produce all the colors you see.
There’s a beautiful symmetry to the way a standard color wheel works,
and a color wheel is essentially what the vectorscope displays.
Any two primary colors will combine to produce a secondary color.
Secondary colors are the opposite of the remaining primary color.
For example, red and green combine to produce yellow, which is the
opposite of blue.

It’s clear enough to see what’s happening in this shot of Seattle. There’s a lot of
darker blue, and there are a few spots of red and yellow. The small amount of red
is indicated by the streak of peaks reaching out toward the R marking in the
vectorscope.
The vectorscope is helpful because it gives you objective information about the
colors in your sequence. If there’s a color cast, perhaps because the camera was
not calibrated properly, it’s often obvious in the vectorscope display. You can
simply use one of the Lumetri Color panel controls to reduce the amount of the
unwanted color or add more of the opposite color.
Some of the controls for color correction adjustments have the same color wheel
design as the vectorscope, making it easy to see what you need to do.
Let’s make an adjustment and observe the result in the vectorscope display.
1. Continue working with the Skyline sequence. Position the Timeline playhead
at 00:00:01:00, where the colors are more vivid.
2. In the Lumetri Color panel, expand the Basic Correction section.
3. While watching the result in the vectorscope display, drag the Temperature
slider from one extreme to the other.
The pixels displayed in the vectorscope move between the orange and blue
areas of the display.
4. Reset the Temperature slider by double-clicking the slider control.
5. In the Lumetri Color panel, drag the Tint slider from one extreme to the
other.
The pixels displayed in the vectorscope move between the green and magenta
areas of the display.
6. Reset the Tint slider by double-clicking the slider control.
By making adjustments while checking the vectorscope, you can get an objective
indication of the change you’re making.
Additive and subtractive color
Computer screens and televisions use additive color, which means the
colors are created by generating light in different colors and combining
them to produce a precise mix. You produce white by combining equal

amounts of red, green, and blue.
When you draw with color on paper, it is usually white paper, which
reflects a full spectrum of colors. You subtract from the white of the paper
by adding pigment. The pigment prevents parts of the light from
reflecting. This is called subtractive color.
Additive color uses primary colors; subtractive color uses secondary
colors. In a sense, they’re flip sides of the same color theory.
RGB parade
Click the Lumetri Scopes Settings menu, and choose Presets > Parade RGB.
The RGB parade provides another form of waveform-style display. The
difference is that the red, green, and blue levels are displayed separately. To fit
all three colors in, each image is squeezed horizontally to one-third of the width
of the display.
You can choose which kind of parade you see by clicking the Lumetri Scopes
Settings menu or by right-clicking in the Lumetri Scopes panel and choosing
Parade Type.

The three parts of the parade have similar patterns in them, particularly where
there are white or gray pixels, because these parts will have equal amounts of
red, green, and blue. The RGB parade is one of the most frequently used tools in
color correction because it clearly shows the relationship between the primary
color channels.
To see the impact color adjustments can have on the parade, go to the Basic
Correction section of the Lumetri Color panel and try adjusting the White
Balance Temperature and Tint controls. Be sure to reset them when you finish by
double-clicking each control.
Exploring the color-oriented effects
As well as adjusting color using the Lumetri Color panel, there are a number of
color-oriented effects worth familiarizing yourself with. You add, modify, and
remove color correction effects in the same way that you manage the other
effects in Premiere Pro. Just as with the other effects, you can use keyframes to
modify color correction effect settings over time.
As you build familiarity with Premiere Pro, you may find yourself wondering
which effect is best for a particular purpose; this is normal! There are often
several ways of achieving the same outcome in Premiere Pro, and sometimes the

choice comes down to which interface you prefer.
 Tip
You can always find an effect using the search box at the top of the
Effects panel. Often, the best way to learn how to use an effect is to
apply it to a clip with a good range of colors, highlights, and
shadows and then adjust all the settings to see the result.
The following are a few effects you may want to try first.
Using coloring effects
Premiere Pro features several effects for adjusting existing colors. The following
two are for creating a black-and-white image and applying a tint and for simply
turning a color clip into a black-and-white one.
Tint
Use the eyedroppers or color pickers to reduce any image to just two colors.
Whatever you map to black and white replaces any other colors in the image.
Black & White
Convert any image to simple black and white. This is useful when combined
with other effects that can add color.

Black-and-white images can often withstand much stronger contrast. Consider
combining effects for the best results.
Leave Color
You can use the advanced HSL Secondary section of the Lumetri Color panel to
achieve a similar result, but this filter is sometimes faster.
Use the eyedropper or color pickers to select a color you want to keep. Adjust
the Amount To Decolor setting to turn the saturation down on every other color.
Use the Tolerance and Edge Softness controls to produce a subtler effect.
Using the Video Limiter effect
In addition to creative effects, Premiere Pro’s color correction repertoire includes
effects used for professional video production.
When video is broadcast, there are specific limits that are permitted for
maximum luminance, minimum luminance, and color saturation. Although it’s

possible to confine your video levels to the limits permitted using manual
controls, it’s easy to mix parts of your sequence that need adjustment.
The Video Limiter effect automatically limits the levels of clips to ensure they
meet the standards you set.
You’ll need to check the limits applied by your broadcaster before setting the
Signal Min and Signal Max controls with this effect (the defaults are very
generous). Then it’s simply a question of choosing the Reduction Axis option.
Do you want to just limit the luminance, the chrominance, or both, or do you
want to set an overall “smart” limit?
The Reduction Method menu allows you to choose the parts of your video signal
you would like to adjust. You’ll usually choose Compress All.
 Tip
While it’s common to apply the Video Limiter effect to individual
clips, you might also choose to apply it to the whole sequence by
using it on an adjustment layer, or by enabling it as an export setting
(see Chapter 18, “Exporting Frames, Clips, and Sequences”).
Using Lumetri Looks presets in the Effects panel
In addition to the manual controls available in the Lumetri Color panel, there are
a number of Lumetri Look presets available in the Effects panel. These are a
fantastic way to get started with advanced color adjustments, and as they are
presets, you can modify the settings to achieve exactly the finish you want.

If you resize the Effects panel, you can reveal previews of each of the built-in Lumetri Look preset
effects.
You apply a Lumetri Look preset effect in the same way that you would apply
any other effect available in the Effects panel.
Lumetri Look presets are actually Lumetri Color effects with settings already
applied, including a Creative Look in some cases.
You can modify the settings in the Effect Controls panel or in the Lumetri Color
panel. The controls are linked, so changing one will update the other.

Fixing exposure problems
Let’s look at some clips that have exposure issues and use some of the Lumetri
Color panel controls to address them.
1. Make sure you are in the Color workspace, and reset it to the saved version if
necessary.
2. Open the sequence Color Work.
3. In the Lumetri Scopes panel, right-click or open the Settings menu to choose
Presets > Waveform RGB.
4. Again, in the Lumetri Scopes panel, right-click or open the Settings menu to
choose Waveform Type > YC No Chroma. This changes the display to a
waveform that uses the standard broadcast television range, which is a useful
reference for most video projects.
5. Position the Timeline playhead over the first clip in the sequence. It’s the shot
of the lady walking. You’re going to add some contrast.

The environment is smoky; 100 IRE (displayed on the left on the waveform)
means fully exposed, and 0 IRE means not exposed at all. No part of the
image comes close to these levels. Your eye quickly adjusts to the image, and
it’ll soon appear fine. Let’s see whether you can bring it to life a little.
6. In the Lumetri Color panel, click the Basic Correction heading to display that
section.
7. Use the Exposure and Contrast controls to make adjustments to the shot
while checking the waveform display to make sure the image doesn’t become
too dark or too light.
You’ll get the best perceived results if you have a frame from a later part of
the clip on-screen. Around 00:00:07:09 there’s a section of sharp focus.
Try an Exposure setting of 0.6 and a Contrast setting of 60.
8. Your eye is likely to adjust quickly to the new image. Use the check box to
toggle the Basic Correction adjustment off and on to compare the image
before and after.
The subtle adjustment you made adds more depth to the image, giving it stronger
highlights and shadows. As you toggle the effect off and on, you’ll see the
Waveform changing in the Lumetri Scopes panel. You still don’t have bright
highlights in the image, but that’s fine because the natural colors are mainly
midtones.

Fixing underexposed images
Now let’s work with an underexposed image.
1. Switch to the Effects workspace.
2. Position the Timeline playhead over the second clip in the Color Work
sequence. When you first look at this clip, it might look OK. The highlights
don’t look strong, but there’s a reasonable amount of detail throughout the
image. The face, especially, is sharp and detailed.
3. Open the Lumetri Scopes panel so you can view this clip in the waveform. At
the bottom of the waveform there are quite a few dark pixels, with some
touching the 0 line.
In this instance, it looks like the missing detail is in the right shoulder of the
suit. The problem with such dark pixels is that increasing the brightness will
simply change the strong shadows into gray, and no detail will emerge.
4. In the Effects panel, locate the Brightness & Contrast effect. Apply the effect
to the clip.
 Tip
Remember, you can open any panel by choosing it from the
Window menu. The Lumetri Scopes panel isn’t limited to the
Color workspace.
5. Position the panels so you can see the Lumetri Scopes panel, Effect Controls
panel, and Program Monitor. You’ll need to drag the Lumetri Scopes panel
into a new frame, between the Effect Controls panel and the Program
Monitor, to do this.
6. Use the Brightness control in the Effect Controls panel to increase the

brightness. Rather than clicking the number and typing a new number, drag
to the right so you can see the change happening incrementally.
As you drag, notice that the whole waveform moves up. This is fine for
bringing out the highlights in the image, but the shadows remain a flat line.
You’re simply changing the black shadows to gray. If you drag the Brightness
control all the way to 100, you’ll see just how flat the image still is.
 Tip
The Brightness & Contrast effect offers a quick, easy fix, but it’s
easy to accidentally clip the black (dark) or white (bright) pixels,
losing detail. The Lumetri Color panel Curves control keeps
adjustments inside the 0 to 255 scale.
7. Remove the Brightness & Contrast effect.
8. Switch back to the Color workspace. Try to make an adjustment using the
RGB Curves control in the Lumetri Color panel. Here’s an example of an
RGB Curves adjustment that would improve the image.
Experiment with the third clip in the sequence. This clip demonstrates that
there are limits to what can be “fixed in post” (post-production)!

Fixing overexposed images
The next clip you’ll work with is overexposed.
1. Move the Timeline playhead to the fourth clip in the sequence. Notice that a
lot of the pixels are burned out. Just as with the flat shadows in the second
clip in the sequence, there’s no detail in burned-out highlights. This means
that lowering the brightness will simply make the character’s skin and hair
gray; no detail will emerge.
 Tip
Remember, you can reset Lumetri Color controls by double-
clicking them. You can also delete the Lumetri Color effect in
the Effect Controls panel to begin again.
2. Notice that the shadows in this shot don’t reach the bottom of the Waveform
Monitor. The lack of properly dark shadows has a flattening effect on the
image.
3. Try using the RGB Curves control in the Lumetri Color panel to improve the
contrast range. This approach might produce acceptable results, although the
clip definitely ends up looking processed.
When is color correction right?
Making adjustments to images is highly subjective. Though there are
precise limits for image formats and broadcast technologies, whether an
image should be light, dark, blue-tinted, or green is ultimately a subjective
choice. The reference tools that Premiere Pro provides, such as the

Lumetri Scopes panel, are a helpful guide, but only you can decide when
the picture looks right.
If you’re producing video for display on televisions, it’s vital that you
have a television screen connected to your Premiere Pro editing system to
view your content. Television screens usually display color differently
from computer monitors, and consumer screens sometimes have special
color modes that change the appearance of video. For professional
broadcast television, editors will usually have a carefully calibrated
monitor that displays YUV color.
The same rule applies if you are producing content for digital cinema
projection, Ultra High Definition TV, or High Dynamic Range TV. The
only way to know exactly how the picture will look is to view it using the
destination medium. This means if your ultimate destination is a computer
screen, perhaps as web video or part of a software interface, you are
already looking at the perfect test monitor.
Fixing color balance
Your eyes adjust to compensate for changes in the color of light around you
automatically. It’s an extraordinary ability that allows you to see white as white,
even if objectively it’s orange, for example, because it’s lit by tungsten light.
Cameras can automatically adjust their white balance to compensate for different
lighting in the way that your eyes do. With the right calibration, white objects
look white, whether you are recording indoors (under oranger tungsten light) or
outdoors (in bluer daylight).
Sometimes automatic settings are hit or miss, so professional shooters often
prefer to adjust white balance manually. If the white balance is set wrong, you
can end up with some interesting results. The most common reason for a color
balance problem in a clip is that the camera was not calibrated properly.
Balancing with the Lumetri color wheels
Let’s try using the Lumetri Color panel color wheels to adjust the last shot in the
sequence.
1. Switch to the Color workspace, and reset it if necessary.
2. Position the Timeline playhead over the last clip in the Color Work sequence.
3. In the Lumetri Color panel, expand the Basic Correction section, and click
the Auto button to automatically adjust the levels.

The Tone controls change to reflect the new levels.
Premiere Pro has identified the darkest pixels and the brightest pixels and has
balanced automatically.
The adjustment is tiny! Clearly, the problem is not with the range of contrast
in the shot.
4. Set the Lumetri Scopes panel to display the Vectorscope YUV.
It’s clear there’s a reasonable range of colors in the shot, but there’s a strong
bias toward the blue. In fact, this scene has mixed lighting, with bluer

daylight coming from the window and warmer tungsten light coming from
the interior of the room.
5. In the Basic section of the Lumetri Color panel, use the Temperature slider to
push the colors toward the orange. You’ll need to push the adjustment all the
way to 100 to see a reasonable result because the color shift is so strong in
the clip.
The result is pretty good, but perhaps it could be better.
The darker pixels in this shot are generally lit by the interior, warmer room
light, while the lighter pixels are generally lit by the bluer daylight. This
means different color wheels will interact with different areas of the picture in
convincing and natural ways.
6. Expand the Color Wheels section of the Lumetri Color panel. Try using the
Shadows color wheel to pull the color toward the red, while using the
Highlights color wheel to pull the color toward blue.
7. You’ve adjusted the color wheels to warm up the shadows and cool down the
highlights. Experiment with the midtones to obtain the most natural result
possible. Use the image as a guide.
Experiment with the other controls in the Lumetri Color panel to see whether
you can improve the result further.

Making a secondary color adjustment
The Lumetri Color panel allows you to make adjustments that are limited to a
particular range of hues, a level of color saturation, or a level of brightness.
This is useful if you want to bring out the blue in a subject’s eyes or give a
flower a color boost.
Let’s try it.
1. Open the sequence Yellow Flower, and position the Timeline playhead over
the first clip.
This sequence has two shots with clearly distinguished areas of color.
2. Expand the HSL Secondary section of the Lumetri Color panel
3. Click the eyedropper 
 to select it and then click the yellow petals of the

flower to pick that color.
The color selection controls update based on the area of the petal you clicked.
You may get a more useful result by holding Ctrl (Windows) or Command
(macOS) while clicking, as this captures a 5x5 pixel average.
When making a selection of this kind, it can be helpful to initially apply an
extreme adjustment to the colors. This makes it easier to tell if you have
selected the right range of colors in the image.
4. Scroll down in the Lumetri Color panel and drag the Temperature and Tint
controls to the far left to apply an extreme adjustment.
5. Drag the color range selection controls to expand the selection. Your initial
selection probably only selected a few pixels, as there is quite a lot of
variation in the yellow petals.
Each control sets the range of pixels you’re selecting, based on one of three
factors:

H: Hue
S: Saturation
L: Luminance
The upper triangles represent the hard-stop range of the selection. The lower
triangles extend the selection with a softening that reduces hard edges.
6. Once you’re happy you have selected all the pixels in the petals of the flower,
reset the Temperature and Tint controls, and make a subtler adjustment.
The adjustments you make will be limited to the pixels in your selection.
7. Once you have mastered this effect, experiment with the sky in the second
clip in this sequence.
Using special color effects
Several special effects give you great creative control over the colors in your
clips.
Here are a few effects of note.
Using Gaussian Blur
While not technically a color adjustment effect, adding a tiny amount of blurring
can soften the results of your adjustments, making an image look more natural.
Premiere Pro has a number of blur effects. The most popular is Gaussian Blur,
which has a natural-looking, smoothing effect on an image.
Using Stylize effects
The Stylize category of effects includes some dramatic options, some of which,

like the Mosaic effect, you’ll use for more functional applications in
combination with an effect mask, such as hiding someone’s face.
The Solarize effect gives vivid color adjustments that can be used to create
stylized back plates for graphics or intro sequences.
Using Lumetri looks
The Lumetri Color panel includes a list of built-in looks you experimented with
earlier, and as you have found, there are a number of Lumetri Look presets in the
Effects panel to get you started.
These effects all make use of the Lumetri Color effect.
In addition to using the built-in Looks, the Lumetri effect allows you to browse
to an existing .look or .lut file to apply nuanced, subtle color adjustments to your
footage.
It’s possible you will be given a LOOK or LUT file to use as a starting point for
your color adjustments. It’s increasingly common for cameras or location
monitors to employ a color reference file of this kind. It helps to use the same
reference when you are working on footage in post-production.

To apply an existing LOOK or LUT file, open the Input LUT menu at the top of
the Lumetri Color panel, and choose Browse.
Creating a look
Once you’ve spent a little time with the color correction effects available in
Premiere Pro, you should have a feel for the kinds of changes you can make and
the impact those changes have on the overall look and feel of your footage.
You can use effect presets to create a look for your clips. You can also apply an
effect to an adjustment layer to give your sequence, or part of a sequence, an
overall look. Changes made using the Lumetri Color panel apply just as well
when applied to an adjustment layer.
In the most common color correction scenario, you would do the following:
Adjust each shot so that it matches the other shots in the same scene. That
way, there is color continuity.
Next, apply an overall look to your production.
Try using an adjustment layer to apply a color adjustment to a scene.
1. Open the Theft Unexpected sequence.
2. In the Project panel, open the New Item menu and choose Adjustment Layer.
The settings automatically match the sequence, so click OK.
3. Drag and drop the new adjustment layer onto the V2 track in the sequence.
The default duration for adjustment layers is the same as the duration of still
images. It’s too short for this sequence.
4. Trim the adjustment layer until it stretches from the beginning to the end of
the sequence.

5. In the Effects panel, browse to Lumetri Presets > SpeedLooks > Universal.
Drag one of these SpeedLooks onto the adjustment layer. The Look will
apply to every clip in the sequence, and you can modify it using the controls
in the Effect Controls panel or in the Lumetri Color panel.
 Note
If you use adjustment layers in this way on a sequence that has
graphics and titles, you may want to ensure that the adjustment
layer is on a track between the graphics/titles and the video.
Otherwise, you will adjust the appearance of your titles too.
You can apply any standard visual effect this way and use multiple adjustment
layers to apply different looks to different scenes.
 Tip
SpeedLooks available in the Effects panel are applied as regular
effects, so it’s easy to combine them—just apply another.

The Lumetri Color panel controls always adjust the last Lumetri Color effect
applied to a clip. For example, if you apply three instances of the Lumetri Color
effect to a clip, the third effect would be adjusted when clicking in the Lumetri
Color panel.
You can adjust any effect in the Effect Controls panel, or drag effects to change
the order they are applied.
This is just a brief introduction to color adjustment, and there’s an enormous
amount more to explore. It’s worth investing the time to familiarize yourself
with the advanced controls in the Lumetri Color panel. There are a great many
visual effects that can add nuance or a striking look to your footage.
Experimentation and practice are key to developing your understanding in this
important and creative aspect of post-production.
Review questions
1. How do you change the display in the Lumetri Scopes panel?
2. How do you access the Lumetri Scopes panel when not viewing the Color
workspace?
3. Why should you use the vectorscope rather than depending on your eyes?
4. How can you apply a look to a sequence?
5. Why might you need to limit your luminance or color levels?
Review answers
1. Right-click in the panel or open the Settings menu and choose the display
type you would like.
2. Access the Lumetri Scopes panel, like all panels, in the Window menu.
3. The way you perceive color is highly subjective and relative. Depending on
the colors you have just seen, you will see new colors differently. The
vectorscope display gives you an objective reference.
4. You can use effect presets to apply the same color correction adjustments to
multiple clips, or you can add an adjustment layer and apply the effects to
that. Any clips on lower tracks covered by the adjustment layer will be
affected.
5. If your sequence is intended for broadcast television, you’ll need to ensure
you meet the stringent requirements for maximum and minimum levels. The
broadcaster you’re working with will be able to tell you the required levels.

15. Exploring Compositing Techniques
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Using the alpha channel
Using compositing techniques
Working with opacity
Working with a greenscreen
Using mattes
This lesson will take about 60 minutes to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the
“Getting Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the
instructions under “Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.”
Premiere Pro has powerful tools that enable you to combine layers of video in
your sequences.
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the key technologies that make compositing
work and about approaches to preparing for compositing, adjusting the opacity
of clips, and keying greenscreen shots with chromakey and mattes.

Compositing comprises blending, combining, layering, keying, masking, and cropping, in any
combination. Anything that combines two images is compositing.
Starting the lesson
Until now, you have been mainly working with single, whole-frame images. You
have created edits where you have transitioned between one image and another
or edited clips onto upper video tracks to have them appear in front of clips on
lower video tracks.
In this lesson, you’ll learn about ways to combine those layers of video. You’ll
still use clips on upper and lower tracks, but now they will become foreground
and background elements in one blended composition.
This title…

…combines with this video…
…to produce this composite image.
The blend might come from cropping part of the foreground image or from
keying—selecting a specific color to become transparent—but whatever the
method, the way you edit clips onto a sequence is the same as ever.
Let’s begin by learning about the important concept of alpha, which explains the

way pixels are displayed, and then try several techniques.
1. Open Lesson 15.prproj in the Lesson 15 folder.
2. Save the project as Lesson 15 Working.prproj.
3. Switch to the Effects workspace by clicking Effects in the Workspaces panel
or by choosing Window > Workspaces > Effects.
4. Reset the workspace by opening the Effects menu in the Workspaces panel
and choosing Reset To Saved Layout or by choosing Window > Workspaces
> Reset To Saved Layout.
What is an alpha channel?
Cameras selectively record the red, green, and blue parts of the light spectrum as
separate color channels. Because each channel is monochrome (just one of the
three colors), they are commonly described as monochrome.
Adobe Premiere Pro CC uses these three monochromatic (single color) channels
to produce the corresponding primary color channels. They are combined using
what’s called additive color to create a complete RGB image (which stands for
Red, Green, and Blue). You see the three channels combined as full-color video.
Finally, there is a fourth monochromatic channel: alpha. The fourth channel
defines no colors at all. Instead, it defines opacity—how visible the pixel is.
Several different words are used in the world of post-production to describe this
fourth channel, including visibility, transparency, mixer, and opacity. The name
is not particularly important. What matters is that you can adjust the opacity of
pixels independently of their color.
Just as you might use color correction to adjust the amount of red in a clip, you
can use Opacity controls to adjust the amount of alpha. By default, the alpha
channel, or opacity, of clips is 100%, or fully visible. On the 8-bit video scale of
0 to 255, this means it will be at 255. Clips that are animations or text or logo
graphics will often have alpha channels that control which parts of an image are
opaque or transparent.
You can set the Source Monitor and Program Monitor to display transparent
pixels as a checkerboard, just as in Adobe Photoshop.
1. Open the Source Monitor Settings menu 
, and make sure Transparency
Grid is not selected.
2. From the Graphics bin, open the clip Theft_Unexpected.png in the Source
Monitor (be sure to open the PNG clip).

It looks as if the graphic has a black background, but those black pixels are
actually displayed in place of transparency. Think of them as the background
of the Source Monitor.
3. Open the Source Monitor Settings menu 
 and choose Transparency Grid.
Now you can clearly see which pixels are transparent. However, for some
kinds of media, the transparency grid is an imperfect solution. In this case, for
example, it can be a little difficult to see the edges of the text against the grid.
4. Open the Source Monitor Settings menu and choose Transparency Grid again
to disable it.
Making compositing part of your projects
The use of compositing effects and controls can take your post-production work
to a whole new level. Once you begin working with the compositing effects
available in Premiere Pro, you’ll find yourself discovering new ways of filming
and new ways of structuring your edit to make it easier to blend images together.
A combination of pre-production planning, filming techniques, and dedicated
effects will produce the most powerful results when compositing. You can
combine still images of environments with complex, interesting patterns to
produce extraordinary textured moods. Or, you can cut out parts of an image that
don’t fit and replace them with something else.
Compositing is one of the most creative parts of nonlinear editing with Premiere
Pro.
Shooting videos with compositing in mind
Much of the most effective compositing work begins when you are planning

your production. Right at the start, you can think about how you can help
Premiere Pro identify the parts of the image you’d like to be transparent. There
are a number of ways to identify which pixels you’d like to make transparent.
Consider chromakey, for example, a standard special effect used by major
feature film productions to allow action to take place in environments that would
otherwise be too dangerous, or physically impossible—like the inside of a
volcano!
The actors are actually standing in front of a screen that is solid green. Special-
effects technology uses the green color to identify which pixels should be
transparent. The video image of the actors is used as the foreground of a
composition, with some visible pixels (the actors) and some transparent pixels
(the green background).
This…
Next, it’s just a question of putting the foreground video image in front of
another background image. In an epic action feature film, it’s the prebuilt set, a
real-world location, or a composite created by visual effects artists; it could be
anything.
Planning ahead makes a big difference to the quality of your compositing. For
that greenscreen effect to work well, the background needs to be a consistent
color. It also needs to be a color that does not appear anywhere on your subject.
Green-colored jewelry, for example, might turn transparent when the Chromakey
effect is applied.

…combined with this…
If you’re shooting greenscreen footage, the way you film can make a big
difference to the finished result. Try to match the lighting for your subject to the
replacement background you intend to use.
Capture the greenscreen background with soft light and try to avoid spill, where
light reflected from the greenscreen bounces onto your subject. If this happens,
you’ll be in danger of keying out, or making transparent, parts of your subject
because they will be the same green color as the background you are removing.
…becomes this.
Understanding essential terminology
In this lesson, you’ll encounter some terms that might be new to you. Let’s run
through the important ones.
Alpha/alpha channel: The fourth channel of information for each pixel.
An alpha channel defines transparency for a pixel. It’s a separate
monochromatic channel, and it can be created entirely independently of the
content of the image.

Key/keying: The process of selectively making pixels transparent based on
their color or brightness. The Chromakey effect uses color to generate
transparency (that is, to change the alpha channel), and the LumaKey effect
uses brightness.
Opacity: The word used to describe the overall alpha channel value for
clips in a sequence in Premiere Pro. The higher the value, the more opaque
the clip is— the inverse of transparency. You can adjust the opacity for a
clip over time using keyframes, just as you adjusted audio level in a
previous lesson.
Blend mode: A technology originally seen in Adobe Photoshop. Rather
than simply placing foreground images in front of background images, you
can select one of several different blend modes that cause the foreground to
interact with the background. You might, for example, choose to view only
pixels that are brighter than the background or to apply only the color
information from the foreground clip to the background. You used a blend
mode in Lesson 13, “Adding Video Effects.” Experimentation is a good
way to learn about blend modes.
 Tip
For more information on blend modes in Adobe software, see
The Hidden Power of Blend Modes, by Scott Valentine (Adobe
Press).
Greenscreen: The common term that describes the process of filming a
subject in front of a screen that is solid green and then using a special effect
to selectively turn green pixels transparent. The clip is then combined with
a background image. An old-style weather report is a good example of
greenscreen.
Matte: An image, shape, or video clip used to identify a region of your
image that should be transparent or semitransparent. Premiere Pro allows
multiple types of mattes, and you’ll work with them in this lesson. You can
use an image, another video clip, or a visual effect like Chromakey to
generate a matte dynamically based on the color of the pixels.
When you made a secondary color adjustment in Lesson 14, “Improving
Clips with Color Correction and Grading,” Premiere Pro generated a matte
that was applied to the color adjustment.
Secondary color adjustments apply a dynamically generated matte to an

effect, limiting the pixels that are changed. The Chromakey effect applies
the matte to the alpha channel, selectively making pixels transparent.
Working with the Opacity effect
You can adjust the overall opacity of a clip using keyframes on the Timeline or
in the Effect Controls panel.
1. Open the sequence Desert Jacket. This sequence has a foreground image of a
man in a jacket, with a background image of a desert.
2. Increase the height of the Video 2 track a little. You can do this by dragging
the dividing line between V2 and V3 or by hovering the mouse cursor over
the V2 track header, holding Alt (Windows) or Option (macOS), and
scrolling your mouse wheel.
3. Click the Timeline Settings menu, and make sure the option Show Video
Keyframes is enabled.
4. Now you can use the clip rubber band to adjust the settings and keyframe any
effect you apply to a clip. Since the fixed effects include Opacity, this option
is automatically available. In fact, it’s the default option, which means that
the rubber band already represents clip opacity. Try dragging the rubber band
up and down using the Selection tool on the clip on Video 2.
 Tip
When adjusting the rubber band, after you begin dragging, you
can hold Ctrl (Windows) or Command (macOS) for fine control.
Be careful not to hold the modifier key before clicking or you’ll
add a keyframe.

In this example, the foreground is set to 50% opacity.
When you use the Selection tool in this way, the rubber band is moved
without additional keyframes being added.
Keyframing opacity
Keyframing opacity on the Timeline is almost the same as keyframing volume.
You use the same tools and keyboard shortcuts, and the results are likely to be
exactly what you expect: The higher the rubber band, the more visible a clip will
be.
1. Open the Theft Unexpected sequence in the Sequences bin.
This sequence has a title in the foreground, on track Video 2. It’s common to
fade titles up and down at different times and with different durations. You
can do so using a transition effect, just as you would add a transition to a
video clip; or, for more control, you can use keyframes to adjust the opacity.
2. Make sure track Video 2 is expanded so you can see the rubber band for the
foreground title, Theft_Unexpected.png.
 Tip

It’s often easier to add the keyframe markers to the rubber band
first and then drag them to adjust them.
3. Ctrl-click (Windows) or Command-click (macOS) the rubber band for the
title graphic to add four keyframes—two near the beginning and two near the
end. Don’t worry about the precise positions of the new keyframes.
4. Adjust the keyframes so they represent a fade-up and a fade-down in the
same way that you would adjust audio keyframes to adjust volume.
 Tip
Once you’ve added a keyframe by Ctrl-clicking (Windows) or
Command-clicking (macOS), you can release the key and start
dragging with the mouse to set the keyframe position.
5. Play the sequence, and watch the results of your keyframing.
You can also use the Effect Controls panel to add keyframes to the opacity for a
clip. Like the audio volume keyframes controls, the Opacity setting has
keyframing turned on by default in the Effect Controls panel.
Combining tracks using a blend mode
Blend modes are special ways for foreground pixels to combine with
background pixels. Each blend mode applies a different calculation to combine
the foreground red, green, blue, and alpha (RGBA) values with those of the
background. Each pixel is calculated in combination with the pixel directly
behind it.
The default blend mode is called Normal. In this mode, the foreground image
has a uniform alpha channel value across the entire image. The more opacity the
foreground image has, the more strongly you will see those pixels in front of the
pixels in the background.
The best way to find out how blend modes work is to try them.

1. Replace the current title in the Theft Unexpected sequence with the more
complex title Theft_Unexpected_Layered.psd in the Graphics bin.
You can replace the existing title by dragging the new item onto it while
holding Alt (Windows) or Option (macOS). Notice that replacing a clip this
way retains the Timeline clip keyframes you added.
2. Select the new title on the Timeline, and take a look at the Effect Controls
panel.
3. In the Effect Controls panel, expand the Opacity controls, and browse
through the Blend Mode options.
4. Right now, the blend mode is set to Normal. Try a few different options to
see the results. Each blend mode calculates the relationship between the
foreground layer pixels and the background pixels differently. See Premiere
Pro Help for a description of the blend modes. Choose the Normal blend
mode when you have finished experimenting.
 Tip
Hover the mouse cursor over the Blend Mode menu without
clicking to open it, and scroll to quickly browse through the
modes.

In this example, the graphic has the Lighten blend mode applied. In this mode, a pixel is visible only
if it is lighter than the pixel behind it.
Working with alpha-channel transparencies
Many types of media will already have varying alpha channel levels for pixels. A
title graphic is an obvious example: Where text exists, pixels have 100% opacity,
and where there is no text, pixels usually have 0% opacity. Elements such as
drop shadows behind text typically have a value somewhere in between.
Keeping some transparency in a drop shadow helps it look a bit more realistic.
Premiere Pro sees pixels with higher values in the alpha channel as being more
visible. This is the most common way to interpret alpha channels, but
occasionally you might come across media that is configured in the opposite
way. You will immediately recognize the problem because you’ll see a cutout in
an otherwise black image. This is easy to address because, just as Premiere Pro
can interpret the audio channels on a clip, it’s also possible to choose a different
interpretation of an alpha channel.
You can see the results using a title in the Theft Unexpected sequence.
1. Locate Theft_Unexpected_Layered.psd in your project.
2. Right-click the clip and choose Modify > Interpret Footage. In the lower half
of the Modify Clip dialog, you’ll find the Alpha Channel interpretation
options.

The Alpha Channel Premultiplication options relate to the way
semitransparent areas are interpreted. If you find that soft semitransparent
image areas are blocky or poorly rendered, try selecting Premultiplied Alpha
and view the results.
3. Try selecting Ignore Alpha Channel; then try selecting Invert Alpha Channel.
Observe the results in the Program Monitor (you will need to click OK
before the display will update.)
 Note
Blend modes still apply when changing the interpretation of the
alpha channel. If you invert the alpha channel and use a blend
mode like Lighten, the black background won’t be visible.
Ignore Alpha Channel: Treats all pixels as having 100% alpha. This
can be useful if you don’t intend to use a background clip in your
sequence and would prefer black pixels.
Invert Alpha Channel: Reverses the alpha channel for every pixel in
the clip. This means that pixels that were fully opaque will become fully
transparent, and pixels that were transparent will become opaque.
It’s easy to spot when there’s an issue with the alpha channel.
Color keying a greenscreen shot

When you change the opacity level of a clip using the rubber band or the Effect
Controls panel, you adjust the alpha for every pixel in the image by the same
amount. There are also ways to selectively adjust the alpha for pixels, based on
their position on the screen, their brightness, or their color.
Chromakey effects adjust the opacity for a range of pixels based on their specific
luminance, hue, and saturation values. The principle is quite simple: You select a
color or range of colors, and the more similar a pixel is to the selection, the more
transparent it becomes. The more closely a pixel matches the selection, the more
its alpha channel value is lowered, until it becomes fully transparent.
 Note
Highly compressed media files (such as H.264 4:2:0) will generally
not give the same result as a RAW or lightly compressed file (such
as ProRes 4:4:4:4) captured using a high-end camera.
Let’s set up a chromakey composition.
1. Drag the clip Timekeeping.mov, in the Greenscreen bin, onto the New Item
button menu in the Project panel. This creates a sequence that matches the
media perfectly, with the clip on Video 1.
2. In the sequence, drag the Timekeeping.mov clip up to Video 2—this will be
the foreground.
3. Drag the clip Seattle_Skyline_Still.tga from the Shots bin to track Video 1,
under the Timekeeping.mov clip on the Timeline.
Because this is a single-frame graphic, its default duration is too short.
4. Trim the Seattle_Skyline_Still.tga clip so that it’s long enough to be a

background for the full duration of the foreground clip on Video 2.
5. In the Project panel, your sequence is still named after Timekeeping.mov, and
it’s stored in the same Greenscreen bin. Rename the sequence Seattle
Skyline, and drag it into the Sequences bin.
 Note
There’s no special secret to creating multilayered compositions
in Premiere Pro. Place clips on multiple tracks, knowing that
clips on upper tracks will appear in front of clips on lower tracks.
This kind of on-the-fly organization is worth the extra effort, as it helps you
stay in control of your project.
You now have foreground and background clips. All that remains is to make the
green pixels transparent.
Preprocessing the footage
In a perfect world, every greenscreen clip you work with would have a flawless
green background and nice, clean edges on your foreground elements. In reality,
there are lots of reasons why you might be faced with less-than perfect material.
There are always potential problems caused by poor lighting when the video is
created. However, there’s a further problem caused by the way many video
cameras store image information.
Because your eyes do not register color as accurately as they do brightness
information, it’s common for cameras to reduce the amount of color information
stored.
Camera systems achieve reductions in file size using this system of reduced
color capture, and the approach varies from system to system. Sometimes color
information is stored for every other pixel; other times it might be recorded for
every other pixel on every second line. This type of file-size reduction is usually
a good idea because otherwise the storage required would be huge. However,
this kind of visual compression can make keying more difficult because there

simply isn’t as much color detail as you’d like.
If you find that your footage is not keying well, try the following:
Consider applying a light blur effect before keying. This blends pixel detail,
softening the edges and often giving a smoother-looking result. If the
amount of blur is light, it should not dramatically reduce the quality of your
image. You can simply apply a blur effect to the clip, adjust the settings,
and then apply a chromakey effect on top. The chromakey effect will be
applied after the blur because it appears next on the list in the Effect
Controls panel.
Consider color correcting your shot before you key it. If your shot lacks
good contrast between your foreground and background, you can
sometimes help the key by adjusting the picture first using the Lumetri
Color panel.
Using the Ultra Key effect
Premiere Pro has a powerful, fast, and intuitive chromakey effect called Ultra
Key. The workflow is simple: Choose a color you want to become transparent
and then adjust settings to suit. The Ultra Key effect, like every greenscreen
keyer, dynamically generates a matte (defining which pixels should be
transparent) based on the color selection. The matte is adjustable using the
detailed settings of the Ultra Key effect.
1. Apply the Ultra Key effect to the Timekeeping.mov clip in the new Seattle
Skyline sequence. You can find the effect easily by typing Ultra in the
Effects panel search box.
The Key Color can be set by clicking the color swatch and using the color picker or by clicking in
the picture using the eyedropper.
2. In the Effect Controls panel, select the Key Color eyedropper.

3. Holding the Ctrl key (Windows) or Command key (macOS), use the
eyedropper to click a green area in the Program Monitor. This clip has a
consistent green background, so it’s not too important where you click. With
other footage, you may need to experiment to find the right spot.
 Tip
If you hold Ctrl (Windows) or Command (macOS) when you
click with the eyedropper, Premiere Pro takes a 5×5 pixel sample
average, rather than a single-pixel selection. This often captures
a better color for keying.
The Ultra Key effect identifies all pixels that have the green you selected and
sets their alpha to 0%.
4. In the Effect Controls panel, change the Output setting for the Ultra Key
effect to Alpha Channel. In this mode, the Ultra Key effect displays the alpha
channel as a grayscale image, where dark pixels will be transparent and light
pixels will be opaque.

It’s a pretty good key, but there are a few areas of gray where the pixels will
be partially transparent, which you don’t want. Where there’s naturally semi-
transparent detail, like hair or the soft edges of clothing, there should be some
gray, and the right and left sides don’t have any green, so none of those pixels
can be keyed. You’ll fix that later. Still, in the main areas of the alpha channel
should be solid black or white.
5. In the Effect Controls panel, open the Setting menu for the Ultra Key effect
and choose Aggressive. This cleans up the selection a little. Scrub through
the shot to see whether it has clean black areas and white areas. If you see
gray pixels in this view where there should not be, the result will be partially
transparent parts in the picture.
6. Switch the Output setting back to Composite to see the result.
The Aggressive mode works better for this clip. The Default, Relaxed, and
Aggressive modes modify the Matte Generation, Matte Cleanup, and Spill
Suppression settings. You can also modify manually to get a better key with

more challenging footage.
Here’s an overview of the settings:
Matte Generation: Once you’ve chosen your key color, the Matte
Generation category of controls change the way it’s interpreted. You’ll
often get positive results with more challenging footage just by adjusting
these settings.
Matte Cleanup: Once your matte is defined, you can use these controls to
adjust it:
Choke shrinks the matte, which is helpful if your key selection misses
some edges. Be careful not to choke the matte too much because
you’ll begin to lose edge detail in the foreground image, often
supplying a digital haircut in the vernacular of the visual-effects
industry.
Soften applies a blur to the matte, which often improves the apparent
“blending” of the foreground and background images for a more
convincing composite.
Contrast increases the contrast of the alpha channel, making that
black-and-white image a stronger black-and-white version and more
clearly defining the key. You will often get cleaner keys by increasing
the contrast.
Spill Suppression: Spill Suppression compensates for color that bounces
from the green background onto the subject. When this happens, the
combination of the green background and the subject’s own colors are
usually different enough that it does not cause parts of the subject to be
keyed transparent. However, it does not look good when the edges of your
subject are green. Spill suppression automatically compensates by adding
color to the foreground element edges that are positioned opposite, on a
color wheel, to the key color. For example, magenta is added when
greenscreen keying, or yellow is added when blue-screen keying. This
neutralizes the color “spill” in the same way that you’d fix a color cast.
 Note
In this example, you’re using footage with a green background. It is
also possible you’ll have footage with a blue background for
keying. The workflow is the same.

The built-in Color Correction controls give you a quick and easy way to adjust
the appearance of your foreground video to help it blend in with your
background.
Often, these three controls are enough to make a more natural match. Note that
these adjustments are applied after the key, so you won’t cause problems for
your key by adjusting the colors with these controls. You can use any color
adjustment tools in Premiere Pro, including the Lumetri Color panel.
Masking clips
The Ultra Key effect generates a matte dynamically, based on the colors in your
shot. You can also create your own custom matte or use another clip as the basis
for a matte.
When you create your own matte, you’ll use the mask feature applied to the
Opacity settings for your clip. Let’s create a matte to remove the edges from the
Timekeeping.mov clip.
1. Return to the Seattle Skyline sequence.
As you discovered earlier, the foreground clip has an actor standing in front
of a greenscreen, but the screen does not reach the edge of the picture. It’s
common to shoot greenscreen footage this way, particularly when filming on
location where full studio facilities may not be available.
2. Disable the Ultra Key effect, without removing it, by clicking the Toggle
Effect button 
 in the Effect Controls panel. This allows you to clearly see
the green areas of the picture again.
3. Still in the Effect Controls panel, expand the Opacity controls and click the
Create 4-point Polygon Mask button 
 just under that heading.
A mask is applied to the clip, making most of the image transparent.

4. Resize the mask so that it reveals the central area of the shot but hides the
black edges. You will almost certainly need to reduce the Program Monitor
zoom to 50% or 25% to see beyond the edges of the image.
As long as you have the mask selected in the Effect Controls panel, you can
click directly in the Program Monitor to reposition the corner control points
for the mask.
 Tip
If you deselect the mask, the control points displayed in the
Program Monitor will disappear. Select the mask in the Effect
Controls panel to reactivate them.
This mask extends beyond the edge of the image. This is fine—the main goal is to choose what you
will exclude. In this case, the curtain is successfully excluded.
 Tip
A rough mask of this kind, used to remove unwanted image

elements, is often referred to as a garbage matte.
5. Set the Program Monitor zoom option to Fit.
6. Toggle the Ultra Key effect back on in the Effect Controls panel, and deselect
the clip to remove the visible mask handles.
The result is a clean key.
Using mattes that use graphics or other clips
Adding a mask to the Opacity settings in the Effect Controls panel sets user-
defined regions that should be visible or transparent. Premiere Pro can also use
another clip as a reference for a matte.
The Track Matte Key effect uses the luminance information or alpha channel
information from any clips on a track to define a transparency matte for a
selected clip on another track. With a little planning and preparation, this simple
effect can produce powerful results because you can use any clips as a reference
and even apply effects to them, changing the resulting matte.
Using the Track Matte Key effect
Let’s use the Track Matte Key effect to add a layered title to the Seattle Skyline
sequence.
1. Select and delete the Timekeeping.mov clip on the Video 2 track.
2. Edit the clip Laura_06.mp4, from the Shots bin, onto the V2 track, at the
beginning of the sequence.
3. Drag the graphic clip SEATTLE from the Graphics bin onto the Timeline V3
track, directly above the Laura_06.mp4 clip.

4. Trim the SEATTLE graphic clip to match the duration of the Laura_06.mp4
clip.
5. Find the Track Matte Key effect in the Effects panel, and apply it to the
Laura_06. mp4 clip on the V2 track.
6. In the Effect Controls panel, set the Track Matte Key Matte menu to Video 3.
7. Scrub through the sequence to see the result. The top clip is no longer visible.
It’s being used as a guide to define the visible and transparent regions of the
clip on V3.
By default, the Track Matte Key effect uses the alpha channel from clips on
the selected track to generate a key. If your reference clips don’t use an alpha
channel, change the Composite Using menu to Matte Luma, and the
brightness of the reference clips will be used instead.
 Tip
In this example, you’re using a still image as a reference for the
Track Matte Key effect. You can use any clip, though, including
other video clips.

The Track Matte Key effect is an unusual effect because most other effects
exclusively change the clip they are applied to. The Track Matte Key effect
changes both the clip it’s applied to and the clip used as a reference.
The colors in the Laura_06.mp4 clip work well against the blue in the
background clip, but they could be more vivid. You might want to experiment
with color correction tools to make the red stronger and brighter so it’s a more
compelling composition.
You could also add a blur effect to the Laura_06.mp4 clip and change the
playback speed to create a softer, slower-moving texture.
Review questions
1. What is the difference between the RGB channels and the alpha channel?
2. How do you apply a blend mode to a clip?
3. How do you keyframe clip opacity?
4. How do you change the way a media file’s alpha channel is interpreted?
5. What does it mean to key a clip?
6. Are there any limits to the kinds of clips you can use as a reference for the
Track Matte Key effect?
Review answers
1. The difference is that the RGB channels describe color information, whereas
the alpha channel describes opacity.
2. Blend modes are in the Opacity category in the Effect Controls panel.

3. You adjust clip opacity in the same way you adjust clip volume, on the
Timeline or in the Effect Controls panel. To make an adjustment on the
Timeline, make sure you’re viewing the rubber band for the clip you want to
adjust and then drag with the Selection tool. If you hold Ctrl (Windows) or
Command (macOS) while clicking, you’ll add keyframes. You can also work
with keyframes using the Pen tool.
4. Right-click the file and choose Modify > Interpret Footage.
5. A key is usually a special effect where the color or brightness of pixels is
used to define which part of the image should be transparent and which part
should be visible.
6. You can use just about anything to create your key with the Track Matte Key
effect, as long as it is positioned on a track above the clip you apply the effect
to. You can even apply special effects to the reference clip, and the results of
those effects will be reflected in the matte. You can even use multiple clips,
because the setting is based on the track, rather than a particular clip.

16. Creating Titles
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Using the Essential Graphics panel
Working with video typography
Creating titles
Stylizing text
Working with shapes and logos
Making text roll and crawl
Working with template titles
This lesson will take about 90 minutes to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the
“Getting Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the
instructions under “Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.”
While you will rely upon audio and video sources as the primary ingredients for
building a sequence, you will often need to incorporate text into your project.
Adobe Premiere Pro CC includes powerful title and graphic creation tools you
can work with right in the Timeline panel.

You can use the Essential Graphics panel to create text and shapes. You can place these above video or
use them as stand-alone clips to convey information to an audience.
Starting the lesson
Text is effective when you need to convey information quickly to your audience.
For example, you can identify a speaker in your video by superimposing their
name and title during the interview (often called a lower-third). You can also use
text to identify sections of a longer video (often called bumpers) or to
acknowledge the cast and crew (with credits).
Text, properly used, is clearer than a narrator and allows for information to be
presented in the middle of dialogue. Text can be used to reinforce key
information.
The Essential Graphics panel offers a range of text-editing and shape-creation
tools that you can use to design titles. You can use the fonts loaded on your
computer (and those available via Adobe Typekit as part of your Creative Cloud
membership).
You can also control opacity and color and insert graphic elements or logos

created using other Adobe applications, such as Adobe Photoshop or Adobe
Illustrator.
Let’s try a few graphic and titling techniques.
1. Open Lesson 16.prproj in the Lesson 16 folder.
2. Save the project as Lesson 16 Working.prproj.
3. Switch to the Graphics workspace by clicking Graphics in the Workspaces
panel or by choosing Window > Workspaces > Graphics.
4. Reset the workspace by opening the Effects menu in the Workspaces panel
and choosing Reset To Saved Layout or by choosing Window > Workspaces
> Reset To Saved Layout.
The Graphics workspace reveals the Essential Graphics panel and positions the
Tools panel next to the Program Monitor to make it easier to access the graphics
tools you’ll work with directly on the video preview.
Getting an overview of the Essential Graphics panel
The Essential Graphics panel has two sections.
Browse: Allows you to browse a number of built-in title templates, many of
which include animation.
Edit: Allows you to make changes to titles you have added to a sequence or
created in a sequence.

In addition to starting with a template, you can use the Type tool 
 to create a
new title by clicking in the Program Monitor.
You can also use the Pen tool 
 directly in the Program Monitor to create
shapes to use as graphic elements in titles.
Notice the Pen tool has a tiny triangle to indicate it’s also a menu. If you click
and hold the Pen tool, the Rectangle tool and the Ellipse tool are revealed.
If you click and hold the Type tool, the Vertical Type tool is revealed, which
allows you to type text in a column, instead of a row.
Once you have created new graphic and text elements, you can reposition and
resize them using the Selection tool 
.

All of this creative work is performed directly in the Program Monitor and in the
Timeline panel.
Let’s start with some preformatted text and modify it. This is a good way to get
an overview of the powerful features of the Essential Graphics panel. Later in
this lesson, you’ll build titles from scratch.
1. Open the sequence 01 Clouds.
2. Position the Timeline playhead over the Cloudscape title on the V2 track, and
select it.
3. Switch to the Edit pane of the Essential Graphics panel.
Like the Effect Controls panel, the Edit pane of the Essential Graphics panel
shows options for whichever clip is selected in the Timeline panel.
Also, just like the Effect Controls panel, you can view the options for only

one clip at a time.
Like the Lumetri Color panel, changes made in the Essential Graphics panel
actually appear as effects in the Effect Controls panel, with the full range of
settings available, including the options to create effect presets and to animate
graphic elements with keyframes.
Notice there are two items listed at the top of the Essential Graphics panel:
Cloudscape and Shape 02.
If you are familiar with Adobe Photoshop, you’ll recognize these as layers.
Each item in a graphic is displayed as a layer in the Essential Graphics panel.
Just like Timeline tracks, the layers at the top are in front of the layers at the
bottom, and you can drag items up and down the list.
You’ll also recognize the familiar eyeball icon 
 to enable or disable a
layer.
4. Click the Shape 02 layer at the top of the Essential Graphics panel.
This displays standard alignment and appearance controls for Shape layers, in
this case, the red band that goes across the screen.
Many of the options will be familiar to you from the Motion effect in the
Effect Controls panel.

Items that are new to you are likely to be in the Appearance section, where
you can specify a color for the shape fill, stroke (a colored line on the edges
of a shape), and shadow.
Perhaps these color swatches are already familiar to you. They work in an
intuitive way.
5. Click the Fill color swatch.
A color picker appears that allows you to choose a precise color. There are a
number of color systems to choose between, or you can click the color
directly that you want.
6. Click Cancel, and then click the eyedropper 
 for the fill color on the right
side of the Essential Graphics panel.
The eyedropper allows you to pick a color from anywhere in the image. In
fact, you can pick colors from anywhere on your computer screen! This is
particularly useful if you have a range of colors you always want to use, such
as a logo or branding color.
7. Click the thin blue band of sky between the clouds. The shape fill changes
color to match the sky.

Notice the control handles visible on the shape in the Program Monitor. You
can use the Selection tool to change the shape directly. For now, you’re going
to use the Selection tool to select another layer in the title.
 Note
Using the Selection tool, click away from items in the Program
Monitor to hide the control handles and see the result more
clearly.
To select a layer in the Program Monitor, you may need to first deselect the
layer that’s already selected. You can do this by clicking the background of
the Program Monitor or by deselecting the title clip in the Timeline panel.
8. Use the Selection tool to click the word Cloudscape in the Program Monitor.
 Note
You may have to expand the window or scroll to see all the
Essential Graphics panel options.
The same Align And Transform and Appearance controls are displayed in the
Essential Graphics panel, but now there are additional controls that determine
the appearance of your text.

 Note
With all the clicking and testing, it’s easy to accidentally deselect
layers. If there’s no bounding box with handles around the text or
shape, select it using the Timeline Selection tool.
 Tip
If you’re ever unsure about the purpose of a control, hover the
mouse cursor over an icon and a tool tip will tell you the name.
9. Try a few fonts and font styles to experiment with the controls. Anywhere
you see blue numbers, you can drag with your mouse to update the setting.
This is a quick way to find out what a control is for.

The specific fonts loaded on each system will vary, and your Adobe Creative
Cloud membership includes access to many more fonts than you will have
available to begin with.
To add more fonts, go to the Graphics menu and choose Add Fonts From
Typekit to visit the Adobe Typekit website where you will find thousands of
fonts to use.
 Note
Premiere Pro automatically saves your updated title in the project
file. It does not show up as a separate file on your hard drive.
Mastering video typography essentials
When you design text for video, it’s essential that you follow typography
conventions. If text is composited over a moving video background with
multiple colors, it can take some work to create a clear design.
 Tip
If you’d like to learn more about typography, consider the book Stop
Stealing Sheep & Find Out How Type Works, Third Edition (Adobe
Press, 2013), by Erik Spiekermann.
Find a balance between legibility and style, making sure enough information is
on the screen without crowding it. If there’s too much text, it will quickly

become hard to read, frustrating the viewer.
Choosing a font
Your computer probably has many fonts, which can make choosing a good font
for video work difficult. To simplify the selection process, try using a triage
mentality and consider these factors:
Readability: Is the font easy to read at the size you’re using? Are all the
characters readable? If you look at it quickly and then close your eyes, what
do you remember about the text block?
Style: Using adjectives only, how would you describe the font you’ve
chosen? Does the font convey the right emotion? Type is like a wardrobe or
a haircut; picking the right font is essential to the overall success of the
design.
Flexibility: Does the font mix well with others? Does it come in various
weights (such as bold, italic, and semibold) that make it easier to convey
significance? Can you create a hierarchy of information that conveys
different kinds of information, such as a name and title for a speaker’s
lower-third name graphic?
The answers to these guiding principles should help steer you toward better-
designed titles. You may need to experiment to find the best font. Fortunately,
you can easily modify an existing title or duplicate it and change the copy for a
side-by-side comparison.
Choosing a color
Although you can create a nearly infinite number of possible color combinations,
choosing the right colors to use in a design can be surprisingly tricky. This is
because only a few colors work well for text while remaining clear for the
viewer. This task becomes even more difficult if you’re editing your video for
broadcast or if your design must match the style and branding of a series or
product. The text may also need to work when placed over a busy moving
background.
 Note
When creating text for use in a video, you will often find yourself
placing it over a background that has many colors present. This will
make it difficult to achieve proper contrast (which is essential to
preserving legibility). To help in this case, you may need to add an

edge stroke or shadow to get a contrasting edge.
While it may feel a little conservative, the most common color for text in video
is white. Not surprisingly, the second most popular color is black. If colors are
used, they tend to be very light or very dark shades. The color you choose must
provide suitable contrast from the background that the text is being placed over.
White text has good readability over a dark background.
This blue text is more difficult to read because it’s a similar color and tone to parts of the sky.
Adjusting the kerning
It’s common to adjust the spacing between the letters in a title to improve the
appearance of text and help match it to the design of the background. This
process is called kerning. Taking the time to manually adjust text becomes more
important the larger the font gets (because it makes improper kerning that much
more visible). The goal is to improve the appearance and readability of your text
while creating optical flow.
You can learn a lot about kerning by studying professionally designed materials
such as posters and magazines.

Kerning is applied per letter, allowing for creative use of spacing.
 Tip
A common place to start kerning is to adjust between an initial
capital letter and the succeeding lowercase letters, particularly in the
case of a letter with very little “base,” such as T, which creates the
illusion of excessive space along the baseline.
Try kerning an existing title.
1. Locate the title clip White Cloudscape in the Assets bin.
2. Edit the clip into the 01 Clouds sequence after the first title on the V2 track.
Make sure the title is positioned over the background video clip so you can
use it as a reference for positioning.

3. Use the Type tool 
 to select the text in the Program Monitor, placing the I-
bar between the D and the S of the word CLOUDSCAPE.
4. In the Edit pane of the Essential Graphics panel, in the Text section, set
Kerning to 250 
.
The kerning option is available only when a single letter is selected or when
the I-bar is placed between two letters.
5. Repeat this process for the remaining letters.
6. Click the Horizontal Center button in the Align And Transform section of the
Essential Graphics panel to reposition the text. Then deselect the text by
clicking an empty track in the Timeline panel.
7. Select the Selection tool.
 Tip
After using a different tool, it’s a good idea to return to the
Selection tool to avoid accidentally adding new text or making
unwanted changes to your sequence.
Setting the tracking
Another important text property is tracking (which is similar to kerning). This is
the overall control of spacing between all the letters in a line of text. Tracking
can be used to globally condense or expand a line of text.
It’s often employed in the following scenarios:
Tighter tracking: If a line of text is too long (such as a lengthy title for a
speaker’s lower-third), you may tighten it slightly to fit. This will keep the
font size the same but fit more text into the available space.

Looser tracking: A looser track can be useful when using all uppercase
letters or when you need to apply an outside stroke to the text. It’s used
often for large titles or when text is used as a design or motion graphics
element.
You can adjust tracking in the Text section of the Essential Graphics panel.
Simply select a text layer and adjust the setting.
Adjusting the leading
Kerning and tracking control the horizontal space between characters. Leading
(pronounced “led-ing”) controls the vertical space between lines of text. The
name comes from the time when strips of lead were used on a printing press to
create space between lines of text.
You adjust the leading in the Text section of the Essential Graphics panel Edit
pane.
The original leading causes the two lines of text to become difficult to read.

Increasing the leading adds space between lines and improves readability.
In most cases, you’ll find the default setting works well for leading. Adjusting
leading can have a big impact on your title. Don’t set the leading too tight;
otherwise, descenders from the top line (such as the downward lines on j, p, q,
and z) will cross ascenders from the lower line (like the upward lines on b, d, k,
and l). This collision is likely to make the text more difficult to read.
Setting the alignment
While you may be used to seeing text left-justified for things like a newspaper,
there are no hard-and-fast rules for aligning video text. Generally, text used for a
lower-third title is left- or right-justified.
You’ll often center text used in a rolling title sequence or segment bumper. In the
Essential Graphics panel, there are buttons to align your text.
Point text (see below) allows for regular text alignment.
Paragraph text (see below) allows for text block justification.
Setting the safe title margin
When creating titles, you may want to view guides to help you position text and
graphic elements.
You can enable or disable these by going to the Settings menu in the Program
Monitor and choosing Safe Margins.

The outer box shows you 90 percent of the viewable area, which is considered
the action-safe margin. Things that fall outside this box may get cut off when the
video signal is viewed on a television monitor. Be sure to place all critical
elements that are meant to be seen (like a logo) in this region.
The inner box, which is 80 percent of the viewable area, is called the title-safe
zone. Just as this book you’re reading has margins to keep the text from getting
too close to the edge, it’s a good idea to keep text inside the innermost, or title-
safe, zone. This will make it easier for your audience to read the information.
This text reaches too close to the edge (and outside the title-safe margin).
This image shows the text properly positioned inside the title-safe margin, which makes it more readable
and visible, even on a badly calibrated screen.
Creating titles

When you create a title, you’ll need to make some choices about how the text is
displayed. There are two approaches to creating text, each offering both
horizontal and vertical text direction options.
Point text: This approach builds a text bounding box as you type. The text
runs on one line until you press Enter (Windows) or Return (macOS).
Changing the shape and size of the box changes the Scale property in the
Essential Graphics panel.
Paragraph (area) text: You set the size and shape of the text box before
entering text. Changing the box size later displays more or less text but does
not change the size of the text.
When using the Type tool in the Program Monitor, you choose which type of
text you are adding when you first click.
Click and type to add point text.
Drag to create a text box and then type to add paragraph text.
Most of the options in the Essential Graphics panel apply to both types of text.
Adding point text
Now that you have a basic understanding of how to modify and design a title,
let’s build one from scratch, working with a new sequence.
You’ll create a new title to help promote a tourist destination.
1. Open the sequence 02 Cliff.
2. Select the Type tool.
3. Click in the Program Monitor, and type The Dead Sea.
A new graphic clip is added to the sequence in the Timeline panel on the next
available video track. In this case, it’s V2.

 Note
If you have been experimenting with the Essential Graphics
panel, your title may look different from the example shown.
Whatever settings you used last will be applied to new titles you
create.
4. Try changing the background video frame by dragging the Timeline
playhead. Choose the background frame carefully when designing a title.
Because video moves, you may find a title works at the start of a clip but not
at the end.
5. Choose the Selection tool. Handles appear on the text bounding box.
You won’t be able to use a keyboard shortcut for the Selection tool because
you’re typing into a text bounding box.
6. Drag the corners and edges of the text bounding box. Notice that the settings
for Font Size, Width, and Height do not change. Instead, the Scale setting is
adjusted. By default, the height and width maintain the same relative scale.
You can adjust the height and width separately by clicking Set Scale Lock 
.
7. Hover the pointer just outside a corner of the text box until a curved pointer
appears. This allows you to rotate the text box. Drag to rotate the bounding
box off its horizontal orientation.

Notice that the default location of the anchor point is the bottom-left corner of
the clip. When you rotate, it’s not around the center but instead around that
corner.
8. With the Selection tool still active, click anywhere in the bounding box and
drag the text and its bounding box toward the top-right corner.
9. Disable the Video 1 track output by clicking the Toggle Track Output button 
.
0. Click the Program Monitor Settings menu, and enable the Transparency Grid
option.
Use the settings in the Essential Graphics panel to try to match the example
given here.

Now you can see the title against a transparency checkerboard, but it’s almost
impossible to read.
1. With the text selected, go to the Appearance section of the Essential Graphics
panel, and enable the Stroke option. Set the color to black, and set Stroke
Width to 7.
Now it’s easy to see the text, and you can be confident it will remain readable
against a range of background colors.
Adding paragraph text
While point text is flexible, you can take better control over layout with
paragraph text. This option will automatically wrap the text as it reaches the
edge of the paragraph text box.
Continue working with the same title.
1. Select the Type tool.
2. Drag in the Program Monitor to create a text box that fills the lower-left
corner of the title-safe area.
3. Start typing. Start entering names of participants who will be attending the
tour. Use the names here or add your own. Press Enter (Windows) or Return
(macOS) after each name to start a new line.
Type a name with enough characters to go beyond the end of the text box.
You may need to reduce the font size so you can see a few lines of text at
once. Unlike point text, area text remains within the confines of the bounding
box you defined, and it wraps at the edges of the box.

The last name is too large to fit on one line, so it wraps to the next.
4. Press Enter (Windows) or Return (macOS) to add a new line.
5. Use the Selection tool to change the size and shape of the bounding box to fit
around the text a little better.
As you resize the text box, the text stays the same size, adjusting its position
in the text box. If you make the box too small to fit all your text, the extra text
scrolls below the bottom edge of the text box.
 Tip
A good way to avoid spelling mistakes is to copy and paste text
from an approved script or email that has already been reviewed by
your client or producer.
There are now two layers in the Essential Graphics panel. Each text item is a
separate layer, with its own controls.

Styling text
The Essential Graphics panel gives full control over the font, color, positioning,
scaling, rotation, and color of your text.
In addition, visual effects can be applied to titles, just like video clips.
Changing a title’s appearance
In the Appearance section of the Essential Graphics panel, there are two main
options for improving the readability of text.
Stroke: A stroke is a thin edge added to the outside of the text. It helps to
keep text legible over moving video or a complex background.
Shadow: A drop shadow is a common addition to video text because it
makes the text easier to read. Be sure to adjust the softness of the shadow.
Also, be sure to keep the angle of shadows identical for all titles in a project
for consistency.
Just as with the text fill, you can give any color to a stroke and shadow. You will
often achieve effective results by choosing a darker shade of the fill color for
both.
 Note
If you see an exclamation point next to the color you’ve chosen,
Premiere Pro is warning you that a color is not broadcast-safe. This
means it can cause problems when the video signal is put into a
broadcast television environment. Click the exclamation point to
automatically choose the closest color that is still broadcast-safe.
Let’s work on the colors for the current title.
1. Enable the track output for Video 1.
2. Experiment with the options in the Essential Graphics panel to make the text

more readable and add more color to the composition.
3. Try to match the appearance of the title in this example.
Saving custom styles
If you create a look you like, you can save time by storing it as a style. A style
describes the color and font characteristics for text. You can use a style to change
the appearance of text with a single click; all the properties of the text update to
match the preset.
Let’s create a style from the text you modified in the previous exercise.
1. Continuing to work on the same title, use the Selection tool to select the blue
text.
2. In the Essential Graphics panel, open the Master Styles menu, and choose
Create Master Text Style.
3. Enter the name Blue Bold Text, and click OK. The style is added to the
Master Styles menu.
The new Master Style also appears in the Project panel. This makes it easy to
share text styles between projects.

4. Select the other text layer, and use the Master Styles menu to apply the Blue
Bold Text style.
So far, you have worked with a title that was already created in a sequence,
edited one from the Project panel, and created a new one.
 Note
Titles have a default duration set in the user preferences, just like
other single-frame media.
In almost all cases, Premiere Pro requires that any item in a sequence also exists
in the Project panel. Titles are an exception to this rule.
Remember that White Cloudscape title you edited into the 01 Clouds sequence
earlier? Edit a second instance of that title into the sequence (you can easily drag
the clip into the Timeline panel).

The changes you made to the title have been applied to the master clip in the
Project panel. That’s because the title is a Master Graphic.
Master Graphics stay linked, so changes made to one instance will update all
other instances. It’s a useful option for title backgrounds, where you just intend
to update foreground text.
You can convert any title to a Master Graphic by selecting it in the Timeline
panel, going to the Graphics menu, and choosing Upgrade To Master Graphic.
A new graphic clip is added to the Project panel that you can easily share
between sequences or multiple projects.
Creating an Adobe Photoshop graphic or title
You can create titles or graphics for Premiere Pro in Adobe Photoshop.
While Photoshop is known as the premier tool for modifying photos, it
also has many capabilities for creating elegant titles or logo treatments.
Photoshop offers several advanced options, advanced formatting (such as
scientific notation), flexible layer styles, and even a spellchecker.
To create a new Photoshop document from inside Premiere Pro, follow
these steps:
1. Choose File > New > Photoshop File.
2. The New Photoshop File dialog appears, with settings based on your
current sequence.

3. Click OK.
4. Choose a location to store your new PSD file, name it, and click Save.
5. Photoshop opens, ready for you to edit the file. Photoshop
automatically displays safe action and safe title zones in the form of
guides. These guides won’t appear in the finished image.
6. Select the Text tool by pressing T.
7. Draw a text block, and by dragging, draw from the upper-left corner of
the title-safe area to the lower-right corner. This creates a paragraph
text box to hold the text. As in Premiere Pro, using a paragraph text
box in Photoshop allows you to precisely control the layout of text.
8. Enter some text you’d like to use.
9. Adjust the font, color, and point size to taste using the controls in the
Options bar across the top of the screen.
10. Click the Commit button 
 (in the Options bar) to commit the text
layer.
11. To add a drop shadow, choose Layer > Layer Style > Drop Shadow.
Adjust to taste.
 Tip
If you have disabled guides in the Photoshop View options, you can
enable them by choosing View > Show > Guides.
When you’re finished in Photoshop, you can save and close the file. It will
already be in your Project panel in the Premiere Pro project.
If you’d like to edit the title in Photoshop, select it in the Project panel or
Timeline and choose Edit > Edit In Adobe Photoshop. When you save changes
in Photoshop, the title updates automatically in Premiere Pro.
Working with shapes and logos
When building titles, you’ll likely need more than just words to build a complete
graphic. Fortunately, Premiere Pro offers the ability to create vector shapes as
graphic elements. Many of the title properties you worked with for text also
apply to shapes. You can also import completed graphics (like a logo) to enhance
your title.

Creating shapes
If you’ve created shapes in graphics-editing software such as Photoshop or
Adobe Illustrator, you’ll find creating geometric objects in Premiere Pro similar.
Select the Pen tool, and click multiple points in the Program Monitor to create a
unique shape.
You can also use the Pen Tool submenu to select the Rectangle tool or Ellipse
tool. Using either tool, drag in the Program Monitor to create a new shape.
Try these steps to draw shapes in Premiere Pro (this exercise is just for practice):
1. Open the sequence 03 Shapes.
2. Select the Pen tool, and click multiple points in the Program Monitor to
create a shape.
Each time you click, a new control point is added.
3. Complete the shape by clicking the first control point.
 Note
Remember, new shapes will have the same appearance you last
selected in the Essential Graphics panel. You can easily change
the settings.
4. Try changing the fill color and stroke color while the shape is selected.

5. Create a new shape with the Pen tool. This time, instead of just clicking, drag
each time you click.
Dragging when you click creates control points with Bezier handles; these are
the same handles you experimented with when setting up keyframes. These
handles give you precise control over the shape you have created.
6. Click and hold the Pen tool to give access to the Rectangle tool.
7. Use the Rectangle tool to create rectangles. Hold the Shift key as you drag to
create squares.
8. Now try the Ellipse tool. The Shift key allows you to create perfect circles.

These kinds of random shapes are unlikely to win any design awards, but
they should give you an idea of the flexibility of these shape tools.
9. Select the Pen tool, and drag a series of control points to create a free-form
shape.
The Pen tool allows you to adjust any existing shape. You can even click to
add control points for more complex shapes.
0. Press Ctrl+A (Windows) or Command+A (macOS), and then press Delete to
make another clean slate.
You can also select layers in the Essential Graphics panel and delete them.
1. Experiment with the different shape options. Try overlapping them and using
different colors, with different levels of opacity.
Adding a graphic

You can add image files to your title designs using common file formats,
including vectors (.ai, .eps) and still images (.psd, .png, .jpeg).
Let’s try this with an existing title.
1. Open the sequence 04 Logo.
This is a simple sequence with space in the graphic for a logo.
2. Select the “Add a logo” title clip in the sequence.
3. In the Essential Graphics panel, in the Edit pane, open the New Layer menu,
and choose From File.
4. Browse to the file logo.ai in the Lessons/Assets/Graphics folder, and click
Import.
5. With the Selection tool, drag the logo to position it where you want it in the
title. Then adjust the size, opacity, rotation, or scale of the logo.

Making text roll and crawl
You can easily make rolling text for opening and closing credits and crawling
text for items such as headline bulletins.
Try this now at the end of the 04 Logo sequence.
1. Use the Program Monitor Settings menu to disable the transparency grid. For
this exercise, you’ll use the black background of the Timeline.
2. Using the Type tool, click in the Program Monitor to add point text.
3. Type some text in the box that you would like to use as a credit roll, pressing
Enter (Windows) or Return (macOS) after each line.
For the purposes of this exercise, don’t worry about the precise words.
Type enough text to more than fill the screen vertically.
You’ll find it difficult to add many lines of text without constantly
repositioning it. It’s often easier to have the text ready in a document so you
can copy and paste it into Premiere Pro.

4. Use the Essential Graphics panel to format your text as desired.
5. Deselect the text layer (by clicking the background of the Program Monitor
with the Selection tool).
This reveals the graphic properties in the Essential Graphics panel, including
the option to create a title roll.
6. Check the box to add a Roll effect.
When you enable the Roll effect, a scroll bar appears in the Program Monitor.
Now, when you play through the clip, it will roll on and off the screen.
You have the following options:
Start Off Screen: This sets whether the credit begins off-screen and
rolls in or whether it begins where you placed it in the Program Monitor.
End Off Screen: This indicates whether the credits roll completely off
the screen or end on the screen.
Preroll: This sets the number of frames to delay before the first words
appear on-screen.
Ease-In: This specifies the number of frames at the beginning to
gradually increase the speed of the roll or crawl from zero to full speed.

Ease-Out: This specifies the number of frames to slow down the speed
of the roll or crawl at the end.
Postroll: This specifies the number of frames that play after the roll or
crawl ends.
The length of a rolling or crawling title on the Timeline defines the playback
speed. A shorter title will roll or crawl faster than a long one.
7. Play through your rolling title.
Working with template titles
The Browse pane of the Essential Graphics panel includes many prebuilt
template titles you add to your sequences and modify to suit your projects. Many
of the presets include motion, so they are referred to as Motion Graphics
templates.
The templates are divided into categories. Drag a chosen template into a
sequence to add it.
Some templates may have a yellow font warning symbol 
. This indicates that
the template uses a font not currently installed on your system.
If you use one of these templates, the Resolve Fonts dialog will appear.
If a missing font is available from the Typekit service, it appears in this dialog
box.

Check the box for the missing font, and it will be automatically installed, ready
for use in this title.
Creating a custom template title
You can add your own custom titles to the Browse pane of the Essential
Graphics panel. Simply select the title you want to add, click the Graphics menu,
and choose Export As Motion Graphics Template.
Choose a name for the new template title and a location in the Essential Graphics
panel or on a local drive, and click OK.
If you chose a local drive location, you can import the file on any computer by
choosing Graphics > Install Motion Graphics Template, or by clicking the button
in the Essential Graphics panel Browse pane 
.
This makes it easy to share your custom template titles or store them in a
collection for future use.
Introducing captions
There are two kinds of captions you might encounter when producing video for
television broadcast and beyond: closed and open.
Closed captions are embedded in the video stream and can be enabled or
disabled by the viewer. Open captions are always on-screen.
Premiere Pro allows you to work with either kind of caption in the same way. In
fact, you can even convert one kind of caption file to another. However, there is
one limitation; closed caption files have a more limited range of colors and

design features than open captions. This is because they are actually displayed
by the viewer’s TV, set-top box, or online viewing software, so controls are in
place before you begin.
The following workflow describes working with closed captions, but open
captions work the same way—just right-click the imported caption file and
choose Modify to access the option to change the file to an open caption or
create a new open caption item from the start.
Using closed captions
Video content can be enjoyed by more people when it is accessible. An
increasingly used practice is to add closed-captioning information that can be
decoded by television sets. Visible captions are inserted into a video file and
travel through supported formats to specific playback devices.
Adding closed-captioning information is relatively easy as long as you have
captions that have been properly prepared. Caption files are often generated with
software tools such as MacCaption, CaptionMaker, and MovieCaptioner.
Here’s how to add captions to an existing sequence:
1. Close the current project, and open Lesson 16_02.prproj.
2. Save the project as 16_02 Working.prproj.
3. Open the sequence NFCC_PSA.
4. Choose File > Import, and navigate to the Lessons/Assets/Closed Captions
folder. Import the file NFCC_PSA.scc (.scc and .mcc formats are supported).
The caption file is added to the bin as if it were a video clip, with a frame rate
and duration.
5. Edit the closed captions clip to a track above all the clips in your sequence. In
this case, use the V2 track.
6. Click the Settings menu button in the Program Monitor 
, and choose
Closed Captions Display > Enable.
7. Play the sequence to see the captions. If your captions don’t display properly,
open the Program Monitor Settings menu again, and choose Closed
Captioning Display > Settings. Make sure the settings match the file type
you’re using. In this case, choose the CEA-608 option.
8. You can adjust the captions using the Captions panel (Window > Captions).
You can adjust the content, timing, and formatting of captions using the
panel’s controls.

This public service announcement was produced by RHED Pixel and is provided courtesy of the
National Foundation for Credit Counseling.
You can also change the timing by dragging the handles for each caption on the
Timeline.
You can create your own closed captions right within Premiere Pro.
1. Choose File > New > Captions. The New Captions dialog opens.
2. The default settings are based on your current sequence. These are fine, so
click OK.
3. Another dialog opens, asking for advanced settings for broadcast workflows.
CEA-608 (also known as Line 21) is the most commonly used standard for
analogue broadcast. CEA-708 is for digital broadcast. TeleText is sometimes
used in PAL countries. Open captions are always visible and give the
maximum flexibility for appearance. For this clip, choose CEA-708.
4. The default option of Service 1 from the Stream menu sets this as the first
stream of closed captions. Click OK. The closed caption clip is added to the
Project panel.
5. Remove the existing closed caption clip on the Video 2 track by selecting it
and pressing Backspace (Windows) or Delete (macOS).
6. Edit the new closed-caption clip onto the Video 2 track. It will be too short
for the sequence (by default it is 3 seconds long). Drag the end of the caption
to trim it to the duration you need. Select the closed caption clip on the
Timeline and go to the Captions panel (Window > Captions).
7. Click the Program Monitor Settings menu and choose Closed Captions

Display > Settings. In the Standard menu, choose CEA-708, and click OK.
Now the Program Monitor will display the caption type you have created.
8. Enter text that matches the dialogue and/or narration being spoken and then
click the + (plus) button at the bottom of the panel to add another caption.
 Note
Using the Button Editor, you can customize the Program Monitor
by adding a Closed Captions Display button for easy access to
toggling viewable captions.
9. Adjust the In and Out durations for each caption in the Captions panel or
directly on the Timeline.
0. Use the formatting controls at the top of the Captions panel to adjust the
appearance of each caption.
If the total caption duration increases, you may need to trim the sequence clip
longer to display all of its contents.
Using open captions
You can create, import, adjust, and export open captions in exactly the same way
that you would work with closed captions.
The difference is that open captions are always visible, so in many ways they
function like titles.
The benefit of working with open captions is that the timing is set in the caption
file, or caption clip in Premiere Pro, saving you significant time synchronizing
the text with the spoken words.
Another similarity with regular titles is in the broader range of appearance
options than you’ll find with closed captions.
The reason for the limited range of colors and fonts when working with closed
captions is that they’re actually displayed by the television set or software
player. To be certain of the layout and appearance, universal standards have been
set.
No such limitations exist for open captions.
You can modify the captions type by right-clicking a caption’s clip in the Project
panel and choosing Modify > Captions.

In the Target Stream Format section, you can specify the stream type for this
caption clip.
Because of the additional options available for open captions, you can convert a
closed-caption clip to an open caption type, but not the other way around.
Review questions
1. What are the differences between point text and paragraph (or area) text?
2. Why display the title-safe zone?
3. How do you use the Rectangle tool to make a perfect square?
4. How do you apply a stroke or drop shadow?
Review answers
1. You create point text by clicking in the Program Monitor with the Type tool.
Its text box expands as you type. When you drag in the Program Monitor
with the Type tool, you define a bounding box, and the characters remain
within its confines. Changing the box’s shape displays more or fewer
characters.
2. Some TV sets cut off the edges of the picture. The amount lost varies from
set to set. Keeping your text within the title-safe margin ensures that viewers
will see all your title. This is less of a problem with newer flat-screen TVs
and isn’t important for online video, but it’s still a good idea to use the title-
safe zone to frame your titles.
3. To create a perfect square, hold down the Shift key as you draw using the
Rectangle tool.

4. To apply a stroke or drop shadow, select the text or object to edit, and enable
the Stroke (Outer or Inner) or Shadow options in the Essential Graphics
panel.

17. Managing Your Projects
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Working in the Project Manager
Importing projects
Managing collaboration
Managing your hard drives
This lesson will take about 60 minutes to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the
“Getting Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the
instructions under “Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.”
In this lesson, you’ll learn how to stay organized when working with multiple
Adobe Premiere Pro CC projects. The best kind of organizational system is the
one you already have when you find that you need it. This lesson will help you
be more creative with a little bit of planning.

Stay on top of your media and projects with a few simple steps.
Starting the lesson
When you start creating projects with Premiere Pro, you may not feel the need to
invest time in staying organized. Perhaps you’re working on your first project
now, and if that’s the case, it’s going to be nice and easy to find it on your
storage drive.
Once you start working on multiple projects, staying organized gets a little more
complicated. You might use multiple media assets taken from multiple storage
locations. You’ll have multiple sequences, each with its own particular structure,
and you’ll be generating multiple titles. You may also have multiple effect
presets and title templates. All in all, you’ll need quite a filing system to keep all
these project elements organized.
The solution is to create an organizational system for your projects and to have a
plan in place for archiving those projects that you might want to work on again.

The thing about systems for organization is that they’re usually easier to use if
they exist before you need them. Look at this idea from the other direction: If
you don’t have an organizational system in the moment you need it—when you
have a new video clip to put somewhere, for example—you might be too busy
being creative to think about things such as names and file locations.
Consequently, it’s common for projects to end up with similar names, stored in
similar locations, with a mix of files that don’t go together.
The solution is simple: Make your organizational system in advance. Map it out
with pen and paper if it helps and work out the journey you’ll take, starting with
acquiring your source media files, moving through your edit, and finishing with
output, archiving, and beyond.
In this lesson, you’ll begin by learning about features that help you stay in
control, without losing focus on what matters most—your creative work. Then
you’ll learn about some positive approaches to collaboration.
1. Open Lesson 17.prproj in the Lesson 17 folder.
2. Save the project as Lesson 17 Working.prproj.
3. In the Workspaces panel, click Editing. Then open the menu adjacent to the
Editing option, and choose Reset To Saved Layout, or go to Window >
Workspaces > Reset to Saved Layout.
Using the File menu
Though you can perform most of your creative work using buttons in the
interface or using keyboard shortcuts, some important options are available only
in the menus. The File menu gives you access to the project settings and to the
Project Manager, a tool that automates the process of streamlining your project.
Using the File menu commands
There are some important File menu options for project management:
Batch Capture: This allows you to capture multiple clips from tape; see
Lesson 3, “Importing Media.” This option is available only if you select one
or more “offline” clips with no associated media in the Project panel.

Link Media: If you have clips that have become unlinked, use this option
to open the Link Media dialog and relink the media (see the next section).
 Tip
The commands Link Media and Make Offline are also
available in the Project panel when you right-click selected
clips.
Make Offline: You can deliberately break the connection between clips
you select in the Project panel and their media files (see the next section).
Project Settings: These are the settings you chose when you created your
project; see Lesson 2, “Setting Up a Project.”
Project Manager: This automates the process of backing up your project
and associated media files and discarding unused media files (described
later in this lesson).
Making a clip offline
The words offline and online have different meanings in different post-
production workflows, depending on the context. In the language of Premiere
Pro, they refer to the relationship between clips and the media files they link to.
Online: The clip is linked to a media file.
Offline: The clip is not linked to a media file.
When a clip is offline, you can still edit it into a sequence, and even apply effects
to it, but you won’t be able to see any video. Instead, you’ll see the Media
Offline warning.

In almost all operations, Premiere Pro is nondestructive. This means that no
matter what you do with the clips in your project, nothing will happen to the
original media files. Making a clip offline gives you a rare exception to this rule.
If you right-click a clip in the Project panel or choose File > Make Offline,
you’ll have two options.
Media Files Remain on Disk: This unlinks the clip from the media file and
leaves the media file untouched.
Media Files Are Deleted: This deletes the media file. The effect of
deleting the media file is that the clip goes offline because there is no media
file to link to anymore.
The benefit of making clips offline is that they can be reconnected with new
media. If you’ve been working with low-resolution media, this means you can
recapture tape-based media, or reimport file-based media, at a higher quality.
 Tip
You can make multiple clips offline in a single step. Just select any
clips you want to make offline before you choose the menu option.
Working with low-resolution media is sometimes desirable if you have limited
disk storage or a large number of clips. When your editing work is complete and
you’re ready for fine finishing, you can replace your low-resolution, small file-
size media with selected high-resolution, large file-size media.
The proxy editing workflow handles this process well (see Chapter 3, “Importing
Media”), but there will be occasions when you want to set one or more particular
clips to be offline to link to new media files.
Be careful with the Make Offline option, though! Once your media file is
deleted, it’s gone. Be cautious when using the option that deletes the actual
media file.
Using the Project Manager

Let’s take a look at the Project Manager (choose File > Project Manager). The
Project Manager provides several options that automate the process of
consolidating your project, or gathering together any media files you’ve used in
your project.
It’s useful if you intend to archive your project or if you want to share your
work. By using the Project Manager to gather all your media files, you can be
confident nothing will be missing—or offline—when you hand the project over
to colleagues.
The result of using the Project Manager is a new, separate project file. Because
the new project file is independent of your current project, you should double-
check that the new project is as you want it before deleting your original media
or project file.
Here’s an overview of the options:
Sequence: Select one or all of the sequences in your project. The Project
Manager works with clips and media files based on the sequences you
select.
Resulting Project: Create a new project that has full copies of the clips
included in your sequences, or create a new project with new media files
based on only the trimmed parts of clips included in your sequences. You
can choose a range of formats and codecs for the newly created media files
when transcoding (that is, converting the media files to a new format and
codec).
 Note
Not all media formats can be trimmed. If you create a trimmed
project that has media of this kind, the Project Manager creates
copies of the full original clips.
Exclude Unused Clips: With this option selected, the new project will
include only clips that are used in your selected sequences.
Include Handles: If you’re creating a trimmed project, using the
Consolidate And Transcode option, this adds the number of frames you
specify to the newly trimmed versions of the clips in your sequences. The
extra content gives you the flexibility to trim and adjust the timing of your
edits later.

Include Audio Conform Files: This includes the audio conform files with
your project, so Premiere Pro won’t need to conduct analysis of your audio
again. You don’t need these, as Premiere Pro will create them automatically
as required, but it can save time.
Convert Images Sequences To Clips: If you have imported one or more
animated image sequences or stop-motion photography sequences as clips,
this option converts them into regular video files. This is often a useful
option because it will save space and simplify file management. It might
also improve playback performance.
Include Preview Files: If you’ve already rendered your effects, you can
include the preview files with your new project so you won’t need to render
them again. These files aren’t necessary but can save a considerable amount
of time.
Rename Media Files To Match Clip Names: As the name implies, this
option renames your media files to match the clip names in your project

(useful if you have renamed clips to make them easier to find). Consider
carefully if you want to use this option because it can make it difficult to
identify the original source media for your clips.
Convert After Effects Compositions To Clips: Choose this option to
exclude dynamically linked After Effects compositions, replacing them
with a rendered video file. This can be valuable because the Project
Manager is unable to collect dynamically linked After Effects compositions
or the media files associated with them. This is a good reason to stay extra
organized when working with After Effects and Premiere Pro together.
Preserve Alpha: If you are transcoding your footage, you can choose to
keep alpha channel information so transparent areas will stay transparent.
This will lead to larger files but may mean you retain valuable picture
information.
Destination Path: Choose a location for your new project.
Disk Space: Click Calculate to see an estimate of the total space needed for
your new project.
Managing media with Dynamic Link
Dynamic Link allows Premiere Pro to use After Effects compositions as
imported media while they are still editable in After Effects. For Dynamic
Link to work, Premiere Pro must have access to the After Effects project
file that contains the composition, and After Effects must have access to
the media files.
While working on a single computer with both applications installed and
your media assets located on internal storage, this is achieved
automatically.
If you use the Project Manager to collect files for a new Premiere Pro
project, it will not bring copies of Dynamic Link files. Also, duplicated
audio files created when sending sequences to Adobe Audition are not
included. Make copies of the files in Windows Explorer (Windows) or
Finder (macOS). This is easy to do: just copy the folder and include it
with the assets already collected. In After Effects, choose File >
Dependencies > Collect Files to automate this process.
Collecting files and copying them to a new location
Perhaps your media files are in too many locations in your storage system. Or

perhaps you’re sharing your work with another editor. Perhaps you’re taking an
edit on the road. You may not need every clip incorporated into your newly
created project. This option lets you create perfect copies of your original,
complete media files in a new single location, but selectively (using the Exclude
Unused Clips option).
There’s no need for you to go right through the process with this project, but let’s
take a look at the options you’d choose to collect all the files used in your
selected sequences to a new, single location.
1. Choose File > Project Manager.
2. Select the sequences you want to be included in your new project.
3. Select Collect Files And Copy To New Location.
4. Select Exclude Unused Clips.
If you want to include every clip in your bins, regardless of whether they are
used in a sequence, deselect this option. Deselect this option if you are
creating a new project to organize your media files a little better—perhaps
because you imported them from lots of different locations. When the new
project is created, every media file linked to the project will be copied to the
new project location.
5. Decide if you want to include existing preview files to save you from having
to rerender your effects in the new project.
6. Decide if you want to include Audio Conform Files to save Premiere Pro
from having to analyze the audio files again.
7. Decide whether you want to rename your media files. Generally, it’s better to
leave your media files with their original names. However, if you’re
producing a project to share with another editor, it might be helpful for them
to identify the media files if they are renamed.
8. Click Browse and choose a location for your new project file and associated
media.
9. Click Calculate to have Premiere Pro estimate the total new size of your
project, based on your selections. Then click OK.
Premiere Pro will make copies of the original files in a single location. If you
intend to create an archive of your entire original project, this is the way to do it.

Consolidating and transcoding
Premiere Pro can transcode all the media in your project to a new format and
codec in a single step using this option in the Project Manager.
This is useful if you plan to use a so-called mezzanine codec (sometimes called a
house codec), which all media is converted to before being stored on a media
server or edited. These codecs are usually easier for editing systems to play back
than in-camera codecs, as well as being high quality, often with a higher bit
depth (and therefore more color acuity) than the original media. This doesn’t add
quality, but it helps maintain it.
To create copies of all your media, deselect Exclude Unused Clips. Otherwise,
the options are similar to those you’d choose when creating a trimmed project.
Creating a trimmed project
To create a new trimmed project file with new media files, including only the
parts of the clips you have used in your selected sequences, do the following:
1. Go to the File menu, and choose Project Manager.
2. Select the sequences you want to be included in your new project.
3. Select Consolidate and Transcode.
4. Use the Source menu to choose from the following options:
Sequence: If clips in the selected sequence (or sequences) match the
sequence settings (frame size, frame rate, and so on), the newly created
clips will be formatted to match the sequence they are used in. If they
don’t match, the media files are copied instead.
Individual Clips: The newly created clips will match their original
frame size and format (though it is possible you will be changing the
codec). It’s likely you will generally choose this option to maintain the
maximum quality of your footage.
Preset: This allows you to specify a new format using the Preset menu;
many options are available.
5. Use the Format menu to choose from the following options:
DNxHR/DNxHD MXF OP1a: This selects an MXF file type with
DNxHR/DNxHD preselected as the codec. DNxHR and DNxHD are the
preferred codecs for Avid Media Composer, but playback performance
is excellent in Premiere Pro as well.
MXF OP1a: This selects an MXF file type with a range of codec

options in the Preset menu.
QuickTime: This selects a QuickTime MOV file type, giving access to
the GoPro CineForm codec and Apple ProRes codec in the Preset menu.
6. Choose the codec you prefer, or click to import a preset. You can create a
transcoding preset in Adobe Media Encoder.
7. Select Exclude Unused Clips.
8. Add some handles. The default is 1 second on each end of the clips used in
your sequences. Consider adding more if you’d like to have more flexibility
to trim and adjust your edits in the new project.
 Tip
Choosing to add 5 or 10 seconds of media at each end of the clip
will do no harm; it will just mean your media files are a little
larger.
9. Decide whether you want to rename your media files. Generally, it’s better to
leave your media files with the original names. However, if you’re producing
a trimmed project to share with another editor, it might be helpful for that
editor to identify the media files if they are renamed.
Understanding the GoPro CineForm codec
While you may already be familiar with the idea of different file types
(.mov, .avi, for example), you may not be as familiar with codecs. With
each type of file you use, you can think of the file as a container.
What’s contained in the file is the encoded video and encoded audio.
The word codec is a shortening of the words compressor and
decompressor. It’s the way the picture and sound information is stored.
As complex as codec technology might be, the decisions you make
about choosing a codec are often quite simple. You’ll probably choose
based on the following:
A requirement as part of an in-house workflow
The desire to match the original media codec
A personal preference for one codec over another (based on your
personal research)
The GoPro CineForm codec is efficient, is well-suited to post-
production, supports very high-resolution video, and can store an alpha

channel. This is important if you are working with media that has
transparent pixels (such as animated titles).
0. Click Browse and choose a location for your new project file.
 Note
If your media has a nonstandard frame size or you choose to
preserve alpha but select a codec that does not support alpha, the
media will be copied, instead of trans-coded, and a warning
message will inform you of this.
1. Click Calculate to have Premiere Pro estimate the new total size of your
project, based on your selections. Then click OK to close the dialog box.
The benefit of creating a newly transcoded, trimmed project is that you no longer
have unwanted media files cluttering up your hard drive. It’s a convenient way to
transfer your project to a new location using the minimum storage space, and it’s
great for archiving.
The danger with this option is that once your unused media files are deleted,
they’re gone! Be sure that you have a backup of your unused media or that you
definitely do not want to use the media before you create a trimmed project.
When you create your trimmed project, Premiere Pro will not delete your
original files. Just in case you selected the wrong items, you can always go back
and check before manually deleting the files on your hard drive.
Rendering and replacing
Earlier, while working with visual effects, you explored the option to render and
replace clips in sequences. There may be occasions that you will have a
particular clip in a sequence that is hard for your system to play back without
dropping frames. For example, if you have high-resolution raw media files, stop-
motion photography, or a complex dynamically linked Adobe After Effects
composition, you may find it necessary to render for playback at the full frame
rate.
There is another way: You can open the Render And Replace dialog box by
right-clicking a clip segment in a sequence and choosing Render And Replace.

The key benefit of this option, compared with simply rendering that section of
the sequence, is that you can work with the rendered and replaced clip as you
would any other. You can move it to a different location, combine it in a
composition with other clips, and add visual effects. You’ll probably experience
markedly improved real-time performance.
You’ll notice the options in the Render And Replace dialog are similar to those
in the Project Manager.
 Tip
Not every codec supports the alpha channel (allowing partial
transparency in the clip). The QuickTime format allows you to use a
version of the GoPro CineForm codec that includes alpha.
When you render and replace a clip, the newly created media file is linked to a
clip in the Project panel, which is used to replace the original sequence clip.
Remember, if you have replaced a clip using Render And Replace, you can
restore the link to the original item (including a Dynamically Linked After
Effects composition) by right-clicking the clip and choosing Restore
Unrendered.

This allows you to make changes to the original item and have it update in
Premiere Pro.
Using the Link Media panel and the Locate command
The Link Media panel gives you simple options for reconnecting the clips in
your bin with the media files on your storage drive.
The panel appears automatically if you open a project with clips that are not
linked to media files.
The default options work well, but if you’re relinking to different file types or
using a more complex system to organize your media files, you may want to
enable or disable some of the options for file matching.
At the bottom of the Link Media panel, you’ll find a series of buttons.
 Note
Link Media is different from Replace Footage. Use Replace Footage
to link a single clip to an alternative media file. The result is the
same, but the automated search options are bypassed, allowing you
to link a clip to a different file.

Offline All: Premiere Pro will keep all the clips in the project but won’t
automatically prompt you to relink them.
Offline: Premiere Pro will keep the selected clip (highlighted in the list) in
the project but won’t automatically prompt you to relink it. The next clip on
the list will be highlighted for you to make a selection.
Cancel: This closes the dialog.
Locate: If you would like to relink clips, choose options to define the
search settings, including File Name or File Extension (or both), and click
Locate. The Locate panel appears, and you can search for your missing
media.
 Note
Premiere Pro also has an option for preserving your interpret
footage settings. If you’ve modified the way Premiere Pro
interprets media, select the Preserve Interpret Footage Settings
check box to apply the same settings to the newly linked media
files.
The Locate File panel gives you a quick, easy way to locate your missing media.
The simplest way to find a file is as follows:
1. Review the Last Path information as a guide to locating the file. Often the

storage drive will have changed, but the path within the drive will be the
same. You can use this information to manually search for a containing
folder.
2. In the folder browser on the left, select a folder that you think contains the
media, perhaps as a subfolder. Don’t worry about choosing the particular sub-
folder that contains the media.
3. Click Search. Premiere Pro will locate a file that matches the selected
missing clip. The file is highlighted.
4. Select the option Display Only Exact Name Matches. Premiere Pro will hide
media files that do not match, making it easy to identify which file to select.
5. Double-click the correct file, or select it and click OK.
When you click OK, Premiere Pro will automatically search for other missing
media files in the same location. This automation can dramatically speed up the
process of relinking missing media files.
Performing the final project management steps
If your goal is to give yourself maximum flexibility to reedit your sequences
based on the new project, consider choosing Edit > Remove Unused before you
use the Project Manager.
Remove Unused will leave you with only those clips currently used in
sequences. Any clips that are not used will be removed (this can result in empty
bins because they are not affected).
You can then continue to work on your project with less clutter.
Browsing projects with the Media Browser panel
As well as importing many kinds of media files, Premiere Pro can import
sequences from existing projects, along with all the clips used to create them.
You can import other Premiere Pro project files as if they were a media file,
giving limited access to project contents, or by browsing in the project file using
the Media Browser.
Let’s explore both options.
1. Use any method you prefer to import a new media file. If you double-click a
blank area in the Project panel, the Import dialog will appear.

2. Select the file called Lesson 17 Desert Sequence.prproj in the Lesson 17
folder, and click Import.
The Import Project dialog appears.
Import Entire Project: This imports every sequence in the project
you’re importing and every clip already imported into a bin.
Import Selected Sequences: This allows you to select the specific
sequence you’d like to import. Only clips used in that sequence will be
imported.
 Note
If you import a Premiere Pro project file and choose to
import selected sequences, the Import Premiere Pro
Sequence dialog appears. Using this dialog, you can
selectively import specific sequences, bringing associated
clips into your project automatically.
Create folder for imported items: This creates a bin in the Project
panel for the items you import rather than adding them to the main
Project panel, which is usually a good idea as it avoids potentially
mixing them up with existing items.
Allow importing duplicate media: If you import clips that link to
media files you have already imported, by default Premiere Pro will
consolidate the two clips into one. If you would prefer to have two
copies of the clip, select this option.
3. For now, click Cancel. You’ll use another method.

You can also import whole projects or individual clips and sequences using
the Media Browser. Simply browse to a project and open it as if it were a
folder.
Using the Media Browser to access the contents of project files this way gives
you access to the entire contents of the project as if it were a folder. You can
browse inside bins, select clips to import, and even view the contents of
sequences.
When you want to import an item (including a sequence), drag it into your
current project file, or right-click it and choose Import.
Let’s try this.
1. Save and close the current project.
2. Open the project Lesson 17 Desert Sequence.prproj in the Lesson 17 folder
to make sure the media files are correctly relinked.
This is a montage sequence, showing images of a desert. Let’s take clips from
this project.
3. Save and close the project. This updates the project file with links to the
media you copied into your local storage.
4. Choose File > Open Recent, and select Lesson 17 Working.prproj in
whichever location you chose for it, or browse to the Lesson 17 folder, and
open Lesson 17 Working.prproj.
5. In the Media Browser, browse to the Lesson 17 folder and then double-click
Lesson 17 Desert Sequence.prproj to browse inside the project.
6. Double-click the Desert Montage sequence.
The sequence opens in the Source Monitor, just as you would expect a clip to.
The sequence also opens in a read-only Timeline panel; you can view the
sequence, but you can’t make changes to it.
This protects the contents of the project file you are browsing in.

In the Timeline panel, the sequence name includes the phrase (Source Monitor) to remind you that
this is not a current project sequence.
You can easily import a whole sequence from the Media Browser by right-
clicking it and choosing Import. However, you can also drag a clip or multiple
clips from this Source Monitor Timeline panel into your Project panel.
If you position the read-only Timeline panel next to your current sequence
Timeline panel, you can drag clips directly from one to the other.
Opening multiple projects
You can open multiple projects and work with them at the same time.
Each open project will have its own Project panel, within which there will be
sequences, clips, and so on.
When working with multiple projects open at the same time, it’s easy to copy
clips and sequences from one project to another. It can be a little confusing at
times, as menu choices will apply to whichever project you are working with at
any given moment.
There’s an easy way to know which project you’re working on right now: Look
at the top of the Premiere Pro interface.
You see the currently active project file path and file name displayed.
Unlike browsing inside a project via the Media Browser, when you open
multiple projects, they are all editable. This means you’ll want to be careful not
to make unwanted changes, particularly if you’re opening someone else’s project
using shared network-based storage to copy some contents from it.
Managing collaboration
The option to import other projects, and to open multiple projects, presents novel
workflows and opportunities for collaboration. You could, for example, share
work on different parts of a program between different editors, all using the same
media assets. Then, one editor could import all the other projects to combine
them into a completed sequence.
Project files are small—often small enough to email. This allows editors to email
each other updated project files, open them and compare, or import them to do a
side-by-side comparison in the project, provided that each editor has a copy of
the same media files. You can use local-folder file-sharing services to update a
shared project file that links to duplicated copies of local media files. You can

also share files using Creative Cloud.
You can add markers with comments to a Timeline. When updating a sequence,
consider adding a marker to highlight changes for your collaborators.
Be warned: By default, Premiere Pro does not lock project files when they are in
use. This means two people can access the same project file at the same time.
This could be creatively dangerous! As one person saves the project file, it
updates. As the next person saves the file, it updates again. Whoever saves last
defines the file, replacing changes made by the last editor. If you intend to
collaborate, it’s usually best to work on separate project files or manage access
to one project file carefully.
 Tip
Although it is beyond the scope of this book, check out Adobe
Creative Cloud for Teams for more advanced collaborative project-
sharing workflows.
There are several dedicated media servers made by third parties that help you to
collaborate using shared media files. These allow you to store and manage your
media in a way that is accessible by multiple editors at the same time.
Keep these questions in mind:
Who has the latest version of the edited sequence?
Where are the media files stored?
As long as you have simple answers to these questions, you should be able to
collaborate and share creative work using Premiere Pro.
Premiere Pro allows you to export a selection of clips and sequences as a new
Premiere Pro project. This streamlined project file makes collaboration easier
because it allows you to focus on precisely the content that matters.
To export a selection as a Premiere Pro project, select items in the Project panel,
and choose File > Export > Selection As Premiere Project. Choose a name and
location for the new project file, and click Save.
The new project file will link to your existing media files.
Using the Libraries panel
The Libraries panel gives you direct access to stock assets, graphics, Motion
Graphics Template titles, and LUTS created elsewhere and shared via Creative

Cloud, inside Premiere Pro.
You can also place media files in your Creative Cloud Files folder, which will
automatically populate Creative Cloud Files folders on other computers if you
are logged in to your Creative Cloud account on those systems.
It’s easy to share folders with other users too, so the Creative Cloud Files folder
is a useful way to share project files.
Managing your hard drives
Once you’ve used the Project Manager to create a new copy of your project or
you have completed your project and finished with its media, you’ll want to
clean up your drives. Video files are big. Even with large storage drives, you’ll
quickly need to think about which files you want to keep and which ones you
want to discard. You might also want to move your project media to slower,
larger archive storage to keep as much fast media storage available as possible
for current projects.
To make it easier to remove unwanted media when you’ve finished a project,
consider importing all media files via your project folder or via a specific
location on your media drive for your project. This means putting copies of your
media into a single location before importing because when you import media,
Premiere Pro creates a link to it wherever it is on your computer.
By organizing media files before you import them, you’ll find it much easier to
remove unwanted content at the end of the creative workflow because
everything is conveniently located in one place.
Remember that deleting clips in a project, or even deleting the project file itself,
will not delete media files. Remember, also, to account for proxy files if you
have used them. It’s possible your proxy files will be stored in a different
location to your full-resolution original media.
Removing cache and preview files
The Premiere Pro media cache uses storage space when you import new media
files to your projects and they are analyzed. Also, each time you render effects,
Premiere Pro creates preview files.
To remove these files and reclaim extra space on your hard drive, there are
several options.
Choose Edit > Preferences > Media Cache (Windows) or Premiere Pro CC
> Preferences > Media Cache (macOS), and click Delete Unused in the

Media Cache Files section. This will remove cache files that are no longer
referenced by a project.
Delete render files associated with your current project by choosing
Sequence > Delete Render Files.
Locate your Preview Files folder by checking under File > Project Settings
> Scratch Disks. Then delete the folder and its contents using Windows
Explorer (Windows) or Finder (macOS).
Consider carefully when choosing the location of the media cache and your
project preview files. The total size of these files can be significant, and the
speed of the drive will impact playback performance in Premiere Pro.
Review questions
1. Why would you choose to make a clip offline?
2. Why would you choose to include handles when creating a trimmed project
with the Project Manager?
3. Why would you choose the Project Manager option called Collect Files And
Copy To A New Location?
4. What does the Remove Unused option in the Edit menu achieve?
5. How can you import a sequence from another Premiere Pro project?
6. Will the Project Manager collect Dynamic Link assets, such as After Effects
compositions, when creating a new project?
Review answers
1. If you’re working with low-resolution copies of your media files, you’ll want
to make your clips offline so you can recapture them or reimport them at full
resolution.
2. Trimmed projects include only the parts of your clips used in sequences. To
give yourself the flexibility to adjust your edit points later, you’d add
handles; 24 frame handles would actually add 48 frames to the total duration
of each clip because one handle is added at the beginning and end of each
clip.
3. If you have imported media files from lots of different locations on your
computer, it can be difficult to find everything and stay organized. By using
the Project Manager to collect all the media files into one location, you’ll
make it easier to manage your project media files.

4. When you choose Remove Unused, Premiere Pro removes any clips from
your project that are not used in a sequence. No media files are deleted.
5. To import a sequence from another Premiere Pro project, import the project
file as you would import any media file. Premiere Pro will invite you to
import the entire project or selected sequences. You can also browse inside
project files with the Media Browser, or even simply open the other project
file to copy and paste between the two projects.
6. The Project Manager does not collect Dynamic Link assets when creating a
new project. For this reason, it’s a good idea to create any new Dynamic Link
projects in the same location as your project folder or in a dedicated folder
for your project. That way, it’s easier to locate and copy the assets for the
new project.

18. 
Exporting 
Frames, 
Clips, 
and
Sequences
Lesson overview
In this lesson, you’ll learn about the following:
Choosing the right export options
Exporting single frames
Creating movie, image sequence, and audio files
Using Adobe Media Encoder
Uploading to social media
Working with edit decision lists
This lesson will take about 90 minutes to complete. Please log in to your account
on peachpit.com to download the lesson files for this chapter, or go to the
“Getting Started” section at the beginning of this book and follow the
instructions under “Accessing the lesson files and Web Edition.”
One of the best things about editing video is the feeling you have when you can
finally share it with your audience. Adobe Premiere Pro CC offers a wide range
of export options to record your projects to tape or convert them to additional
digital files.

Exporting your project is the final step in the video production process. Adobe Media Encoder offers
multiple high-level output formats. Within those formats you have dozens of options and can also export
in batches.
Starting the lesson
Nowadays, the primary form of media distribution is digital files. To create these
files, you can use Adobe Media Encoder CC. Adobe Media Encoder is a stand-
alone application that handles file exports in batches, so you can export in
several formats simultaneously and process in the background while you work in
other applications, including Premiere Pro and Adobe After Effects.
 Note
Premiere Pro can export clips selected in the Project panel, as well
as sequences or ranges within sequences or the Source panel. The
content that’s selected when you choose File > Export is what
Premiere Pro will export.

Understanding the export options
Whether you’ve completed a project or you just want to share an in-progress
review, you have a number of export options.
You can export to a file to post online or create a Digital Cinema Package
(DCP) file for theatrical distribution.
You can export a single frame or a series of frames.
You can choose audio-only, video-only, or full audio/video output.
Exported clips or stills can be reimported into the project automatically for
easy reuse.
You can play directly to videotape.
Beyond choosing an export format, you can set several other parameters.
You can choose to create files in a similar format and at the same visual
quality and data rate as your original media, or you can compress them to a
smaller size for distribution on disc or the Internet.
You can transcode your media from one format to another to make it easier
to exchange with creative collaborators.
You can customize the frame size, frame rate, data rate, or audio and video
compression choices if an existing preset doesn’t fit your needs.
You can apply a color lookup table (LUT) to assign a look; set overlay
timecode and other clip text information; add an image overlay; or upload a
file directly to social media accounts, an FTP server, or Adobe Creative
Cloud.
You can make an undetectable last-minute adjustment to the duration of
your new media file by automatically shortening or extending periods of
low activity.
Exporting single frames
While an edit is in progress, you may want to export a still frame to send to a
team member or client for review. You might also want to export an image to use
as the thumbnail of your video file when you post it to the Internet.
When you export a frame from the Source Monitor, Premiere Pro creates a still
image that matches the resolution of the source video file.
When you export a frame from the Program Monitor, Premiere Pro creates a still
image that matches the resolution of the sequence.

Let’s give it a try.
1. Open Lesson 18_01.prproj from the Lessons/Lesson 18 folder.
2. Save the project as Lesson 18_01 Working.prproj.
3. Open the sequence Review Copy. Position the Timeline playhead on a frame
you want to export.
4. In the Program Monitor, click the Export Frame button 
 on the lower
right.
If you don’t see the button, it may be because you’ve customized the Program
Monitor buttons. You might also need to resize the panel. You can also select
the Program Monitor and press Shift+Ctrl+E (Windows) or Shift+E (macOS)
to export a frame.
5. In the Export Frame dialog, enter a filename.
6. Use the Format menu to choose a still-image format.
JPEG, PNG, GIF, and BMP are universally readable. JPEG and PNG
files are commonly used in website design.
TIFF, Targa, and PNG are suitable for print and animation workflows.

DPX is often used for digital cinema or color-grading workflows.
OpenEXR is used to store high dynamic range picture information.
7. Click the Browse button to choose a location to save the new still image.
Create a folder named Exports in the Lessons folder, select it, and click
Choose.
 Note
In Windows, you can export to the BMP, DPX, GIF, JPEG,
OpenEXR, PNG, TGA, and TIFF formats. On a Mac, you can
export to the DPX, JPEG, OpenEXR, PNG, TGA, and TIFF
formats.
8. Select the Import Into Project option to add the new still image into your
current project, and click OK.
 Note
The music in this project is titled “Tell Somebody,” by Alex
featuring AdmiralBob. Licensed under Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0.
Exporting a master copy
Creating a master copy allows you to make a pristine digital copy of your edited
project that can be archived for future use. A master copy is a self-contained,
fully rendered digital file output of your sequence at the highest resolution and
best quality possible. Once it’s created, you can use a file of this kind as a
separate source to produce other compressed output formats without opening the
original project in Premiere Pro.
Matching sequence settings
Ideally, the frame size, frame rate, and codec of a master file will closely match
the sequence it’s based on. Premiere Pro makes this easy by offering a Match
Sequence Settings option when you export.
1. Continue working with the Review Copy sequence.
2. With the sequence selected (in either the Project panel or the Timeline panel),
choose File > Export > Media.

The Export Settings dialog opens.
3. You’ll learn more about this dialog later. For now, select the Match Sequence
Settings check box.
4. The blue text showing the output name is actually a button that opens the
Save As dialog. You’ll find the same type of text-as-a-button in Adobe Media
Encoder. Click the output name now.
5. Choose a target location (such as the Exports folder you created earlier),
name the sequence Review Copy 01.mxf, and click Save.
 Note
In some cases, the Match Sequence Settings option cannot write
an exact match of the original camera media. For example,
XDCAM EX will write to a high-quality MPEG2 file. In most

cases, the file written will have an identical format and closely
match the data rate of the original sources.
6. Review the Summary information to check that the output format matches
the sequence settings. In this case, you should be using DNxHD media (as
MXF files) at 29.97fps. The Summary information is a quick, easy reference
that helps you avoid minor errors that can have big consequences. If the
Source and Output Summary settings match, it minimizes conversion, which
helps maintain the quality of the final output.
When exporting a sequence, the sequence itself is the source in this dialog—not the clips, which
will have already been conformed to the sequence settings.
7. Click the Export button to create a media file based on the sequence.
Choosing another codec
When you export to a new media file, you can choose the codec that’s used.
Some camera capture formats (such as the popular H.264 .MP4 files commonly
produced by DSLR cameras) are already heavily compressed. Using a higher-
quality mastering codec can help to preserve quality.
1. With the same sequence selected, choose File > Export > Media or press
Ctrl+M (Windows) or Command+M (macOS).
2. In the Export Settings dialog, open the Format menu, and choose QuickTime.
3. Click the output name (the blue text), and give the file a new name, Review
Copy 02.mov. Save it to the same destination you used in the previous
exercise.
4. Click to select the Video section near the bottom of the window.
5. In the Video Codec section of the dialog box, choose a video codec that you
have installed.
Try the GoPro CineForm codec. This produces a high-quality (but reasonably
sized) file. Make sure the frame size and frame rate match your source
settings. You might need to scroll down or resize the panel to see all the

settings.
 Note
GoPro CineForm is a professional codec that is supported
natively by Adobe Creative Cloud applications. Like all codecs,
it will only play back in media applications that support it.
Understanding the GoPro CineForm Codec options
The GoPro CineForm codec comes in three configurations, which can
be selected using the Preset menu at the top of the Export Settings
dialog.
GoPro CineForm RGB 12-bit with Alpha at Maximum Bit Depth:
This produces a high-quality file, storing picture information with 12-bit
color (rather than the more common 8-bit) and using the full RGB color
gamut, with effects calculated in 32-bit floating point and with an alpha
channel. It’ll take a little longer to produce the file, and it’ll be a little
larger, but the quality will be excellent.
GoPro CineForm RGB 12-bit with Alpha: This produces the same
high-quality file as the first option, but the encoding is performed using
the standard color bit depth. It’s still a high-quality result, and the
encoding will take place faster.
GoPro CineForm YUV 10-bit: This produces a high-quality video file
using YUV color, the most common color mode for camera media and
televisions. There is no alpha channel, but it’s rare that you will need it.
While this file is created with 10-bit color rather than 12-bit, remember
most video is produced in just 8-bit.
6. Click the Match Source button.

Below the Match Source button, each output format setting has a check box.
If the check box is selected, the setting will automatically match the source.
7. Click to select the Audio section. In the Basic Audio Settings section, choose
48000 Hz as the sample rate, and set the Sample Size to 16 bit. Just below
that, set the Audio Channel Configuration Output Channels to output Stereo.
8. Click the Export button at the bottom of the dialog to export the sequence
and transcode it to a new media file.
 Tip
HEVC/H.265 is a new compression system formulated by the
same Motion Picture Experts Group that brought us H.264. It’s
more efficient, but fewer players support it. You may be asked to
supply media using this codec when producing UHD content.
The most popular delivery format and codec is an MPEG4 (.mp4) file, using the
H.264 codec. If you choose H.264 in the Format menu, you’ll find presets for
YouTube and Vimeo.
Working with Adobe Media Encoder CC
Adobe Media Encoder CC is a stand-alone application that can be run
independently of or be launched from Premiere Pro. One advantage of using
Media Encoder is that you can send an encoding job directly from Premiere Pro
and then continue working on your edit as the encoding is processed. If your
client asks to see your work before you finish editing, Media Encoder can

produce the file in the background without interrupting your flow.
By default, Media Encoder pauses encoding when you play video in Premiere
Pro to maximize playback performance. You can change this in the Premiere Pro
Playback Preferences.
Choosing a file format for export
It can be a challenge to know how to deliver your finished work. Ultimately,
choosing delivery formats is a process of planning backward; find out how the
file will be presented, and it’s usually straightforward to identify the best file
type for the purpose. Often, clients will have a delivery specification you must
follow, making it easy to select the right options for encoding.
Premiere Pro and Adobe Media Encoder can export to many formats.
 Note
If working with a professional mastering format (such as MXF
OP1a, DNxHD MXF OP1a, or QuickTime), you can export up to 32

channels of audio where the format allows. The original sequence
must use a multichannel master track with the corresponding
number of tracks.
Using the formats
Adobe Media Encoder supports many formats. Knowing which setting to
use can seem a little overwhelming. Let’s take a look at some common
scenarios and review which formats are typically used. There are few
absolutes, but these should get you close to the correct output. It’s a good
idea to test your output on a short section of your video before producing
a full-length finished file.
Encoding for uploading to user-generated video sites: The H.264 format
includes presets for YouTube and Vimeo in widescreen, SD, HD, and 4K.
Use these presets as a starting point.
Encoding for devices: Use the H.264 format for current devices (Apple
iOS devices, Apple TV, Kindle, Nook, Android, and TiVo), as well as for
some generic 3GPP presets; use MPEG4 for older MPEG4-based devices.
Be sure to check the manufacturer’s specifications on its website.
Encoding for DVD/Blu-ray: Generally, you’ll use MPEG2 for shorter
video projects—namely, the MPEG2-DVD preset for DVD and MPEG2
Blu-ray preset for Blu-ray Discs. The visual quality of MPEG2 is
indistinguishable from H.264 in these high-bit-rate applications and
encodes faster. However, the H.264 codec is more efficient, letting you fit
more content into a smaller storage space.
In general, the Premiere Pro presets are proven and will work for your
intended purpose. Avoid adjusting settings when using presets designed
for devices or optical discs because changes that seem subtle might make
the files unplayable; hardware players have stringent media requirements.
Most Premiere Pro presets are conservative and will deliver good results
with the default settings, so you probably won’t improve the quality by
tinkering.
Configuring the export
To export from Premiere Pro to Adobe Media Encoder, you’ll need to queue the
export. The first step is to use the Export Settings dialog to make choices about
the file you’re going to export.

1. Continue working with the Review Copy sequence. Either select it in the
Project panel or have it open in the Timeline panel, with that panel active.
2. Choose File > Export > Media, or press Ctrl+M (Windows) or Command+M
(macOS).
It’s best to work through the Export Settings dialog from the top down.
Choose your format and presets first, then pick the output, and finally decide
whether you’d like to export audio, video, or both.
3. Choose H.264 from the Format menu. This is a popular choice for files you’ll
upload to online video websites.
4. In the Preset menu, choose Vimeo 720p HD.
These settings match the frame size and frame rate of the sequence. The
codec and data rate match the requirements for the Vimeo.com website.
5. Click the output name (the blue text) and give the file a new name, Review
Copy 03.mp4. Save it to the same destination you selected in the previous
exercise.
6. Check the Summary information text to verify your choices.
 Note
The settings displayed change depending on the format you
choose. Most of the critical options are accessed in the Video and
Audio tabs.
Here’s an overview of the various tabs displayed on the Summary tab:
Effects: You can add a number of useful effects and overlays as you output
your media (see these options in the next section).
Video: The Video tab allows you to set the frame size, frame rate, field
order, and profile. The default settings are based on the preset you chose.
Audio: The Audio tab allows you to adjust the bit rate of the audio and, for
some formats, the codec. The default settings are based on the preset you

chose.
Multiplexer: These controls let you determine whether the encoding
method is optimized for compatibility with a specific device. This can also
control whether the video and audio are combined or delivered as separate
files.
Captions: If your sequence has captions, you can specify whether they are
ignored or “burned in” (added to the visuals permanently).
Publish: This tab lets you enter the details of several social media services
for your file to be delivered to. You’ll learn more about this later in this
lesson.
Export effects
You have the option to apply several effects, add information overlays, and make
automated adjustments to the output file.
Here’s an overview:
Lumetri Look/LUT: Choose from a list of built-in Lumetri looks or
browse to your own, allowing you to quickly apply a nuanced adjustment to
the appearance of your output file.
SDR Conform: If your sequence is high dynamic range, you can produce a
standard dynamic range version.
Image Overlay: Add a graphic, like a company logo or network “bug,” and
position it on-screen. The graphic will be incorporated into the image.
Name Overlay: Add a text overlay to the image. This is particularly useful
as a simple watermark to protect your content or as a way of marking
different versions.
Timecode Overlay: Display timecode for your finished video file, making
it easy for viewers without specialized editing software to note reference
times for commenting purposes.
Time Tuner: Specify a new duration or playback speed, up to + /–10%,
achieved by applying subtle adjustments to periods of low action where the
soundtrack is silent. Results vary depending on the media you are working
with, so test different speeds to compare the end result. A music soundtrack
is likely to interfere with the results.
Video Limiter: While it’s usually best to get your video levels right in the
sequence, you can apply a limiter here too, just in case.
Loudness Normalization: Use the Loudness scale to normalize audio

levels in your output file. Like video levels, it’s best to get this right in the
sequence, but it can be a helpful extra security to know your levels will be
limited during export.
Using the Source and Output panels
Moving to the left side of the Export Settings dialog, you’ll find the Source
Range menu.
You can export the entire sequence, a range you set by placing an In mark and an
Out mark, a range set by the Timeline Work Area bar (an additional option in the
Timeline panel largely replaced by using In and Out marks), or a custom region
selected now using the small triangular handles and navigator directly above the
menu. By default, In and Out marks are used if they exist in your sequence or
clip when exporting.
In the upper-left corner of the Export Settings dialog are the Output and Source
panes. The Output pane shows a preview of the video to be encoded. It’s useful
to view the video on the Output tab to spot errors such as unwanted letterboxing
or distortion caused by the irregularly shaped pixels used in some video formats.
The Source tab gives access to basic cropping controls. Always check the Output
tab after making changes on the Source tab; it shows the final result.
Queuing the export
When you’re ready to create your media file, you have a few more options to
consider. These are found in the lower-right portion of the Export Settings dialog
box.
Use Maximum Render Quality: Consider enabling this setting when
scaling from larger image sizes to smaller image sizes. This option requires
more RAM and can slow down the output. This option is usually not
needed except when working without GPU acceleration, scaling the image
down, and seeking the highest quality possible.

Use Previews: When you render effects, preview files are produced that
look like your original footage combined with the effects. If you enable this
option, the preview files will be used as the source for the new export. This
can save a significant amount of time that would otherwise be spent
rendering the effects again. The result might be lower quality, depending on
the sequence preview files format (see Lesson 2, “Setting Up a Project”).
Import into project: This option automatically imports the newly created
media file into your current project.
Set Start Timecode: This allows you to specify a new file start timecode.
This is particularly useful if you are working in a broadcast environment
where a specific timecode start may be a delivery requirement.
Render Alpha Channel Only: Some post-production workflows require a
separate grayscale file representing the alpha channel (the channel that
defines opacity). This option produces just that file.
Time Interpolation: If your exported file will have a different frame rate to
your sequence, this menu lets you specify the way the frame-rate change is
rendered. The options are the same as those that apply when changing clip
playback speed in a sequence.
Metadata: Click this button to open the Metadata Export panel. You can
specify a wide range of settings, including information about copyright,
creator, and rights management. You can even embed useful information
such as markers, script, and speech transcription data for advanced delivery
options. In some cases, you may prefer to set the Metadata Export Options
setting to None, removing all metadata.
 Note
On the Video tab, you’ll also find the option Render At
Maximum Depth. When working without GPU acceleration,
this can improve the visual quality of your output by using

greater precision to generate colors. However, this option can
add to the render time.
Queue: Click the Queue button to send the file to Adobe Media Encoder,
which will open automatically, allowing you to continue working in
Premiere Pro while the export takes place.
Export: Select this option to export directly from the Export Settings
dialog rather than sending the file to the Adobe Media Encoder queue. This
is a simpler workflow and usually a faster export, but you won’t be able to
edit in Premiere Pro until the export is complete.
Click the Queue button to send the file to Adobe Media Encoder, which
starts up automatically.
Media Encoder will not begin encoding automatically. To begin encoding,
click the Start Queue button 
 in the top right corner.
Looking at additional options in Adobe Media Encoder
Using Adobe Media Encoder brings a number of benefits. Although it involves a
few extra steps beyond simply clicking the Export button in the Export Settings
panel of Premiere Pro, the extra options are worth it.
Here are some of the most useful features you’ll find in Adobe Media Encoder:

Add files for encoding: You can add files to Adobe Media Encoder by
choosing File > Add Source. You can even drag and drop files into it from
Windows Explorer (Windows) or Finder (macOS). There’s a Media
Browser panel too, which you can use to locate select items, just as you
would in Premiere Pro.
 Note
Adobe Media Encoder does not have to be used from Premiere
Pro. You can launch Adobe Media Encoder on its own and
browse Premiere Pro projects to choose items to transcode.
Import Premiere Pro sequences directly: You can choose File > Add
Premiere Pro Sequence to select a Premiere Pro project file and choose
sequences to encode (without ever launching Premiere Pro).
Render After Effects compositions directly: You can import and encode
compositions from Adobe After Effects by choosing File > Add After
Effects Composition. Once again, you don’t need to open Adobe After
Effects.
Use a watch folder: If you’d like to automate some encoding tasks, you
can create watch folders by choosing File > Add Watch Folder and then
assigning a preset to that watch folder. Media files placed into the folder are
automatically encoded to the format specified in the preset.
Modify a queue: You can add, duplicate, or remove any encoding tasks
using buttons at the top of the list.
Start encoding: You can set the queue to start automatically in the Media
Encoder preferences. Alternatively, click the Start Queue button 
 to start
encoding. Files in the queue are encoded one after another. You can add
files to the queue after encoding has begun. You can even add files to the
queue directly from Premiere Pro while encoding is taking place.
Modify settings: Once the encoding tasks are loaded into the queue,
changing settings is easy; click the item’s Format or Preset in blue, and the
Export Settings dialog appears.
When encoding has completed, you can quit Media Encoder.

Uploading to social media
Return to Premiere Pro, make sure the Timeline panel is active, and go to File >
Export > Media to display the Export dialog.
Select the Publish settings.
The Publish settings allow you to upload exported videos to your Creative Cloud
Files folder, Adobe Behance, Facebook, an FTP server (FTP is a standard way to
transmit files to a remote file server), Twitter, Vimeo, and YouTube when the
encoding is complete.
Social media platforms are increasingly important media distribution outlets, and
Adobe is closely involved in developing new technologies and workflows to
make it easier to share your creative work and maximize audience engagement.
Exchanging with other editing applications
Collaboration is often essential in video post-production. Premiere Pro can both
read and write project files that are compatible with many of the top editing and
color-grading tools on the market. This makes it straightforward to share creative
work, even if you and your collaborators are using different editing systems.
Premiere Pro supports EDLs, OMF, AAF, and XML import and export.
If you’re collaborating with an Avid Media Composer editor, you can use AAF
as an intermediary, allowing the exchange of clip information, edited sequences,
and a limited number of effects.
If you’re collaborating with an Apple Final Cut Pro editor, you can use XML as
an intermediary in a similar way.
It’s easy to export an AAF or XML file from Premiere Pro. Just select a
sequence you want to export and either choose File > Export > AAF or choose
File > Export > Final Cut Pro XML.

For more information about best practices when sharing creative work between
applications, see the online help.
Exporting to OMF
Open Media Framework (OMF) has become a standard way of exchanging
audio information between systems (typically for audio mixing). When you
export an OMF file, the typical method is to create a single file with all your
audio tracks inside. When the OMF file is opened by a compatible application, it
will show all the tracks.
Here’s how to create an OMF file:
1. With a sequence selected, choose File > Export > OMF.
2. In the OMF Export Settings dialog, enter a name for the file in the OMF Title
field.
3. Check that the Sample Rate and Bits Per Sample settings match your footage;
48000 Hz and 16 bits are the most common settings.
4. From the Files menu, choose one of the following:
Embed Audio: This option exports an OMF file that contains the
project metadata and all the audio files for the selected sequence.
Separate Audio: This option exports separate mono audio files into an
omfiMediaFiles folder.
5. If you’re using the Separate Audio option, choose between the AIFF and
Broadcast Wave formats. Both are high quality, but check with the system
you need to exchange with. AIFF files tend to be the most compatible.
6. Using the Render menu, choose either Copy Complete Audio Files or Trim
Audio Files (to reduce the file size). You can specify that handles (extra

frames) be added to give you some flexibility when modifying the clips.
7. Click OK to generate the OMF file.
 Note
All OMF files have 2GB file limit—if you’re working on a long
sequence, you may need to separate it into two sections and
export them separately.
8. Choose a destination, and click Save. You can target your lesson folder for
now.
Working with edit decision lists
An edit decision list (EDL) is a simple text document with a list of
instructions for automating editing tasks. The formatting follows
standards that allow the EDL to be read by a number of different systems.
It’s rare for an EDL to be requested. Still, you can export a sequence to
the most commonly used type, CMX3600.
To create a CMX3600 EDL, select a sequence in the Project panel or open
it in the Timeline panel, and choose File > Export > EDL.
The requirements for EDLs are usually particular, so be sure to request the
EDL specifications before creating one. Thankfully, EDL files are usually
small, so if you are unsure of the settings you should choose, you can
quickly produce several alternative versions to see which works best.
Final practice
Congratulations! You have now learned enough about Adobe Premiere Pro to
import media; organize projects; create sequences; add, modify, and remove
effects; mix audio; work with graphics and titles; and output to share your work
with the world.
Now that you have completed this book, you may want to practice a little. To
make this easier, the media files for a few productions have been combined in a
single project file so you can explore the techniques you have learned.
These media files can be used only for personal practice and are not licensed for
any form of distribution, including YouTube or any other online distribution, so
please do not upload any of the clips or the results of any editing work you do
with them. They are not for sharing with the public; they are just for you to

practice with privately.
The Final Practice.prproj project file, in the Lessons folder, contains original
clips for a few productions.
360 Media: A short excerpt from an introduction to a 360 Video feature
film. Use this media to experiment with the playback controls for 360
Video.
Andrea Sweeney NYC: This is a short road-movie diary piece. Use the
voice-over as a guide to practice combining 4K and HD footage in a single
timeline. Experiment with panning and scanning in the 4K footage if you
choose to use HD sequence settings.
Bike Race Multi-Camera: This is simple multicamera footage.
Experiment with live editing on a multicamera project.
Boston Snow: This is a mixture of shots of Boston Common filmed in
three resolutions. Use this media to experiment with Scale To Frame Size,
Set To Frame Size, and keyframe controls to scale shots. Try using the
Warp Stabilizer effect to lock one of the high-resolution clips, and then
scale up the clip and create a pan from one side to the other.
City Views: This is a series of shots from the air and on land. Use these to
experiment with image stabilization, color adjustment, and visual effects.
Desert: Use the diverse colors to try color correction tools and combine the
footage with music to produce a montage.
Jolie’s Garden: This consists of atmospheric tableaux shot at 96fps, set to
play back at 24fps, filmed for a new feature film social media marketing

campaign. Use these clips to experiment with the Lumetri Color panel looks
and speed change effects.
Laura in the Snow: This is a spec commercial shot at 96fps, set to play
back at 24fps. Use this footage to practice color correction and grading
adjustments. Experiment with ramping slow motion and masking both the
video and the effects you apply.
Music: Use these music clips to practice creating an audio mix and editing
visuals to music.
Music Video Multi-Camera: This is a music video shoot. Practice
multicamera editing skills with this media.
She: This is a series of stylized, mostly slow motion, clips that will be
useful for experimenting with speed changes and visual effects.
Theft Unexpected: This is an award-winning short film directed and edited
by Maxim Jago. Use this footage to experiment with trimming and practice
adjusting timing in simple dialogue.
Review questions
1. What’s an easy way to export digital video if you want to create a self-
contained file that closely matches the original quality of your sequence
preview settings?
2. What Internet-ready export options are available in Adobe Media Encoder?
3. What encoding format should you use when exporting to most mobile
devices?
4. Must you wait for Adobe Media Encoder to finish processing its queue
before working on a new Premiere Pro project?
Review answers
1. Use the Match Sequence Settings option in the Export dialog.
2. This varies by platform, but both Windows and macOS include H.264 and
QuickTime.
3. H.264 is the encoding format used when exporting to most mobile devices.
4. No. Adobe Media Encoder is a stand-alone application. You can work in
other applications or even start a new Premiere Pro project while the render
queue is processed.

Index
= (equal sign) key, 161
/ (forward slash) key, 112
` (grave) key, 57, 59, 74, 101
3D motion effect, 232
5:1 audio, 44, 253
8-bit video, 334–335
32-bit color effects, 301–302
64-bit processing, 31
360 video. See VR video
A
AAF files, 448
A/B timeline, 157, 165
accelerated effects, 301
action-safe zone, 90, 396
active panels, 101
adaptive audio tracks, 45
Add Marker button, 102, 136
additive color, 348, 369
adjustment layers
applying effects using, 305–307
creating a color look using, 362–363
Adobe After Effects. See After Effects
Adobe Audition, 8, 9, 266, 290–292
Adobe Authorized Training Centers, xvii
Adobe Creative Cloud. See Creative Cloud
Adobe Dynamic Link, 8, 9, 60, 307, 420
Adobe Illustrator, 8, 63
Adobe Media Encoder, 7, 9, 54, 436, 441–447
See also exporting
Adobe Mercury Transmit, 34

Adobe Photoshop. See Photoshop
Adobe Prelude, 8, 9, 55, 139
Adobe Premiere Pro. See Premiere Pro CC
Adobe Stock service, 28, 64–65
advanced Find option, 77–78
After Effects, 8, 9
applying effects with, 308–310
importing compositions from, 60, 420
sending clips to, 307–308
aligning text, 396
alpha channels
explanation of, 369–370, 371
rendering only, 445
working with, 376
amplitude, 259
anchor points, 209–210
angles, multicamera, 245
animation
of clip size changes, 221–223
keyframe interpolation and, 223–227
See also Motion effect
Anti-flicker filter, 210
Appearance preferences, 19
area text, 397, 399–400
arrow keys, 126
assembly edits, 119
audio, 6, 248–295
characteristics of, 259–260
cleaning up noisy, 280–281, 290–292
dialogue adjustments, 278–293
display format options, 32–33
editing in Audition, 290–292
effects for improving, 277, 284–289, 292–293
export settings for, 442, 443
gain adjustments, 263–264

getting started with, 250
installing plug-ins for, 288
interface setup, 250–259
loudness options, 278–280, 292–293
master track output, 253–254
monitoring process, 259
multicamera sync using, 238
normalizing, 264–266
Pan and Balance controls, 271
recording voice-over, 67, 260–261
review questions/answers on, 272–273, 294–295
samples and sample rate, 33, 255–256
selecting without video, 145
sending to Audition, 266
speed changes and, 183
split edits, 267–268
sweetening, 276–277
syncing with video, 93
track types, 43–45, 258
transitions, 171–174
volume adjustments, 262–266, 268–271, 283
waveforms, 256–258
audio channels
choosing, 92–93
explanation of, 253
interpretation tips, 94
Audio Clip Mixer, 15, 252, 270–271
audio effects, 277, 284–289, 299
Loudness Radar effect, 292–293
Notch effect, 288–289
Parametric Equalizer effect, 284–288
See also video effects
Audio Gain dialog, 264
Audio Master setting, 44
audio meters, 254, 255

audio noise removal, 280–281, 290–292
Audio Plug-in Manager, 288
Audio Track Mixer, 252, 292–293
Audio workspace, 251–253
Audition, Adobe, 8, 9, 266, 290–292
Auto Bezier interpolation, 224, 320
Auto Save feature, 19, 36
Avid Media Composer, 448
B
backups, 19–20
Balance control, 271
Basic 3D effect, 232
Bass effect, 277
Batch Capture option, 417
bevel effects, 228–230
Bezier interpolation, 224, 320
bins, 32, 78–86
creating new, 78–79
customizing, 84–85
filtering content in, 75–76
managing media in, 79
metadata displayed for, 84–85
opening multiple, 85–86
Project panel and, 80
renaming clips in, 83–84
Search bin creation, 82
view options for, 80–82
See also Project panel
bit depth, 43
Black & White effect, 303, 350
blend modes, 372
alpha channels and, 376
combining tracks using, 374–375
tip for scrolling through, 375

video effects and, 307
Brightness & Contrast effect, 314, 354–355
broadcast-safe colors, 401
bumpers, 388
Button Editor, 91, 114, 251
C
cache file removal, 431
captions, 409–412, 443
closed, 410–411
open, 411–412
Captions panel, 410
capture format setting, 33–34
capturing media
from DV and HDV cameras, 33
from third-party hardware, 33–34
from videotape, 66
chain icon, 183, 184
Change Clip Speed option, 178
channels
alpha, 369–370, 371
audio, 92–93, 94, 253
chapter marker, 135
chromakey effects, 377–381
Cinespace 100 effect, 311
Clarity tool, 281–282
Classroom in a Book training series, xi
clip markers, 138–139
Clip Name effect, 325–326
Clip Speed/Duration dialog, 183–184
clipboard, 149
clips
closing, 87
conforming, 39, 109
deleting, 151

disabling, 151–152
dragging, 147
finding, 74–78
handles of, 159
importing, 59
label colors for, 82–83
linking and unlinking, 146
loading, 101
locating on drives, 80
markers added to, 138–139
masking, 382–384
master, 310–313
media files vs., 50, 84
merging, 93
moving, 146–149
nudging, 148
offline, 417–418
organizing, 72–86
origin of term, 4, 26
playback speed of, 87, 178, 180–186
playing, 86–89
previewing, 58
rearranging, 148–149
removing, 149–151
renaming, 83–84
replacing, 186–187
repositioning, 214–215
resizing, 218–221
rotating, 217–218
selecting, 102–104, 143–145, 173
splitting, 145–146
subclips created from, 105–106
volume adjustments, 268–271
closed captions, 409, 410–411
codecs, 41, 421, 422, 423, 424, 439–441

collaboration, 429–430
collecting files, 420–421
color balance. See white balance
color correction, 6, 332–365
color grading and, 336
Color workspace for, 336–337
creating a look through, 362–363
effects related to, 349–352, 361
exposure problems and, 353–356
getting started with, 334
guidelines for checking, 356
Lumetri Color panel for, 337–340, 357–360, 361
Lumetri Look presets for, 352
Lumetri Scopes panel for, 341, 342–349
review questions/answers on, 364–365
Ultra Key effect and, 381
white balance and, 357–360
workflow for, 335–349
color grading, 336
color picker, 391
color space, 342
color wheels, 339, 358
Color workspace, 336–337
coloring effects, 350–351
colors
additive and subtractive, 348
broadcast-safe, 401
item label, 82–83
primary and secondary, 347
text, 393
comment marker, 135
Commit button, 403
compositing, 366–385
alpha channels for, 369–370, 376
blend modes used in, 374–375

color keying greenscreen shots for, 377–381
getting started with, 368–369
masking clips for, 382–384
Opacity effect for, 372–375
review questions/answers on, 385
shooting videos for, 370–371
terminology related to, 371–372
conforming process, 39, 65, 109
consolidating projects, 418, 421–423
Constant Gain crossfade, 172
Constant Power crossfade, 172
Continuous Bezier interpolation, 224, 320
copying/pasting
clip segments, 149
video effects, 305
crawling text, 407–408
Creative Cloud
expanding the workflow using, 8–9
saving backup files to, 20, 36
sharing files using, 429
credits, rolling text for, 407–408
Cross Dissolve effect, 160–161, 164
crossfade transitions, 172
Curves adjustments, 338
customizing
bins, 84–85
media cache, 65–66
monitors, 91
Project panel, 73–74
sequence presets, 42–43
track headers, 113–114
transitions, 165–168
workspaces, 16–18
cuts, 158–159

D
decibel (dB) scale, 255, 280
DeEss audio option, 280
DeHum audio option, 280, 289
Delay effect, 277
deleting
clips, 72, 151
media files, 417, 423
See also removing
Deselect All shortcut, 203
dialogue adjustments, 278–293
audio effects, 284–289, 292–293
clarity options, 281–282
loudness settings, 278–280
noise removal, 280–281
reverb effect, 283
volume settings, 283
See also voice-overs
Dip to White transition, 161
Directional Blur effect, 304
disabling clips, 151–152
distortion removal, 328
Drag Audio Only icon, 91, 129, 256
Drag Video Only icon, 91, 129
dragging clips, 127, 128, 147
drop shadows
motion effects and, 227–228
text styles and, 401
drop zone, 18
dropped frames, 29
duration
audio transition, 172
displaying clips by, 75
setting for still images, 120

speed changes related to, 182–185
timecode display showing, 90
video transition, 163, 166, 170
DV and HDV camera captures, 33
DVD/Blu-ray encoding, 442
Dynamic Link, 8, 9, 60, 307, 420
dynamic trimming, 202–203
E
Ease In/Out controls, 225–227, 320
edit decision lists (EDLs), 449
Edit Original option, 63
edit points, 158–159
editing
multicamera, 7, 234–247
nonlinear, 4
touch-screen, 87
See also video editing
Editing workspace, 13, 100
edits
assembly, 119
extract, 143, 151
four-point, 118, 178–180
insert, 115–117, 127–129
lift, 150–151
overwrite, 114–115, 142
replace, 188–189
ripple, 194–195
rolling, 195–196
slide, 197–198
slip, 196–197
split, 267–268
three-point, 117–118
Effect Controls panel, 15, 16
audio effects in, 284–289

Brightness & Contrast controls, 314
customizing transitions in, 157, 165–168
interpretation of RAW media files, 95–96
Motion effect controls, 210
saving presets from, 321–322
Show/Hide Timeline View button, 167
Source Monitor and, 311
video effects in, 302, 305, 311
volume adjustments in, 262–263
effects. See audio effects; video effects
Effects panel, 15, 300–302
finding effects in, 301, 303, 304, 350
presets in, 322, 352
SpeedLooks in, 362, 363
video transitions in, 160
Ellipse tool, 405
End key, 126
Equalizer, Parametric, 284–288
Essential Graphics panel, 388–392
Appearance options, 401
Browse pane, 388, 408–409
Edit pane, 388, 390, 395, 396
features illustrations, 389, 390, 392
formatting text in, 395, 396, 407
styling text in, 400–403
template titles in, 408–409
Essential Sound panel, 276–284
clarity adjustments, 281–282
dialogue adjustments, 278–283
loudness settings, 278–279
noise removal, 280–281
reverb adjustments, 283
sweetening sound with, 276–277
volume adjustments, 283
Exponential Fade transition, 172

Export Frame button, 102, 437
Export Settings dialog, 438–439, 442–446
exporting, 434–451
AAF files, 448
configuration settings for, 442–444
file formats for, 441–442, 448–449
markers, 135
master copies, 438–441
OMF files, 448–449
overview of options for, 436
queuing media files for, 444–446
review questions/answers on, 451
selections as projects, 429–430
single frames, 437
to social media, 447
XML files, 448
See also Adobe Media Encoder
exposure problems, 353–356
overexposed images, 355–356
underexposed images, 354–355
Extract button, 151
extract edits, 143, 151
eyeball icon, 390
eyedropper
Effect Controls panel, 379
Essential Graphics panel, 391
Lumetri Color panel, 359
F
Feet + Frames option, 32
file formats
choosing for export, 437, 441–442, 448–449
supported by Premiere Pro, 56
File menu, 416–418
making a clip offline in, 417–418

project management options, 417
file-based camera workflow, 54–55
files, project, 11, 19, 26
See also media files
fill, text, 401
Fill color swatch, 391
filtering bin content, 75–76
Final Cut Pro, 448
Final Practice project file, 449–450
Find panel, 77–78
finding assets
Effects panel for, 301, 303, 304, 350
Find panel for, 77–78
Media Browser for, 56–59
Project panel for, 74–78
Timeline panel for, 140
FireWire connections, 33
Fit Clip dialog, 178–179
Fit to Fill edit, 180
fixed effects, 208, 298–300, 304
Flash cue points, 135
flattened files
creating from multicamera edits, 245
importing from Photoshop, 60
Flip Over transition, 162
fonts
exploring available, 392
factors for choosing, 393
resizing in Project panel, 18, 81
warning symbol for missing, 408
footage
monitoring, 86–91
replacing, 189–190
formats, 41
forums, Adobe, xvi

four-point editing, 118, 178–180
options available for, 178–179
steps in process of, 179–180
frame rate, 33
frames
dropped, 29
exporting single, 437
video displayed in, 32
frames per second (fps), 33
freeze frame, 169, 170
frequency, 259
fx button, 303, 318
G
gain adjustments, 263–264
gaps, finding/removing, 143
garbage matte, 383
Gaussian Blur effect, 306, 361
Go to In/Out buttons, 102
GoPro CineForm codec, 423, 424, 440
GPU acceleration, 7, 30, 31, 301
GPU cards, 301, 323
graphics
adding to titles, 406
creating in Photoshop, 403
Graphics workspace, 388
gray interface, 340–341
grayscale, 303
greenscreen, 372
color keying shots made with, 377–381
shooting videos using, 371
grid
multicamera, 241
transparency, 370

H
H.264 format, 441, 442
handles
including in trimmed projects, 418, 422
transition effects and, 159, 169–171
hard drives
finding media files on, 80
managing, 430–431
typical setup for, 36
hardware support, 6
HDR technology, 342
headers, track, 67, 111, 113–114
Help resources, xvi
HEVC/H.265 format, 441
high-bit-depth effects, 301–302
History panel, 16
HLS vectorscope, 346
Hold interpolation, 224, 320
house (or mezzanine) codec, 421
HSL secondary adjustment, 339
I
Icon View button, 59, 80, 119
Ignore Alpha Channel option, 376
Illustrator, Adobe, 8, 63
image stabilization effect, 323–324
images. See still images
immersive video. See VR video
Import command, 50–51
Import Project dialog, 427
importing, 48–69
assets into projects, 50–52
customizing media cache for, 65–66
file formats supported for, 56

finding assets for, 56–59
getting started with, 50
Illustrator files, 63
images into projects, 60–64
Import command for, 50–51
ingest process and, 37–38
layered documents, 61–62, 79
Media Browser for, 51–52, 56–59
Photoshop files, 61–62, 79
projects or sequences, 426–428
proxy media files, 52–54
review questions/answers on, 68–69
stock items, 64–65
subfolders, 63–64
tape-based video, 66
VR video, 64
In and Out marks
multicamera editing, 238
Project panel, 105
shortcuts for adding, 112, 150
Source Monitor, 101, 103–104, 111
three-point editing with, 117–118
Timeline panel, 112–113
Info panel, 16
ingest settings, 37–38, 53
Insert button, 102, 116
insert edits, 115–117, 127–129
installing Premiere Pro, xii
instances, clip, 83
interactive markers, 139
interpolation methods, 224–225, 317–319, 320
Interpret Footage option, 94–95, 100, 181
intrinsic effects, 208, 298–300
Invert Alpha Channel option, 376

J
J-cut edits, 267
jump cuts, 158
K
kerning text, 394–395
Key Color eyedropper, 379
keyboard shortcuts, 20–21
for nudging clips, 148
for playing clips, 87, 89
for ripple edits, 195
for setting In and Out marks, 112, 150
for trimming clips, 203
for volume adjustments, 269
for zooming in/out, 108, 161
keyframes, 6, 208, 223–227
adding to clips, 316–317
clip- vs. track-based, 270
Ease In/Out controls for, 225–227
interpolation methods for, 224–225, 317–319, 320
Opacity effect using, 373–374
Velocity graph for, 318, 319
video effects using, 316–320
volume adjustments using, 269–270
keying process, 368, 372
L
label colors, 82–83
layers
Essential Graphics panel, 390
Photoshop, 61–62, 79
L-cut edits, 268
leading, text, 395–396
Leave Color effect, 351

Lens Distortion effect, 328
Lens Flare effect, 316–319
lesson files, xiii–xiv, 449–450
letterboxing, 220
Libraries panel, 15, 37, 430
Lift button, 151
lift edits, 150–151
Linear interpolation, 224, 320
Link Media panel, 417, 424–426
Linked Selection button, 144
linking clips, 146
List View button, 59, 74, 80
loading clips, 101
Locate File panel, 425–426
locking tracks, 140–143
sync locks for, 140–142
track locks for, 142–143
logos in titles, 406
Loop button, 91
looping playback, 202
Loudness Radar effect, 292–293
Loudness scale, 280
lower-third title, 388, 396
Lumetri Color panel, 337–340
built-in looks, 361
example of using, 339–340
sections and controls, 337–339
white balance adjustments, 357–360
Lumetri Look presets, 352
Lumetri Scopes panel, 341, 342–349
RGB parade, 348–349
waveform display, 343–345
YUV vectorscope, 345–348, 358
M

magnifying glass icon, 28
Maintain Audio Pitch option, 183
Make Offline option, 417
managing projects. See project management
margins, safe, 90, 396–397
Mark In/Out buttons, 102
Marker dialog, 137
markers, 134–139
clip, 138–139
explanation of, 135
exporting, 135
interactive, 139
methods for adding, 136, 138
multicamera syncing with, 238
navigating with, 139
Prelude for adding, 139
sequence, 136–138
types of, 135–139
Markers menu, 138
Markers panel, 136–137, 138, 139
masking
composited clips, 382–384
visual effects, 313–315
master clip effects, 310–313
master copy exports, 438–441
choosing other codecs for, 439–441
matching sequence settings for, 438–439
Master Styles menu, 402
Match Frame option, 310
Match Sequence Settings option, 438–439
Match Source button, 440
mattes, 372
creating custom, 382–383
graphics or clips as basis for, 383–384
Ultra Key effect, 379–381

Maximum Bit Depth option, 43
Maximum Render Quality option, 43
Media Browser, 15, 51–52
benefits of using, 52
finding assets with, 56–59
importing sequences using, 427–428
maximizing the size of, 57
navigation features, 59
media cache, 65–66, 431
Media Encoder. See Adobe Media Encoder
media files
clips vs., 50, 84
deleting, 417, 423
info about lesson, xiii–xiv, 449–450
locating on drives, 80
managing, 418–426, 430
offline, 417–418
proxy, 52–54
RAW, 95–96
renaming, 419
Mercury Playback Engine, 30–31, 34, 130
merging clips, 93
metadata, 7, 84–85, 445
Metadata Display panel, 84–85
mezzanine codec, 421
Milliseconds mode, 33
Monitor panels. See Program Monitor; Source Monitor
monitoring
audio, 259
footage, 86–91
monitors, second, 101
mono audio, 45, 253
monochromatic channels, 369
Morph Cut transition effect, 168–169
Motion effect, 206–233, 299

adjusting, 208–213
clip size changes, 218–223
Ease In/Out controls, 225–227
effects related to, 227–232
getting started with, 208
keyframe interpolation and, 223–227
options for working with, 209–210
position changes, 214–215
properties related to, 211–213
reusing settings for, 215–216
review questions/answers on, 233
rotating clips with, 217–218
Transform effect vs., 230–231
motion graphics templates, 37
motion-related effects
Basic 3D effect, 232
Bevel effects, 228–230
Drop Shadow effect, 227–228
moving clips, 146–149
clipboard used for, 149
dragging and, 147
nudging and, 148
rearranging and, 148–149
MPEG2 file format, 442
MPEG4 file format, 441, 442
multicamera editing, 7, 234–247
flattening process, 245
getting started with, 236
potential uses for, 237
re-recording edits in, 244
review questions/answers on, 246–247
sequence creation in, 238–242
source sequence in, 239–241
steps in process of, 242–243
switching angles in, 245

sync points for, 238–239
target sequence in, 241–242
workflow process, 236–237
multichannel audio, 253
multiplexer controls, 443
multithreading, 31
music tracks. See audio
Mute button, 259
N
naming/renaming
clips, 83–84
media files, 419
project files, 119
narration. See voice-overs
Navigate Up button, 101, 108
nested sequences, 14, 108, 190–191, 241
network-based storage, 36
New Custom Bin button, 301
New Item menu, 39
New Photoshop File dialog, 403
New Project dialog, 28, 30
New Sequence dialog, 40
noise removal, 280–281, 290–292
nonlinear editing system (NLE), 4
Normal blend mode, 375
normalizing audio, 264–266
Notch effect, 288–289
nudging clips, 148
O
Obsolete effects, 300
offline clips, 417–418
OMF file export, 448–449

online clips, 417
opacity, 369, 372
Opacity effect, 299, 372–375
open captions, 409, 411–412
Optical Flow option, 185
optimizing performance, xii–xiii
organizing media, 72–86
bins used for, 78–86
Project panel for, 72–78
review questions/answers on, 97
See also project management
Out marks. See In and Out marks
overcranking technique, 181
overexposed images, 355–356
overlay options, 90
Overwrite button, 102, 115
overwrite edits, 114–115, 142
P
Pan control, 271
panel tab, 19
panels
active, 101
monitor, 15
stacked, 156
See also specific panels
paragraph text, 397, 399–400
Parametric Equalizer effect, 277, 284–288
Paste Attributes dialog, 216
Paused Resolution setting, 132
peak level for audio, 280
Pen tool, 269, 389, 404–405
performance
optimizing, xii–xiii
video playback, 31

phase, audio, 259–260
photo montage transitions, 163–164
Photoshop, 8, 9
creating titles or graphics in, 403
importing files from, 61–62, 79
pixel aspect ratio, 72, 94
playback
controls for, 88–89
customizing monitors for, 91
Mercury Playback Engine and, 30–31
methods for performing, 86–89
real-time, 29–31
rendered, 29–30
resolution for, 89, 130–132
safe margins display, 90
speed controls for, 87, 178, 180–186
Trim mode looping, 202
VR video, 132–134
Playback Renderer settings, 12
playhead marker, 88
plug-ins, audio, 288
point text, 397–399
Polygon Mask button, 382
Position control, 209, 214–215
Poster Frame button, 74
preferences
introduction to setting, 18–20
synchronizing between computers, 22
Prelude, Adobe, 8, 9
adding markers with, 139
importing files from, 55
Premiere Pro CC
installing, xii
nonlinear editing, 4
online resources, xvi

performance optimization, xii–xiii
supported file formats, 56
system requirements, xii
Preserve Interpret Footage Settings option, 425
presets
built-in, 320–321
color correction, 352
keyframe, 225
saving, 321–322
sequence, 26, 40–43
video effect, 305, 320–322
previews
exporting files of, 445
Media Browser, 58
Project panel, 74
removing files of, 431
primary vs. secondary colors, 347
Program Monitor, 15, 124–129
adding clips to Timeline with, 126–129
customizing display of, 91
features illustration, 125
insert editing with, 127–129
navigation bar, 113
selecting layers in, 391
Source Monitor vs., 125
trimming in, 198–201
viewing clips in, 316
See also Source Monitor
project files, 11, 19, 26
project management, 7, 414–433
collaboration and, 429–430
Dynamic Link and, 420
File menu for, 416–418
getting started with, 416
hard drives and, 430–431

importing projects or sequences, 426–428
Libraries panel used in, 430
opening multiple projects, 428–429
Project Manager features, 418–426
Remove Unused option, 426
review questions/answers on, 432–433
See also organizing media
Project Manager, 417, 418–426
consolidation and transcoding in, 421–423
file collection and copying in, 420–421
Link Media panel, 424–425
Locate File panel, 425–426
options overview, 418–420
rendering and replacing in, 423–424
trimmed project creation, 422–423
Project panel, 14, 72–78
bins and, 80
customizing, 73–74
editing video from, 105
features overview, 72–73
finding assets in, 74–78
font size changes, 18, 81
label colors in, 82–83
renaming items in, 84
toggling views of, 74
viewing clips in, 59
See also bins
Project Settings option, 417
project setup, 24–47
adding audio tracks, 43–45
audio display format, 32–33
Auto Save location, 36
capture format settings, 33–34
downloaded file location, 37
getting started with, 26–27

ingest settings, 37–38
item name display, 34
label color display, 34
playback settings, 29–31
rendering process, 29–30
review questions/answers on, 46–47
scratch disk setup, 34, 35
sequence setup, 39–45
Start screen options, 27–28
storage systems, 35–36
video display format, 32
project-based storage setup, 35
proxy media, 52–54
PSD files, 61
psychoacoustics, 260
Publish settings, 447
Push transition effect, 162
Q
Queue button, 445, 446
R
rasterization process, 63
Rate Stretch tool, 184–185
RAW media files, 95–96
Razor tool, 145
real-time playback, 29–31
rearranging clips, 148–149
recording voice-overs, 67, 260–261
Rectangle tool, 405
RED media files, 95–96
Reduce Noise option, 280
Reduce Rumble option, 280
regular trim, 192–193

relinking offline files, xiv
Remove Unused option, 426
removing
cache and preview files, 431
clips from a sequence, 149–151
gaps in the Timeline, 143
In and Out marks from the Timeline, 112–113
markers from clips, 139
noise from audio, 280–281, 290–292
unused clips, 426
See also deleting
renaming. See naming/renaming
Render and Replace dialog, 424
rendering, 29–30
all sequences, 328
maximum quality option for, 43, 445
parts of sequences, 165
and replacing, 328–329, 423–424
Replace Edit command, 188
Replace Footage feature, 189–190, 425
replacing
clips, 186–187
edits, 188–189
footage, 189–190
rendering and, 328–329, 423–424
Reset button, 211
resizing. See sizing/resizing
resolution, playback, 89, 130–132
Resolve Fonts dialog, 408
resources, Premiere Pro, xvi
Restore Unrendered option, 424
Restrict Trims to Subclip Boundaries option, 106
Reverb effect, 283
Reverse Speed option, 183, 184
RGB color system, 334–335

RGB Curves control, 356
RGB parade, 348–349
Ripple Delete edits, 151
Ripple Edit tool, 169, 171, 194–195
ripple trim, 194–195, 198
roll trim, 195–196, 198
rolling credits, 407–408
Rolling Edit tool, 167, 171, 195–196, 267
Rotation control, 209, 217–218
rubber bands, 268, 269, 373
S
safe margins display, 90, 396–397
Save Preset dialog, 322
saving
effect presets, 321–322
text styles, 401–403
Scale controls, 209, 218–221
scratch disks, 34, 35
scrubbing, 113
Search bins, 82
secondary vs. primary colors, 347
segmentation marker, 135
selecting
all clips on a track, 145
audio or video only, 145
clips in a sequence, 144–145, 173
parts of clips, 102–104
Selection tool, 16, 144, 193, 196, 389
selections, exporting, 429–430
sequence markers, 136–138
sequences, 14, 26
audio tracks in, 43–45
conforming clips in, 39, 109
creating new, 108–109

explained, 108
extract edits in, 151
importing from projects, 426–428
insert edits in, 115–117, 127–129
lift edits in, 150–151
markers added to, 136–138
matching settings in, 39, 438–439
multicamera, 238–242
nested, 14, 108, 190–191, 241
opening in Timeline, 109
overwrite edits in, 114–115
presets for, 26, 40–43
rearranging clips in, 148–149
removing clips from, 149–151
rendering parts of, 165
selecting clips in, 144–145, 173
setting up, 39–45
Set Scale Lock button, 398
setting up projects. See project setup
Settings menu, 90, 91, 132
shadows. See drop shadows
shapes, title, 404–405
Show/Hide Timeline View button, 167, 317
single-layer image files, 60
single-sided transitions, 160–161
sizing/resizing
clips, 218–221
fonts, 18, 81
thumbnails, 58
slide edits, 197–198
Slide tool, 168, 197–198
slip edits, 196–197
Slip tool, 196–197
slow motion effect, 180–182
snapping feature, 147

social media uploads, 447
Soft Light blend mode, 307
Solarize effect, 321, 361
Solo button, 259
Sort Icons button, 81, 119
sound. See audio
Source Monitor, 15, 100–106
controls overview, 102
customizing display of, 91
dragging sequences into, 109
Effect Controls panel and, 311
In and Out marks, 101, 103–104, 111
loading clips into, 101
Program Monitor vs., 125
trimming in, 192
See also Program Monitor
Source Range menu, 444
source track indicators, 111
spatial interpolation, 225
spatial properties, 211
special effects. See audio effects; video effects
speed controls
for changing playback speed, 178, 180–186
keyboard shortcuts used as, 87
speed/duration changes, 182–185
Clip Speed/Duration dialog for, 183–184
downstream effects of, 186
Rate Stretch tool for, 184–185
Speed/Duration command, 182
SpeedLooks, 362, 363
spill suppression, 381
split edits, 267–268
Split transition effect, 162
splitting clips, 145–146
stabilizing images, 323–324

stacked panels, 156
standard audio tracks, 44, 258
Start screen, 10–11, 27–28
stereo audio, 253
still images
adding to titles, 406
exporting single frames as, 437
importing into projects, 60–64
setting duration for, 120
stock items, 64–65
Stopwatch icon, 317
storage systems, 35–36
storyboards, 118–119
strokes, text, 401
Studio Reverb effect, 277
styles, text, 400–403
Stylize effects, 361
subclips, 105–106
subfolders, 63–64
subtractive color, 348
sync locks, 140–142
Sync Settings option, 12, 22
synchronizing
audio and video, 93
multicamera media, 238–239
preferences between computers, 22
system requirements, xii
system-based storage setup, 35–36
T
tape-based video, 66
targeting tracks, 111
team projects, 12, 28
Temperature control, 358, 360
templates, title, 408–409

temporal interpolation, 225
text
aligning, 396
captions as, 409–412
colors for, 393
fonts for, 392, 393
kerning, 394–395
leading for, 395–396
paragraph, 397, 399–400
point, 397–399
review questions/answers on, 413
rolling and crawling, 407–408
safe title margin for, 396–397
styles for, 400–403
tracking, 395
See also titles
three-point editing, 117–118
thumbnails
navigating, 86–87
resizing, 58
Time Interpolation option, 445
Time Remapping effect, 299
time rulers, 104, 113
timebase, 120
timecode display, 90, 238
Timecode effect, 324–325, 326
timecode number entry, 103, 126
Timecode standard, 32
Timeline panel, 14, 106–114
adding clips to, 126–129
dragging clips from/to, 428
facts about, 106–108
features illustration, 107
finding clips in, 140
In and Out marks, 112–113

locating gaps in, 143
locking tracks on, 140–143
opening sequences in, 109
targeting tracks in, 111
time rulers, 113
track headers, 111, 113–114
trimming sequences in, 192–193
Tint control, 360
Tint effects, 350
titles, 7, 386–413
appearance options for, 401
creating for video, 397–400
Essential Graphics panel for, 388–392
getting started with, 388
graphics added to, 406
Photoshop for creating, 403
review questions/answers on, 413–414
rolling and crawling text for, 407–408
safe title margins for, 396–397
shapes created for, 404–405
stylizing text for, 400–403
templates available for, 408–409
typography essentials for, 392–397
See also text
title-safe zone, 90, 397
Toggle animation button, 211
Toggle Effect button, 382
Toggle Proxies button, 53
Toggle Track Lock button, 143
Toggle Track Output button, 62, 217, 399
Tools panel, 16, 107
touch-screen editing, 87
track headers, 67, 111, 113–114
track locks, 142–143
Track Matte Key effect, 383–384

Track Meter button, 252
Track Select Backward tool, 145
Track Select Forward tool, 145
tracking
motion, 313, 315
text, 395
tracks, 15
audio, 43–45, 258
blend modes combining, 374–375
explained, 109–110
headers for, 67, 111, 113–114
locking, 140–143
selecting all clips on, 145
targeting, 111
transcoding process, 421–423
Transform effect, 230–231
Transform icon, 213
transitions, 154–175
A/B timeline and, 157, 165
audio, 171–174
best practices with, 158
customizing, 165–168
dragging on Timeline, 170
duration of, 163, 166, 170
explanation of, 157
getting started with, 156
handles and, 159, 169–171
Morph Cut effect, 168–169
multiple-clip, 163–164
review questions/answers on, 175
single-sided, 160–161
swapping, 162
two-clip, 161–163
video, 160–164
when to use, 158

transparency, 369–370, 376
Treble effect, 277
Trim In/Out cursors, 193
trimmed projects, 422–423
trimming, 7, 167, 192–203
keyboard shortcuts for, 203
modifier keys to refine, 201
performing dynamic, 202–203
Program Monitor options for, 198–201
ripple edits for, 194–195
rolling edits for, 195–196
sequences on the Timeline, 192–193
slide edits for, 197–198
slip edits for, 196–197
Source Monitor for, 192
tutorials, xvi
Type tool, 389
Typekit fonts, 392, 409
typography. See text
U
Ultra Key effect, 379–381
underexposed images, 354–355
Undo command, 142
Undock Panel option, 52
unlinking clips, 146
V
vector graphics, 63
vectorscope, 345–348
Velocity graph, 318, 319
video
8-bit, 334–335
display format options, 32

export settings for, 443
interpreting footage from, 94–95
RAW files used for, 95–96
selecting without audio, 145
syncing audio with, 93
VR, 7, 45, 64, 132–134, 326–327
video editing
advanced techniques of, 176–205
delete edits in, 151
extract edits in, 151
four-point, 118, 178–180
getting started with, 100
insert edits in, 115–117, 127–129
lift edits in, 150–151
loading clips for, 101
nesting sequences, 190–191
overwrite edits in, 114–115
Program Monitor for, 124–129
Project panel for, 105
replacing clips/footage, 186–190
review questions/answers on, 121, 153
ripple delete edits in, 151
second monitor used in, 101
selecting parts of clips for, 102–104
sequences used in, 108–109
Source Monitor for, 100–106
speed/duration changes, 180–186
still image duration in, 120
storyboards for, 118–119
subclip creation in, 105–106
three-point, 117–118
Timeline panel for, 106–114
tracks used in, 109–111
transitions used in, 154–175
trimming as, 192–203

video effects, 296–331
adjustment layers for, 305–307
After Effects used for, 307–310
applying to clips, 302–305
Clip Name effect, 325–326
color-related, 349–352, 361
copying/pasting, 305
Effects panel, 300–302
exporting media with, 443–444
finding, 301, 303, 304, 350
fixed, 208, 298–300, 304
frequently used, 323–328
getting started with, 298
immersive or VR, 326–327
keyframing, 316–320
Lens Distortion effect, 328
masking and tracking, 313–315
master clip, 310–313
presets for, 305, 320–322
real-time playback of, 29–31
review questions/answers on, 330–331
Timecode effect, 324–325, 326
Warp Stabilizer effect, 323–324
See also audio effects
Video Limiter effect, 351
video scopes, 341
video transitions, 160–164
vignette effect, 339
voice-overs
adjusting audio for, 278–293
recording, 67, 260–261
See also dialogue adjustments
volume adjustments, 262–266, 268–271
Audio Clip Mixer, 270–271
Effect Controls panel, 262–263

Essential Sound panel, 283
gain adjustments, 263–264
keyboard shortcuts for, 269
keyframes for making, 269–270
loudness settings and, 278–280, 292–293
normalizing audio, 264–266
overall clip levels, 268–269
VR Glow effect, 327
VR video
360 video vs., 133
display mode for, 7
effects for, 326–327
importing, 64
playing back, 132–134
Premiere Pro support for, 45
transitions for, 157
VR Video Settings, 326–327
W
Warp Stabilizer effect, 323–324
waveform display, 343–345
Web Edition of book, xv
web link marker, 135
web resources, xvi
white balance, 357–360
Lumetri color wheels for, 357–359
secondary color adjustment of, 359–360
workflow
color-oriented, 335–349
enhancing with Premiere Pro, 6–7
expanding using Creative Cloud, 8–9
file-based camera, 54–55
multicamera editing, 236–237
proxy files used in, 52–54
standard digital video, 5–6

workspaces, 9–18
Audio workspace, 251–253
Color workspace, 336–337
customizing, 16–18
Editing workspace, 13, 100
features illustration, 14
Graphics workspace, 388
main interface elements, 14–16
preferences for, 18–20
working with, 12–14
Workspaces panel, 13, 57, 156
Write Keyframes button, 271
X
XML files, 448
Y
YC waveform display, 344
YUV color system, 334–335
YUV effects, 302
YUV vectorscope, 345–348, 358
Z
Zoom controls, 81, 89, 108, 161

Production Notes
The Adobe Premiere Pro Classroom in a Book (2018 release) was created
electronically using Adobe InDesign CC. Art was produced using Adobe
InDesign CC, Adobe Illustrator CC, Adobe Premiere Pro, and Adobe Photoshop
CC.
References to company names, websites, or addresses in the lessons are for
demonstration purposes only and are not intended to refer to any actual
organization or person.
Images
Photographic images and illustrations are intended for use with the tutorials.
Typefaces used
Adobe Myriad Pro and Adobe Warnock Pro are used throughout this book. For
more 
information 
about 
OpenType 
and 
Adobe 
fonts, 
visit
http://www.adobe.com/type/opentype/.
Media credits
Thanks to Patrick Cannell for the music “Ambient Heavens,” Copyright © 2015
by Patrick Cannell
Thanks to Patrick Cannell for the music “Cooking Montage,” Copyright © 2015
by Patrick Cannell
Footage from Andrea Sweeney NYC, Copyright © 2015 by Maxim Jago
Footage from Laura in the Snow, Copyright © 2015 by Maxim Jago Footage
from Theft Unexpected, Copyright © 2014 by Maxim Jago Footage from Jolie’s
Garden, Copyright © 2016 by Maxim Jago
Footage from Boston Snow, Copyright © 2016 by Maxim Jago
Footage from She, Copyright © 2017 by Maxim Jago
Lesson project credits
The following individuals contributed artwork for the lesson files for this edition
of the Adobe Premiere Pro CC Classroom in a Book (2018 release):

Patrick Cannell (www.patrickcannell.com.)

