
ADOPTION
A Reference Handbook

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Capital Punishment, Michael Kronenwetter
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Conflicts over Natural Resources, Jacqueline Vaughn
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Euthanasia, Martha L. Gorman and Jennifer Fecio McDougall
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Genetic Engineering, Harry LeVine, III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mainline Christian Values and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and 
James Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


ADOPTION
A Reference Handbook, 
Second Edition
Barbara A. Moe
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2007 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Moe, Barbara A.
Adoption : a reference handbook / Barbara A. Moe.— 2nd ed.
p. cm. —  (Contemporary world issues series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-029-2 (hardcopy : alk. paper) — 
ISBN 978-1-59884-030-8 (ebook)  1.  Adoption—United States—
Handbooks, manuals, etc.  I. Title. 
HV875.55.M645 2007
362.7340973—dc22
2007001714
11  10  09  08  07    10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. 
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

To all those whose lives 
have been touched by adoption.


Contents
Preface, xiii
1
Background and History, 1
Lifelong Issues in Adoption, 2
Who Adopts Children?, 2
How Agencies Screen Prospective Parents: 
The Home Study Process, 3
Types of Children Available for Adoption, 4
Methods (Styles) of Adoption, 4
Types of Adoption and Care, 11
Possible Emotional and Health Problems, 15
Laws and Policies, 23
Other Information of Interest, 29
Summary, 33
References and Further Reading, 33
2
Issues and Controversies, 37
Open versus Closed Adoption, 38
Open versus Closed Records, 44
Do Transcultural and/or Transracial Adoptions Work?, 49
Should Single People Be Allowed to Adopt?, 59
What About Same-Sex Couples?, 62
Should the Government Provide More or Less Regulation
of Adoption?, 72
What About Infant Abandonment Laws? Are They “Safe
Havens,” or “Baby Dumps?”, 76
What About Adoption Itself? Is It Valuable, or Not?, 79
Summary, 81
References and Further Reading, 82
ix

3
Adoption around the World, 89
Canada, 91
The United Kingdom, 93
Russia, 96
China, 98
Romania, 105
South Korea, 108
Finland, 109
Sweden, 113
The Philippines, 114
India, 117
Mexico, 118
References and Further Reading, 120
4
Chronology, 123
5
Biographical Sketches, 145
Viola Wertheim Bernard, 145
John Bowlby, 146
Charles Loring Brace, 147
Pearl S. Buck, 148
Reverend George Clements, 149
Dorothy DeBolt and Robert DeBolt, 150 
Michael Dorris, 150
Marian Wright Edelman, 151
Vera Fahlberg, 151
Florence Anna Fisher, 152
Anna Freud, 152 
Sigmund Freud, 153
Arnold Gesell, 154
Clara McBride Hale, 155
Joan Heifetz Hollinger, 156
Harry Holt and Bertha Holt, 157
Patricia Irwin Johnston, 158
C. Henry Kempe, 158
H. David Kirk, 159
Janusz Korczak, 160
Betty Jean Lifton, 161 
Lois Ruskai Melina, 162
Jean Paton, 163
Justine Wise Polier, 164
Jessie Taft, 165 
x
Contents

Sophie van Senden Theis, 165 
Dave Thomas, 166
Barbara Tremetiere, 167
6
Facts and Data, 169
The Children’s Bureau, 169
The Child Welfare Information Gateway, 169
Data Collection History and Sources, 175
Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting 
Systems (AFCARS), 175
Statewide Automated Child Welfare Information 
System (SACWIS), 176
What Is the Difference between AFCARS and 
SACWIS?, 176
AFCARS Data, 177
Federal Laws and Policy, 193
Testimony and Statements, 202
Litigation in Adoption, 222
Supporting Adoptive Families, 228
7
Directory of Organizations, 229
Federal Agencies Concerned with Adoption, 229
National Resource, Educational, Support, 
Advocacy, and/or Policymaking Organizations 
Concerned with Adoption, 232
National Legally Oriented Organizations with 
Adoption Connections, 253
State Offices, 258
8
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources, 269
Books, 269
Journals and Other Periodicals, 296
Websites, 299
Videos and DVDs, 302
CD-ROMs, 308
Software, 310
Databases, 310
Glossary, 315
Index, 323
About the Author, 343
Contents
xi


Preface
I
n late July 2006, while thousands of U.S. citizens rushed in panic
to get out of war-torn Beirut, a prospective adoptive American
parent of a Lebanese boy refused to leave. Interviewed on radio,
she planned to stay with “her” child, not yet formally adopted.
“What mother would leave her son behind?” she asked. “I don’t
know anyone here. If I go, I’ll never see him again.”
Chris, adopted at age six into a family with older birth chil-
dren, is now twenty-six. In a discussion with his father, he stated
(or did he ask?): “I suppose you love your birth children more
than the adopted ones.”
Adoption is a complicated entity. Anyone who has gone
through the process as an adopted person, an adoptive parent, or
as a birth parent knows this is true. The process can be so com-
plex and filled with so many “potholes” that the subject could fill
several books. While keeping much in common with adoption
processes of the past, changes are constantly occurring. Keeping
up with the changes in adoption can be challenging. Another area
of complexity is the connection among members of the adoption
triad, a relationship that for many (in the recent past) has become
more open. In addition, support for all triad members is a must,
but there is never (it seems) enough support to go around.
Adoption is an “affair of the heart.” But as much as adoption
fills a need for love, there is much more involved. There are legal
issues, psychological issues, emotional issues, financial issues,
sometimes medical issues, and much paperwork.
Adoption: A Reference Handbook is intended for anyone who
wants to get more informed about the many “faces” of adoption.
This one-volume reference work can answer some—maybe
many—of the questions that students of adoption ask. If it cannot
xiii

provide all of the answers (and it can’t), it can at least point read-
ers in the right direction for finding the answers they need.
A goal of the book is to present in an objective way the many
facets of adoption. People who “know” adoption (and even some
who don’t) have strong and differing opinions about what is
“right” in adoption. This book will present some of these differing
views on various aspects of adoption and let the reader decide.
Chapter 1, Background and History, offers a starting point
with the history of adoption. Where and how did it originate? In
what directions does it seem to be going? The chapter includes in-
formation on who adopts children, how families are screened, the
types of children available for adoption, the various adoption
“programs,” and the types of adoption. Chapter 1 also includes
information on the Hague Convention and possible emotional or
psychological issues some adopted children display. It includes
the threats posed by substances such as alcohol, HIV/AIDS, and
methamphetamine. Also discussed are laws and policies, post-
legal services, costs of adoption, the role of attorneys, and what
happens when an adoption does not succeed.
Chapter 2, Issues and Controversies, takes an objective look
at some of the issues in adoption, and controversies over such
questions as “Which is best—open or closed adoption?” “What
about open records?” “Are transracial/transcultural adoptions
good for children?” “Should single people adopt?” “What about
same-sex couples?” “Should the government provide more or
less regulation of adoption?” “Are infant abandonment laws—so
called ‘safe havens’—useful or not?” “What about the concept of
adoption itself?” Chapter 3, Adoption Around the World, ex-
plores how people in selected countries outside the United States
handle adoption.
Chapter 4, Chronology, presents a timeline of adoption
“milestones”—the founding of national organizations and adop-
tion movements, the dates of important adoption legislation, sig-
nificant conferences, and publication dates of important books (to
name a few). It provides a context for understanding how the
practice of adoption has evolved over the years. Chapter 5, Bio-
graphical Sketches, presents thirty brief biographical sketches of
adoption “pioneers,” those whose actions, writings, or both have
changed adoption.
Chapter 6, Facts and Data, presents figures and tables that
answer some commonly asked adoption questions. The chapter
also includes important federal laws related to adoption, excerpts
xiv
Preface

from testimonies of people whose experiences have influenced
adoption policy, Supreme Court verdicts regarding adoption
cases, and a concept model for postadoption services.
Chapter 7, Directory of Organizations, gives listings of im-
portant adoption organizations for adopted persons, birth par-
ents, and adoptive parents. Some of the groups have education as
their main focus; others are set up to support the specific mem-
bers of the adoption triad. Some have many purposes. Chapter 8,
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources, provides an annotated
and selective list of books, journals/magazines, websites,
videos/DVDs, CD-ROMs, databases, and software, all useful in
learning about various aspects of adoption.
I appreciate all of the willing helpers I have used so freely in
the preparation of this second edition. Mary Sullivan and her col-
leagues, especially Phyllis Charles and John Vogel, at the Child
Welfare Information Gateway have provided invaluable assis-
tance along the way. Likewise, numerous staff members of the
Denver Public Library and Adoption Alliance have helped. Also,
many thanks to Ellen Herman of the Adoption History Project
and Randy Comfort of Our Place. I am grateful for the help of my
family, especially Paul and David Moe, and technical advisors,
such as Jim Esten and Peggy Roberts, and to the adoptive families
who allowed me to tell their stories. Last, many thanks to editors
Mim Vassan, Dayle Dermatis, and Alisha Martinez who cheer-
fully and promptly answered many, many questions and never
wavered in their support.
Preface
xv


1
Background and History
A
doption of children, in one form or another, is as old as human
history. Most people are aware of at least one legendary adop-
tion: that of the pharoah’s daughter rescuing the baby Moses
from the bulrushes.
The Babylonian Code of Hammurabi (approximately 1780
BC) was found in what is now southern Iraq; it contains the oldest
written law on adoption. One section of the code discusses risks
and concerns about the experience of adoption—that parents may
treat the adopted child differently (from their birth children), that
the child will suffer from changes in caregivers, or that the family
and the adopted child may not be a good match. Ancient Greece,
Rome, Egypt and other countries in the Middle East, and Asia all
practiced some form of adoption.
Adoption law was not part of English Common Law, from
which many other U.S. laws evolved. (England did not even have
adoption laws until 1926.) Much of the adoption law of the
United States evolved from Napoleonic code or from early
Roman laws having to do with inheritance. The purpose of adop-
tion was not necessarily to promote the welfare of the child but to
give the adults an heir. Modern U.S. adoption law came into
being in the late 1800s as a way of helping orphaned and neg-
lected children. In the recent past, however, adoption laws and
policies have changed more than ever before. Most experts agree
that two principles have emerged to guide adoption practice: 
decisions should be made in the best interests of the child, and a
permanent home for every child is the primary goal of adoption.
1

Lifelong Issues in Adoption
Most adoption workers agree with this statement: adoption is a
lifelong issue. In other words, adoption presents ongoing “work”
for everyone concerned. The late Marshall Schechter, MD, a na-
tionally known psychiatrist, counseled adopted adults. He be-
lieved that many of his patients shared such issues as feelings of
loss and abandonment, questions of identity, and low self-esteem
(Brodzinsky and Schechter, 1990).
Since 1988, two adoption professionals, Deborah Silverstein
and Sharon Kaplan Rozsia, have worked to help the three parties
in any adoption (birth parents, adoptive parents, and the adopted
person) understand the lifelong implications of adoption.  Their
“seven core issues of adoption” are loss, grief, rejection, guilt and
shame, identity, intimacy, and mastery and control.
Meeting with a therapist knowledgeable about adoption will
help some. Others may access support groups through local or-
ganizations or national groups. The Child Welfare Information
Gateway has a fact sheet, “Impact of Adoption on Adopted Per-
sons: A Factsheet for Families,” available at http://www.child
welfare.gov/pubs/f_issues.cfm.
Who Adopts Children?
Although adoption laws vary from state to state, most states
allow any “fit” person to adopt. In theory, there are few restric-
tions on who can become an adoptive parent. In actuality, agen-
cies or courts may limit who adopts.
Those who adopt may be family members or may be unre-
lated to the child. Because the adoption of family members is
often unofficial, estimates vary as to the frequency of this type of
adoption (referred to as kinship adoption). Most experts agree,
however, that stepparent and relative adoptions make up the
largest percentage of adoptions in the United States today. An at-
torney familiar with adoption law can formalize a stepparent or
kinship adoption in most states, but some states (and some
judges) require a social worker to first do a home study. Although
simple in a legal sense, stepparent adoptions maybe be compli-
cated in an emotional sense, as is often the case with blended fam-
ilies. But because of blood ties, a child may feel more comfortable
2
Background and History

with relatives. Nonrelative adoption, however, is the primary
subject of this book.
Those who adopt may have problems with infertility and be
unable to have children by birth. Or they may have children by
birth but believe they have room for another child (or two or three
or more). Some couples who adopt older children do so because
they want to help in some way; they may still have “parenting en-
ergy” left but choose not to add to the world’s overpopulation
and so decide to become parents to a waiting child. Some choose
to adopt as single parents. Some are same-sex couples. (Who is
permitted to adopt can become controversial and will be dis-
cussed in the next chapter.)
How Agencies Screen Prospective
Parents: The Home Study Process
Regardless of what social workers and adoption agencies decide
to call this getting-to-know-you experience, the home study
process has remained at the center of the adoption experience for
many years. Because the term home study connotes a physical in-
spection of a family’s living quarters, efforts to rename the process
continue. Some agencies have decided to call this evaluation a
“family assessment.”
Before taking a child into their home, a family must “pass the
test” of suitability for adoption. The formal application process
usually includes all or some of the following: the submission of fin-
gerprints for FBI clearance, a check of the child abuse registry, phys-
ical examinations, letters of reference, the submission of a marriage
license and/or divorce decrees, and proof of health insurance. A
home inspection is actually a small part of the home study. More
important for the social worker to explore with the family are ques-
tions such as: What are their motivations to adopt? What type of
child will they consider (e.g., age, race, handicapping conditions)?
How will they deal with emotional or physical disabilities? How
were they disciplined? What is the status of their relationships with
family and friends? How strong is their marriage? What hardships
have they overcome? If they have not yet parented, what do they
know about parenting? What do they know about adoption? Other
areas for exploration are employment, finances, religious and ethi-
cal beliefs, lifestyle, expectations, and flexibility.
How Agencies Screen Prospective Parents: The Home Study Process
3

Training for prospective adoptive parents is mandatory in
most agencies. Training gives credence to the belief that al-
though raising an adopted child is in many ways similar to rais-
ing any child, there are different issues, and different skills may
be required.
Types of Children Available for Adoption
Adoptive families face challenges and choices. Prospective adop-
tive parents may sometimes pick the sex of their child, but in an
infant adoption this is not usually possible because adoptive par-
ents often do not know the sex of the child to be born to them.
However, those adopting an older child or a child from another
country often do state a preference. An interesting paradox is that
larger numbers of those expecting their first birth child would
choose a boy if they could, while more adoptive couples and sin-
gle women prefer girls.
Methods (Styles) of Adoption
In deciding how to go about finding a child, families have even
more choices to make. Sorting adoption methods into categories
helps explain these choices, but in reality categories overlap. Al-
though federal laws are important, state laws govern the intrica-
cies of adoption, and the content of these laws vary from state to
state.
Domestic (In-Country) Adoption
Infant Adoption.
Infant adoption is both a type of adoption based
on the age of the child (usually under one year of age, although
some allow up to two years) and a method of adoption based on
the procedures involved. The steps that prospective adoptive
parents must take in order to adopt an infant from the United
States are different, for example, from the procedures involved in
adopting an older child from the United States or a child from
another country.
In addition to completing the home study, couples interested
in being considered for an infant usually make a profile of them-
selves for the adoption agency to present to the birth mother; they
4
Background and History

also write a “Dear Birth Parent” letter telling the birth mother (or
birth couple) why they would be interested in the child, often not
yet born. In many cases the birth parents want to meet the
prospective adoptive parents and “choose” them; in other cases
the birth parents want the agency to make the decision. (In gen-
eral, when birth parents choose, they tend to pick young married
couples with no children or only a few other children.) Often the
birth parents request pictures of the child once a year on the
child’s birthday; the agency usually coordinates the exchange. In
some cases, there is ongoing contact between the two families; in
other cases, there is none.
Today there is a swing toward more openness in infant adop-
tion and more involvement of birth parents in the process. The
placement of domestic infants occurs on a continuum of openness
and ranges from very open to totally closed, with most infant
adoptions falling in the middle of this range.
Special Needs Adoption.
According to the Child Welfare Information
Gateway and the Child Welfare League of America, there are
approximately 114,000 special needs children waiting in foster care
for adoptive families.
When a couple (or single person) decides to adopt a child
with “special needs” (sometimes called a “waiting child”), they
may go either through the county or state agency that has cus-
tody of the child or through a private agency. (Not all private
agencies work with public agencies to place special needs chil-
dren, but many do.) Although the designation of “special needs”
varies, social workers tend to put the following “types” of chil-
dren in the special needs category:
—Any child over the age of seven (or eight)
—Children of color, especially those over the age of four
—Siblings to be adopted together, especially more than two
siblings
—Any child born to a mother who has used alcohol and/or
drugs during her pregnancy
—Children who have a positive result from an HIV
antibody test
Methods (Styles) of Adoption
5

—Children who have been physically, emotionally, or
sexually abused
—Children with physical, intellectual, or emotional
disabilities
—Children who have had multiple moves (these children
are at high risk for attachment disorder, which we will
discuss later in this chapter under the heading “Reactive
Attachment Disorder”)
Coparenting.
Coparenting is a community-based alternative for
families adopting children with developmental disabilities. In
some places the project is federally funded through a grant from
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The goal of
the program is to strengthen families through “planned sharing.”
Volunteer caregivers, who have no legal rights, come into the
families’ lives to help when needed. Because research has shown
that children with developmental disabilities wait ten times
longer than other children for an adoptive home, a special effort
is being made to preserve these placements. In this project,
coparents help reduce stress on the adoptive family by sharing
some of the workload. Coparents receive up to six weeks of
specialized training.
Adoption Exchanges.
No discussion of special needs adoption
would be complete without a mention of adoption exchanges.
These organizations, usually regional in scope, are not adoption
agencies but referral sources (networking units) for hard-to-place
children. Their role does not duplicate that of agencies; exchanges
do not usually do home studies and do not work directly with
children, except to film them for photo books, the Internet, or
television. Exchanges function as intermediary organizations in
linking waiting children with waiting parents.
Laws and Policies Relating to Domestic Adoption.
When parents in
one state adopt a child from another state, they are subject to the
conditions of the Interstate Compact on the Placement of
Children (ICPC). The compact is not a national law but an
agreement to which all of the states, as well as the District of
Columbia and the U.S. Virgin Islands, subscribe. Its purpose is to
6
Background and History

assure safe placement of children across state lines and to make
sure the requirements of the “sending state” and the “receiving
state” are in agreement and being complied with by all parties.
Each state has a compact administrator who reviews the pa-
perwork, including the home study of the prospective adoptive
parents, before the child is placed. Until the administrator gives
permission, the adoptive parents may not travel with the child to
their home state.
The Interstate Compact on Adoption and Medical Assistance
(ICAMA) helps provide medical and other services to adoptive
families and children in placement across state lines or in the case
of a parental move to a different state before the adoption is fi-
nalized. Currently most of the states belong to ICAMA. The com-
pact provides for consistent policies and procedures in programs
such as Medicaid. For children covered by Medicaid, the “receiv-
ing state” may issue a new Medicaid card to the child who has
moved.
Intercountry (International) Adoption
The terms intercountry and international adoption are used inter-
changeably. According to the Evan P. Donaldson Adoption Insti-
tute, citizens of the United States began adopting children from
other countries in substantial numbers after World War II. Many
of these children were war orphans from various countries of Eu-
rope and also Japan. Following the civil war in Greece
(1946–1949), the Korean War (1950–1953), and the Vietnam War
(1954–1973), international adoptions continued to increase. Other
factors driving these adoptions in recent years have included
poverty and social upheaval in Latin America, Eastern Europe,
and the former Soviet Union. In China, government controls on
population have led to the abandonment of infant girls and over-
crowded orphanages. As a “scarcity” of available infants devel-
oped in the United States, more couples looked to other countries
to find young children to adopt. Altruistic motives also motivate
some parents to pursue intercountry adoptions.
Citizens of the United States adopted more than a quarter of
a million children internationally between 1971 and 2001. Be-
tween 1991 and 2001, international adoptions more than doubled,
with 19,237 immigrant visas issued to orphans coming to the
United States in 2001. In the decade between 1995 and 2005, in-
tercountry adoptions climbed from 8,987 in 1995 to 22,728 in 2005.
Methods (Styles) of Adoption
7

Those who would like more information on intercountry adop-
tion statistics can visit the U.S. State Department website at
http://travel.state.gov.
Intercountry adoption continues to change. Throughout the
1960s and 1970s, most internationally adopted children came
from Korea and Vietnam. Thrust into the world spotlight during
the 1988 Olympic Games, South Korea began to reconsider the
loss of many of its children to overseas adoptions, and the num-
ber of adoptions from that country dropped. With the breakup of
many Communist-bloc nations in that same era, international
adoptions began to shift focus. The early 1990s saw a surge in
adoptions from Romania; in the late 1990s there was an increase
in adoptions from Russia and China.
Many single parents, mostly women, have found the inter-
national adoption process more hospitable to them than either
domestic infant or special needs programs. An intercountry
adoption may be the only way a single person can adopt a very
young child. (Almost 9 percent of internationally adopted chil-
dren are younger than five years old; 46 percent are under one
year of age.) In the United States, a birth mother may be a single
parent herself and want her child to have a two-parent family.
Single persons can also pursue an intercountry adoption of a
child with “special needs.” Nevertheless, the process of adopting
a child from another country can be challenging.
Because of the complexity of the intercountry adoption
process, many people choose to work with a licensed child place-
ment agency. Some are able to find an agency in their area that
has its own adoption program in a certain country. At other times,
the local agency links up with a different agency in another part
of the country. Adoption Alliance, a nonprofit agency in Denver,
Colorado, opened its doors in 1989, and has since found homes
for children in Latin America, Jamaica, the Dominican Republic,
China, Romania, Vietnam, and other locations throughout the
world.
The countries themselves decide what the requirements,
such as age, marital status, or religion, will be. For example,
Adoption Alliance’s work with Jamaica requires adopting parents
to be practicing fundamentalist Christians.
In addition to the rules of the other country’s government
and the laws of the adopters’ own state, the U.S. government has
regulations. U.S. Citizenship and Immigrations Services (USCIS)
requires that at least one person in an adoptive couple be a citizen
8
Background and History

of the United States, and one of them must be at least twenty-five
years old.
Other rules apply. Under immigration law, the definition of
an orphan (from the Immigration and Nationality Act) is a long
one. An orphan is 
a child, under the age of sixteen at the time a petition is
filed in his behalf to accord a classification as an imme-
diate relative under section 201(b), who is an orphan be-
cause of the death or disappearance of, abandonment or
desertion by, or separation or loss from both parents, or
for whom the sole or surviving parent is incapable of
providing the proper care and has, in writing, irrevoca-
bly released the child for emigration and adoption; who
has been adopted abroad by a U.S. citizen and spouse
jointly or by an unmarried U.S. citizen at least twenty-
five years of age, who personally saw and observed the
child prior to or during the adoption proceedings; or
who is coming to the United States for adoption by a
U.S. citizen and spouse jointly, or by an unmarried U.S.
citizen at least twenty-five years of age, who have or has
complied with the preadoption requirements if any, of
the child’s proposed residence: Provided, That the Attor-
ney General is satisfied that proper care will be fur-
nished the child if admitted to the United States: Pro-
vided further, That no natural parent or prior adoptive
parent of any such child shall thereafter, by virtue of
such parentage, be accorded any right, privilege, or sta-
tus under this Act. (U.S. Department of Justice, Septem-
ber 2000, revised, 35)
The child, living in either an orphanage or a foster home, may be
represented by an attorney, physician, judge, or social worker.
Rosemary and Sam Wilber of South Carolina have one birth
child, Ben, age ten. The Wilbers wanted to complete their family
by adopting a younger girl. For a while, they considered adopt-
ing a child with special needs from the United States. Although
their social worker told them about several girls over the course
of a year, they didn’t hear about one that seemed right for their
family. Ultimately, they decided to try an intercountry adoption,
which involved a whole new set of paperwork and a home study
addendum. During the second process, the social worker realized
Methods (Styles) of Adoption
9

that Rosemary had at one time taught Spanish in an elementary
school. Now Rosemary is brushing up on her language skills
while the family waits for the go-ahead to travel to Guatemala to
pick up their newly assigned daughter, Maria, age seven.
After a couple receives a referral of a particular child and
they accept the child, they may, for a variety of reasons, have a
long wait before they can parent that child. Changes in country
policies and procedures may lead to delays in the process. Once
the paperwork is complete, depending on country and/or agency
policies, either the prospective adoptive parents will travel to the
country (sometimes twice) to finalize the adoption and bring the
child home or, as is the case with many Korean adoptions, the
child may travel with an escort to the United States.
People often believe that adopting from another country will
be an easy way to get a healthy Caucasian infant. Often they are
wrong. In the first place, intercountry adoptions are rarely easy.
Second, most children adopted from other countries in the past
fifty years, beginning with Pearl Buck’s Welcome House in the
1940s and Holt International Children’s Services in the 1950s,
have been children of color. According to adoptive parent and
publisher Patricia Johnston, “many couples who would not even
consider adopting an American black child adopt internationally
from Asia, India, or South America without considering it a tran-
sracial or transethnic placement.” (This is one of the controversial
topics we will consider in Chapter 2.)
Laws and Policies for Intercountry Adoption.
In addition to the
requirements all adoptive parents must meet, those adopting
from out of the country have special requirements. For most
countries, the family must put together a notarized dossier and
follow the guidelines set forth by U.S. immigration law, found in
the Immigration and Naturalization Act. These guidelines not
only determine if a particular child may enter the United States
but also mandate adherence to state laws and the laws of the
child’s country.
Most often the first form prospective parents see from the
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) is the I-600 A,
the Application for Advanced Processing of an Infant. To be ap-
proved, families must submit such documents as a positive home
study, fingerprint forms, proof of citizenship, and marriage and
divorce decrees. Adopters then file the I-600 Petition to Classify
and Orphan as an Immediate Relative, most often in the other
10
Background and History

country. This form allows a child to enter the United States. In ad-
dition to giving information about the prospective parents, the I-
600 Petition must also include information about the child to be
adopted, particularly the status of his or her parents.
Much of the immigration paperwork is done before the par-
ents travel to meet their assigned child or before the child is es-
corted to the United States. Usually parents legally adopt the
child in the child’s country of birth. After the child comes to the
United States to live with his or her adoptive family, the adoption
agency may do six to twelve months of post-placement supervi-
sion, which may be followed by a court validation or finalization.
Later the child must be “naturalized,” a separate process.
The Hague Convention on Intercountry Adoption is a multi-
lateral treaty designed to protect children, birth parents, and
adoptive parents by developing uniform standards and safe-
guards for intercountry adoption. After three years of work, sixty-
six nations took the first step toward making the convention a re-
ality and approved the treaty at the Hague. Before this time,
rumors of child abduction and organ stealing had surfaced in
many countries, which then closed or reduced their international
adoption programs.
In September 2000 the United States ratified the treaty. The
Intercountry Adoption Act of 2000 (IAA), enacted on October 6,
2000, provides implementing legislation for the convention. In
August 2005 the U.S. Department of State submitted regulations
on accreditation and approval of international adoption services
to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). This is the final
step before the regulations become final. Accreditation of agen-
cies to conduct adoptions under the Hague Convention must be
finished before the United States can officially ratify the treaty. The
United States is expected to implement the treaty by 2007–2008.
Types of Adoption and Care
Agency Adoption
Those who would like to adopt a child must travel down many
“streets” on their way to adoption. If potential adoptive parents
take the agency route, they have to decide between a private and
a public agency. To support their work, public agencies receive
tax money from the federal government and/or state, county, or
Types of Adoption and Care
11

municipality in which they are located. Because these agencies
generally place children within their jurisdictions, they do not get
involved in intercountry adoptions, nor do they place infants un-
less the child has special needs or has been in foster care.
The private agency is another route to adoption. Private
agencies may be nonprofit or for-profit; they may be denomina-
tional or nondenominational. Because private agencies do not re-
ceive tax dollars, they usually have to charge fees for their serv-
ices. Fees and policies vary from state to state, but in each state
they are governed by state laws.
People may choose an agency for the services they hope to
receive, such as training about adoption, assistance in communi-
cating with birth parents, and/or support during and after the
adoptive placement.
Independent Adoption
Another route to adoption is the independent or private one. In a
private adoption (not the same as a private agency adoption), a
couple legally adopts a baby directly from the birth parents with-
out the involvement of an adoption agency. An intermediary (at-
torney, physician, member of the clergy, social worker, or “adop-
tion consultant”) may act as a “facilitator,” making sure all of the
legal requirements have been followed. Several states prohibit in-
dependent adoptions.
Jean Warren Lindsay, author of Open Adoption: A Caring Op-
tion (1987), says she always favored agency adoption because of
the expectation that a good agency would provide the all-impor-
tant counseling for birth parents as well as counseling and train-
ing for adoptive parents. The disadvantage (years ago) to an
agency placement was that absolute secrecy prevailed. Things
have changed. Nowadays more and more agencies are not only
providing counseling but are also insisting on some degree of
openness in the infant placement. At the same time, says Lindsay,
some independent adoption services offer counseling and educa-
tion similar to what was formerly available only through an
agency. Distinctions have blurred.
Designated Adoption
A designated adoption (also called a “targeted” or “identified”
adoption) falls somewhere between the two aforementioned
12
Background and History

adoption styles.  In a designated adoption, prospective adoptive
parents locate a birth mother, or a birth mother finds the adoptive
parents, sometimes through an intermediary. Together they locate
a licensed child placement agency from which they can receive
the needed services, such as a home study for the adoptive fam-
ily and counseling for the birth mother (as well as for the birth fa-
ther, if he is involved).
Parent-Initiated Adoption 
A parent-initiated adoption is a style related to designated adop-
tion in which prospective adoptive parents and/or birth parents
take an active role in the pre-adoption process. Either party may
send out letters and resumes or place classified advertisements in
newspapers and on the internet. When the two sets of parents
match up, there is an assumption that the birth parents will go
through with an adoption plan. No one is obligated, however,
until court involvement has taken place. Sometimes a parent-ini-
tiated adoption occurs when a family has found a child free for
adoption in another country.
Foster-Adoption
There are many differences between foster care and adoption, but
the two sometimes interface when a foster-care situation “turns
into” an adoption. The state (or county) and the courts work to-
gether to try to keep children safe. Children are placed in a foster
home when birth parents have been unable to care for them; in
many cases, the children have been neglected or abused.
Foster-adoption is sometimes called fost-adopt, fos-adopt,
legal-risk, or concurrent permanency planning. Not too many
years ago, foster parents were not considered for the adoption of
children placed in their home. These days, the current foster par-
ents usually become the family of choice for a child when that
child becomes “free” for adoption.
Because foster parents and adoptive parents may have the
same goal (providing permanence for a child), many child place-
ment agencies screen, educate, and “study” adoptive and foster
families together. More and more often, caseworkers (especially
those who work with young children) ask prospective adoptive
parents who have not been foster parents if they would consider
a legal-risk (foster-adopt) placement because this arrangement
Types of Adoption and Care
13

could spare the child another move. Nevertheless, some prospec-
tive adoptive parents are hesitant to accept a child who is not
legally free for adoption.
While adoption is “forever,” and the adoptive parents have
the same rights and responsibilities as if the child had been born
to them, foster care may be temporary. If the birth parents succeed
in following through with the treatment plan ordered by the court
(e.g., to be free of drugs and alcohol, to have a means of earning
a living, and to have a safe place to live), the child may go home.
This is the goal.
However, if the birth parents are unable to follow through
with the court orders, the court may terminate the parental rights
of the birth parents, and after an appeal period, the child becomes
legally free for adoption. In these cases, the current foster parents
may be allowed to adopt them. This works out well for many
children, who have already begun to think of their foster parents
as their “forever” parents.
Baby Tonya was born to Martha, a patient in a mental hos-
pital in Ohio. Caseworkers believe Martha’s ex-husband, who
came to the hospital for visits, was the baby’s father. Martha had
six other children she had not been able to parent. Authorities be-
lieved that a family in California had adopted the older four; the
workers were looking for a home together for the younger two,
who had been badly burned by the birth mother during one of
her psychotic episodes. Tonya, the seventh child, was placed
with the Fletchers at two days of age. They were the only couple
at the time willing to take two risks: a history of mental illness in
the mother, and the risk that Martha might get well enough to
eventually parent her baby. In this case, the court terminated the
birth parents’ rights, and the Fletchers became Tonya’s perma-
nent parents.
Kinship Care
Kinship care refers to a situation in which relatives by blood or by
marriage, or others with close family ties, take care of children
who are unable to live with their original parents. Sometimes the
birth parents ask these relatives to take in the children; sometimes
social service agencies recruit them so that the children will not
have their birth links completely severed. Kinship care may lead
to a formal adoption.
Travis, eight, and Katie, six, have the same mother but dif-
14
Background and History

ferent fathers. Their mother left them with a number of her
boyfriends, who sexually abused them. As a result, these siblings
act out sexually when they are together. In addition, each requires
a tremendous amount of individual attention. Two years ago
Lisa, the birth mother, left Oregon for Texas, and no one in town
has seen her since. Lisa’s older sister is taking care of Katie, a
compliant child, and wants to adopt her. Travis is anything but
compliant. He has temper tantrums that last for hours; he lies,
cheats, and steals; he has no friends. The foster father in the home
in which Travis has lived for the past two years is the cousin of
Travis’s father. This family has offered to take legal guardianship
of Travis but believes his problems are too severe for them to
adopt him. (Legal guardianship is an arrangement under which
the law allows a person who is not the child’s adoptive parent to
take responsibility for the daily care and financial management of
the minor child.)
A recurring question in kinship care is whether relatives car-
ing for children are entitled to the same financial and other sup-
ports as nonrelative foster parents, or whether relatives should in-
stead care for “their own” without financial assistance.
Stepparent Adoption
Although the exact numbers are not known, stepparent adoption
is considered the most common type of adoption in the United
States. In order for a stepparent to legally adopt a child, the
child’s birthparent (who is not living in the home) must consent
to the adoption or a judge must terminate his/her parental rights.
Depending on the state and/or the circumstances, a judge
may order a home study and criminal and child abuse back-
ground checks. If the child is over a certain age (for example, ten,
twelve, or fourteen, depending on state requirements), the child
must also consent to the adoption. In many cases, the child will
want to (and be able to) continue to have a relationship with the
biological parent.
Possible Emotional and Health Problems
No one knows how many adopted children develop special prob-
lems, but those who do often end up in the spotlight. For exam-
ple, if an adopted teen drinks, drives, and causes an accident, a
Possible Emotional and Health Problems
15

newspaper headline may say, “Adopted Youth Causes Accident.”
A similar mishap caused by the parents’ birth child is unlikely to
say, “Birth Child Causes Accident.” Thus, the expectation of some
that adopted persons are either less or more responsible for their
own actions because they are adopted may compound any exist-
ing issues the child may have.
Reactive Attachment Disorder
One condition in adopted children that can be difficult to diag-
nose and treat is reactive attachment disorder (RAD). Attachment
is a child’s emotional connection to his primary caregivers. If a
consistent figure meets a baby or young child’s needs when he
cries, he develops a secure attachment, which leads to a feeling of
well-being. Many people believe that a child’s future emotional
health, including his ability to form healthy relationships, has its
basis in the quality of attachment during the child’s first one or
two years. (Some people use the word bonding to describe this
process.)
RAD is a psychological diagnosis describing children who,
on a continuum of seriousness, have not bonded to their current
caregivers. (Students of this condition will find a more thorough
description in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Dis-
orders (the DSM-IV), published by the American Psychiatric As-
sociation.) Abuse and/or neglect, alcohol and drug exposure in
utero, illness or separation from the primary caregiver—all break
attachments and may cause the child to lose (or never develop)
the ability to trust, which is the underlying cause of attachment
problems.
Although any child, such as a premature infant placed in an
incubator, can develop attachment difficulties, some people expect
to see this condition in children adopted at an older age. And yet,
not all “special needs” children develop RAD, especially if they
have not moved from place to place and have bonded to a care-
giver, such as a foster mother or father. In the preface to the second
volume of his trilogy on attachment and loss, John Bowlby writes,
“What is believed to be essential for mental health is that the in-
fant and young child should experience a warm, intimate and con-
tinuous relationship with his mother (or permanent mother-sub-
stitute) in which both find satisfaction and enjoyment.”
In 1988 a county department of social services placed David,
age eight, for adoption with Bill and Lisa Burns. Bill is an attor-
16
Background and History

ney; Lisa is a registered nurse. The couple had three almost-
grown birth children and an eleven-year-old daughter named
Carrie, who was adopted as a six-year-old. Carrie was doing well,
and the family believed they had “room for one more.” The ink
on this family’s home study had barely dried when the county
asked Bill and Lisa if they would consider adopting David. The
social worker suggested that David might be a wonderful addi-
tion to the family, and a psychologist had found him to be highly
intelligent.
David had a troubled background. When he was six, his
birth mother, an alcoholic with drug problems, had threatened to
take him to the social services building and leave him there; on
another occasion, she did. David had witnessed domestic vio-
lence, having seen his birth mother’s boyfriend pull a knife on her
husband (not David’s father). When David was two, a policeman
had found him, teddy bear in hand, running away from home.
Furthermore, he had been shuttled back and forth between his
birth mother in Texas and his grandmother in Oklahoma. Al-
though the social worker also mentioned the possibility of sexual
abuse in David’s background, as well as some of the symptoms of
RAD, she hoped a loving home could help David overcome these
difficulties.
For some reason unknown to them, Bill and Lisa did not re-
ceive any financial help for the overwhelming psychological
problems that developed after David’s formal adoption. With two
older children in college and one a senior in high school, Bill and
Lisa could not afford $6,000 a month (the cost at the time) to
maintain David in a residential treatment center for children with
attachment problems. By age seventeen, David, who at one time
seemed to have the potential for a promising future, had no
friends, did not work or go to school, and spent most of his time
watching television.
Adoption professionals who place older children know the
symptoms of RAD. They include some or all of the following:
—Crazy lying (lying about the obvious)
—Stealing
—Preoccupation with fire
—Cruelty to animals
Possible Emotional and Health Problems
17

—Absence of conscience or poor conscience development
—Unusual food habits, which may include gorging, stealing
food, hoarding food, getting up at night to eat, or refusing
to eat
—Lack of impulse control
—Abnormal speech patterns
—Learning problems
—Superficially charming behaviors but lack of real friends
—Overabundance of affection with strangers and/or lack of
affection with parents
David displayed some of the above behaviors. His parents
were afraid to leave the house for fear they would come back to a
pile of rubble; David loved to burn incense and was addicted to
cigarettes.
Ten years later, David shows increased developmental matu-
rity, conscience development, and attachment. He lives inde-
pendently with an occasional “infusion” of financial help from
his parents, has a job working with developmentally delayed
adults, has a few friends, and is considering going to a commu-
nity college to become a nurse. Although he has never said “I love
you” to his adoptive parents, he solicits their advice and often
thanks them for their help. In spite of some misgivings along the
way, David’s parents now consider his adoption a success.
Members of the adoption community generally support the
concepts of bonding and attachment, but some professionals are
skeptical about current views on the subject. Psychology profes-
sor Diane E. Eyer (1992) says that people use the term bonding to
suggest that parents can mold children like clay. Not so, says
Eyer. There are too many other intervening factors, such as the in-
fluence of genetics, the child’s unique temperament, and other
people in his world.
Even though the majority of those in the community do sup-
port the concepts of bonding and attachment, much is still un-
known, including how to best treat RAD. Specialized therapists
often attempt to treat the assumed absence of attachment with
18
Background and History

various types of holding therapies. Therapy of some kind is al-
most always essential to the healing process for children who
have experienced neglect and abuse, but it must be therapy spe-
cific to the problems and by a therapist familiar with adoption.
(For an excellent description of the types of therapy that have
helped adopted children, see chapter 10 in Adopting the Hurt
Child: Hope for Families with Special Needs Kids (1995), by Gregory
C. Keck and Regina Kupecky.
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD)
No level of alcohol consumption is safe during pregnancy. Fetal
alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is an umbrella term used to de-
scribe a range of conditions that may affect a person whose birth
mother drank alcohol at any time during her pregnancy. The ef-
fects are irreversible and may include physical changes, mental or
behavioral difficulties, and learning disabilities. Conditions
under the umbrella are fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), alcohol-re-
lated neurodevelopmental disorder (ARND), and alcohol-related
birth defects (ARBD). Some people still use an older term, fetal al-
cohol effects (FAE), but the Institute of Medicine replaced that
term with FASD in 1996.
A diagnosis of FAS, which was first described as a syndrome
in the early 1970s in the United States, is based on (1) abnormal
facial features, (2) growth deficiencies, and (3) central nervous
system difficulties. Children may have difficulties in school and
in getting along with other people. Those affected may also have
problems with vision and/or hearing, communicating, paying at-
tention, remembering, and learning. Children with FAS tend not
to put together cause and effect, which makes taking care of them
frustrating for their caregivers. As they become teenagers and
older, they are at risk for noncompletion of their education, un-
employment, psychiatric disturbances, and even criminal behav-
ior. Protective factors include early diagnosis and interventions as
well as a stable family life.
A child whose birth mother drank alcohol during her preg-
nancy may have some, but not all, of the clinical signs of fetal al-
cohol syndrome. The terms ARND (alcohol-related neurodevel-
opmental disorder) and ARBD (alcohol-related birth defects)
refer to less serious levels of involvement. Experts believe these
disorders occur three times as often as FAS.
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is a potential problem in
Possible Emotional and Health Problems
19

children adopted from anywhere in the world, including the
United States. If a birth mother does not drink alcohol during
pregnancy, the condition is entirely preventable.
HIV/AIDS
HIV (the human immunodeficiency virus) progressively dam-
ages the body’s ability to protect itself from disease organisms. It
is transmitted by sexual contact or the sharing of needles. AIDS
(acquired immune deficiency syndrome) is the chronic condition
the virus causes. Without treatment, pregnant women may trans-
mit the virus to their babies.
Since the introduction of new antiviral therapies in the mid-
1990s, the death rate (and transmission rate to newborns) from
HIV/AIDS in the United States has greatly decreased. Unfortu-
nately this is not true in some other parts of the world, such as
Africa.
Currently in the United States if a pregnant woman’s infec-
tion is identified and she receives up-to-date treatment, the trans-
mission rate of the virus to her baby is less than 2 percent. In
mothers who do not receive treatment, approximately 28 percent
of babies will be infected.
Carol Salbenblatt, RN, MS, is the HIV program coordinator
at the Children’s Hospital in Denver, Colorado (interview with
the author, November 23, 2005). She says that if a young woman
in the United States has HIV infection and gets “state-of-the-art”
treatment that she complies with, she may live a relatively normal
life span (similar to a person with diabetes). Two factors, how-
ever, may change this optimistic outlook: (1) if the disease for
some reason progresses quickly and aggressively, and (2) if a per-
son continues to use intravenous drugs, does not take her med-
ication, and/or has multiple sexual partners.
In these situations (or in the case of a parent with a terminal
illness from any cause), a guardianship arrangement can be im-
portant. Every state allows the transfer of guardianship authority
from a parent to another adult. A potential problem is that there
are no guarantees. If challenged by another person with legal
standing, the sick person’s wishes may not stand up in court.
A relatively new type of legal arrangement is more friendly
to birth parents with HIV infection, another disability, or a termi-
nal illness. In standby guardianship, a person the parent chooses
“stands by” until, or if, needed. This type of legal guardianship
20
Background and History

allows the parent to give testimony in court as to the child’s best
interests as she knows them. The parent can then feel comfortable
that her chosen plan will actually happen—if she becomes inca-
pacitated.
Methamphetamine
Methamphetamine is a relatively new substance on the substance
abuse scene. “Meth,” as it is usually called, is an addictive central
nervous system stimulant, most often available as a powder that
dissolves in water. Sometimes it comes in clear crystals, hence the
name “crystal meth.” It is also referred to as “ice,” “speed,”
“crank,” “biker’s coffee,” and “chalk.”
Although methamphetamine can have legitimate medical
uses, it is the illegal use that worries agencies of the federal gov-
ernment, local governments, and child welfare workers. At the
ninth hearing (July 26, 2005) on methamphetamine abuse held by
the federal government’s Subcommittee on Criminal Justice,
Drug Policy, and Human Resources, chairman Mark Souder said,
“Meth is one of the most powerful and dangerous drugs avail-
able, and one of the easiest to make. It can be ‘cooked’ using com-
mon household or agricultural chemicals and simple cold medi-
cines, following recipes easily available on the Internet. The drug
is highly addictive and has multiple side effects, including psy-
chotic behavior, physical deterioration, and brain damage. Death
by overdose is a significant risk.”
It doesn’t take a big leap, then, to realize that when parents
spend their time getting high, struggling to recover from the
“crash” (sometimes by using alcohol or other drugs), they may
neglect and/or abuse their children. In fact, having children in
the same house where meth is being made constitutes abuse be-
cause of the potential harm to the children.
Souder went on to tell about two reports that detailed the ef-
fect meth abuse is having on law enforcement agencies and child
welfare services. “Criminal Effect of Meth on Communities” and
“The Impact of Meth on Children: Out of Home Placement” came
from surveys of hundreds of counties across the country. The sur-
veys showed that children are increasingly becoming the primary
victims of methamphetamine abuse. Forty percent of child wel-
fare agencies reported an increase in “out of home placement be-
cause of meth in the past year.” This abuse included physical and
mental trauma, as well as sexual abuse. Sixty-nine percent of
Possible Emotional and Health Problems
21

county social service agencies reported that they had to provide
additional training for staff to be able to address the specialized
needs of children affected.
At the same hearing, Nancy K. Young, PhD, director of the
National Center on Substance Abuse and Child Welfare and di-
rector of Children and Family Futures, observed that although
the population of children in out-of-home care had actually de-
creased since 1999, the percentage of children in foster care be-
cause of their parents’ substance abuse had probably increased.
Anecdotal estimates ranged from 40 to 80 percent. In its report to
Congress in 1999, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices (DHHS) estimated that between one-third and two-thirds of
children in the U.S. child welfare system are affected by substance
abuse disorders.
Health Problems That May Occur in 
Children Adopted Internationally
As a result of poor economic conditions, children from develop-
ing countries may have health problems when they first arrive in
the United States. Dr. Dana Johnson started the first International
Adoption Clinic at the University of Minnesota in 1986. Since
then, many international adoption clinics have sprung up across
the country. Parents, with the help of health professionals, can
usually correct or mitigate the presenting problems with im-
proved nutrition and health care. Among the most common
health issues are intestinal parasites, earlier exposure to tubercu-
losis, hepatitis B or C, dental caries, lactose intolerance, incom-
plete immunizations, parasitic conditions such as scabies or lice,
emotional or behavioral problems, and visual or hearing impair-
ments. A standard screening protocol usually includes a review
of immunizations, a complete blood count and urinalysis, and
screening tests for hepatitis B and C, HIV, intestinal parasites, tu-
berculosis, and syphilis.
Thoa is a fourteen-month-old girl adopted from Vietnam. On
the way home in the plane, Thoa had a seizure, perhaps from a
high fever. At the same time, she had chicken pox, impetigo,
eczema, a runny nose, a cough, an ear infection, and conjunctivitis.
On arrival in the United States, she seemed slow in her develop-
ment. Doctors did routine screening tests, which were all normal.
It is still too early to tell if Thoa’s developmental delays are the tem-
porary results of orphanage life, or if her delays will be permanent.
22
Background and History

Laws and Policies
Laws and policies are important parts of the adoption picture.
Those who do not abide by the rules of a particular state may end
up with a failed adoption and much heartache. Although state
laws govern most adoption policies, certain procedures are com-
mon to most adoptions. These procedures can be looked at from
two different perspectives—that of the birth parents, and that of
the adoptive parents.
For Birth Parents
Consent.
The first step in any adoption is the birth parents’
written consent. Parental rights must be terminated (or
relinquished) before finalization of an adoption. This part of the
process may be done before the adoptive parents meet their new
child. The Consent for Adoption, sometimes called the Petition for
Parental Termination or Relinquishment, must be signed before a
judge, notary public, or other witnesses. Details vary from state to
state. Some state laws specify that seventy-two hours must pass
before consent is given. States also vary as to whether or not
persons under the age of eighteen may give consent to an
adoption without their parents’ knowledge or approval. The
purpose of these laws is to protect birth parents’ rights. Since 1972,
unmarried fathers must also give consent to an adoption;
disregard for a father’s rights can cause disaster for the adoptive
parents. If a known father’s name is on the child’s birth certificate,
the father will have to sign a consent form. A common way of
trying to find an unknown birth father (if his consent is required
by law) is to place a notice in the newspaper. A birth father has
parental rights even if he is prison, is not married to the child’s
mother, or is married to someone else.
Exceptions to the above are circumstances in which a court
terminates parental rights because of neglect, abuse, abandon-
ment, mental illness, or other conditions making the birth parents
unfit. Termination of parental rights is a long and involved court
process in which the petitioning party (usually the social service
agency that has custody of the child) has the burden of proving
the birth parents unfit.
Consent Revocation.
When may a birth parent “break a promise”
and revoke his or her consent to the adoption? Certainly if they
Laws and Policies
23

have signed nothing, birth parents have every right to change
their minds. State laws differ, but a birth parent may always
revoke his or her consent if it was obtained by fraud or under
duress. Most states allow the revoking of consent only with court
approval. A few states allow birth parents to withdraw consent
(for any reason) before the judge issues the final decree of
adoption. Courts try to balance the interests of all triad members
and usually rule in favor of the “best interests of the child”
combined with birth parents’ rights.
Available Resources.
As part of making the difficult decision that
may result in an adoption plan, birth parents need counseling.
Some states require a certain number of hours of birth parent
counseling; other states “suggest” an amount. Adoption agencies
often prefer ten or twelve hours of counseling, but usually it is up
to an individual judge or magistrate to decide how much is
acceptable.
The cost of birth parent counseling is most often paid by the
adoptive parents whether or not the birth parents decide to place
their child for adoption. The work should be done (before and
after the child’s birth) by a knowledgeable, impartial birth parent
counselor. When the birth parents believe they have had enough
counseling and are ready to go to court, a relinquishment hearing
is scheduled. The judge will usually ask the birth mother if she
feels she has been coerced into making her decision and/or if she
has received enough counseling to help her make an informed
decision. In states where there is a requirement for birth parent
counseling, a birth father involved in the process must also be of-
fered counseling.
For Adoptive Parents
Placement.
Placement day is an important date in the life of an
adopted child, especially if he or she remembers that day. Some
families celebrate this date as an adoption birthday because it is
the true beginning of the adoption. An agency may make
arrangements for a placement, or in the case of an independent
adoption, birth parents or an attorney may arrange the placement
date—the day the child moves in to stay. A court must then
approve the placement, often with the recommendation of a
social service agency.
24
Background and History

Petition to Adopt and Adoption Hearings.
One of the tasks of
prospective adoptive parents is to file paperwork, such as proof
of marriage, a financial statement, the results of physical
examinations, letters of reference, and fingerprint cards. Agency
policy rather than state law usually sets standards of placement.
A home study is the standard proof that a family is suitable for a
particular child or category of children.
After the child is placed in a home, the adoptive parents file
a Petition to Adopt and may go to court for a preliminary or “in-
terlocutory” hearing, at which time the judge gives his or her con-
sent to the placement. At the final hearing, usually six months to
a year from the date of placement, the judge issues the Final De-
cree of Adoption. The judge has determined that the adoption is
in the child’s best interests based on recommendations of the
guardian ad litem (the court-appointed attorney for the child)
and the social service agency involved.
Along with the adoptive parents, the child is usually pres-
ent in court, especially if he or she needs to consent to the adop-
tion. (In most states a child of age twelve or older must add his
or her consent.) The Final Decree of Adoption gives children
new legal parents, a new last name, and a new birth certificate.
At this time adoption records may be sealed or not sealed, ac-
cording to state law.
Postadoption Services.
Even after adoptive families finalize an
adoption, they are likely to need help in the form of support
groups and/or possible referrals to special services and
therapists. In recognition of the fact that adoption is a lifelong
process, some states have begun to fund such services for parents
and their children. One of the purposes of the Promoting Safe and
Stable Families Amendments of 2001 was to admit to the need for
postadoption services.
Costs of Adoption.
Citing the average cost of an adoption is
impossible because costs range from virtually nothing to more
than $30,000. State or county agencies will charge the lowest fees
for the adoption of a waiting child, who may also receive a
monthly government subsidy. The main thing for adoptive
parents to keep in mind is that judges often look carefully at costs
to make sure adoptive parents are paying only for services rendered
Laws and Policies
25

and are not “buying” a baby. Typically, adoptive parents of
infants do pay for birth parent medical expenses related to the
pregnancy and delivery, for authorized living expenses, and for
birth parent counseling, attorneys’ fees, and agency fees. A
special report in the February 2006 issue of the magazine Adoptive
Families analyzes costs of various types of adoptions and how
some families have dealt with these costs.
The Attorney’s Role
The role of the attorney varies with the type of adoption. In an
independent adoption, an attorney may be the major player. He
or she may have several roles, not only of handling legal details
but also of dealing with financial and social matters. In fact, be-
cause of the possibility of a conflict of interest, a single adoption
may have two attorneys involved, one representing the birth
parents and the other representing the adoptive parents. On the
other end of the scale, some adoptions, such as special needs
adoptions through an agency, may not require an attorney. The
agency may be able to prepare all of the forms and documents
needed for court.
Probably the most important thing for clients to know is that
not all attorneys are knowledgeable about adoption law; adop-
tive parents who need suggestions about a competent attorney
can contact an adoptive parent support group, the local bar asso-
ciation, or the American Academy of Adoption Attorneys.
Black-Market Adoptions
Not a sanctioned type of adoption, black-market adoption occurs
when birth parents or intermediaries of some kind profit illegally
from the adoption. One method used to control black-market
adoption is to have adoptive parents and all other parties involved
report to the court any payments made or received. Financial help
given to birth parents should be for pregnancy-related expenses
and nothing else. Any other monies given to birth parents could
be construed as “baby buying” or “baby brokering.”
Disruption and Dissolution
If a child is placed for adoption but proper legal proceedings have
not been followed, a birth parent or other intervener may chal-
26
Background and History

lenge the adoptive placement. The objecting person could be a
birth father whose rights were ignored. Or, if a supervising case-
worker discovers a child is not being properly cared for in the
adoptive home, he or she could remove the child. Both are exam-
ples of involuntary disruption.
In a voluntary disruption, the child may not want to leave
the home, but his behaviors may be so disturbing to the adoptive
parents that they ask to have the child removed.
Joan and Jim Welch had an approved home study and, in
their search for a child, had “fallen in love” with the picture of
thirteen-year-old Emily on the Internet. A social worker arranged
to bring Emily along with Joel, another thirteen-year-old from
Nevada, to an Adoption Exchange picnic in Colorado. At the pic-
nic, the Welches, a childless couple in their mid-thirties, got ac-
quainted with both of the children. As caring people, the Welches
could not bear the idea of adopting one child without the other;
eventually both Emily and Joel came to live with them.
After five months, Emily, who expressed overwhelming
homesickness for birth relatives in Nevada, went back to her for-
mer foster home. Although the children and parents had received
family counseling and support from their agency, the Welches be-
lieved their marriage was about to collapse from the strain of
Emily’s lying, stealing, and fighting. Three months after Emily
left, the Welches, in cooperation with the various agencies,
arranged for Joel to return to his home state. He had run away
several times after the Welches had put limits on his activities;
they decided they couldn’t parent this child either.
Involuntary and voluntary disruptions are those that take
place in the first six months to a year before the adoption is final-
ized. Although most adoptive placements are successful and go
on to finalization, research has shown that for older children the
disruption rate is between 8 and 16 percent.
Dissolution is the term used for an adoption that dissolves after
it is finalized. Dissolution is a difficult court process; the adoptive
parents relinquish the child after they have had enough counseling
to satisfy themselves and/or the court. Probably the most common
cause of a dissolution is the parents’ claim that the agency deliber-
ately deceived them as to the health or background of the child. For
this reason, most agencies give the prospective parents before
placement all of the information known about the child. Some
agencies even record this “presentation.” Experts estimate that 3 to
6 percent of special needs adoptions result in dissolution. No
Laws and Policies
27

agency can foresee the future, and neither can the adoptive parents,
which is why a strong commitment to the child is essential.
Disruption or dissolution can be devastating to all the parties
involved. Most adoption professionals do anything they can to
avoid it.
Funding, Financial Assistance, and Other Aid for
Adoptive Parents
In addition to the obvious benefits of adoption, financial re-
sources are sometimes available to help with adoption costs.
These include loans, grants, adoption tax credits, subsidies, and
employer-provided benefits.
For the year 2005, some adoptive parents were able to take a
tax credit of up to $10,630 for qualifying expenses paid to adopt
an eligible child. Internal Revenue Service “Qualified Adoption
Expenses,” Publication 8839, gives details at www.irs.gov/
pub/irs-pdf.
In addition, children with special needs may be eligible for a
monthly subsidy. The Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act
of 1980 was the first federal law to make subsidies (“adoption as-
sistance”) available for children adopted from the foster care sys-
tem. The two major funding sources of adoption assistance are (1)
the Federal title IV-E program under the Social Security Act, and
(2) various state subsidy programs. Those interested will find in-
formation on all of the above at the Child Welfare Information
Gateway website, http://www.childwelfare.gov.
Employers may also provide benefits, some financial and
some “other.” Over the years, the number of employers willing to
offer benefits to adoptive parents has grown. A survey by Hewitt
Associates in 1990 found that 12 percent of the employers sur-
veyed offered some type of adoption benefits. At the time of the
2004 Hewitt survey, the number had increased to 39 percent. The
average maximum reimbursement was $3,879 for adoption-re-
lated expenses.
Employers may offer financial assistance to adoptive parents
in the form of a “lump sum” reimbursement for costs related to
the child’s adoption. Or, employees may get reimbursed for spe-
cific expenses such as the home study.
Other possible benefits from employers include information
such as referrals to support groups, adoption specialists, and li-
28
Background and History

censed agencies, to name a few. A third possible employee bene-
fit is parental leave. Federal law requires employers with fifty or
more employees to offer mothers and fathers up to twelve weeks
of unpaid leave after the birth or adoption of a child. Also, em-
ployees must be able to return to the same job (or an equivalent
position) with the same health benefits. Those interested in learn-
ing more about the Family and Medical Leave Act can find this
information at http://www.dol.gov/esa/whd/fmla.
Other Information of Interest
Available Resources
Similar to birth parents, adoptive parents need advice, education,
and support. For couples who have experienced infertility, RE-
SOLVE, Inc., a national organization begun in 1974 by Barbara
Eck Menning, may be helpful. RESOLVE members are more than
15,000 couples dealing with infertility problems. Grieving and re-
solving infertility issues are important so that adoptive parents
and their adopted children can develop a sense of entitlement, the
feeling that each belongs with the other.
Education is another enormously important part of prepar-
ing all prospective parents for adoption. In many ways parent-
ing an adopted child is the same as parenting any child. There
are, however, significant differences. Acknowledgment of differ-
ences is important. Similarities are obvious—all babies need to
be fed, bathed, and changed; all older children need rules and
structure, as well as flexibility from their parents. All need un-
conditional love. To help with issues common to all parents,
first-timers may find parenting classes helpful. To help with the
differences, support groups and/or educational classes such as
those offered by agencies or groups of experienced adoptive par-
ents may be helpful. Common topics include the effects of phys-
ical, emotional, and sexual abuse and how to anticipate and deal
with the resulting behaviors; the use of psychological therapists;
attachment disorder and what do about it; parental expectations;
the importance of genetic influence; and how parents can take
care of themselves.
Groups of parents may support each other in informal ways.
An example is the friendship of the Trenton family with the Stan-
ley family. By most standards the Trentons are a large adoptive
Other Information of Interest
29

family; they have five children with special needs and would like
to add two more. Their friend Miriam Stanley is a single nurse
who had planned on adopting an infant with Down syndrome.
Instead, the agency offered Miriam eight-year-old Francesca, a
child with developmental delays from abuse she had suffered in
her birth family. When the two families began attending monthly
support group meetings at their agency, they discovered they
lived only a mile from each other. They now carpool to meetings
and have an occasional family picnic together. The Trentons have
a ten-year-old daughter named Melissa who has a hard time get-
ting along with peers, but she and Francesca have become
friends. All nine members of this informal support group have
helped families new to the adoption process, and the three par-
ents have spoken at the agency training sessions about their
adoption experiences.
Assisted Reproductive Technologies
Before 1978, when the first “test-tube baby” was born by in vitro
fertilization, couples with fertility problems had two choices: re-
main childless, or adopt. Today’s infertile couples face a confus-
ing array of choices—too many choices, some say. These “solu-
tions” may cause other problems—moral questions and ethical
dilemmas, as well as related adoption issues.
In the most common option, in vitro fertilization (IVF), ova
and sperm from the couple, who may have a problem such as
blockage in the woman’s fallopian tubes, meet in a laboratory
dish. When fertilization occurs, the embryos are placed in the
woman’s uterus. An advancement in the treatment of male infer-
tility is intracytoplasmic sperm injection. This procedure aims to
place one sperm in the right place in the egg for optimal growth
of the embryo, which is then placed in the woman’s uterus.
Another variation is gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT), in
which the woman’s eggs are combined with the husband’s
sperm, then surgically injected into the fallopian tubes. If fertil-
ization occurs, it will happen inside the woman’s body.
ZIFT stands for zygote intrafallopian transfer. In this proce-
dure the eggs and sperm are mixed in the laboratory, and after
fertilization occurs, the doctor places the embryo in the fallopian
tubes.
In many cases, one (or both) of the prospective parents will
not be the child’s biological parent. If the husband is infertile,
30
Background and History

sperm donation (referred to as artificial insemination through a
donor, or AID), may solve the problem. A single woman or a
woman in a lesbian relationship may choose this option. Most
commonly, the sperm donor is not known to the parents. Simi-
larly, if the wife is infertile because she no longer produces viable
eggs, a female donor may provide the eggs. If the procedure is
successful, the wife becomes the baby’s birth mother but is not
the biological mother.
Another procedure offers embryos for “adoption.” Premade
frozen embryos result from a mixture of donated eggs and sperm.
When a woman is unable to produce a child or to carry a
baby to term, the couple may pursue surrogacy, in which another
woman is selected to receive the husband’s sperm (or the
mother’s fertilized egg), carry the baby, and then at birth, allow
the infertile couple to adopt the baby. This process may cause
problems, as in the famous 1986–1987 “Baby M” case, in which
the surrogate mother, Mary Beth Whitehead, decided she wanted
to keep the child she had given birth to. After a long court battle,
Mary Beth Whitehead lost her parental rights. A year later, how-
ever, the court granted her visitation rights.
Samantha’s single mother worried about how to tell five-
year-old Samantha that she had been conceived by donor insem-
ination. The longer she waited, the harder the task seemed, so
Samantha’s mother said nothing. “Where’s your daddy?” asked
Sam’s friend one day when she visited.  (There were no pictures
of Sam’s daddy on the mantle.) “I never had a daddy,” said
Samantha. “Yes, you did,” said her friend. “Everyone has a
daddy.” Tears rolled down Sam’s cheeks. “No, I don’t.” Saman-
tha’s mother might have gotten some help with the task of ex-
plaining the scientific facts about conception to her daughter. In-
stead, her silence caused Samantha much emotional pain. One
helpful book is Choosing Assisted Reproduction: Social, Emotional,
and Ethical Considerations, by Susan Lewis Cooper and Ellen Sara-
sohn Glazer (1998).
Positive Adoption Language
In 1972, Marietta Spencer of the Children’s Home Society of
Minnesota brought up the importance of using positive and
constructive expressions when discussing adoption. Over the
years, various types of “politically correct” terminology have
come and gone. The bottom line remains the same: positive
Other Information of Interest
31

adoption language shows respect for the joining of persons in a
family by a legal process. Indifference to language can be irri-
tating at best and demeaning at worst. For example, the ab-
sence of respect for the adoption process could cause birth 
parents to avoid making an adoption plan for their child when
adoption might be in the best interests of the child and the 
parents.
This book takes its cues from adoption professionals cur-
rently at work in adoption. While it is not possible to cover every
error here, it is possible to highlight some outstanding stereo-
typed responses and misusages (i.e., negative, thoughtless, or un-
constructive adoption language).
The word adoptee may seem harmless, similar to the word di-
vorcee used to describe a divorced person. However, the phrase
adopted person is preferable because adoption does not define a
person’s entire being.
In the past, people might have said that a birth mother “gave
up” her child for adoption, or she “gave away” her child. Pre-
ferred language includes the terms making a plan for a child and
choosing or deciding on adoption, suggesting that the well-being of
the child is of the utmost importance. Similarly, the terms adopted
out or put up for adoption take us back to the Orphan Train Era, a
time in which children were “put up” on the platform at the train
station to be chosen by adoptive families. The terms natural par-
ents and real parents are objectionable because all parents are “nat-
ural” and “real.” The terms birth parents, first parents, or genetic
parents are preferable.
Finally, it is important to remember that those introducing or
discussing an adopted person need not mention “adoption” any
more than they would say, “This is Mrs. Miller’s birth child.”
Adopt-A-What?
Adopt-A-Pet, Adopt-A-Tree, Adopt-A-Whale, Adopt-A-High-
way, Adopt-A-Park, Adopt-A-Bus Stop—the list goes on. As
noble as these causes seem, the image they project may be con-
fusing to adopted children. For example, if a person adopts a pet
and discovers after a week or so that the animal bites, it can be
returned for another. Will the same thing happen to me? Also, in
the aforementioned programs, the “adopted” object is not taken
32
Background and History

home and cared for; in most cases it exists for the person who
adopted it only on a piece of paper. Adoption activists argue
that Adopt-A-Whatever media campaigns trivialize the serious
and life-changing nature of the adoption of a child.
Adoption Month
Every year adoption organizations invite those with adoption
connections to celebrate November as Adoption Month. During
this time, posters feature waiting children from the United
States with some of these children participating in national
media events. The goals of Adoption Month are to increase the
public’s awareness of adoption, to increase positive media cov-
erage of adoption, and to find more permanent homes for wait-
ing children.
Adult Adoption
Adoption of a person over the age of eighteen is not common but
is possible in some states. The prospective adoptive parents and
the adult person must both consent. One of the more common
reasons for such an adoption is that a person has reached the age
of eighteen without being eligible for adoption. That person may
now want his foster parents to adopt him. Another reason is to es-
tablish legal inheritance rights. Those interested should find out
the adoption laws in their state.
Summary
Adoption is a many-faceted entity. Whatever happens in an adop-
tion affects three groups—the birth parents, the adoptive parents,
and the children. All of these parties have something to gain, but
they share the issue of loss. Loss requires grieving, and grieving
takes time—in some cases, a lifetime.
In order to understand adoption, sorting it into various 
categories may help, but in reality categories overlap, and con-
fusion sometimes results. No matter how we approach it, adop-
tion is a sensitive topic touching the hearts and souls of all those
involved.
Summary
33

References and Further Reading
Ashe, Nancy. “Interstate Adoption: ICPC and ICAMA.” Accessed at
http://www.adopting.org/adoptions/interstate-adoption.html.
Ashe, Nancy. 2005. “Politically Correct Adoption Language, Part 3: Talk
the Talk.” Accessed at http://www.adopting.org/adoptions/politically-
correct-adoption-language–2,3.html.
Benet, Mary Katherine. 1976. The Politics of Adoption. New York: Free
Press.
Brodzinsky, David, M., and Marshall D. Schechter, eds. 1990. The Psy-
chology of Adoption. New York: Oxford University Press.
Child Welfare Information Gateway. 2004. “Adoption Assistance for
Children Adopted from Foster Care: A Factsheet for Families.” Accessed
at http://www.childwelfare.gov/pubs/f_subsid.cfm.
Child Welfare Information Gateway. 2004. “Impact of Adoption on
Adopted Persons: A Factsheet for Families.” Accessed at http://
www.childwelfare.gov/pubs/f_issues.cfm.
Child Welfare Information Gateway. 2005. State Statutes Series. “Standby
Guardianship.” 
Accessed 
at 
http://www.childwelfare.gov/
systemwide/laws_policies/statutes/guardianshipall.pdf.
Child Welfare Information Gateway and U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. 2005. “Post-Legal Services for Children with Special
Needs and Their Families.” Accessed at http://www.childwelfare.gov/
pubs/h_postlegal/index.cfm.
Committee on Government Reform, Subcommittee on Criminal Justice,
Drug Policy, and Human Resources. July 26, 2005. “Fighting Meth in
America’s Heartland: Assessing the Impact on Local Law Enforcement
and Child Welfare Agencies.” Accessed at http://reform.house.gov/
CJDPHR/Hearings/EventSingle.aspx?EventID=31114.
Cooper, Susan Lewis, and Ellen Sarasohn Glazer. Choosing Assisted Re-
production: Social, Emotional, and Ethical Considerations. 1998. Indianapolis:
Perspectives Press.
Evan P. Donaldson Adoption Institute. 2005. “International Adoption
Facts.” Accessed at http://www.adoptioninstitute.org/FactOverview/
international.html.
Eyer, Diane E. 1992. Mother-Infant Bonding: A Scientific Fiction. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Freundlich, M., and L. Wright. 2003. “Post-permanency Services.” Seat-
tle: Casey Family Programs. Accessed at http://www.childwelfare.gov/
pubs/h_postlegal/index.cfm.
34
Background and History

Frievalds, Susan. 2001. “A New International Treaty on Adoption.” Adop-
tive Families (January/February): 29–30.
Johnston, Patricia I. 1995. Adopting after Infertility. Indianapolis: Perspec-
tives Press.
Keck, Gregory C., and Regina Kupecky. 1995. Adopting the Hurt Child: Hope
for Families with Special Needs Kids. Colorado Springs, CO: Pinon Press.
Lindsay, Jean Warren. 1987. Open Adoption: A Caring Option. Buena Park,
CA: Morning Glory Press.
Melina, Lois R., and Sharon Kaplan Roszia. 1993. The Open Adoption Ex-
perience. New York: HarperCollins.
National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention. 2005. “Fetal Alcohol Informa-
tion.” Accessed at http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/fas/fasask.htm.
“News and Notes.” 2005. Adoptive Families (September/October): 12–13.
Powell, Dwight A. 2005. “The Challenges of Making Health Assessments
on Foreign Children.” Pediatric Directions 28, Columbus (OH) Children’s
Hospital: 2–5.
Salbenblatt, Carol. 2005. Children’s Hospital, Denver, CO. Discussion
with the author, November 23.
Silverstein, Deborah N., and Sharon Kaplan Rozsia. 1982. “Lifelong 
Issues in Adoption.” Accessed at http://library.adoption.com/parenting-
and-families/lifelong-issues-in-adoption/article256.
Sorosky, Arthur D., Annette Barron, and Reuben Pannor. 1978. The Adop-
tion Triangle: The Effects of the Sealed Record on Adoptees, Birth Parents, and
Adoptive Parents. Garden City, NY: Anchor Press/Doubleday.
Streissguth, Ann. 1997. Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: A Guide for Families and
Communities. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes Publishing.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Association, U.S. Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services. Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders
Center for Excellence. 2005. Accessed at http://fasdcenter.samhsa.gov.
U.S. Department of Justice. September 2000, revised. “The Immigration
of Adopted and Perspective Adoptive Children.” Glossary/Definitions,
35. Available at http://uscis.gov/graphics/lawsregs/handbook/
adopt_book.pdf.
Summary
35


2
Issues and Controversies
T
hat there are two sides (or more) to every question is no less
true in adoption. Many of the controversies of the past are still
providing material for debate. This chapter will examine some
of these controversies, including the following:
—Open or closed adoption? Which is best?
—What about open adoption records? Should records be
open or closed?
—Do transcultural and/or transracial adoptions “work”?
—Should single people be allowed to adopt?
—What about adoptions by same-sex couples?
—Should the government provide more or less regulation
of adoption?
—What about infant abandonment laws? Are they “safe
havens” or “baby dumps”?
—What about adoption itself? Is it valuable?
37

Open versus Closed Adoption
Those who like an argument along with a state of confusion will
enjoy the debate over closed versus open adoption. There is little
agreement (even among professionals) as to the meaning of these
terms. Although we can try to define the terms, in reality, each
adoption is unique and “open” or “closed” along a continuum.
Closed Adoption
In most closed or confidential adoptions, there is no sharing of
identifying information. In most open adoptions, children may
have ongoing contact (e.g., letters, e-mails, telephone calls, or vis-
its) with their birth family. The parties involved decide how often
they want to have contact. Within these two categories, many
variations of openness exist. Adoption professionals often call the
middle ground “semi-open” or “mediated” adoption. In this type
of adoption, a mediator, such as an attorney or agency case-
worker, relays information from one party to another.
Closed adoption, also called “confidential,” “traditional,”
“classic,” or “anonymous” adoption, became the norm in the
early part of the twentieth century because of increased regula-
tion of adoption that sought to protect single birth mothers from
the scorn of society. As E. Wayne Carp points out in Family Mat-
ters: Secrecy and Disclosure in the History of Adoption (1998), birth
mothers originally demanded secrecy. At the same time, married
women who couldn’t biologically produce offspring because of
infertility were also stigmatized.
In the twenty-first century, those who favor confidential
adoption argue that birth parents can have some choices, which
may include choosing the race or religion of the prospective
adoptive parents. Sometimes birth mothers in a closed adoption
can actually meet the prospective parents and have an exchange
of first names.
The proponents of closed or confidential adoption argue that
in some cases, birth parents may choose not to make an “adoption
plan” for their child unless they are promised confidentiality. An-
other argument for confidentiality is that openness may be dis-
ruptive to all members of the triad (or adoption circle) because it
impedes the ability of the birth parents to “move on” with their
lives. Also, ongoing contact may be disruptive to the daily rou-
38
Issues and Controversies

tines of the entire adoptive family. “Bonding” between the child
and the adoptive parents may be impaired; the child may feel
“caught in the middle” between two sets of parents.
Adults who were adopted as infants in a closed adoption
often feel the urge to search for their birth parents. They want to
“see someone who looks like me,” or they have a desire for ge-
netic information. One young adult woman of Mexican heritage
adopted by a Caucasian family often dreamed about a search
but eventually commented, “It would be like finding a needle in
a haystack.” Still, she wondered if her health plan would allow
her to have an early mammogram because “I have no medical
history.”
Most adopted persons would like to know their history, es-
pecially their medical history. And, according to the American
Academy of Pediatrics, there is ample evidence to suggest that
this need to seek one’s ancestry is an important one.
The search may affect all members of the adoption triad; con-
fidential adoption proponents sometimes give the following ar-
guments for their point of view. For example, the searcher may
worry about rejection by the birth parent or about rejection by his
or her adoptive parents, who may feel threatened by a search. The
adoptive parents may feel that they have done something wrong
in their child rearing. Otherwise, why would their child need to
search? (However, most experts agree that if the child is willing to
discuss a search with the parents who raised him, the parents
have probably done something right.) The birth parent who is
“found” will also probably deal with strong, mixed emotions.
Nevertheless, say most experts, the results of a search (even if the
adopted person experiences rejection) will likely have many pos-
itive aspects. One of these aspects is that the searcher usually ex-
periences satisfaction, a sense of accomplishment, and a feeling of
completeness.
Until recently, there was little documented evidence about
the results of searches. But results from a five-year study in Great
Britain showed that such reunions had generally positive out-
comes: 80 percent of adoptive parents were pleased about the
search, 97 percent of those adopted said that the reunion did not
change their feelings for their adoptive families, and 66 percent of
birth families and adoptive families became friends.
The Child Welfare Information Gateway (CWIG) offers many
resources for those interested in a search. “Searching for Birth Rel-
atives” is a factsheet that also provides a state-by-state listing of
Open versus Closed Adoption
39

local and national adult search and support groups in the United
States. CWIG provides referrals to adoption experts (psychother-
apists and other counselors) who specialize in working with
those touched by adoption. In addition, it has an online library of
more than 48,000 documents at www.childwelfare.gov/library.
More than 130 informational publications are also available at
www.childwelfare.gov/search/pubs_search.cfm. For further in-
formation on the Child Welfare Information Gateway, see the
complete listing under Resources in Chapter 8.
Open Adoption
Those in favor of open adoption also have many reasons for their
strongly held views. Brenda Romanchik, a proponent of open
adoption and a triad member herself, emphasizes that a truly
open adoption is one in which the adopted child is free to develop
an ongoing, one-on-one relationship with his or her birth family.
Beginning in the 1970s and 1980s, societal changes made
open adoption more popular. In the 1990s and onward, the open
adoption concept began to gain momentum. Reasons include the
increased empowerment of women (who usually bear the
“brunt” of an unintended pregnancy because they are carrying
the child), greater acceptance of single parenthood, more open-
ness about the subject of adoption in general, and more valuing
of diversity, including acceptance of different types of families.
Romanchik argues that although adoption professionals
may advise prospective adoptive parents to do “what they are
comfortable with,” the level of contact should not be about the
adults’ comfort level but about what is best for the child. Some
of the goals of open adoption are to minimize loss for the
adopted child, to help children resolve the losses they feel with
reality instead of fantasy, and to maintain and celebrate the
child’s connections.
On July 19, 1997, Metropolitan Adoption Services placed a
three-month-old girl, Jessie, in the home of Bob and Linda Mait-
land. Linda’s fourteen-year-old son by a previous marriage was
very involved in the adoption process. The birth parents chose
the Maitland family for Jessie when they decided they could not
raise her. Both birth parents, who are young and unmarried, have
visited Jessie at the Maitland home. So have the baby’s birth
grandparents on both sides and even one great-grandmother. The
Maitlands were willing to have these visits because they believe
40
Issues and Controversies

the contact will be good for Jessie, and because they want the
birth parents to feel as if they’ve had some “say” in Jessie’s life
plan.
Open adoption requires not only the respect of all parties for
each other but also clear communication. After some time, the
two families became such good friends that the grandparents
began to drop in often and unannounced, interrupting the adop-
tive family’s life. When Linda requested that visits be scheduled
at least three days in advance, the drop-in visits stopped.
Those who favor open adoption maintain that it benefits all
members of the triad (adoption circle). First, the child benefits. An
open adoption takes away much of the mystery, secrecy, and
taboos connected with a closed adoption. A child will have less
need for fantasies and, as an adult, will have no need to search. In
addition, adopted persons have the right to know their health his-
tory, which should be available in an open adoption. In addition
to medical knowledge, children need knowledge of their origins
to help with identity formation. Further, children need to know
that they weren’t “rejected,” but that their birth families care
about their welfare.
Second, proponents of open adoption say an open adoption
benefits the birth family. (Birth fathers are less likely than birth
mothers to be involved in ongoing contact, but this is not always
the case. There may also be interested grandparents, uncles,
aunts, or cousins.) Knowing where their children are and being
able to relate to them on an ongoing basis helps birth parents
“move on” with their lives. In fact, say proponents of open
adoption, unless birth parents have an opportunity for an open
adoption, many will choose not to make an adoption plan for
their child.
Finally, there are many reasons why adoptive parents benefit
from an open adoption. First, this is their child. (Research has
shown that birth parents do not pose a threat to a child’s legal
adoption. If the court has issued a decree of adoption, the birth
parents no longer have legal rights to the child.) Whatever bene-
fits the child also benefits the legal parents of that child. Adoptive
parents tend to feel more entitled when they receive “permission”
from birth parents to be the child’s “real” parents. Family rela-
tionships in general are more healthy when they exist in a climate
of openness rather than in one of secrecy. (For example, the adop-
tive parents do not have to fear an accidental meeting with the
birth parents at a restaurant or at the mall.)
Open versus Closed Adoption
41

Mimi is friends with a young couple who is in an open adop-
tion process through Lutheran Family Services. They are adopt-
ing a six-month-old girl. Mimi reports that the process is going
well even though the adoptive mother says she is sometimes tired
from being the arranger of visits, or, as she called herself, “social
chairwoman.”
In their book The Open Adoption Experience (1992), Lois
Melina and Sharon Roszia discuss a problem common to both
birth parents and adoptive parents: the feeling of loss of control.
Birth parents’ feelings of loss of control may come from an un-
planned pregnancy and the need to make a decision that will af-
fect them and their child forever. In addition, the birth parents
may feel that the adoptive family is offering an open adoption as
a “carrot” and will change their minds about contact later.
The adoptive parents may feel a loss of control because of
their inability to produce a birth child no matter how hard they
try, that they are being scrutinized by an agency and by birth par-
ents, that they may never be “chosen” by birth parents, and that
if chosen, they will have to proceed or perhaps never be chosen
again. They may prefer a closed adoption but feel that they
“must” choose openness.
However, a feeling of loss of control (although in a different
way) is also common in a confidential adoption. In a closed adop-
tion, birth parents must give up control to the agency and/or to
the adoptive parents. Adoptive parents may also feel a loss of
control because of an inability to connect with the child’s history
and lack of knowledge about the child’s origins.
Bruce Rappaport, PhD, executive director of the Independent
Adoption Center in Pleasant Hill, California, takes the concept of
open adoption to a new level. Writing in the September/October
2005 issue of Adoptive Families, Rappaport says he believes the
term “open adoption” is outmoded. Twenty years ago, a distinc-
tion between two controversial types of adoption (“closed” and
“open”) made sense. But now, Rappaport thinks there are few
truly closed adoptions in the United States, and that the trend to-
ward openness has even spread to international adoptions. He
proposes that members of the adoption community no longer
need to say “open adoption” but simply “adoption.”
Cooperative Adoption
Cooperative adoption (sometimes called “adoption with con-
42
Issues and Controversies

tact”) is a relatively new concept that involves postadoption con-
tact between adoptive families and certain members of the child’s
birth family. Adoption of older children from the foster care sys-
tem is different from infant adoption and may be confidential in
some ways, but older children are likely to know their last names
and may remember much about their birth parents. In some
cases, keeping healthy connections (after finalization) with birth
relatives may be beneficial to the children, to the birth parents,
and to the adoptive parents. For example, adoptive parents may
find that birth family members have valuable medical informa-
tion about the child. Arrangements can be informal or formal (as
in written contracts). The parties usually figure out what will
work and sign the contract before finalization.
Cooperative adoptions work well in many cases. In other
cases, problems may arise. If the agreement is not formalized
with a contract, adoptive parents could change their minds about
contact after finalization. More and more often today, adoption
professionals are looking to state legislatures to provide enforce-
ment for cooperative adoption arrangements.
In 1999 the Children’s Bureau of the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services convened a group of experts who
recommended certain key provisions in cooperative adoptions
that include the following:
—The birth parent cannot “set aside” a voluntary
relinquishment.
—The court will approve the agreement only if all parties,
including children twelve and older, agree. The court must
also agree that the arrangement is in the child’s best
interests. (A relationship with a birth parent may not be in a
child’s best interest in cases where there has been violence
directed at the child and/or when birth parents cannot
maintain appropriate boundaries with a child because of
emotional or mental illness.)
—Parties to the agreement may petition the court for
changes to the agreement or to terminate the agreement.
Fewer than half of the states currently have legislation al-
lowing written and enforceable cooperative adoptions. Some
states allow contact only with birth parents; other states may 
Open versus Closed Adoption
43

include grandparents, aunts, uncles, and siblings in the agree-
ment. Information on the states that have this legislation, as well
as information on laws related to cooperative adoption and access
to adoption records and mutual consent registries, is available
through the Child Welfare Information Gateway website:
http://childwelfare.gov/systemwide/laws_policies/statutes/
infoaccessapall.pdf.
An easy-sounding solution to the debate over closed vs. open
adoption would be to hope that all of the adults (although not all
birth mothers are legally adults) involved in an adoption would
be able to find an agency that works well for them and with them.
After all, the child has no choice.
In his book The Realities of Adoption (1997), Jerome Smith re-
ports on the results of his interviews with five adoption authori-
ties, several of whom had worked in the field of adoption when
closed adoptions were the norm. Most took a cautious but hope-
ful approach to open adoption while at the same time saying
there is no “one size fits all” in adoption. The goal is to find the
approach that works best for the child.
Neither closed adoption nor open adoption is without diffi-
culties, but in spite of some difficult issues that must be worked
out between the parties, open adoption seems to be in the ascen-
dancy; societal changes have forced the issue.
Open versus Closed Records
The debate over closed versus open adoption records is different
from the previous controversy over closed versus open adoption.
The issues, however, are related, and some overlapping occurs. For
example, the same reasons that made open adoption more popular
beginning in the 1970s also increased the pressure for open records.
“A Short Personal History of Adoption Reform,” by Mary
Anne Cohen (August 2000), begins with a look at Jean Paton and
her organization, Orphan Voyage. Beginning in the 1960s, Paton,
an adopted person and a social worker who had gotten access to
her own birth records, fought for open records for all adopted
adults. Florence Fisher, an adopted person from New York City,
founded the Adoptees’ Liberty Movement Association (ALMA)
in 1971 and wrote The Search for Anna Fisher (1986) about her own
search for her birth mother. In addition, the 1970s saw the publi-
cation of The Adoption Triangle: The Effects of the Sealed Record on
44
Issues and Controversies

Adoptees, Birth Parents, and Adoptive Parents (1978), written by
Arthur Sorosky, Annette Baran, and Reuben Pannor, who argued
that adoption laws should be changed to allow adult adopted
persons access to their own birth records. Also in his book Shared
Fate (1984), adoptive parent David Kirk supported the adopted
person’s right to know his or her heritage.
More individuals and organizations followed with similar
(though sometimes also differing) agendas. Members of the Con-
cerned United Birthparents (CUB, organized in 1976) testified at
early hearings for open records legislation. The American Adop-
tion Congress (AAC), begun in 1978, promised to be an umbrella
organization for adoption reform.
Bastard Nation, born on the Internet in 1996, has as its goal
to restore the right of adults adopted as children to access their
birth records. When asked if open records is the same as open
adoption, Bastard Nation says “no.” In an open adoption the
birth parents, adoptive parents, and the minor child have an on-
going relationship. But even in an open adoption, the adult
adopted person cannot necessarily access his or her birth and
adoption records. Access to open records means the adopted per-
son should be able to get his own legal documents, including the
original birth certificate and the adoption decree, and ultimately,
the right to contact birth parents if he chooses.
At the other end of the spectrum is the National Council for
Adoption (NCFA), based in Washington, DC. The stance of
NCFA, founded in 1980, is that states should have to use “ex-
traordinary” measures before records are opened to an adopted
person. In 2005 the organization, which believes strongly in
closed records, laid out (on its website) why it was upset with the
governor and legislators of the state of New Hampshire. NCFA’s
president and CEO, Thomas Atwood, scolded the state, which al-
lowed an open records law to become a reality. “The failure of
New Hampshire’s legislature and governor to keep the promises
made to birthparents and to preserve and protect adoption is an
egregious violation of trust and common decency,” he wrote. He
went on to state that the policy of open records would “deny
women and teens with crisis pregnancies the perfectly valid op-
tion of confidential adoption.”
The Massachusetts Adoption Act of 1851 initiated the first
adoption court records in the United States. A small start in the
regulation of adoption, the law required that judges investigate
the suitability of adoptive parents (the first “home studies”), and
Open versus Closed Records
45

that adoption should serve the best interests of the child. Closed
adoption records began with the Minnesota Act of 1917, the first
state statute to seal adoption records. Many states followed with
similar acts, and by the 1920s sealed adoption records were the
standard because of the dictates of society—out-of-wedlock
births were supposed to be hidden. Today, advocates of confi-
dentiality argue that the opening of birth records violates a prom-
ise made to birth parents and also to adoptive parents. Birth par-
ents may not have told others, such as the children they are
parenting, that they placed an earlier child for adoption. Adop-
tive parents may fear that the birth parents will “find” them and
interfere with their parenting.
Thinking for the adopted person, proponents of sealed adop-
tion records say that in the case of a “search and reunion,” the
adoptee may experience a devastating rejection. Also, many
adopted persons do not search and apparently feel satisfied with
any nonidentifying information they have received from the
agency or from their adoptive parents. (Nonidentifying informa-
tion is anything that would not help the adopted person in find-
ing the birth parents, such as date and time of birth. Identifying
information, such as a last name, is information that might enable
the adopted person to find his or her birth parents.)
Those in favor of strict confidentiality add that if the adopted
person desperately needs medical history in a life-threatening sit-
uation, he can petition the court to open the records. In “Whose
Rights Rule in Adoption?” Marianne Means (2000) writes that “il-
legitimacy may no longer be the devastating scandal it used to be,
but the decision to make it public should be the mother’s alone.”
She argues that “opening old records meant to be closed creates
trouble and turmoil.” She describes the conflict as “explosive on
many levels.”
Those who favor closed records in adoption offer mutual con-
sent registries (sometimes called “passive registries” or “mutual
consent voluntary registries”) as an alternative to openness. Jean
Paton’s book The Adopted Break Silence was published in 1954, just
a few years after she began operating the first voluntary registry
from her home. ALMAhad an early nongovernmental registry, and
in 1975 Emma Mae Villardi started the International Soundex Re-
union Registry in Carson City, Nevada. CUB also established a mu-
tual consent registry. Soon afterwards, some states began their own
registries. In 1981 Senator Carl Levin of Michigan introduced the
46
Issues and Controversies

idea of a voluntary national computerized clearinghouse in the
Adoption Identification Act. But the proposed federal registry did
not become law because of opposition from some members of the
public and groups such as the National Council for Adoption.
Registries provide another topic for disagreement. Although
the earlier registries helped many adoptees and their birth par-
ents find each other, the state registries that came later had prob-
lems. Mutual consent registries (in the states that have them) offer
central repositories where adopted persons, birth parents, and
sometimes birth siblings who have had involvement in an adop-
tion can indicate their willingness to disclose identifying infor-
mation. The registries are based on the concept that if birth par-
ents and adopted persons want to meet, both parties may have
the opportunity to do so by signing up with a state agency. Cur-
rently about half the states have some form of mutual consent
registry. Interested persons must register in the state in which the
adopted person was born or adopted. Some states employ “con-
fidential intermediaries,” who act as objective third parties be-
tween the adoptee and the birth parent. One problem with reg-
istries is that some states will not release the requested
information if the other party has died.
State legislatures began offering mutual consent registries to
adoptees eager to access their identifying information in the 
late 1970s. The American Adoption Congress (AAC) surveyed
twenty-one of these registries in 1993, 1996, and 1998. Based on
these contacts, the AAC reached the conclusion that the state reg-
istries (in general) are understaffed, underfunded, and under-
publicized. Budget restrictions are one of the causes.
Proponents of open records give many reasons for wanting
access to their records. Kate Burke, a former president of the
American Adoption Congress, summarized some of these rea-
sons in 2004. First, adoptees have a civil and human right to see
their own vital statistics and court records, just as every other cit-
izen has that right. They are not asking that adoption records be
open to the general public.
Second, opponents of open records argue that opening
adoption records breaches a contract made years earlier with the
birth parent or parents. Proponents of open records agree that
“civil codes” may have implied confidentiality at the time. But
times have changed, and confidentiality is not necessarily con-
sidered desirable in the present day. Even if a birth parent wants
Open versus Closed Records
47

confidentiality at the time of placement, the adopted person
should have the right to see records at a later date.
Third, even if only 2 percent of adopted persons search annu-
ally, it is a different 2 percent each year. Besides, say proponents of
open records, why should the minority (those who search) be de-
nied their rights just because they are in the minority?
Fourth, what if birth parents do not want their adopted chil-
dren to find them? Those in favor of open records say that gain-
ing access to vital records and court files is not the same as search-
ing for a birth parent. Although it is possible that gaining access
to records may lead to a search, a birth parent, if found, has the
right to say “no.” (A note in the May/June 2003 issue of Adoptive
Families says that nearly 15,000 adult adoptees asked for their
original birth records in the four states that had opened those
records in the preceding four years.) In addition, the Washington
Times reported that more than 80 percent of birth parents in Al-
abama, Delaware, Oregon, and Tennessee said it would be okay
for an adoptee to contact them.
Fifth, proponents of closed records say that open records
laws will encourage abortion. Burke points out an important dif-
ference: abortion is a decision not to have a child; adoption is a de-
cision not to parent a child. Informal studies have shown that one
reason a birth parent may choose abortion is because of “secret”
adoption practices.
Finally, proponents of closed records argue that the “threat”
of open records will keep birth parents from considering adop-
tion. This does not seem to be the case, however, as open adop-
tion and open records have gained in popularity in the past
twenty-five years.
Because of increased interest in open records, in 1980 the U.S.
Congress considered the Model State Adoption Act and Model
State Adoption Procedures. At the time, Congress was trying to
fulfill a mandate from Public Law 95–266, the Child Abuse Pre-
vention and Treatment and Adoption Opportunities Act of 1978.
The latter was the first statute to lay out a role for the federal gov-
ernment in adoption of children in foster care.
As proposed, the Model State Adoption Act would have
opened adoption records to all members of the adoption triad.
However, public comment, along with opposition from the Child
Welfare League of America, caused changes in the act. By 1981 the
renamed Model Act for Adoption of Children with Special Needs
became an entity that recommended changes for adoption of chil-
48
Issues and Controversies

dren with special needs without the force of law and without the
open records provisions.
In 1994, in spite of opposition from groups such as the Child
Welfare League of America, Concerned United Birthparents, and
the American Adoption Congress, the National Conference of
Commissioners on Uniform Laws decided that adoption records
should be sealed for ninety-nine years.
As E. Wayne Carp points out (1998), trends come and go. No
one can predict the future. Some birth parents and some adoptive
parents will undoubtedly work out agreements for openness, and
this group may join with adults who are products of donor in-
semination in demanding open records.
On the other hand, even some birth parents and some adop-
tive parents prefer secrecy. Perhaps, Carp writes, in the future,
adoption may again become illegal, birth mothers may again feel
stigmatized, and more infants may be available for adoption. In
such a new world, the trend may shift again. Will more members
of the adoption triad want secrecy in adoption records, or will
more adopted persons demand the right to see their vital statis-
tics and court reports? Only time will tell.
Do Transcultural and/or 
Transracial Adoptions Work?
Transracial (sometimes called interracial, transcultural, or
transethnic) adoption is the joining together of racially or ethni-
cally different parents and children in an adoptive family. These
terms may apply to adoptions within the United States, such as
when a Caucasian family adopts an African American child, or to
an international adoption, such as when Caucasian parents adopt
Asian children or children from Latin America. Technically, the
term could refer to African American parents adopting a Cau-
casian child, but this situation is uncommon.
Transracial adoptions were not common until after World
War II, when they began in significant numbers. Between 1946
and 1953, Americans adopted close to 6,000 children from Greece,
Germany, and Japan, countries that had suffered from war. As a
result of the Korean War, Harry Holt and his wife began a pro-
gram now called Holt International Children’s Services. Between
1953 and 1981, approximately 38,000 Korean children were
Do Transcultural and/or Transracial Adoptions Work?
49

adopted, primarily by Caucasian citizens of the United States.
Another spurt of transracial adoptions came with the Vietnam
War. And before Native American opposition put brakes on the
practice, Caucasian families adopted Native American children.
More recently, in addition to adopting transracially from many
other countries, families in the United States have adopted chil-
dren in significant numbers from Central America. The number
of adoptions from Guatemala, for example, has grown from 1,609
in 2001 to 3,783 in 2005 (U.S. Department of State). Federal gov-
ernment data shows that the overall rate of transracial adoption
from the foster-care system rose from 10.8 percent in 1995 to 15
percent in 2001 (News and Notes, 2006).
In the liberal climate of the 1960s and 1970s, “racial match-
ing” gave way to more transracial placements, such as the place-
ment of black infants in white homes. Before the 1960s, some
states prohibited transracial adoption. But eventually child wel-
fare workers began to see a need for more parents to give perma-
nent homes to children who were trapped in permanent foster
care. The number of black-white placements continued to rise
throughout the 1960s, and peaked in 1971 with more than 2,500
such placements (Silverman and Fiegelman, 188).
Meanwhile, black social workers had begun to rise up
against this trend. In 1968, they founded the National Associa-
tion of Black Social Workers (NABSW) and protested what they
considered racist social welfare policies. For example, they criti-
cized traditional screening practices, which emphasized mar-
riage stability, financial security, and youthfulness, as discrimi-
nating against black parents. Further, the NABSW pointed out
that more often than not, Caucasian families were not adopting
older black children from foster care but were seeking the same
black infants for whom there were already enough black fami-
lies. At its third annual conference in 1972, the group came out
strongly against transracial placements: black children, its mem-
bers stated, belonged in black families. In the next year, transra-
cial placements dropped by half, and by 1975 the number had
shrunk to around 800.
Approximately 60 percent of the children in foster (or out-
of-home) care in the United States are racial and ethnic minori-
ties. African American children make up 46 percent of this
group (but African Americans make up only 15 percent of the
U.S. population).
Because the U.S. government stopped collecting adoption
50
Issues and Controversies

data (such as total number of children adopted) in 1975, the
quoted numbers of transracial/transcultural adoptions are edu-
cated guesses. One source estimates that Caucasian families
adopt 1,000–2,000 African American children each year. Taking
into account data from the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Ser-
vices regarding intercountry adoptions, the Child Welfare Infor-
mation Gateway estimates that about 14 percent of all adoptions
are transracial or transcultural.
Experts expect the number of transracial/transcultural adop-
tions to continue to rise. According to some estimates, approxi-
mately 60 percent of children adopted internationally are non-
white. Laws and financial incentives initiated in the mid-1990s
are encouraging people to adopt from the U.S. foster-care system,
and intercountry transracial adoptions continue.
Authorities on the subject tend to lump all transracial/tran-
scultural adoptions into a single category. But if a single white
woman adopts a black six-year-old boy from the foster-care sys-
tem, the issues they face are likely to be different from those of a
Caucasian couple who adopt a two-year-old girl from Korea.
Two laws that deal with the subject of transracial/transcul-
tural adoption in the United States seem to reach different con-
clusions about what is best in the transracial/transcultural de-
bate. The first, which became law in 1978, is the Indian Child
Welfare Act (ICWA), the first major national act legislating adop-
tion in the United States. The law was designed to prevent non-
tribal public and private agencies from removing Native Ameri-
can children from their birth tribes. Government and private
institutions had developed “boarding schools” for Native Ameri-
can children. As late as 1974, approximately 34,000 native chil-
dren still attended these schools away from their homes.
Native Americans also lost children through adoption and
foster care. During the 1950s and 1960s, welfare agencies placed
hundreds of Native American children with Caucasian families.
The Association on American Indian Affairs undertook a study in
1976 that showed 25 to 35 percent of Native American children
were not living in their own homes. Of that figure, 85 percent of
those children lived in non–Native American homes. Those who
proposed the act had concerns about the survival of Native Amer-
ican tribes.
The Indian Child Welfare Act is complicated. It requires adop-
tion agencies to make a concerted effort to find Native American
families for Native American children. Under provisions of the
Do Transcultural and/or Transracial Adoptions Work?
51

act, anyone involved in the placement of a Native American child
must first notify the Bureau of Indian Affairs or the child’s tribe, so
that the tribe can make custody arrangements. Tribal courts have
jurisdiction over children living on reservations and some rights
over Native American children living off reservations. If a Native
American birth mother wants to place her infant for adoption, she
must first go through the process and receive the tribe’s permis-
sion. Placement preference is given first to members of the child’s
tribe and last to persons of another culture.
Federal and state laws together govern a child of Native
American heritage. According to the Indian Child Welfare Act,
termination of parental rights may be held before a tribal court. If
a state court hears the case, the child’s tribe has the right to inter-
vene and object to the placement preferences of the child’s birth
parents or those of an adoption agency. A birth parent who ini-
tially agrees to the placement of a Native American child has a
chance to withdraw consent until a decree of adoption is entered
in court. If the consent to adoption was obtained by fraud or
under duress, the birth parent has at least two years to get the
adoption nullified. Prospective adoptive parents who have had a
Native American child in their home for months, or in some cases
for years, may have their adoption petitions denied. The Indian
Child Welfare Act trumps all other laws.
Donald Standing Bear (not his real name) and his wife, Betsy,
had no children; they came to a private nonprofit agency in their
home state of Colorado, hoping to adopt young children. Al-
though he was not registered with a tribe, Donald had Native
American heritage through his father and participated in celebra-
tions and rituals within his community. Betsy was not Native
American but participated in tribal activities with Donald. They
had many Native American friends.
Through a photo listing on the Internet, the couple found in
North Dakota two Native American boys, ages two and four, that
they hoped to adopt. The social services department that had cus-
tody of the boys visited the Standing Bears in Denver. After
months of back-and-forth visits, two social workers brought the
boys to stay in their new home in Colorado. A letter from a tribal
judge in North Dakota had given permission for the boys to be
moved. Agencies of both states followed proper procedures for
an interstate placement.
The Colorado agency carefully supervised the boys’ place-
52
Issues and Controversies

ment, doing regular home visits during which its caseworkers got
to know the children in order to support the new parents and give
them parenting tips. The agency also provided contact with other
adoptive parents, as well as a support group. The boys, who had
been somewhat developmentally delayed at placement, made
much progress, especially in signs of attachment and in speech
development. Donald, who worked from home, was the primary
caregiver.
Approximately five months into the placement, the two so-
cial workers from North Dakota who had brought the boys to
Colorado came (on short notice) to pick them up. A distant rela-
tive had intervened and, backed by the Indian Child Welfare Act,
had gotten permission to take the boys to live on the reservation.
Devastated by the loss of the boys, Donald and Betsy never again
attempted to adopt.
Some ICWA supporters say the act does not go far enough in
addressing the wrongs of the past. Those who have had problems
with it, they say, are mostly doing independent adoptions or
working with people who do not understand the law. Opponents
say the act impinges on the rights of birth mothers (for one thing)
and gives too much power to the tribes, who may not understand
adoption issues such as attachment. Although many in Congress
have proposed amendments, the Indian Child Welfare Act has
changed little since 1978.
The second controversial act is the Multiethnic Placement
Act, passed in 1994, which requires that any entity receiving fed-
eral funds cannot delay or deny the placement of a child in foster
care or adoption because of concerns over race or ethnicity. Its au-
thor, Senator Howard Metzenbaum (D-Ohio), believed that chil-
dren should not languish in foster homes while black parents
were being sought for them if there were Caucasian parents will-
ing to adopt them. Frustrated that the act was not being imple-
mented, Senator Metzenbaum went back to Congress in 1996 and
pushed an amendment through. With the change of some word-
ing, the 1996 amendment, the Removal of Barriers to Interethnic
Adoption, made clear that discrimination on the basis of race
would not be tolerated.
Two experts, Owen Gill and Barbara Jackson believe that ar-
guments against transracial adoption fall into two categories: the
first has to do with robbing the black culture of its most valuable
resources, its children. Those who oppose transracial adoption
Do Transcultural and/or Transracial Adoptions Work?
53

point to the overrepresentation of African American and Latino
children in the foster-care system as a failure of the system to help
those families affected by poverty. Rather than encouraging tran-
sracial adoption, minority families need support to keep their chil-
dren at home. Those who support transracial adoption would no
doubt agree to the truthfulness of this statement. But what happens
to the children while “someone” comes up with the funding to give
the needed support?
In the second category, those who oppose transracial adop-
tion say that some black children may do well in their Caucasian
families during the elementary school years but will likely have
racial-identity problems when they become teenagers and start
dating. In response to this statement, Arnold Silverman and
William Feigelman (in The Psychology of Adoption, 1990) prepared
a report titled “Research Evidence on the Outcomes of Transracial
Adoptions.” They cite one study that found that the attitudes of
the adoptive parents had an impact on their transracially adopted
children. Parents who saw their children as African American and
supported their children’s identification with the African Ameri-
can community produced positive attitudes from the children to-
ward their heritage.
Subsequent studies such as the one by Rita J. Simon and
Howard Alstein found that young black children saw themselves
as black and did not attach a negative evaluation to that assess-
ment. Simon and Alstein did their study with a sample of 206 tran-
sracially adopting families, beginning in 1972 and continuing to
1983. The longitudinal nature of the study made it possible to eval-
uate the findings even after the adoptees  had finished college,
married, and had children of their own. Simon and Alstein re-
ported that the adoptees—now older adolescents or adults—were
firmly committed to their adoptive parents in spite of relation-
ships that in some cases had been “rocky, accusative, and angry.”
Those who believe in transracial adoption (if a same-race
placement is not available) say that it’s the length of time without
permanence that is the main problem. The longer children wait
for permanent families (of any race), the more damage is done to
their sense of identity and self-esteem, and the less likely they
will be adopted. Summarizing this point of view in an article in
Adoption Today (June/July 2005, 22), Elizabeth Bartholet, a Har-
vard professor and adoptive parent of two transracially/tran-
sculturally adopted children, argues that there is no evidence in
54
Issues and Controversies

the research that transracial adoption hurts children. In fact, she
says, “there is extensive, unrefuted, and overwhelmingly power-
ful evidence that delays in permanent placement do devastating
damage to children.” Researchers Simon and Alstein also found
that a majority (63 percent) of the transracially adopting parents
said that their children identified with the racial backgrounds of
their birth parents as well as the racial backgrounds of their adop-
tive parents.
At the risk of sparking another argument, the authors of The
Complete Adoption Book (Beauvais-Godwin and Godwin, 2005) ask
whether there are really enough transracial adoptions to wipe out
black culture. And even if there were, should the welfare of chil-
dren be sacrificed to that end?
A November 2005 article in Ebony Magazine suggests that
more and more African American families are coming forward to
adopt black children. This is an encouraging trend. But the ma-
jority of African American couples want infants or young chil-
dren, just as most other adopting parents do. (As mentioned ear-
lier, children of all races tend to stay longer in foster care the older
they get. And the older they get, the less chance they have of
being adopted.)
No one would argue that all transracially adopted children
are “well adjusted” or free of problems. All children have “is-
sues,” especially in adolescence. According to most studies, 25
percent of transracially adopted children do have adjustment
problems. Beth Hall and Gail Steinberg of PACT–An Adoption
Alliance say that although transracial adoption offers unique and
positive outcomes for children, it also results in some “losses.”
Children have to work to deal with these losses; transracial adop-
tion, they say, is not something to be “for” or “against,” but a re-
ality to be dealt with.
“Heritage starts at home,” says Lisa Milbrand, editor of
Adoptive Families magazine. In her article by that title in the April
2006 issue, Milbrand offers many ways for adopted children to
connect with their heritage. Culture camps and heritage tours are
one way, she says. But cultural activities should not be reserved
for holidays and events; they must be a part of daily life.
Adoption research is hard to quantify. For example, if a black
child is not well adjusted (and how can anyone define that term?)
would a person conclude that the “maladjustment” has to do
with the transracial placement? Perhaps that child in an African
Do Transcultural and/or Transracial Adoptions Work?
55

American family would have similar problems. Unfortunately for
research purposes, adoption is not an assembly line with the
“product” turning out the same each time it goes down the belt.
Each adopted child and each adopted family is different.
Margaret is a single Caucasian adoptive parent of four
African American children. Years ago when she was married,
Margaret and her husband had adopted two biracial siblings,
who are now adults. As she contemplated the adoption of a sec-
ond sibling group, Margaret made it clear to her agency that al-
though she had many contacts with the African American com-
munity and could handle the transracial part of the adoption, she
did not want children who had been sexually abused. Margaret
found the children she wanted on a website; the agency in the
other state assured Margaret that there was no sexual abuse in the
children’s background. After a couple of months of back-and-
forth visits, the children, Tasha, 5, and Aaron, 4, moved in. Soon
afterward, Tasha apparently felt comfortable enough with her
adoptive mother to reveal that she had in fact been sexually
abused in her former foster home. In addition to therapy, Mar-
garet used her connections with her African American church
congregation and a local support group for transracially adopted
families to support herself and her new daughter. Tasha is now a
sophomore in high school and doing well.
The preceding discussion has concentrated mainly on do-
mestic adoptions. But much of it, such as skin color, also applies
to children adopted from another country. When families adopt
from China, Korea, or Guatemala, for example, their children will
be both transracially and transculturally adopted. While these
programs continue to thrive, there are many who take a negative
view.
Arguments against transracial or transcultural adoption in-
clude the reasoning that intercountry adoption is a “one-way
street” in which rich adopting parents from Western nations pay
large sums of money to take away a country’s most precious re-
sources. Second, because children in families beset by poverty
and lack of resources get “whisked away,” the supplying coun-
tries do not have a chance to develop their own social service net-
works, which might be able to prevent out-of-home/out-of-coun-
try adoptions. Third, opponents of transethnic adoption (as
practiced in intercountry adoption) see some parallels to slavery:
children are stripped of their identities, separated from parents
and siblings, and forced to fit into the dominant white culture. Al-
56
Issues and Controversies

though some adoptive parents take their adopted children back
to the places of their birth, the children return to their country of
birth as foreigners. Fourth, although adopted children may have
received special attention and privileges in their adoptive homes,
when they become adults in the “real world,” strangers may treat
them as if they were “just another immigrant.” Fifth, unscrupu-
lous adoption “facilitators” in other countries may bribe poor, un-
educated women to part with their infants and then turn around
and charge high prices to foreign (e.g., American) lawyers and
agencies.
In the June/July 2005 issue of Adoption Today, Jinny Jordan,
adopted as an infant from Korea by American parents, has com-
piled comments about some of life’s challenges (low points and
high points) from four transracially/transculturally adopted chil-
dren, now adults. Christopher C. Brownlee (formerly Tran Quoc
Tuan), adopted from Saigon, Vietnam, talks about being discrim-
inated against “from all sides.” Asian Americans accuse him of
not being “Asian enough” while white Americans think he
should be good in math and science, accomplished in kung fu,
and experienced in “eating dog.” Kim Winn, adopted from Seoul,
Korea, believes she has been “shamefully blessed,” but hopes that
transracially/transculturally adoptees and their adoptive parents
can “confront, combat and educate against . . . harmful stereo-
types and prejudices.”
Is transracial/transcultural adoption a good idea? Many ex-
perts agree that given the powerful role of race in U.S. society,
those contemplating transracial/transcultural placements must
think deeply, be carefully screened, and be more than adequately
prepared. To help in this effort, social workers and adoption train-
ers can ask prospective adoptive parents some basic questions.
Many variations are available, including questions asked by Holt
International and available through the Child Welfare Informa-
tion Gateway. Adoption Alliance, a private nonprofit agency in
Denver, Colorado, has for years asked its parents to carefully
think about answers to these questions when considering a tran-
sracial/transcultural adoptive placement.
1. What is their motivation? What made them consider
parenting transracially/transculturally?
2. Are there people of other races in their family? If so,
what experiences have they had with these family
members?
Do Transcultural and/or Transracial Adoptions Work?
57

3. Have they discussed their interest in parenting
transracially/transculturally with their nuclear family,
extended family, and neighbors? What was the reaction?
4. Do they have friends or neighbors who are of the same
race as the child they wish to adopt? Do they socialize
with those of other races and cultures?
5. What is the racial composition of their neighborhood,
including schools and churches, childcare centers, and
organizations the child would become a member of?
6. What do the applicants know about the music,
entertainment, and eating preferences of the child’s race
or ethnic group?
7. What do the applicants know about the skin/hair care,
dietary, and health needs of the child?
8. How will the children in their home learn about the new
child’s race/culture history and customs?
9. How will they involve people of the child’s race and
other races in the child’s life?
10. How do the applicants feel that their decision to parent
interracially will benefit the child? How will it benefit
themselves?
11.
How may their decision to parent interracially
negatively affect them? How about the child? How will
they handle negative effects and the hurt for the child
and for themselves?
12. How will they teach coping skills to a child of a different
race?
13. What problems do they think might come up in school
and in the neighborhood? How will they handle social
situations, such as dating? 
According to Silverman and Feigelman, transracial adoption
appears to result in “children whose self-esteem is at least as high
as that of nonadopted children and whose adjustment seems
more than satisfactory.” They go on to state that for the most part,
nonwhite children raised in white homes identify with both
white and nonwhite communities. “Though they are afflicted
with some degree of doubt and discomfort, there is every evi-
dence that most transracial adoptees have a positive evaluation of
their nonwhite backgrounds” (199-200).
58
Issues and Controversies

Should Single People 
Be Allowed to Adopt?
Until about thirty years ago, departments of social services and
adoption agencies rarely considered single persons as possible
adoptive parents. Some states even had laws prohibiting singles
from adopting. Now, singles adopt more than 25 percent of chil-
dren with special needs. Experts estimate that single people are
responsible for about 5 percent of all other adoptions. Today,
some adoption professionals may still look at single people as a
last resource and then only for the most hard-to-place children,
but the picture seems to be changing. And yet, prospective single
parent adopters may have to “prove” themselves even more than
couples do. Singles can make themselves more desirable and feel
more prepared if they try to answer some of the following ques-
tions suggested by Jane Mattes, founder of the organization Sin-
gle Mothers by Choice, Inc.
1. Have you accomplished all of the personal and career
goals that are necessary for you to feel good about
yourself? How will you feel if you are not able to
achieve some of these goals?
2. How will you feel about others’ criticism of your
decision to be a single parent?
3. Are you able to support yourself and a child
emotionally and financially?
4. Do you have elderly parents who may need your
assistance at the same time you will be devoting
yourself to a baby or young child?
5. Are there particular reasons why you are not with a
partner, and will these reasons affect how you parent
your child?
6. If you date often, can you manage working, dating, and
caring for a child? How will a child affect your
likelihood of finding a mate? Can you make a
distinction between which needs can be fulfilled by a
child and which ones can be fulfilled only by a spouse?
7. Do you have a good support system involving friends,
Should Single People Be Allowed to Adopt?
59

family, a religious community, or work to help you
during stressful times?
8. Is your job flexible enough so that you can meet your
child’s needs when he is sick, has a special event, or
needs extra attention?
9. How do you handle stress? Will you be able to meet the
challenge of caring for a child while working?
10. If you are considering adopting an older child, are you
prepared to meet the child’s special emotional needs
and issues? Do you have time to take your child to a
therapist in addition to Girl Scouts and other school and
community activities?
(These questions were condensed from a list published by
Laura Beauvais-Godwin and Raymond Godwin, The Complete
Adoption Book, 2005, 120–121.)
After a long wait, Amy was chosen to parent Bryan, age six;
some professionals considered him “unadoptable” because of his
behavioral disturbances. (In reality, most adoption professionals
agree that there are no “unadoptable” children.) Most single par-
ents work outside the home, and Amy was no exception. Al-
though she found it difficult to respond to the frequent calls from
school, she “hung in there” with Bryan, who is now twelve and
still has some hard-to-manage behaviors. A year ago, Amy and
Bryan moved to the East Coast so that Amy could be closer to her
sister and brother-in-law, who could give her support. Bryan has
enjoyed getting to know his uncle, a new male role model.
Another single woman, Carol, a nurse, was selected to parent
Becky, an eighteen-month-old girl exposed to methamphetamine
in utero. Carol figures she got Becky because no one else wanted
her. Fortunately, at age four Becky shows few developmental de-
lays. Carol’s mother and father, both retired, take care of Becky
when Carol works twelve-hour shifts at the hospital. Becky’s
adoptive grandparents think she’s wonderful. Now Carol wants
to adopt again. According to Vic Groze, assistant professor at the
University of Iowa School of Social Work, studies have shown
that support from extended family is a huge factor in making a
single-parent adoption successful. (Groze defines single parents
as those who choose to become a parent while single, not those
who lose a spouse because of death or divorce.)
In both of the above situations, the chosen single moms, re-
ceiving children from the foster care system, turned out to be ex-
60
Issues and Controversies

cellent choices. But birth mothers usually choose a two-parent fam-
ily and are unlikely to choose a single mom for several reasons:
—Birth mothers who decide to make an adoption plan may
be young, needing more education, and struggling
financially. They may “buy into” the stereotype of a single
parent being in the same situation, not realizing that with
their older age, prospective single mothers and fathers may
be better educated, have more support, and be financially
stable.
—Birth mothers may think there is “something wrong”
with a person who remains single instead of getting
married.
—Birth mothers may worry that a single parent will not
have enough time to devote to the child.
—Birth mothers tend to favor younger parents (in their
twenties and thirties) rather than people in their forties or
older, the age of many singles considering adoption.
Because the odds in domestic adoption seem stacked against
them, prospective single mothers often turn to intercountry adop-
tion—if they can afford it.
If single mothers have more difficulty adopting than two-
parent families, single men have even more difficulty. The same
questions, such as “Will the adoptive parent have enough time for
my child?” persist, but additional questions arise. Men are gener-
ally considered less nurturing and less communicative than
women. Birth mothers and agencies tend to question a single
male’s motivation to adopt: is he perhaps a pedophile, someone
who preys on children? Agencies tend to “study” single men ex-
tensively (if they consider them at all), often doing psychological
testing, asking for extra references, and requiring them to take
parenting classes. Agencies often encourage single men to apply
to adopt an older male child. Many international programs rule
out men completely.
Those who argue against the idea of single-parent adoptions
point out that even an older single person may find a “significant
other,” and a child who has adjusted to the single parent will
have a hard time accepting another person in the home. Another
Should Single People Be Allowed to Adopt?
61

argument against adoption by single parents is the question,
“What if that parent dies?” For that reason agencies tend to be
extra careful in asking the parent if he or she has a will and/or
plans for a guardian.
Research shows that single-parent adoptions dramatically
increased between 1970 and 1986. One study showed that al-
though single parents had a lower level of income than dual-in-
come families, single parents, who are mostly female, had a high
level of emotional maturity along with a high frustration toler-
ance, and did not let the opinions of outsiders upset them.
On the positive side, the disruption rate of children placed
with single parents was not significantly higher than those placed
in two-parent families. Groze admits that many single parents
have difficulty in the immediate post-placement period. Appar-
ently the anxiety any new parent feels is compounded by the fact
that single parents usually have an “intense” relationship with
the child, and additionally have to deal with any difficulties by
themselves.
Sara, forty-three, had overcome many difficulties in her life
(usually a sign of the emotional strength necessary to raise an
older “special needs” child). However, a month after the place-
ment of Kayla, age eight, in Sara’s home, she asked to have Kayla
removed. “It’s too much togetherness,” she said. “She even fol-
lows me into the bathroom.” Sara’s agency had prepared her with
classes and a preadoptive support group, but obviously better
preparation, perhaps mentoring a child, might have helped.
Groze concludes, however, that based on his studies, single-par-
ent adoption turned out to be a workable plan for many children.
What about Same-Sex Couples? 
One of the most hotly debated current issues has to do with the
rights of same-sex couples. In Single Parents by Choice (1992),
Naomi Miller writes that because the word homosexual has a long
history of pejorative use, many in the gay community disdain its
use. They prefer the words  lesbian and gay. The latter term can
refer to males or females, whereas lesbian refers only to women.
The debate over whether gays and lesbians should be allowed to
adopt is part of the debate over whether same-sex persons should
be allowed to marry. Before the debate begins on these pages, it’s
important to note that proponents and opponents on both sides
62
Issues and Controversies

of the debate point to what they consider reliable data to back up
their claims. Each says that the other is selective, biased, or just
plain incorrect. Those who are members of conservative religious
and/or political groups often speak of the negative effects; those
who support gay rights and/or are themselves homosexual are
likely to point to the positive effects. Adoption adds a new vari-
able, and the true number of same-sex couples who have adopted
is not known.
According to the Child Welfare Information Gateway, defin-
ing the structure of a gay family can be difficult. For one thing, the
most common kind of homosexual family is a stepparent or
blended family. One or both of the parents may have had birth
children in a former heterosexual relationship. Or the parents
may have used various types of reproductive technology. Finally,
the couple may have adopted their children.
Sexual orientation (or an ongoing romantic attraction to
same-sex individuals) is usually evident by early adolescence to
the person who has these feelings. But because of the shame con-
nected with homosexuality, many individuals with this type of
sexual orientation do not “come out” until much later, if ever.
Sexual orientation, referring to a person’s innermost feelings, is
not the same as sexual behavior. What causes homosexuality is
for many people a matter of debate. Some believe in a genetic
cause; others believe in environmental factors, such as early
childhood experiences. Some experts believe in a combination of
factors.
Experts still debate the number of homosexual persons in the
United States. Some say gays make up 5 to 10 percent of the pop-
ulation. Others have revised that number downward to 1 or 2
percent. Another estimate is that up to 14 million children have a
gay or lesbian parent, and up to 10 million children are being
raised in a gay or lesbian home.
So what about same-sex couples? Should they be allowed to
adopt? While the debate rages, homosexual couples are adopting
children. However, most states do not allow gay couples to adopt
as a unit. Commonly only one member of the couple can adopt
the child; if the other person also wants custody of the child, that
person has to apply for “second parent” or “coparent” adoption
status. Courts in only about half of the states grant second-parent
adoptions. Second-parent adoption offers benefits for children,
including health benefits, social security benefits, and the ability
of both parents to consent to medical treatment. Most important,
What about Same-Sex Couples?
63

it guarantees that the second parent will have custody rights if the
first parent dies or becomes incapacitated.
State laws tend to govern the intricacies of adoption, and
states have different laws. If a homosexual couple wants to adopt
from the public child welfare system, they should look into their
state’s laws. For example, both California and New York have
laws against discrimination. Therefore, social workers in these
states cannot reject applicants because of their sexual orientation.
It is possible, though, that a social worker who has her own ideas
about homosexuality might find another reason to reject the po-
tential adoptive parents. And what if there really was another rea-
son to reject them? A judge will make the final decision based on
“the best interests of the child.”
A private agency will “study” a family but may have differ-
ent policies on working with gay clients. Keeping in mind the
best interests of available children, the home study worker will
use references and other measures to recommend or not recom-
mend her clients for adoption. As for the prospective parents, it is
illegal to lie during the home-study process. However a same-sex
couple may present themselves in a variety of ways.
Stacey, a high-school math teacher and girls’ basketball
coach, was a card-carrying member of a Native American tribe. In
retrospect, her single-parent adoptions (at different times) of two
Native American infant boys were a “piece of cake.” Stacey’s spa-
cious residence on acres of land was also home to several horses
that the boys would learn to ride. By the ages of three and five
years, her boys were happy, healthy, and “attached.”
Several years later, the private agency that had worked with
Stacey on those two adoptions recruited her for the adoption of
eight-year-old William, a Native American special needs child
from Alaska. But what had not been an issue in Stacey’s two pre-
vious adoptions suddenly reached epic proportions in the run-up
to the third. In the earlier home studies, Stacey’s agency had in-
cluded Tara, Stacey’s housemate, in the study. They had inter-
viewed Tara and had gotten references and child abuse and FBI
clearances. Tara, who had her own bedroom, played a significant
role in the upbringing of the younger boys.
But questions initiated by the placing agency that had cus-
tody of William became intense. Was the relationship between the
two women a lesbian relationship? “No,” said Stacey, and her
agency took her at her word. Her home-study worker’s experi-
ence with Stacey had been 100 percent positive. Her sexual orien-
64
Issues and Controversies

tation was not an issue with her agency. Eventually, they were
able to persuade the placing agency that Stacey was “okay.”
William came to stay, “but not,” said Stacey, “until Tara and I had
jumped through more hoops than two dogs in a circus.”
In an independent adoption, a facilitator, such as an attorney
or a physician, brings the adoptive and birth families together.
(This type of adoption is illegal in some states.) Although some
birth parents may be reluctant to pick a nontraditional couple,
getting picked and having an open adoption situation with birth
parents might work well for gay parents who won’t have to
worry that someone will discover their “secret.”
If they are totally forthcoming about their relationship, an in-
tercountry adoption will probably not work for a homosexual cou-
ple. Some foreign countries prohibit homosexual adoptions. For
example, in 2002, in a probable effort to stem the tide of homo-
sexual adoptions, China reduced the quota of single-parent adop-
tions from 40 to 8 percent. Currently, only heterosexual couples
and single females can legally adopt Chinese children.
In an interesting development on December 30, 2005, the
countries of England and Wales gave gay couples, as well as un-
married couples, the right to adopt a child together. The  News
Telegraph called the Adoption and Children Act, which had been
on the drawing board for three years, “the biggest shake-up in
adoption law for 30 years.”
In the United States the debate rages on. Those against gay
adoption often base their arguments on religion or morality. Tim
Dailey, a senior fellow in culture studies at the Family Research
Council—a conservative organization that promotes public pol-
icy based on Judeo-Christian values and traditional definitions of
marriage and the family—attacks the methodology of research
showing that children raised in homosexual households fare no
worse than children raised in traditional families. He says that
“children raised in traditional families by a mother and father are
happier, healthier, and more successful than children raised in
non-traditional environments” (2005, 30). He adds that children
need a mom and a dad, and that “homosexual or lesbian house-
holds are no substitute for a family” (39). Robert H. Knight, also
of the Family Research Council, agrees. According to the CQ Re-
searcher, Knight commented after newborn twins from Texas were
adopted by two Washington professional women that placing the
babies in a lesbian household would deliberately deprive the chil-
dren of a father’s love.
What about Same-Sex Couples?
65

Dailey believes that same-sex households expose children to
harmful situations resulting from the homosexual lifestyle.
Among these are promiscuity, health hazards, family violence, in-
cest, substance abuse, greater risk for suicide, and sexual identity
confusion. Activists in favor of the homosexual lifestyle, Dailey
adds, are out to undermine marriage “by attacking monogamy,
commitment, and chastity,” and that children do better in tradi-
tional families “where they receive appropriate discipline, atten-
tion, and moral and spiritual guidance” (29).
Even in committed, monogamous homosexual relationships,
says Dailey, “there is a magnum order of difference between the
lifetime fidelity rate cited for homosexuals and the 75 to 90 per-
cent cited for married couples” (33). Homosexual relationships,
he says, are unstable and incapable of providing children with se-
curity.  Evidently committed means something entirely different in
a homosexual relationship than in a heterosexual marriage.
Dailey mentions AIDS as one of the “bacterial and parasitical
sexually transmitted diseases” that are the result of unhealthy
sexual practices common among homosexuals (34). Domestic vi-
olence, he states, is higher in homosexual relationships than in
traditional marriages. He cites studies showing that homosexual
relationships are far more violent than traditional relationships
and notes that this fact is not often reported.
Dailey says there is a high incidence of mental health prob-
lems among homosexuals, and points to a national survey of les-
bians published in the Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
that shows that nearly 75 percent of the respondents had pursued
counseling of some kind, many for treatment of long-term de-
pression or sadness. A study published in Nursing Research, says
Dailey, found that lesbians are “three times more likely to abuse
alcohol and suffer from other compulsive behaviors” (35). He
points to two simultaneous articles in the Archives of General Psy-
chiatry, one of which discusses a higher incidence of suicide for
those with same-sex partners.
The claim that homosexual households do not “recruit” chil-
dren into a similar lifestyle, Dailey says, is refuted by growing ev-
idence that children raised in these households are more likely to
engage in sexual experimentation and homosexual behavior. He
concludes that “no society has ceased to honor the institution of
marriage and survived” (40). In his view, those who wish to live
together without marriage are free to do so, but children should
not be entrusted to those unions.
66
Issues and Controversies

Paul Cameron is chair of the conservative Family Research
Institute (FMI) in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The institute is a
“non-profit scientific and educational corporation that believes
the strength of our society depends on preserving America’s his-
toric moral framework and the traditional family.” It welcomes
those who would like to join the fight to “restore a world where
marriage is upheld and honored, where children are nurtured
and protected, and where homosexuality is not taught and ac-
cepted, but instead is discouraged and rejected at every level”
(home page, Family Research Institute, http://www.familyre-
searchinst.org). Cameron takes issue with the findings of the
American Academy of Pediatrics, which, in the year 2002, recom-
mended legal and legislative efforts to allow children born to or
adopted by one member of a gay or lesbian couple to be adopted
by the homosexual partner. Cameron points to narratives by chil-
dren living in homosexual households who mentioned one or
more “problems” in these households. (The narratives are avail-
able on the FMI website.) Cameron states that gay-rights activists
are adept at manipulating research to their own ends and de-
scribes the report of the American Academy of Pediatrics as
“cooking the books” (2005, 54). He also says that homosexuals die
earlier than heterosexuals; therefore, children with homosexual
parents are more likely to lose a parent to death.
Another person against allowing homosexuals to adopt is
Lynn Wardle. At the time of his presentation at the Marriage,
Adoption, and the Best Interests of the Child Symposium, Wardle
was professor of law at Brigham Young University. He observed
that some individuals advocating for gay rights say it is uncon-
stitutional for states or state agencies to prohibit or restrict gay
couple adoption. Wardle states that homosexual couples do not
have a constitutional right to adopt (Dudley 2004).  Some experts
might argue that no one has the right to adopt but that individu-
als interested in adopting should have the right to be “studied” or
to be considered as adoptive parents.
A mini-debate, “Are Gay Parents Good for Children?,” begins
on the pages of the Psychotherapy Networker (January/February
2006) with President George W. Bush’s announcement at a press
conference a year earlier. “Studies have shown,” said the presi-
dent, “that the ideal is where a child is raised in a married family
with a man and a woman” (22). After a review of research in 2002,
Tufts University professor of pediatrics Ellen Perrin differed with
the president. She concluded that “there’s no good evidence that
What about Same-Sex Couples?
67

same-sex parents are any less fit than homosexual parents, and
some of them may provide subtle advantages” (22). The American
Academy of Pediatrics based its stance that there should be no
barriers to gay adoption and custody partly on Perrin’s report.
In support of the other side, the American College of Pedia-
tricians (ACP), a smaller organization that broke away from the
American Academy of Pediatrics because of the latter’s position
paper, states that children of gay parents are at a risk for emo-
tional problems (Psychotherapy Networker, January/February
2006). In the same debate, Perrin faced off with Paul Cameron of
the Family Research Institute. Cameron accused Perrin of using
“biased studies from homosexual journals.” Perrin responded
that her studies came from peer-reviewed journals, whereas ten
of Cameron’s studies have been published in only one journal,
Psychological Reports, in which authors must pay to be published.
Perrin concluded, “It isn’t the sexual identity of the parents that
matters: it’s things like how well the parents get along, how inte-
grated the children are in school—the same social factors that
matter to all kids” (23).
Those who believe that homosexual individuals and/or cou-
ples have the right to be considered as adoptive parents maintain
that the arguments and research from the “other side” is flawed
or wrongly applied. These advocates believe same-sex couples
can give good homes to children, and they agree with Perrin that
all of the available research to date has concluded that children of
homosexual parents grow up as successfully as the children of
heterosexual parents. Some of the organizations in support of gay
adoption, in addition to the American Academy of Pediatrics, are
the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), the American Psy-
chological Association, the Child Welfare League of America, the
North American Council on Adoptable Children, the Evan B.
Donaldson Adoption Institute, the National Association of Social
Workers, the American Counseling Association, the American
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, and the Dave
Thomas Foundation for Adoption.
Countering the arguments of those who do not want to see
homosexuals as parents, the American Civil Liberties Union has
drawn up a list of “myths vs. facts” (Gay and Lesbian Families,
2005). The first myth, according to the ACLU, is that the only ac-
ceptable home for a child is one with a married-to-each-other
mother and father. Out of the more than 100,000 children in the
foster care system available for adoption in 1998, only 20,000
68
Issues and Controversies

found adoptive homes. The rest may never get a mother or a 
father if child welfare policies do not include nontraditional
families.
The second is the myth that children need to have a mother
and father to provide proper role modeling. Children in foster
care may have mother/father role models in the foster home, but
unless children have permanent parents, they may move to twenty
different foster homes and end up with no parents at all. Addi-
tionally, children find role models not only in parents but in
grandparents, uncles, aunts, teachers, religious leaders, family
friends, and neighbors.
The third myth, argues the ACLU, is that gays do not have
stable relationships and have no idea how to be good parents. The
fact is that most lesbian women and gay men do have stable rela-
tionships, just as most heterosexual couples do. However, there
are many divorces in heterosexual marriages, and there are
breakups in homosexual relationships. The American Psycholog-
ical Association has not found one study that shows children of
homosexual families to be disadvantaged in any significant way
relative to children raised in heterosexual families. The fact is,
says the ACLU, that children are not placed with any parents who
do not pass rigorous screening tests, including reference and
background checks.
Fourth, states the ACLU, it is a myth to say that children
raised by gay parents are more likely than other children to grow
up homosexual. Studies have shown that the children of gay par-
ents are no more likely than other children to become homosex-
ual themselves. Some children of same-sex parents will become
gay, but so will some children of heterosexual parents. Research
has also shown that children of same-sex parents are more toler-
ant of diversity than many other children, which is not a bad trait.
If indeed a child of a homosexual parent turns out to be gay, the
child will have the advantage of being raised by a sympathetic
parent. Charlotte Patterson, a professor of psychology at the Uni-
versity of Virginia, adds that the quality of a child’s parenting is
more important than a parent’s gender, and that a parent’s sexual
orientation is not a predictor of how well the child will adjust.
Fifth, while it is true that children of homosexual parents may
be subject to harassment and teasing, children endure teasing for
many other reasons—being too fat or too thin, being too short or
too tall—and survive. Besides, parents who themselves may have
endured harassment will be well qualified to support the child. If
What about Same-Sex Couples?
69

the child grows up in permanent foster care and never gets
adopted, he or she will certainly bear the brunt of teasing.
The sixth myth, says the ACLU, is that when gay men and
lesbians adopt, their children will be living in an “immoral envi-
ronment.” One argument against this reasoning is that there is no
general agreement as to what is moral or immoral. Some people
believe that war is immoral or guns are immoral; others believe
that dancing is immoral or that playing cards is immoral. If all of
those willing to provide an adoptive home for a child are rejected
because something they did is someone else’s idea of “immoral,”
there will be no parents left to adopt children.
A seventh myth is that gays are more likely than heterosexu-
als to molest children. An adult sexual attraction to children or
the molesting of children is pedophilia. Experts say there is no
connection between homosexuality and pedophilia. Heterosexual
men perpetrate 90 percent of sexual abuse on children. In a study
reported in the journal Pediatrics, out of 296 cases of child sexual
abuse, only two of the offenders were homosexual. In 82 percent
of the cases, the alleged offender was a heterosexual partner of a
close relative of the child. The study reports that a given parent’s
heterosexual partner is more than 100 times more likely to abuse
a child than a homosexual or bisexual. The study concluded that
“there is no support for . . . advocating (for) legislation limiting
rights of homosexuals” (Jenny, Roesler, and Poyer, 1994,  44).
According to an article in the National Law Journal, a ban on
gay adoptions hurts children. The author, Vivian Berger, takes
aim at Florida, the only state in the United States that prohibits
outright all gay and lesbian adoptions. Berger says, “sexual ori-
entation has nothing to do with parental performance.” 
A report from the Evan B. Donaldson Institute states that
“gay adoption is commonly accepted” (2005, 46). The institute,
established in 1996, is an independent, nonprofit organization
with no affiliation to any interest group. Its goal is to provide ac-
curate research-based information leading to more ethical, effec-
tive, and informed policies, practices, and laws.
Some of those against the idea of homosexual adoption say
that child-welfare agencies are biased in favor of same-sex cou-
ples. Candi Cushman is a writer for the Citizen, a publication of
Focus on the Family, a conservative Christian organization. She
says that “county governments’ subtle antagonism to religious
and conservative families . . . aggravates the backlog of home-
less children” (2004, 194). Cushman quotes a social services in-
70
Issues and Controversies

vestigator from Alameda County, California, as saying that cer-
tain counties will give preference to gay or lesbian families
while putting “what I see as good religious families with good
values on the bottom of the pile” (194). But Cushman concludes
by writing that Christians who “pool their resources have con-
quered political pressure” (195). She urges Christians to stare
down the state.
The Evan B. Donaldson Institute does not deny “that Ameri-
cans’ attitudes are evolving—as reflected in the fact that more and
more agencies are allowing openly gay and lesbian clients to
adopt” (2005, 47). According to the institute, solid research show-
ing agency practices and results were lacking until a study done
in 1999–2000. The institute mailed surveys requesting informa-
tion on agency policies and practices to the fifty-one public (state)
agencies in the nation. In addition, surveys were mailed to 844
randomly selected private agencies. The results confirmed that
gays were adopting “regularly and in notable numbers, both at
public and private agencies” (47). A clear majority, states the in-
stitute, or 60 percent, said they had accepted applications from
self-identified lesbians and gay men in 1999–2000. The agencies
most likely to work with same-sex couples were those who did
special-needs placements (85.3 percent). Religious affiliation also
affected the results. Almost all Jewish-affiliated agencies accepted
gay clients, followed by public agencies (90 percent), private
agencies with no religious affiliation (80.2 percent), and Lutheran
agencies (66.7 percent). About 20 percent of all agencies reported
that in one or more instances, they had rejected applications from
prospective adoptive parents who were homosexual.
In different writings on the subject of scrutiny, prospective
parents from both groups (homosexuals and Christians) believe
they have received more scrutiny than other groups. The social
services investigator from California (mentioned earlier) believes
that Christian families are often “phased out through heavier
screening processes and regulations” because of being religious.
“If you’re going to be religious,” he said, “then they are going to
hold you to a greater weight of certain rules. Like where the bed’s
located . . . Do they have their own separate bedrooms? . . .
There’s 100 different questions” (Cushman, 2004, 194–195). How-
ever, in special-needs adoptions, families must often be certified
or licensed for foster care, which can involve a very long list of
questions.
At the same time, according to the Child Welfare Information
What about Same-Sex Couples?
71

Gateway, same-sex couples may be asked extra questions, such as
those suggested by Denise Goodman, PhD, a consultant and
trainer in Ohio. (Except for the first question, however, hetero-
sexual couples are often asked the same questions.) Are they com-
fortable with their self-image and with being gay? What kind of
family support do they have? How stable is their relationship? Do
they have a will (or wills)? Do they share finances?
Should the Government Provide 
More or Less Regulation of Adoption?
Regulation of adoption—whether to have more or less govern-
ment involvement—is a complicated subject that generates con-
troversy. First, although state regulations govern much of adop-
tion practice, federal legislation also enters in. Second, one must
consider what type of adoption is being regulated—for example,
domestic infant, the adoption of older children from the foster-
care system, or intercountry adoption. The reasons people give
for wanting more or less regulation often depends on the type of
adoption they have experienced. If the person speaking feels he
or others have been victimized by too much government interfer-
ence, he may argue for less regulation. If the person speaking has
had a negative experience with too little regulation, she may
argue for more regulation.
Those who believe that more government regulation is neces-
sary may have had a bad experience in an intercountry adoption.
On January 8, 2006, National Public Radio aired part of a special
program by American RadioWorks called “Finding Home: Fifty
Years of International Adoption,” which included information on
difficult experiences. Internet scams are not uncommon, says
Trish Maskew, president of Ethica, a group that lobbies for better
rules governing adoption. For example, P. J. Whiskeyman and her
husband lost thousands of dollars in an effort to adopt two
Ukrainian girls they had seen on the Internet. After a trip to the
country to pick up the girls, they returned “empty handed.” Be-
cause federal regulation of adoption agencies in the United States
is lacking and state laws vary widely, adoption fraud is difficult
to prosecute.
The Joint Council on International Children’s Services is the
oldest and largest affiliation of licensed nonprofit agencies for in-
72
Issues and Controversies

tercountry adoption in the United States. However, in some states
there are no laws to give “teeth” to the standards. Some agencies
apply for accreditation through the private Council on Accredita-
tion of Services for Families and Children, but the process is ex-
pensive and time-consuming.
Many adoption professionals argue for more regulation of
intercountry adoption. When fully implemented, the Hague Con-
vention on Intercountry Adoption should help regulate inter-
country adoption by setting minimum standards and practices
for those involved in intercountry adoption. Under regulations
drawn up by the U.S. State Department, those providing adop-
tion services will have to have government-approved accredita-
tion, a written policy prohibiting child buying, and a fee schedule
detailing each part of the adoption process. If they do not follow
the rules, agencies could lose accreditation.
However, there are concerns about the Hague Convention.
One concern is that the convention binds only the countries that
have ratified it. And, according to Joan Hollinger, an adoption
specialist at the Boalt School of Law at the University of Califor-
nia at Berkeley, some people worry that these regulations will
hold U.S. adoption providers responsible for the misbehaviors of
those in sending countries. For example, an agency could face
criminal or civil liability for not disclosing vital medical informa-
tion about a child to an adoptive family when the agency believes
it has disclosed everything. Linda Donovan, international adop-
tion coordinator at Adoption Alliance in Denver, says that there
are many good agencies and some not-so-good agencies, but al-
most all agencies do release medical information if they have it.
Sometimes, she says, they just don’t have it. Hollinger says the
problem is that agencies rely on attorneys, social service agencies,
and local “facilitators” in the countries of origin. For this reason,
U.S. agencies are reluctant to be held accountable.
Cindy Freidmutter, former executive director of the Evan B.
Donaldson Institute, on May 22, 2002, testified for more regula-
tion of intercountry adoption before the U.S. House Committee
on International Relations. She suggested three ways she hoped
the Hague Convention and the Intercountry Adoption Act would
improve services for all members of the adoption triad, as well as
ensuring more ethical international adoptions. Freidmutter rec-
ommended that (1) providers in the United States should be di-
rectly responsible for financial transactions, and that adopting
families should not have to carry large amounts of cash to make
Should the Government Provide More or Less Regulation of Adoption?
73

financial contributions in other countries; (2) prospective adop-
tive parents should know ahead of time exactly what services
they will receive, the fees they will pay, and the complaint reso-
lution process—in other words, that they will receive legal con-
sumer protections; and (3) prospective adoptive parents will have
all the information they will need to make an informed decision
about which agency to work with.
Another problem is that unscrupulous unregulated agencies
sometimes have placed children with severe problems, such as
fetal alcohol syndrome and attachment disorder, in unsuspecting
homes. (Linda Donovan of Adoption Alliance says that these con-
ditions are often difficult to diagnose even in the United States
and are especially difficult to diagnose in young children who
come from countries where medical resources are scarce.) How-
ever, say those wanting more regulation, a problem is that if the
placement disrupts, the children end up in foster care or in ex-
pensive residential treatment facilities, and U.S. taxpayers foot
the bill.
Intercountry adoption is not the only type of adoption that
cries out for more regulation, say its proponents. According to
Maureen Hogan, executive director of the National Adoption
Foundation, many of those opposing more regulation think law-
making should be left up to the states. Hogan argues for more
federal regulation in domestic infant adoption. She says, “Adop-
tion is big business and inherently interstate in nature” (Hogan,
2004, 88).
Hogan reports that as far back as 1955, the U.S. Senate looked
into deceptive and even abusive adoption practices. In oversight
hearings in the Judiciary Committee, Senator Estes Kevauver of
Tennessee heard testimony about some of the unethical practices,
which included kidnapping of babies by unscrupulous adoption
agencies and placement of infants with life-threatening condi-
tions with unsuspecting adoptive families.
In her 1993 testimony before the before the U.S. Senate Sub-
committee on Children, Family, Drugs and Alcohol, Lynn Gab-
bard, an adoptive mother of seven special-needs children, called
for a set of national standards for the care of children. Because of
chronic abuse by some birth parents with their own problems,
children sometimes suffer irreversible damage before they are re-
moved from these homes. Gabbard, who also placed children as
an adoption caseworker, did not presume to know how the gov-
ernment could implement such standards. However, the Adop-
74
Issues and Controversies

tion and Safe Families Act of 1997 and the Promoting Safe and
Stable Families Amendment of 2001 were steps in the right direc-
tion, according to many child welfare workers. These acts call for
“reasonable efforts” to move eligible foster children toward per-
manent adoptive placements (Gabbard, 1995).
Those opposed to more government regulation of adoption
also come from various corners. Laura Cecere, speaking for the
thousands of Americans who have happily adopted children
from other countries, believes that minimal interference from the
federal government has “worked” in intercountry adoption. If the
federal government’s role expands, Cecere fears that the process
could become burdensome, bureaucratic, and even more expen-
sive than it already is. Many people will not be able to adopt or
will decide not to. In addition, smaller agencies giving personal-
ized services could be forced to close their doors. Cecere does not
believe there is a crisis in intercountry adoption and feels that at-
tempts to “fix” what some see as problems will make the situa-
tion worse.
Based on his family’s experiences in trying to adopt a three-
year-old child, Jacob Sullum, a senior editor at the libertarian Rea-
son Magazine, believes that “government regulations and proce-
dures are too cumbersome” (2004, 88). Sullum writes that the
“byzantine system” is biased against action (108). Workers and
agencies are afraid to make decisions with which someone will
later find fault.
Infant adoption, too, should have less government regulation,
says Donald Boudreaux, a professor of law and economics at
Clemson University. Boudreaux has proposed “a liberalized adop-
tion market” in which birth parents would be allowed to contract
freely (at mutually agreed upon prices) for the sale of parental
rights of children up to the age of nine months. Adoptive parents
who purchase the parental rights would have the same rights and
responsibilities as if they had given birth to the child. The adop-
tive parents could not resell the parental rights. Some of the cur-
rent regulations would still apply. For example, adoptive parents
who contracted with birth parents would still need to have a home
study, and courts would still approve each adoption.
One advantage of this arrangement, says Boudreaux, would
be the end of the baby shortage. The supply of adoptable infants
would increase when the birth parents sell their parental rights.
Added benefits, he says, would include fewer abortions, greater
wealth for birth mothers, increased prenatal care, less child abuse,
Should the Government Provide More or Less Regulation of Adoption?
75

fewer children in foster care, and a decrease in the cost of fertility
treatments. Boudreaux anticipates objections to his proposal,
such as the argument that human life should not be an object of
economics. But he argues that the gains he foresees should not be
forsaken because some people “are uncomfortable with the use of
the language of economics and of commerce to explain how a lib-
eralized market in parental rights will function” (120).
Although she offers different suggestions, Elizabeth Bartho-
let, author of Family Bonds (1993), believes we need to deregulate
adoption. Current regulations, she writes, create obstacles, cause
adoption to be costly and unpleasant, and degrade adoption as a
way of building family, making adoption a “last resort.” She sug-
gests more financial incentives and reimbursements, as well as
state and federal tax systems to provide credit for all adoptions.
What about Infant Abandonment 
Laws? Are They “Safe Havens,” 
or “Baby Dumps?”
A newborn baby is left dead in a bathroom during the prom while
its birth mother goes back to the dance floor. Babies in trash cans,
Dumpsters, alleys . . .
Situations such as these inspired the first infant abandon-
ment law in Texas, passed by the legislature on September 1, 1999.
Since then almost all of the states have followed with their own
infant abandonment laws, also called “safe haven” or “safe sur-
render” laws. Most of the laws consider up to three days the age
limit, but some give the parent up to forty-five days.
What are these laws, and what is all the fuss about? Simply
put, state legislators have enacted the laws to provide havens for
newborns to be anonymously abandoned at “safe” places, such as
fire stations and hospitals. Most of the laws grant immunity from
prosecution for those who leave infants at the designated sites if
the baby has not been harmed.
Popular support for the laws is strong. No one likes to think
of puppies or kittens being abandoned, much less newborn ba-
bies. So the idea of offering a distraught parent a safe, legal, and
confidential way of relinquishing an unwanted infant has much
appeal. Those in favor of the laws say they will save babies’ lives
76
Issues and Controversies

(a baby’s last chance, say some), prevent crimes such as child
abuse, and make more infants available for adoption.
Those who question the laws say that at least they call atten-
tion to the desperation women feel who have an unwanted child
that they are unprepared to care for. But, they add, the laws offer
a “simplistic” apparent solution to a complex problem. They say
the laws were enacted too quickly. Because there is no national
agency that tracks the states’ programs and because many states
are not keeping track either, the effectiveness of the law is hard to
gauge.
Another problem is that (even now) not enough women have
heard of their state’s law. And yet, since 1999, states have tried
various advertising campaigns, sometimes spending large sums
of money on advertising. New Jersey tried a slogan, “No shame,
no blame, no names.” But a headline in the New York Times (March
20, 2004) announced: “Program Questioned after Another Dead
Baby Is Found.” The story says that critics worry that the pro-
gram is not reaching enough mothers. Since the program began in
New Jersey, sixteen mothers had used the program while fifteen
others simply abandoned their babies.
A second problem is that young women who abandon their
babies in unsafe places are usually in a state of denial about the
pregnancy; they are unlikely to have weighed their options or to
have thoughtfully considered possible outcomes. For example,
Cynthia Dailard pointed out that in the year after Texas passed its
law, twelve Texas infants were “illegally abandoned.” Not one
was abandoned under the terms of the law.
Many adoption advocates have other concerns about the safe
haven laws. For one thing, if the laws protect the anonymity of
the birth parents as most do, the children face a “closed book”
when it comes to identity questions later in life. (Some state laws
do provide for the parent to pass along medical information.)
However, in many of the states, the babies are turned over to state
or county departments of human services, which are prohibited
from contacting the birth parents.
Professor of family law Joan Hollinger points out that in
some cases the laws are unnecessary. Most states allow birth
mothers to “walk away” from the hospital in which they have
given birth without fear of prosecution. According to the New
York Times, a 1998 federal survey of hospitals showed that 31,000
birth mothers (many with drug problems) had left infants in ma-
ternity wards. 
What about Infant Abandonment Laws?
77

Also, critics say, the laws may bypass the interests of birth fa-
thers. She says safe haven laws create a disincentive for welfare of-
ficials to look for birth fathers, who may have family members in-
terested in the baby. Hollinger also observed in a New York Times
story (August 31, 2001) that the “practice of dropping your chil-
dren by the wayside,” formerly regarded with disfavor, has sud-
denly become “favored and promoted.”
On March 10, 2003, the Evan B. Donaldson Institute issued a
report that raised more questions about the effectiveness and con-
sequences of safe haven laws. The report concludes that contrary
to the claims made by safe haven law proponents, there is no ev-
idence that the laws are working, mainly because they do not ad-
dress the root causes of the problem. In addition to the objections
already mentioned, the report pointed out several “negative con-
sequences” of the laws: (1) that upset family members, or friends,
such as boyfriends and others with no legal rights, can abandon
the baby without the mother’s consent; (2) that women who
might not have abandoned their child may now do so because it
seems easier than receiving counseling and/or making an adop-
tion plan through an agency; (3) that biological fathers may be de-
prived of the legal right to care for a child, even if they have the
desire and resources to do so; (4) that the possibility (in the fu-
ture) of contact and/or the exchange of information between
birth parents and the child may be precluded; and (5) that the
laws may send a signal to young people that they do not neces-
sarily have to assume responsibility for their actions, and that de-
serting one’s child is acceptable.
But those in favor of the laws maintain that a flawed ap-
proach is better than no approach at all, especially when the lives
of children are at stake. The laws, now passed, are unlikely to dis-
appear anytime soon. (The Promoting Safe and Stable Families
Amendments of 2001—federal legislation—allows states to use
some of their federal dollars for safe haven programs.) Perhaps,
as some suggest, state laws may be amended at some time in the
future. If so, and even if not, the Evan B. Donaldson Institute rec-
ommends that the following elements be considered because they
are important adoption policy: (1) research on the causes of aban-
donment to better tailor an effective policy response; (2) educa-
tion for students, teachers, parents, counselors, and clergy about
how to identify concealed pregnancies and enable affected
teenagers and women to get help; (3) confidential counseling for
at-risk pregnant teens and women about prenatal care and safe al-
78
Issues and Controversies

ternatives for their babies, such as care by other biological family
members, or adoption if they cannot or do not want to parent;
and (4) the use of educational materials and support services to
help mothers, fathers, and other biological relatives raise infants
if they wish to do so.
What about Adoption Itself? 
Is It Valuable, or Not?
Doesn’t everyone agree that adoption is wonderful? Abirth mother
“makes a plan” for her child, a loving couple receives the baby, a
child gets a “forever home.” Isn’t that a perfect arrangement?
No, say some individuals and groups who are not pleased
with various aspects of adoption. In 1979, Death by Adoption, writ-
ten by Joss Shawyer of New Zealand, condemned adoption as an
alternative to abortion. Shawyer wrote that “adoption is a violent
act, a political act of aggression towards a woman who has sup-
posedly offended the sexual mores by committing the unforgiv-
able act of not suppressing her sexuality, and therefore not keep-
ing it for trading purposes through traditional marriage” (18).
Shawyer went on to state that unmarried mothers slide to the
bottom of the social ladder. She called the birth mother the “real
mother” and wrote that the adopted child has been denied the
right to her natural heritage, her “birthright.” Shawyer also
pointed to the suffering of the natural mother over the years and
postulated that for her, the actual death of the child might be
preferable.
Those adopted also feel pain because in many cases they
must hide their feelings in order to keep their adoptive parents
from “hurting.” Shawyer wrote that money spent on intercountry
adoption would be better spent on improving conditions for the
underprivileged in the foreign land. She concluded by saying that
studies have shown the long-term psychological after-effects of
abortion to be minimal, and that “restrictive abortion laws are not
only dangerous to women’s health, they are insulting to the entire
female population” (23). She urged “prevention” of unwanted
pregnancies and the “restructuring of society” to enable birth par-
ents to keep their babies.
Writing in the 2002 CUB Communicator, the newsletter of Con-
cerned United Birthparents, Darlene Gerow seems most upset
What about Adoption Itself? Is It Valuable, or Not?
79

about the commercial aspects of adoption. She states, “Adoption
is a huge profit-driven industry where babies are the commod-
ity.” Gerow argues that “the business of infant adoption is out of
control” because the affluent can buy whatever they want.
Poverty, she says, is the main reason birth parents cannot raise
their children.
James Gritter, author of The Spirit of Open Adoption (1997),
agrees. However, he disagrees with the prevailing practice in which
prospective adoptive parents pay the expenses (related to the preg-
nancy) of prospective birth mothers because the adoptive parents
end up expecting a return on their “investment.” In many cases
this practice causes birth mothers to feel indebted to the prospec-
tive adoptive parents and coerced into a decision to relinquish
parental rights.
Gritter also believes that infant adoption has become a lucra-
tive business that attracts many nonadoption professionals such as
attorneys. Adoption, he says, has become a “business model that
aggressively recruits consumers on a buyer-beware basis” (254).
Today, for many reasons, there are fewer infants to adopt. Society
has become more accepting of single parenting and out-of-wedlock
births, which allows more single mothers to parent their babies.
Birth control and abortion also decrease the number of babies avail-
able for adoption. At the same time, says Gritter, infertility rates in
the United States have increased, also for several reasons. Those
who might have had birth children are not having them because of
age and sexually transmitted diseases. Those adopting are more in-
terested in infants than in older “special needs” children.
In an article in Money (April 2003), Gay Jervey agrees that
money cannot be left out of the discussion on the value of adop-
tion. Although adoptive parents consider their children “price-
less,” adoption does involve an exchange of money, sometimes a
great deal of money.
Another who agrees is Adam Pertman, author of Adoption
Nation (2000) and executive director of the Evan B. Donaldson
Adoption Institute. Although Pertman definitely does not advo-
cate doing away with adoption, he writes, “Big money threatens
to undermine the confidence that prospective parents and the
general public must have if adoption is to fit comfortably into
America’s cultural mosaic, without people developing a new set
of negative values about the process” (51). 
Concerned United Birthparents does not advocate the “over-
throw” of adoption but does advocate for the preservation of birth
families as a first choice. In a brochure prepared for birth parents
80
Issues and Controversies

considering adoption, the CUB brochure states, “The words that
follow are not intended to be anti-adoption . . . but in order to be
truly a good thing, it needs to be a well-considered decision.”
It is not difficult to find those who believe that adoption, in
spite of its faults, is a good thing. Elizabeth Bartholet is one of
adoption’s most outspoken champions. In her book Family
Bonds (1993), Bartholet agrees that adoption is “often built on a
foundation of human misery” (xx). But she looks at adoption in
a way that is different from the way that those who oppose it
see adoption. “In an ideal world,” she writes, “we would elim-
inate the social ills that force some to give up the children they
bear and that deprive others of their fertility” (xx). She offers
that the argument of her book is “that in the world in which we
live today and will live tomorrow, the social ills with which we
are familiar do and will exist” (xx-xxi). Adoption works, says
Bartholet, and “should be understood as a possible alternative
to the blood-based family form” (xxi). She adds that although
adoption has the potential to exploit, “it is not inherently ex-
ploitive” (xxi). 
Another adoption champion is Jerome Smith, author of The
Realities of Adoption (1997). Smith says the fact that he has changed
his views about adoption does not alarm him. What does worry
him are statements made by some experts who say that adoption
doesn’t work and should be abolished. Smith thinks that in the re-
cent past, adoption has gone through more changes than any
other part of social work. Adoption is not without difficulties, he
writes.  But unlike some foes of adoption, he still sees adoption as
a solution to three interrelated social issues: child dependency,
unwanted pregnancies, and infertility.
Adam Pertman, author of Adoption Nation (2000), is another
of adoption’s champions. Although he admits that adoption is
fraught with controversy as well as aspects that call out for
change, he writes, “The emerging new realities undeniably are re-
plete with problems and paradoxes. They are raising new issues
for families and creating new dilemmas for the country. But they
also are more sensible, more humane, and more focused on chil-
dren’s well-being than the realities being left behind” (7).
Summary
Controversy in adoption is likely to continue for the foreseeable
and not-so-foreseeable future. Each controversial topic represents
Summary
81

a huge range of opinion. Perhaps if the student of adoption re-
members only one phrase, it will be “in the best interest of the
child,” which is not a cliché but a working command.
Adoption is a complex subject and will not please everyone
all of the time. But discussion is useful because from discussion
comes change. The entity of adoption will respond to some, but
not all, of the attempts to “fix” it. Every minute counts in the life
of a child. The challenge is to find new and better ways to make
sure that all children have safe and nurturing homes.
References and Further Reading
Adamec, Christine, and William Pierce. 2000. The Encyclopedia of Adop-
tion, 2nd ed. New York: Facts on File.
“Adoption Controversies.” 1999. CQ Researcher 9, no. 34. September 10.
American Civil Liberties Union. 1999. “ACLU Fact Sheet: Overview of
Lesbian and Gay Parenting, Adoption, and Foster Care.” Accessed at
http://www.aclu.org.
American Civil Liberties Union. 2005. “Gay Parenting Does Not Place
Children at Risk.” In Gay and Lesbian Families, Kate Burns, ed. Farming-
ton Hills, MI: Greenhaven Press, 41–45.
Amos, Deborah. 2006. “Finding Home: Fifty Years of International Adop-
tion.” American RadioWorks and National Public Radio, January 8. Ac-
cessed at http://americanradioworks.publicradio.org/features/adop-
tion/j1.html.
Ashe, Nancy. “Legalized Abandonment.” Accessed at http://www.crisis-
pregnancy.com/birth-mother/legalized-abandonment-safe-haven-laws.
Ashe, Nancy. “Report on Safe Haven Laws Draws Criticism, Support.”
Accessed at http://www.adopting.org/adoptions/report-on-safe-
haven-laws-draws-criticism-support.html.
Bartholet, Elizabeth. 2005. “Adoption and Race.” Adoption Today.
June/July: 21–23.
Bartholet, Elizabeth. 1993. Family Bonds: Adoption and the Politics of Par-
enting. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Bastard Nation: The Adoptee Rights Organization. Accessed at
http://www.bastards.org.
Beauvais-Godwin, Laura, and Raymond Godwin. 2005. The Complete
Adoption Book: Everything You Need to Know to Adopt a Child, 3rd ed. Hol-
brook, MA: Adams Media.
82
Issues and Controversies

Berger, Virginia. 2005. “Ban Hurts Children.” National Law Journal. April
4. Accessed at http://wf2la3.webfeat.org.
Bernstein, Nina. 2001. “Few Choose Legal Havens to Abandon Babies.”
New York Times. August 31:  Al.
Boudreaux, Donald. 2004. “Infant Adoption Should Be Deregulated.” In
Issues in Adoption, William Dudley, ed. Farmington Hills, MI: Green-
haven Press, 109–120.
Brooks, Dorothy E. 1991. “Black/White Transracial Adoption: An Up-
date.” OURS. July/August: 19–21.
Burke, Kate. 2004. “Arguments against Opening Adoption Records Are
Spurious.” In Issues in Adoption, William Dudley, ed. Farmington Hills,
MI: Greenhaven Press, 125–128.
Cameron, Paul. 2005. “Gay Adoption Should Not Be Accepted.” In Gay
and Lesbian Families, Kate Burns, ed. Farmington Hills, MI: Greenhaven
Press, 51–54.
Carp, E. Wayne. 1998. Family Matters: Secrecy and Disclosure in the History
of Adoption. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cecere, Laura. 2004. “More Federal Regulation May Displace Small In-
ternational Adoption Agencies.” In Issues in Adoption, William Dudley,
ed. Farmington Hills, MI: Greenhaven Press, 93–96.
Child Welfare Information Gateway. 2000. “Gay and Lesbian Adoptive
Parents: Resources for Professionals and Parents.” Accessed at
http://www.childwelfare.gov/pubs/f_gay/index.cfm.
Child Welfare Information Gateway. 2004. “Impact of Adoption on
Adopted 
Persons: 
A
Factsheet 
for 
Families.” 
Accessed 
at
http://www.childwelfare.gov/pubs/f_issues.cfm.
Child Welfare Information Gateway. 1994.  “Transracial and Transcul-
tural Adoption.” Accessed at http://www.childwelfare.gov/pubs/
f_trans.cfm.
Cohen, Mary Anne. 2000. “A Short Personal History of Adoption Re-
form.” First published in the Bastard Quarterly (Fall 2000). Accessed at
http://www.cubbirthparents.org/personalhist.html.
Cooper, Garry. 2006. “Are Gay Parents Good for Children?” Psychother-
apy Networker. January/February: 22–23.
Cunningham, Ann Marie. 2004.”More Regulation Is Necessary to Protect
People from International Adoption Scams.” In Issues in Adoption,
William Dudley, ed. Farmington Hills, MI: Greenhaven Press, 79–83.
Cushman, Candi. 2004. “Adoption Workers Are Wrongly Biased in Favor
of Gays and Lesbians.” In Issues in Adoption, William Dudley, ed. Farm-
ington Hills, MI: Greenhaven Press, 188–196.
References and Further Reading
83

Dailard, Cynthia. 2000. “The Drive to Enact ‘Infant Abandonment’
Laws—A Rush to Judgment?” The Guttmacher Report on Public Policy 3,
no. 4 (August). Accessed at http://www.guttmacher.org/pubs/
tgr/03/4/gr030401.html.
Dailey, Tim. 2005. “Gay Parenting Places Children at Risk.” In Gay and
Lesbian Families, Kate Burns, ed. Farmington Hills, MI: Greenhaven Press,
29–40.
Dudley, William, ed. 2004. Issues in Adoption. Farmington Hills, MI:
Greenhaven Press.
Ethica. 2003. “Safe Haven for Whom? An Ethica Position Paper.” Silver
Spring, 
MD: 
Ethica. 
Accessed 
at 
http://www.ethicanet.org/
item.php?recorded=savehaven.
Evan B. Donaldson Adoption Institute. 2005. “Gay Adoption Is Com-
monly Accepted.” In Gay and Lesbian Families, Kate Burns, ed. Farming-
ton Hills, MI: Greenhaven Press, 46–50.
Freidmutter, Cindy. 2004. “More Regulation of International Adoption
Agencies Is Necessary.” In Issues in Adoption, William Dudley, ed. Farm-
ington Hills, MI: Greenhaven Press, 84–87.
Gabbard, Lynn. 1995. “Unnecessary Barriers to Special Needs Adoption
Must Be Eliminated.” In Adoption: Opposing Viewpoints, Andrew Har-
nack, ed. San Diego: Greenhaven Press, 279–285.
George, Jason. 2004. “Program Questioned after Another Dead Baby Is
Found.” New York Times. March 20: B5.
Gerow, Darlene. 2004. “The Infant Adoption Industry Should Be Abol-
ished.” In Issues in Adoption, William Dudley, ed. Farmington Hills, MI:
Greenhaven Press, 49–65.
Gill, Owen, and Barbara Jackson. 1983. Adoption and Race: Black, Asian,
and Mixed Race Children in White Families. London: Batsford Academic
and Educational.
Goldsmith, Susan. 2004. “Transracial Adoptions Can Be Beneficial.” In Is-
sues in Adoption, William Dudley, ed. Farmington Hills, MI: Greenhaven
Press, 37–41.
Gritter, James L. 1997. The Spirit of Open Adoption. Washington, DC: Child
Welfare League of America Press.
Groze, Vic. 1995. “Single Adults Should Be Encouraged to Adopt Chil-
dren.” In Adoption: Opposing Viewpoints, Andrew Harnack, ed. San Diego:
Greenhaven Press, 126–134.
Hall, Beth, and Gail Steinberg. 2005. “PACT Editor’s Commentary.”
Adoption Today. June/July:  23.
84
Issues and Controversies

Harnack, Andrew, ed. 1995. Adoption: Opposing Viewpoints. San Diego:
Greenhaven Press.
Hogan, Maureen. 2004. “The Federal Government Must Regulate Adop-
tion.” In Issues in Adoption, William Dudley, ed. Farmington Hills, MI:
Greenhaven Press, 88–92.
Jenny, Carole, Thomas A. Roesler, and Kimberly Poyer. 1994. “Are Chil-
dren at Risk for Sexual Abuse by Homosexuals?” Pediatrics 94, no. 1
(July): 41–44.
Jervey, Gay. 2003. “Pricele$$.” Money 32, no. 4 (April).
Johnston, Philip. 2005. “Gay and Lesbian Couples Given Adoption
Rights.” News Telegraph. December 31.
Jordan, Jinny, ed. 2005. “Our Reflections: What Type of Racial Prejudice
Have You Experienced?” Adoption Today. June/July: 45–49.
Kirk, H. David. 1984. Shared Fate: A Theory and Method of Adoptive Rela-
tionships, rev. ed. Brentwood Bay, BC: Ben-Simon Publications.
Lowe, Heather. “What You Should Know if You’re Considering Adop-
tion for Your Baby.” Encinitas, CA: Concerned United Birthparents. Ac-
cessed at http://cubirthparents.org.
Means, Marianne. 2000. “Whose Rights Rule in Adoption?” Liberal Opin-
ion Week. June 19. 
Melina, Lois R., and Sharon K. Roszia. 1993. The Open Adoption Experi-
ence: A Complete Guide for Adoptive and Birth Families—from Making the De-
cision through the Child’s Growing Years. New York: HarperCollins.
Milbrand, Lisa. 2006. “Heritage Starts at Home.” Adoptive Families. April,
36–37.
Miller, Naomi. 1992. Single Parents by Choice: A Growing Trend in Family
Life. New York: Plenum Press.
Mitchell, Melisha, with Jane Nast, Barbara Busharis, and Pam Hasigawa.
1999. “Voluntary Registries Are an Inadequate Substitute for Open
Records Laws.” Adoptive Families. January/February. Reprinted in Issues
in Adoption, William Dudley, ed. (2004) Farmington Hills, MI: Green-
haven Press, 132–138.
Montgomery, Michael. 2006. “New Law Offers Hope in Fighting Adop-
tion Fraud.” January 8. American RadioWorks and National Public
Radio. Accessed at http://americanradioworks.publicradio.org/fea-
tures/adoption/j1.html.
National Council for Adoption. “New Hampshire Eliminates Confiden-
tiality in Adoption: Records Law a Harmful Aberration.” Accessed at
http://www.adoptioncouncil.org/media_news_04_0513.
References and Further Reading
85

News and Notes. 2006. “Domestic Transracial Adoptions Increase.”
Adoptive Families. March/April, 11.
News and Notes. 2005. “Positive Outcomes in Birth Family Reunions.”
Adoptive Families. September/October: 13.
Paton, Jean. 1954. The Adopted Break Silence: Forty Men and Women Describe
Their Search for Their Natural Parents. Philadelphia: Life History Study
Center.
Pertman, Adam. 2000. Adoption Nation: How the Adoption Revolution Is
Transforming America. New York: Basic Books.
Prowler, Mady. “Single Parent Adoption: What You Need to Know.” Na-
tional Adoption Center. Accessed through the National Adoption Infor-
mation Clearinghouse, http://naic.acf.hhs.gov.
Rappaport, Bruce M. 1998. The Open Adoption Book: A Guide for Adoption
without Tears. New York: Hungry Minds.
Rappaport, Bruce M. 2005. “Not Open Adoption, Just Adoption.” Adop-
tive Families. September/October: 17.
Robinson-English, Tracey. 2005. “The Joy of Adoption.” Ebony. Novem-
ber: 182–186.
Romanchik, Brenda. 1999. What Is Open Adoption? Royal Oak, MI: 
R-Squared Press. Shorter version available at http://www.openadoption
insight.org/what_is_open_adoption.htm.
Shawyer, Joss. 1979. Death by Adoption. Auckland, New Zealand: Cicada
Press.
Silverman, Arnold R., and William Feigelman. 1990. “Adjustment in In-
terracial Adoptees: An Overview.” In The Psychology of Adoption, David
Brodzinsky and Marshall D. Schechter, eds. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 199-200.
Simon, Rita J., and Howard Alstein. 2000. Adoption Across Borders: Serving
the Children of Transracial and Intercountry Adoptions. Lanham, MD: Row-
man and Littlefield. 
Smith, Jerome. 1997. The Realities of Adoption. Lanham, MD: Madison Books.
Smith, Jerome, and Franklin Miroff. 1987. You’re Our Child: The Adoption
Experience. Lanham, MD: Madison Books.
Solinger, Rickie. 2001. Beggars and Choosers: How the Politics of Choice Shapes
Adoption, Abortion, and Welfare in the United States. New York: Hill and Wang.
Sorosky, Arthur D., Annette Baran, and Reuben Pannor. 1978. The Adop-
tion Triangle: The Effects of the Sealed Record on Adoptees, Birth Parents, and
Adoptive Parents. Garden City, NY: Anchor Press/Doubleday.
86
Issues and Controversies

Sullum, Jacob. 2004. “Government Regulations and Procedures for
Adoption Are Too Cumbersome.” In Issues in Adoption, William Dudley,
ed. Farmington Hills, MI: Greenhaven Press, 97–108.
U.S. Department of State. “Immigration Visas Issued to Orphans Coming
to the U.S.” Accessed at http://travel.state.gov/family/adoption/
stats/stats_451.html.
Wardle, Lynn. 2004. “Restrictions on Gay and Lesbian Adoption Are Not
Unconstitutional.” In Issues in Adoption, William Dudley, ed. Farmington
Hills, MI: Greenhaven Press, 181–187.
References and Further Reading
87


3
Adoption around the World
A
doption practices vary across the globe; in much of the world,
adoptions are informal and unofficial. Whatever the mecha-
nism, however, most cultures agree on one principle—that
adoption should meet the needs of society, the family, and the
adopted children.
Although some Islamic societies interpret the Koran as ban-
ning adoption, in many cases families and friends still care for or-
phaned or abandoned children. According to The Encyclopedia of
Adoption (2000), adoption is practiced in Iran (at least by Shiite
Muslims) and in Tunisia and Indonesia. Christians in Egypt and
Syria may also adopt children.
In the middle of the nineteenth century in the United States,
Charles Loring Brace, a social reformer and founder of the New
York Children’s Aid Society, believed he had found an answer for
the more than 10,000 homeless children in New York City. Brace
started the Orphan Train movement, which moved approxi-
mately 150,000 children from the northeast United States on
trains to foster and adoptive homes in the West and Midwest.
Brace received both praise and criticism for his efforts, which
ended in 1929.
Even though the preceding numbers are huge, they pale in
comparison to today’s orphan situation in Africa and Asia. “Chil-
dren on the Brink” is a major international report released on July
10, 2004, at the fourteenth International AIDS Conference in
Barcelona, Spain. It provides statistics on orphans from eighty-
eight countries.
Millions of children in sub-Saharan Africa are orphans, one-
third because of AIDS, according to some reports. And although
89

a 2004 report from the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) estimated a total of 43 million orphans in the region,
intercountry adoption is rarely an option. Of 40,000 intercountry
adoptions around the world each year, less than a thousand chil-
dren come from Africa. According to a report from National
Public Radio on February 15, 2006, a valid fear of child traffick-
ing accounts for some of the reluctance. But suspicions and fears
of cultural imperialism are even more prominent, as are dis-
putes over the meaning of family and kinship. Nigeria, for ex-
ample, has recently tightened its laws against intercountry
adoption because of stories of children being “trafficked” as sex
slaves or laborers.
In Rwanda, according to UNICEF, one million children are
orphans. How to care for them is one of Rwanda’s greatest chal-
lenges. The genocide of 1994 had an enormous role in creating the
problem; HIV/AIDS adds to it. In Rwanda, the oldest child in the
family is often the head of the household because both parents
have died. Along with hunger, the children suffer from emotional
scars. In 2001 UNICEF introduced a mentoring program in which
volunteer “mothers” and “fathers” receive training in children’s
issues and rights. The volunteers, who are the children’s neigh-
bors, visit the children in the mornings and evenings to give them
advice about everyday problems. Agricultural skills are also
needed, and teaching the children these skills is another way
UNICEF and Rwanda’s Ministry of Social Affairs help the or-
phans build a better future.
In a three-part series on AIDS in the Denver Post, reporter
Bruce Finley tells the heart-breaking stories of some of these or-
phans. One is thirteen-year-old Veneranda in Tanzania, who lost
both parents to AIDS. Veneranda, who is now HIV-positive her-
self, has been caring for her brother and the two young children
of her aunt. The estimated prevalence of HIV in Tanzania is 7 per-
cent, or approximately two million people.
Africa has the greatest proportion of children who are or-
phans; Asia has the largest number of orphans, 65 million in 2001.
Who will take care of these children?
Dr. Jane Aronson is one example of an individual trying to do
what she can to help with an overwhelming problem. The clinical
assistant professor at the Weill Medical College of Cornell Uni-
versity has evaluated more than 4,000 children adopted interna-
tionally. According to an article in People magazine, she has trav-
eled to orphanages in Russia, Romania, Bulgaria, China, Vietnam,
90
Adoption around the World

Ethiopia, and Latin America. In 1997 she founded the Worldwide
Orphans Foundation (WWO). The organization documents the
medical and developmental conditions of children in orphanages
around the world to identify health-care needs (Erwin, 2005). The
Orphan Ranger program (something like a medical Peace Corps)
uses university students and health-care professionals who live
and work in the orphanages. They are fluent in the native lan-
guage and work in conjunction with orphanage staff members to
improve the physical, nutritional, and emotional health of the
children. Since 1997, Orphan Rangers have worked in Russia,
Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Bulgaria, India, Ecuador, Vietnam, China,
Serbia, Montenegro, and Ethiopia. The program treats orphans
with HIV/AIDS in Vietnam and Ethiopia and has started training
programs for physicians in these countries to care for HIV-in-
fected orphans.
On a larger scale, UNICEF with UNAIDS launched a cam-
paign in late 2005 called the Global Campaign on Children and
AIDS: Unite for Children, Unite against AIDS. The goal of the
campaign is to bring attention and resources to address the im-
pact of AIDS on children.
Although some countries have no formal adoption programs
at this time, policies and practices concerning adoption continue
to evolve. Countries that previously had few adoption laws are
formulating them. New laws supplant older ones.
The following countries represent a cross-section of people
and places: governments with differing structures, different reli-
gions, rich and poor, large and small, developed and not-as-de-
veloped.
Canada
Adoption policies and practices in Canada are similar in many
ways to those of the United States. For example, the home study
is a common requirement for all adoptions in Canada. But, just as
regulations vary from state to state in the United States, rules and
regulations vary in Canada from province to province and terri-
tory to territory. The mechanisms of a private adoption in Quebec
will be different from one in Ontario. Same-sex couples can adopt
as a unit in some provinces but not in others. Some provinces pro-
hibit prospective adoptive parents from paying expenses of the
birth mother.
Canada
91

As in the United States and the United Kingdom, the number
of prospective adoptive parents for infants far exceeds the num-
ber of babies available for adoption within the country. This situ-
ation often leads prospective adoptive parents to pursue inter-
country adoption.
Specialized rules and regulations apply to intercountry
adoptions, including the need for a home study specifically
geared to the country from which the child comes. In recent years,
China has provided Canadians with the largest number of inter-
nationally adopted children. In 2003, Canadians adopted 1,108
children from China. According to The Complete Adoption Book
(Beauvais-Godwin and Godwin, 2005), the number of intercoun-
try adoptions in Canada has remained relatively stable for several
years. One difference between Canadian and U.S. law has to do
with the definition of the word  orphan. Because U.S. law is more
restrictive, a child from another country who cannot legally enter
the United States may find a home in Canada. A website that ex-
plains each province’s regulations regarding intercountry adop-
tion can be found at www.interlog.com/~ladybug/canagen.htm.
If prospective adoptive parents choose domestic adoption,
they can proceed through the public sector or the private sector.
If they choose the private route to adoption, they will work with
a social worker who will do the home study (involving at least
three meetings, including a home visit), the submission of med-
ical records, the securing of background checks, and letters of
reference.
A similar process applies to those who adopt through Chil-
dren’s Aid Societies (CAS), but there will be no fees for the study.
Pre-adoptive parents will likely be required to take eight to ten
weeks of adoption preparation classes. Although a family might
receive an infant through this route, they are more likely to do an
adoption involving an older, hard-to-place child or a sibling
group.
The North American Council on Adoptable Children
(NACAC) promotes and supports permanent families for chil-
dren and youth in the United States and Canada who have been
in care, especially those in foster care and with special needs. The
website is http://www.nacac.org.
92
Adoption around the World

The United Kingdom
The United Kingdom is sometimes mistakenly called Great
Britain or Britain. The UK, however, consists of four countries—
England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. Specific adop-
tion laws may apply to only certain countries in the UK, but in
general the laws are similar.
According to the Department for Education and Skills, the
Adoption Act of 1976 governed England and Wales until re-
cently. In 2002 the Adoption and Children Act received royal 
assent and overhauled the older act. Goals of the new act were
to modernize the legal framework for both domestic and inter-
country adoptions.
On December 20, 2005, the British Association for Adoption
and Fostering (BAAF) issued a press release about the new act,
which became law on December 30, 2005. The act has several
new provisions, including the following three: (1) unmarried
couples in England and Wales, including gay and lesbian cou-
ples, can adopt jointly (previously only one member of the cou-
ple could be the legal parent); (2)  special guardianship orders
now give foster-care givers, relatives, and others who care for a
child the opportunity to apply for a guardianship order lasting
until the child turns eighteen (according to BAAF, which cam-
paigned for some of these changes, special guardianship will
give more security to children who cannot live with their birth
parents for one reason or another, but for whom birth parent ties
still exist); and (3) birth mothers and other birth relatives have
the legal right to request that an intermediary trace an adopted
person (who is now an adult) to find out if the adoptee would
welcome contact. The latter provision will allow (for the first
time) birth mothers to learn how their child is doing and possi-
bly make contact. The adopted adult must give consent and may
decline contact. Framers of the act say it puts children at the cen-
ter of the adoption process where they belong, allows more
people to adopt “looked after” (foster) children, provides an in-
dependent review mechanism for prospective adopters who be-
lieve they have been turned down unfairly, and helps cut harm-
ful delays in the adoption process.
Adoption policies in the United Kingdom are similar in
many respects to those in the United States. Randy Comfort,
founder of Our Place, a center for families who foster and adopt,
points out that the greatest similarity within both countries (and
The United Kingdom
93

perhaps in most countries that do adoptions) is that there are ex-
ceptions to every rule, and that by its very nature, adoption is
rarely a “straightforward” process. Other noteworthy similarities
to U.S. practices are  active recruitment of parents for older chil-
dren, including the use of websites featuring children who are
waiting for families; training for those preparing to adopt, in-
cluding information about the process on several websites; the
home-study process (or adoption assessment) as the cornerstone
of the approval process; a “staged” (that is, in stages) visitation
program for the to-be-adopted child entering a new family; and
the child taking the last name of the adoptive family and having
the right to inherit from them.
Requirements for adoptive parents in the UK also are simi-
lar to those in the United States. Requirements are not usually
rigid, except for those having to do with a person’s criminal
record or age (over twenty-one). Religious beliefs, marital sta-
tus, economic status, employment status, and home ownership
usually will not affect the ability to adopt, although reality can
differ from practice. (In the United States, similar requirements
may depend on the agency or the state.) “Causes for delay” may
include recent fertility treatments, a child in the home who is
less than two years older or younger than the child to be
adopted, very limited housing/bedroom space, a recent crimi-
nal conviction or a pending criminal charge, a new relationship,
and having lost a child recently. “Causes for concern and further
study” may be mental health problems or other health prob-
lems, depending on the severity. A criminal conviction for an of-
fense against a child or other serious offenses to a child in the
adoptive family who was “taken into care” are examples of sit-
uations that will derail the process. Details on this subject in the
United Kingdom are available at http://www.adoption.org.uk/
information/page1.htm.
Countries can and do share ideas as to new and better ways
of helping children. The concept of concurrent planning is one such
idea. According to the information website http://www.adop-
tion-net.co.uk, Lutheran Family Services in Seattle, Washington,
pioneered the concept of concurrent planning, which is widely
used in the United States today. The approach is to ask the adults
(prospective adoptive parents) to take the “risk” (of losing the
child who has been placed with them for adoption—if a child is
returned to birth parents) in order to spare the child a move (or
94
Adoption around the World

many moves). Children who have had to leave their birth homes
because of neglect or abuse are already feeling vulnerable. With
concurrent planning, a family is not only approved for adoption
but also for foster care. If the birth parents fulfill their require-
ments, the child may go back to the birth home, and the adoptive
parents will have to go along with and help facilitate this move.
But if the birth parents cannot fulfill their obligations under the
court order in a reasonable time, the court may terminate their
parental rights and the child may be able to stay in the pre-adop-
tive home (and be adopted).
In the “Director’s Report” (Adoption UK, 2006, 7), Jonathan
Pearce refers to ongoing problems that the Adoption and Chil-
dren Act of 2002 should eventually help rectify. One has to do
with discrepancies between funding available to children in fos-
ter care and that available to them in adoptive homes. Other
problems concern support services to adoptive families, which
even now sometimes seem inadequate, often because of lack of
funding; and services to families dealing with children who have
serious problems, for example, attachment-related behavior diffi-
culties. Pearce observes that if services are not made available to
families who adopt traumatized children, the whole adoptive
family is traumatized. Then when a disruption occurs, profes-
sionals blame the family. All of these problems are similar to those
encountered in the United States.
There are, however, important differences between the two
countries. In the UK,  the new Adoption Act allows same-sex cou-
ples to adopt as a unit, lets parents request paid parental leave for
twenty-six weeks plus an additional twenty-six weeks, if needed;
and minimizes costs  and allows for a standard national child
benefit allowance. In addition, intercountry adoptions are rela-
tively small in number and are somewhat discouraged. Accord-
ing to the website http://www.adoption.org.uk.information/
page1.htm, approximately 300 children are adopted from over-
seas each year in the United Kingdom. The website gives this cau-
tionary advice: “Such adoptions can be plagued by legal and ad-
ministrative complexities, and many believe that the needs of
these children would be better served if they were able to secure a
place within a family in their country of origin. For some the idea
of allowing children to be adopted by a foreign person or family,
who are almost always from a very different culture, and are often
of different racial origin, is a very questionable practice.”
The United Kingdom
95

Minor differences in terminology include the common de-
scription of children in foster care as “looked after” children and
the description of foster parents as “foster carers.”
Russia
A special Adoptive Families (September/October 2005) update on
Russian adoption reports that new incentives are encouraging
Russians to adopt more children in their country. (In 1996, for ex-
ample, Russians adopted 9,000 children, but approximately 30,000
become available for adoption every year.)
As in China, Russia began to view intercountry adoption as
a way of alleviating the problem of overcrowded orphanages,
and in  1991 Russia began allowing intercountry adoptions. In
2004, U.S. citizens adopted 5,865 children from Russia. According
to the U.S. State Department (http://travel.state.gov), that num-
ber dropped to 4,639 the following year. That year, the office re-
sponsible for adoptions, the Russian Ministry of Education and
Science, started scrutinizing the adoption process more carefully
than before and began to change some adoption procedures. As a
result, U.S. families adopting from Russia now may experience a
longer wait for a child.
One reason for the increased scrutiny had to do with reports
that as many as thirteen Russian children had died over the years
as a result of mistreatment by their American adoptive parents. In
a recent case, police arrested the adoptive parents of an eight-
year-old boy who had died of malnutrition. (The parents claimed
malnutrition was the result of cystic fibrosis.)
Because of highly publicized cases such as this one, 62 per-
cent of Russians responding to questions in a public-opinion poll
said they wanted tighter restrictions on intercountry adoption; 39
percent wanted an end to intercountry adoptions.
The Ministry of Education and Science began officially reac-
crediting agencies in the spring of 2005, although the process had
actually started earlier. If one or more post-placement reports
were missing, the foreign agency could lose accreditation.
The estimated number of orphans or abandoned children in
Russian orphanages ranges from 170,000 to two million. In Child
Welfare (March/April 1989), Valeria Sergeevna Mukhina, a psy-
chologist, unsparingly describes what may happen to children
without parents in residential institutions such as orphanages:
96
Adoption around the World

“Deviations in physical and mental development can be observed
in many of them” (235).
One of the reasons for difficulty is that children in large resi-
dential facilities must adapt to great numbers of peers, which cre-
ates “emotional tension and anxiety, and boosts aggressiveness”
(236). The children lack “a private place” where they can go when
they want to get away from other children and adults.
Because of competition with peers, along with an unrealized
need for attention and love, they may treat peers and younger
children with cruelty. In addition, a “we-ness” may develop, in
which the attitude toward the institution may be “you owe us” or
“give it to us.” According to the author, children in large institu-
tions simultaneously seek attention and reject it. They need and
crave love, but their behavior may push it away.
Mukhina describes how the government under Mikhail Gor-
bachev began meeting to try to give “real care and psychology-
based assistance” to these children in order “to eliminate their
posture of parasitism, negativism, and alienation” (237). A new
children’s fund resolved to reduce the number of children in each
facility and to staff these homes with “conscientious persons who
love children” (238). Even if a residential facility has the best
equipment, furniture, clothes, and toys, says the author, children
still need an adult in whom to put their trust. Teachers must be
trained in caring for children deprived of parents. This care must
teach children to be responsible for themselves and others.
In 1998, the Publishing House of Lenin State Pedagogical In-
stitute in Moscow published a textbook entitled Deprived of Par-
ents’ Care. Later, a series of articles, “Development of Individual-
ity in a Child Deprived of Parents’ Care,” contained the results of
work with children brought up in homes for small children, older
children’s homes, and boarding schools. Children who grow up
in residential care, says Mukhina, must each have a “mediator,”
someone who will introduce them to “real life” (240).
Since the time of Mukhina’s writings, new evidence has sur-
faced to support her views. For example, Carol Weitzman and
Lisa Albers in Pediatric Clinics of North America (2005) report that,
based on longitudinal studies of Romanian children, “a substan-
tial number of post-institutionalized children demonstrate signif-
icant cognitive difficulties” (1400). Weitzman and Albers cite a
landmark longitudinal study of institutionalized children in
Britain that followed these children for sixteen years. The chil-
dren who had previously showed “indiscriminate sociability and
Russia
97

attention seeking in their earlier years had problems with peers
by age sixteen” (1409).
Some observers say that the concept of adoption in general
does not seem as accepted in Russia as it is in some other countries.
In the past ten years, domestic adoptions in Russia have dropped
by 50 percent. For the first time (in 2004), the number of intercoun-
try adoptions exceeded the number of domestic adoptions.
To encourage more people to adopt within the country, Rus-
sia has now passed legislation requiring orphans to stay for at
least six months on a list of children available for adoption in the
country before becoming eligible for adoption by foreigners.
Also, there are no longer stringent requirements for a certain in-
come level and type of housing for prospective Russian adoptive
parents.
Some Russian authorities have called for a moratorium on all
U.S. adoptions of Russian children. Others have demanded psy-
chological testing of prospective adoptive parents; judges in at
least one region have implemented this requirement. Some have
called for an end to independent adoptions, as well as stricter
control over accredited agencies.
At this time the Russian Ministry of Education and Science
still supports intercountry adoptions. Those most involved are
hopeful that important reforms will prevent a moratorium.
China
China is another country that has attempted to deal with the
problem of overcrowded orphanages through intercountry adop-
tion. As a result of overpopulation, China instituted the One-
Child Policy in 1979. (Mao Tse-tung had earlier encouraged fam-
ilies to have as many children as possible as a way of showing
that the country was strong and wealthy.) In a 2003 article in the
Arizona Journal of International and Comparative Law, Sara R. Wal-
lace writes that the One-Child Policy produced 100,000 parentless
babies, 95 percent of which were girls.
China has a short history of both domestic and international
adoption. Chinese law first recognized the practice of domestic
adoption in 1981. Ten years later, the government enacted the
Adoption Law of China, which allowed people outside the coun-
try to adopt Chinese children. The following year, the country en-
acted the 1992 Adoption Law of China, which treated foreigners,
98
Adoption around the World

regardless of their heritage or Chinese connections, the same as
its own citizens. The purpose of the 1992 Adoption Law was to
protect lawful adoptions and eliminate black market adoptions.
Nevertheless, illegal adoptions continued, which caused the Chi-
nese government in 1993 to suspend all adoptions for ten months.
During this time the government ratified procedures for interna-
tional adoptions and established the China Adoption Organiza-
tion (CAO) as a central administrative entity to coordinate inter-
country adoptions of Chinese children. Applications must now
include a police report and proof of age, marital status, occupa-
tion, finances, and health conditions. If and when the CAO ap-
proves the application, it helps find a child for the potential adop-
tive parents.
In 1999 the government made changes to allow more indi-
viduals and families (both domestic and foreign) to adopt. These
changes included: (1) a lowering of the minimum age of appli-
cants from thirty-five to thirty years; (2) permission for those
adopting orphans, handicapped, and abandoned children to
adopt more than one child; and (3) a relaxation of procedural re-
quirements for domestic as compared to intercountry adoptions.
In 1998, Kay Johnson, Huang Banghan, and Wang Liyao pub-
lished a behind-the-scenes study of domestic Chinese adoptions
titled Population and Development Review. The authors wanted to
know why orphanages, especially in southern and central China,
had significant increases in their populations in the late 1980s and
early 1990s. They pointed out that the timing of the increases co-
incided with the government’s efforts to strictly implement birth-
control policies.
Beginning in 1991, the State Council had restricted the adop-
tion of healthy “foundlings” to those who had no other children
and were over thirty-five years of age. (This law codified previous
local regulations from the 1980s used to support the one-child
norm for population control.) Also beginning in 1991, the new
law permitted international adoptions by childless couples who
were more than thirty-five years of age, therefore enlarging the
pool of potential adopters to include those who lived outside of
China.
The authors report that until the time of their study, no one
since 1949 had done much systematic study of Chinese adoption
practices. (Before that time, the studies were mainly historical and
anthropological.) In the 1980s, however, some demographers
began to wonder about the fate of the so-called missing girls. This
China
99

term referred to a shortfall in recorded female births compared to
the biologically normal ratios of female-to-male births. Questions
arose, such as: What was happening to the infant girls? Were they
not being recorded, or were they being aborted or killed? Some
studies indicated that perhaps people were informally adopting
the missing girls.
Questions led to more questions. Were people “hiding” the
girls from authorities? Were these arrangements permanent or
temporary? How did abandonment fit into the picture? (The au-
thors say that Chinese demographers argued that abandoned
girls would ultimately end up in government-run welfare centers,
which would then record them.)
No one knows how many children are abandoned in China
each year. Estimates range from 100,000 to 160,000, but the au-
thors speculate that the actual number is higher. If the estimate
that 20 percent of abandoned children end up in the care of the
government is correct, what happens to the rest of the children?
The authors report that a “continuum” of care and planning
seems to be involved. On one end of the continuum are parents
who leave their children in a place that allows the parents not to
get caught. (Abandonment is a crime in China, but few of these
crimes have been prosecuted.) On the other end are parents
whose abandonment appears to involve the making of an “adop-
tion plan.” About 20 percent of the parents who abandoned a
child said they had placed a child on someone’s doorstep, possi-
bly because they knew those people would make good parents.
Favored couples were those with no other children or with a son
but no daughters. About half of the birth parents claimed to know
what had happened to their child. The authors concluded that be-
cause of the care with which many parents try to find a new home
for their child, abandonment becomes more like arranging an
adoption.
At the beginning of the study, the authors noted three phe-
nomena affecting young girls: (1) female child abandonment, (2)
skewed sex ratios, and (3) some kind of informal adoption in-
volving girl children. They hoped the study would discover the
answers to these questions: Was there a “culture” that allowed for
the adoption of foundling girls? Were prospective adoptive par-
ents deterred by the 1991 law?
The authors observed that several scholars have written that
the adoption of foundlings is uncommon today because of cul-
tural and societal attitudes. Were people willing to adopt unre-
100
Adoption around the World

lated children of unknown parentage? Or was it the law that kept
them from adopting?
Before setting out to answer their questions, the authors
noted that abandonment of girl children has a long history in
China. (Infanticide and abandonment of children also occurred in
many other countries and cultures, including Europe, worsening
in times of famine and stress.) After 1949, abandonment and in-
fanticide declined in China (except during the famine of
1959–1961) with the rise of political stability and improved eco-
nomic conditions.
But, beginning in the 1980s, the government began cam-
paigns to implement a one-child policy, even in rural areas. Be-
cause of resistance to this policy, the provincial governments in
the late 1980s allowed a second birth child if the first was a girl.
In fewer areas, policies allowed two children—if they were sev-
eral years apart in age.
In late 1995 and 1996, the authors used questionnaires to
gather information from 629 families. Of these families, 237 had
abandoned a child, and 392 had adopted a child. More than 95
percent of those who had abandoned a child or children lived in
rural villages or towns; approximately 85 percent of the adoptive
families also lived in rural villages or towns. The adoptions
spanned the period between the 1950s to the study’s publication
(1998), with more than 90 percent occurring in the 1980s and
1990s. All but ten of the 237 abandonments occurred in that same
time period.
The authors also interviewed forty of the adoptive families.
They collected more data from welfare centers and from inter-
views with local officials, articles in government publications,
newspapers, magazines, and journals.
The report gives many details. Highlights include the fol-
lowing: (1) except for three unmarried birth mothers of the 237
sampled, the birth parents were married; (2) most of the aban-
doning parents (88 percent) were engaged in “agriculture” as
their occupation and lived in rural villages; and (3) the typical
profile of an abandoned child is a healthy newborn girl with one
or more older sisters and no brothers. Her parents do not make
the decision lightly. They do so because they want a son. Family
planning policies gave them “no choice.” In 50 percent of cases,
the birth father made the decision.
In addition to caring about what happened to the abandoned
infants, the authors were interested in changes in adoption customs
China
101

in decades of political change, rapid economic development, and
severe legal restrictions in family size. The authors wondered if
Chinese society resembled Korean society, in which bloodlines
are of prime importance.
As mentioned earlier, in December 1991 when the govern-
ment passed the first adoption law of the People’s Republic, only
childless couples over thirty-five years of age could adopt. Ear-
lier, the government had made similar prohibitions to keep
people from adopting girls as servants or as wives for other chil-
dren in the family.
The authors report that partly as a result of legal restrictions,
the number of officially recorded adoptions in China is low. Civil
affairs officials say that as of 1996, they recorded approximately
8,000–10,000 legal adoptions per year. Other sources say the num-
ber is higher, perhaps 20,000 per year. As in the United States, sta-
tistics vary and may be incomplete. But the United States (with
one-quarter as many citizens) has approximately 100,000 legally
processed adoptions a year. As per longstanding custom, Chinese
families may arrange many adoptions through private contracts
that are not technically legal. These unofficial adoptions are
thought to be one of the places where the missing girls can be
found.
The majority of the adoptions studied were of children not re-
lated to the birth parents; less than 10 percent involved relatives.
Most (307 of 392) adopted children were girls, and 60 percent had
been abandoned. The authors point out that because of custom
(for old-age security and continuation of the family line), boys
still seem more valued than girls in China.
Except for two single women and seven single men, all of
those adopting children were married couples. Approximately
half (195) of the adoptive parents had no children at the time of
the adoption. Only thirty-five involved people over age thirty-
five as required by law for the adoption of healthy nonorphaned
children. Most people in China consider age thirty-five too long
to wait to become parents, and most Chinese people want to have
children.
The other half of those adopting already had children. This
contradicts the opinion of many Chinese scholars and officials
who claim that only those unable to have children by birth would
want to adopt.
The reason for adopting was most often to get a child of the
other gender. Most of the families adopted girls because girls
102
Adoption around the World

were most available. In some cases the families said that the gen-
der of the child did not matter. The reasons people wanted girls
tended to be emotional, such as the belief that girls are closer to
their parents and tend to be more obedient than boys; they are
usually caring and thoughtful. Some people wanted boys for the
previously mentioned financial and functional reasons, such as
someone to care for them in their old age, or a male to carry on
the family line. For many people the ideal family is one boy and
one girl.
The authors admit that some of their conclusions about chil-
dren were “anecdotal” because they obviously spoke with those
who were open (rather than secretive) about their adoptions. But
these researchers found no situations in which a family had
adopted a “daughter-in-law” or had adopted for the purpose of
acquiring a family servant. Contemporary adoption in China for
the child is similar to that in western countries: in general, parents
adopt children for the joy the parents hope the children will bring
to the family.
More than half (55 percent) of the adoptions in this study
were “open” in the sense that the children knew of their adoptive
status from the beginning (even though the government may not
have known). Twenty percent of the parents in the sample
planned to wait to tell the child the truth until the child was older.
Approximately 25 percent of the parents hoped to be able to keep
the secret of the adoption from the child forever—even if others
in the community knew of the adoption.
In the case of infertile couples, the desire for secrecy had
more to do with the “shame” of infertility than a reflection on the
status of the child. For example, parents might consider secrecy
more important with a boy who is expected to carry on the par-
ents’ bloodline.
In interviews, almost all of the parents in the study expressed
as much affection for their adopted children as for birth children.
Some claimed they loved the adopted child more than their birth
children. In three cases the adoptive parents returned children to
the birth family. But these situations did not have permanency as
their goal; the aim was to hide the children from birth-planning
authorities. In general, adoptive parents expected their “rights
and duties” to be “complete and permanent” even when the chil-
dren knew their birth parents.
Certain negative consequences did result from the 1991
Adoption Law. (One factor that did not turn out to be a problem
China
103

for families in this study was adopting under age thirty-five.)
Childless couples adopted approximately half of the healthy
abandoned children, and most were below the required age.
None received a fine. But a third of the adoptive parents who
broke the law by adopting when they already had a child or chil-
dren received fines, sometimes quite large.The remaining two-
thirds of the families who broke the “childless” law did not re-
ceive a fine, either because the authorities did not know or
because they “looked the other way.” The authors concluded that
if the children were not registered as adopted, they might be
some of the “missing girls.”
Another negative consequence (of requiring the adoptive
parents to be over thirty-five and childless) was the narrowing of
the adoptive-parent pool. Although many of the foundlings even-
tually found homes, the children lacked full legal status, a second
problem. In some cases, the inability to obtain proper legal status
for the child made school enrollment more difficult; the child
would likely be ineligible for benefits such as land allotments,
and the child might not be able to get health benefits such as rou-
tine immunizations. In the early 1990s, by allowing intercountry
adoptions, the government expanded the pool of childless poten-
tial adoptive parents over the age of thirty-five.
By mid-1998, more than 15,000 foundlings had found
homes overseas, mostly in the United States and Canada. Al-
though accused by some people of “baby selling,” the program
seems to have been relatively free from corruption, according to
the authors. Funds from the program have been used to im-
prove conditions for children in the orphanages.
In summary, the authors saw government policy as the biggest
obstacle to finding homes for abandoned children. One Chinese
writer estimated that only 20 percent of abandoned children
made it into the child welfare system. Critics of government poli-
cies have implied that there are few adoptions of foundlings
within China and that most of the abandoned children die. But
the authors of this study believe that a large numbers of people
within the country have come forward to adopt these children, in
many cases defying government policy to do so.
The majority of adopted children have done very well in
their new homes; most of them are treated like birth children. The
authors observe a “popular culture” that supports the adoption
of girls and children who are not related to the birth parents. Pun-
ishments, such as fines, have not deterred the adoptive parents,
104
Adoption around the World

which seems to make China different from countries such as
Korea and India, where efforts by the government have not pro-
duced a great number of internal adoptive families.
Families in general do not adopt disabled children. If the
family chooses to abandon a disabled child, it is usually because
the family finds the financial burden unbearable. The authors
suggest that if the state gave more help to the families, fewer dis-
abled infants would be abandoned.
In the past decade, say the authors, conditions in the or-
phanages have improved due in part to fees from intercountry
adoption, as well as from donations from Chinese citizens and
charitable foundations at home and abroad.
The authors recommended changes in adoption law that
took place soon after the study was completed (e.g., lowering of
the age requirement for adoptive couples). The researchers took
comfort in the knowledge that Chinese families had come for-
ward to adopt orphaned and abandoned children.
Romania
Romania is another country in which population policies con-
tributed to child abandonment and created a link with intercoun-
try adoption, During the tenure of dictator Nicholae Ceausescu
from 1967 to 1989, the government banned contraception and
abortion, and mandated every Romanian couple to have at least
five children (and in some cases ten children) for the nation. The
government also gave mandatory pregnancy tests and punished
women who did not have children. As a result of these policies,
coupled with difficult economic conditions, many of the children
ended up in orphanages. The state-run orphanages for healthy
children became grossly overcrowded. State-run asylums housed
physically and mentally ill children. After the overthrow of
Ceausescu in l989, media coverage revealed the plight of these
children (which numbered between 100,000 and 300,000), and
families from various parts of the world rushed to Romania to
adopt them.
Romania put a moratorium on intercountry adoptions in
1991 because child traffickers were selling orphaned and aban-
doned Romanian children to anyone willing to pay high prices.
Allegations surfaced of bribery, forged documents, and the bully-
ing of birth mothers to give up their children.
Romania
105

That year the Romanian government changed its adoption
laws regarding intercountry adoption. The first change was to
eliminate all private international adoptions. Intercountry adop-
tions would have to be accomplished through an approved
agency in the country of the prospective adoptive parents. Sec-
ond, the amendments encouraged domestic adoptions by making
available for intercountry adoption only those children who had
been waiting for a family in Romania for at least six months. Dur-
ing that time, those who worked with children were to try to find
a Romanian family for the child, who were required to be regis-
tered with the Romanian Adoption Committee. After these
changes, the Romanian government reopened its intercountry
adoption program but announced another moratorium on the
practice beginning in 2001.
Several articles in professional journals at the time described
the efforts of the Romanian government to press for preventive
services, family preservation (when possible), foster care, and in-
country adoptions. In June 2000, the government of Romania
doubled budget allocations for child protection to the equivalent
of $209 million annually to finance 440 orphanages that sheltered
100,000 abandoned or sick children.
On September 14, 2005, Thomas Atwood, president and CEO
of the National Council for Adoption, testified before the Com-
mission on Security and Cooperation in Europe to protest the Ro-
manian ban on intercountry adoptions. According to the tran-
script of his testimony, Americans adopted more than 8,200
Romanian orphans between 1990 and 2004. In the year 2000, 
Atwood says, U.S. citizens adopted more than 1,100 Romanian
orphans. In 2004, only 57 orphans found homes in the United
States; in 2005, none did. Atwood observed that at the time of his
presentation, Romanian law restricted intercountry adoptions to
biological family members. Although Atwood described the ban
on intercountry adoption as “cruel and arbitrary,” he admitted
that domestic adoption is preferable to intercountry adoption.
Atwood further argued that Romania’s own adoption au-
thority, the Child Protection and Adoption Authority, had esti-
mated that 37,000 children (or more) filled state institutions in Ro-
mania, and that the government should allow these children to be
placed with nonrelatives outside the country. Although Atwood
believed that Romania could be in violation of the Hague Adop-
tion Convention, the U.S. State Department admitted that parties
to the convention can put further conditions and restrictions on
106
Adoption around the World

the process. The ban on intercountry adoption was one of a num-
ber of measures designed by the European Union (EU) to de-
crease the number of children in state institutions by the time Ro-
mania joins the EU.
As pointed out by Sara Wallace in a 2003 article, the Hague
Adoption Convention expands on the general principles put
forth in earlier declarations and conventions, the goals of which
were to set specific standards and procedures for intercountry
adoption. Unlike an earlier declaration that says international
adoption is less desirable than foster care in the child’s country of
origin, the Hague Convention modifies the hierarchy of preferred
situations for orphaned and abandoned children.
Unfortunately, according to a 2005 report in the British med-
ical journal Lancet, “Romania’s abandoned children are still suf-
fering.” Author Carmiola Ionescu says that authorities frequently
tout improved conditions for orphans. (Authorities have stated
that in 2004 only 1,483 children under two years of age were in
state institutions, compared with 7,483 in 1997.)
But, writes Ionescu, official figures do not include the num-
ber of children abandoned in hospitals. The mothers of these
healthy children are too poor to take care of them, but under the
new laws, abandoned children cannot go into orphanages until
they are two years of age.
Overworked doctors and nurses have time only to feed and
change the children’s diapers, little more. The only “out” for the
children whose parents do not come back for them is foster care,
and there are too few foster parents. (If birth parents do come for
a child, they will be eligible for some benefits.)
But statistics released at the beginning of 2005 from UNICEF
show that birth parents abandon approximately 4,000 newborns
each year in maternity wards; approximately 5,000 are left in pe-
diatric hospitals. Also according to UNICEF, these figures are
close in number to those of twenty-five years ago when Ceaus-
escu was in power. According to Ionescu’s sources, most aban-
doned children stay in the hospital for at least six months. Not
only do these babies get little attention, but sick children also get
suboptimal care.
According to Ionescu, the Romanian government is aware of
the problem of babies being abandoned in hospitals, and officials
are trying to find solutions. A spokesperson for the National Au-
thority for the Protection of Children’s Rights said that the child
protection system was unprepared for the legislation forbidding
Romania
107

the transfer of children under the age of two to state orphanages.
At the same time, the government is also aware that children
need to start their lives in a family.
South Korea
One of Korea’s greatest challenges, writes Byung Hoon Chun
(1989), has been the historic belief in adoption as a way of contin-
uing the family line or family property. In the patriarchal agricul-
tural society, families consider boy children an asset. The idea of
adoption as a way of giving a child a permanent home because
the child is in need of one has been a concept slow to catch on in
South Korea.
The Korean War began in 1950, lasted for 3 1/2 years, and left
the Korean peninsula devastated. The war also left many orphans
in its wake—including many fathered by U.S. soldiers. Ten years
later, industrialization had taken hold, and South Korea wit-
nessed great economic growth. Population shifted to cities, and
sexual taboos fell along with the traditional family system. Re-
sults included unmarried mothers, out-of-wedlock births, and
abandoned children. Because a large part of the country’s budget
went to defense spending, protecting South Korea from its hostile
neighbor North Korea, South Korea had difficulty taking care of
its homeless children, leaving a smaller portion of the budget for
child welfare services. 
To its credit, the South Korean government gave priority to
the idea of home placement over orphanage placement. The gov-
ernment also took several steps to popularize the concept of do-
mestic (in-country) adoption. For example, it authorized child
guidance clinics and orphanages to provide adoption services and
spent money on recruiting Korean families to adopt Korean or-
phans. The government also limited the number of agencies work-
ing with intercountry adoptions and urged them to concentrate in-
stead on domestic adoptions.
In spite of these efforts, the surge in domestic adoption lasted
only about a decade (1970–1980). The importance of the family line
continues as the main motivator for adoption within the country.
Korean families seem to prefer healthy male infants. Girls and older
or handicapped children have an uphill battle in finding homes.
This is not unlike the difficulty older, handicapped children have in
finding homes in other countries, including the United States.
108
Adoption around the World

Two main differences exist. One is that unlike the move to-
ward openness in many other countries such as the United States,
adoptions in Korea are mostly kept confidential, with families
trying to act as if the children were born to them. Another differ-
ence has been that biological families have had the right to cancel
the adoption for up to a year after the child is placed with an
adoptive family.
The government of South Korea is very active in the entire
intercountry adoption process, including setting standards for
adoptive parents, assuming (along with the foreign country) re-
sponsibility for the home study, and requiring post-placement
reports. The government limits both the number of agencies
within the country that can arrange intercountry adoptions and
the countries to which orphaned or abandoned children can be
sent. Thus, the Korean government can focus on post-placement
and other services to children to lessen their cultural adjustment
issues.
The Social Welfare Society, now a private organization, re-
ceived its name in 1971 and oversees many programs besides in-
terlocutory adoptions. These include  domestic adoption pro-
grams, foster care, counseling of birth mothers, and other
programs of general social welfare. The society also publishes
guides such as “Korea Guide” and “Guidelines for Adoptive
Parents.” Although escorts may take Korean children to their
new homes in other countries, the government encourages
adoptive parents to pick up their children and also to return
later for visits.
Finland
In an article in Child Welfare, Sirpa Utriainen (1989b) provides a
glimpse into child welfare and adoption programs in Finland and
how they have evolved over the years. Much of Finland’s history
is tied to Russia, which seized Finland in 1809. Nicholas II of Rus-
sia ruled Finland between 1894 and 1917, at which time Finland
declared its independence;  civil war broke out the following Jan-
uary. In 1939 Russian forces attacked Finland; the Finns under
General Carl G. Mannerheim fought two wars with Russia—in
1939 and 1944.
Urbanization and industrialization in the late nineteenth cen-
tury gave rise to the Finnish child welfare system. Parents had to
Finland
109

work long hours in the mills and factories, leaving many children
without anyone to care for them. In the late 1860s, the Great
Famine left 26,000 orphans in need of care. On the initiative of the
Russian general governor, the country set up an association to
help orphans and “troublesome children.”
Private child welfare associations organized street kitchens,
schools for girls of working parents, and orphanages. Beginning
in the 1870s, various statesmen embraced the idea of elementary
schools. Most people still considered social problems as moral
problems.
In 1918 the civil war left more orphans, especially on the los-
ing side. According to Utriainen, the editor-in-chief of the Poor Re-
lief Journal wrote that it would be cheaper and safer for society to
educate orphans than to put them in prison.
The first plans called for placing orphans (or “half orphans”)
in foster homes in the country, but some mothers of half-orphans
objected. The government then created a state subsidy system to
allow many of the children to stay in their own homes. According
to the author, 6,000 children received assistance to allow them to
stay at home, 2,500 children entered children’s homes, and 1,700
went into family foster care. Some mothers did not apply for
“poor relief” because they would have lost their right to vote.
Soon the labor movement created its own programs, and between
1919 and 1922 assisted more than 30,000 children.
In the 1920s, services expanded even more, and two large
private child welfare organizations came into being. One was the
Mannerheim League for Child Welfare, which had as its goal the
improvement of the health of Finnish children through children’s
clinics. The other was the Finnish Child Welfare Association,
which began to work in foster care and adoption.
After years of preparation, the Finnish parliament approved
a new child welfare act in 1936 that formalized the conditions
under which a child could be taken into care. If parents could not
adequately provide for their children, the social welfare board
would intervene.
The Child Welfare Act of 1984 put into effect stricter rules, all
of which are geared toward “the best interests of the child.” Not
only do professionals have the duty to notify authorities of any
child in need of protection, but every citizen has this right.
In practice, public authorities on various levels, such as local,
provincial, and national, do the work of child welfare. For exam-
ple, the Provincial Administrative Court must confirm the order
110
Adoption around the World

if a child is taken into care against the parents’ wishes. In actual-
ity, private child welfare organizations assist the government and
abide by the same rules.
The list of areas in which the government helps families is
long. Child welfare services include health care, daytime care, ed-
ucation, social security, and other forms of financial help related
to those with low incomes or special needs.
The Child Welfare Act provides a framework for situations in
which the government must intervene and provide substitute
care for children. These situations include cases in which remain-
ing in the birth home would endanger the child’s health and de-
velopment, and cases in which children endanger their own
health and development by using dangerous substances or com-
mitting serious illegal acts.
As in the United States and other countries with similar laws,
there are always those who find it hard to accept the fact that
some people cannot take proper care of their own children. Utri-
ainen (1989b) points out that everyone should remember the
overarching principle of the best interests of the children; the goal
is not to punish parents. Many times, writes Utriainen, social
service agencies try supportive measures aimed at keeping the
child at home, sometimes for too long; taking a child into care is
always the last step. These principles are similar to child protec-
tion principles in the United States.
The reasons why children in Finland have ended up in care
have changed over the years. In the 1930s and 1940s, many par-
ents died; in the 1950s and 1960s, parents may have been sick or
they may have lacked housing. From the 1970s until the present,
parents tend to have abused alcohol or drugs.
More than half of the children are placed in foster homes,
and almost all of these (90 percent) are long-term foster-care
placements. Introduced in the relatively recent past, legislation
has made it possible for children to keep in touch with (some-
times even visiting) biological parents, except in cases in which
such contact would endanger the child or anyone else involved.
This tendency toward contact is in keeping with U.S. trends, es-
pecially in the cases of older children. Residential care may in-
clude children’s homes, nursery homes, reception homes, mother
and child homes, family group homes, youth homes, and com-
munity homes.
The Adoption Act (amended in 1985) covers all Finnish
adoptions. Before a birth mother consents to a relinquishment,
Finland
111

she must have had counseling, which is focused on the best in-
terests of the child. One section of the act states that the birth
mother must have recovered from the delivery (no earlier than
eight weeks after the child’s birth) before she gives consent to
adoption (Utriainen 1989a).
The only private agency licensed to provide counseling is the
Finnish Child Welfare Association; the local social welfare board
also may do the counseling. As with birth mothers in the United
States, if a client has already decided on an adoption plan, the
number of counseling sessions may be limited to two or three.
Sometimes, however, many more sessions may be necessary. The
birth mother has many opportunities to reflect on her decision.
For example, she may come to the children’s home to nurse and
take care of her child as a way of helping her decide if she can or
cannot parent the child. Newer legislation in Finland also takes
into consideration the rights of birth fathers, and establishing pa-
ternity is a goal for all children.
Whereas in many countries it seems that the welfare of chil-
dren takes a back seat to such concerns as the defense budget, in
Finland, state and municipal taxes finance services, along with
social security fees from employers and employees. Clients pay
minimal fees for services such as adoption counseling.
The Planning and State Subsidies for Welfare and Health Act
of 1982 made subsidies to private agencies possible as part of
long-term national planning. Two “unusual” means of helping to
finance private agencies are the Slot-Machine Association, a state-
controlled monopoly whose profits are used to finance the work
of social welfare and health-care organizations; and the Chil-
dren’s Day Foundation, which has six child welfare organizations
as shareholders.
As is the case with most private nonprofit adoption agencies
in the United States, private agencies also must work to finance
their own activities. “They collect membership fees, receive do-
nations, and carry out fund-raising campaigns [and] sell their
own products, such as bags, towels, scarfs, candles, post-cards,
posters, and all types of publications” (Utriainen, 1989b, 140). In
addition, clients pay a small user’s fee, and municipalities may
purchase places for their children in a children’s home run by the
agency.
112
Adoption around the World

Sweden
In a related story, Anitha Ronstrom points out that social workers
in Sweden and in other countries who have responsibility for
making decisions about the welfare of children work under diffi-
cult circumstances. “They are either accused of not intervening in
time to protect children in harmful situations, or they are accused
of taking children into care without reason” (Ronstrom, 126).
She goes on to point out that the debate has raged for many
years. One group points out how damaging it is for children to be
separated from biological parents. Another group points out the
damage done to children who remain in an unsafe home.
Usually, says Ronstrom, people tend to emphasize the par-
ents’ rights (to an intact family) at the expense of the children’s
rights. How long, she asks, can children be neglected? Although
the scars of physical abuse and neglect may heal with time, emo-
tional scars often last a lifetime.
In Sweden, Ronstrom says, children are usually taken into care
for one of four reasons: drug addiction of parents, parents’ alco-
holism, mentally ill parents, and developmentally delayed parents.
(Most often parents in the last category get support from the com-
munity and keep their children, but she says many of these chil-
dren have delayed development too, or severe behavior problems.)
Finally, Ronstrom wonders if the people who think it is al-
ways best for children to stay with biological parents have ever
talked to a child who has grown up in an abusive or neglectful
home. She asks if they have ever “seen a baby who after a few
months has already lost its zest for life and has ended up in a hos-
pital because of failure-to-thrive or depression; or a ten-year-old
who has attempted suicide several times because life is unbear-
able . . .if they have ever wondered why an eight-year-old starts
to sniff or use drugs or play ‘suicide-games’ . . .why 12-year-old
girls are prostitutes” (Ronstrom, 128). She goes on to say that chil-
dren who grow up in destructive homes often become self-de-
structive. We know this, Ronstrom says, but we don’t “act” on
this knowledge because of the conflict it creates between the best
interests of children and the interests of adults. The conflicts Ron-
strom describes are similar to conflicts in the United States.
Sweden
113

The Philippines
In the early days of the Philippines, religious organizations pro-
vided care for poor and abandoned children. The Hospicio de San
Jose began taking care of abandoned babies in 1810; in 1885, Asilo
de St. Vincent De Paul began caring for destitute and orphaned
girls. In 1917, under U.S. auspices, the country established its first
governmental orphanage (Balanon, 1989).
Greek and Roman law provided the core of adoption law for
the Philippines. For example, in 1923 the legislature authorized
public institutions or duly incorporated charitable agencies cho-
sen by the Public Welfare Commissioner to place children under
the age of eighteen for adoption and give consent for their adop-
tion. Later that year, the attorney general wrote an opinion that al-
lowed a foreigner who permanently resided in the Philippines to
adopt.
In the 1950s, the New Civil Code of the Philippines provided
for childless couples, including resident aliens, to adopt. At that
time the courts handled most adoptions. On January 1, 1964, the
Rules of Court took effect; these rules laid out new procedures for
adoption.
The Child and Youth Welfare Code of December 10, 1974,
which went into effect the following year, eased the limitation
that only childless couples could adopt: “any person in full pos-
session of his or her civil rights, including nonresident aliens,”
could be considered as an adoptive parent (Balanon, 244). A social
worker from the Department of Social Welfare and Development
(DSWD) conducts case studies of the child to be adopted, the
adopting parents, and the birth parents. As in many other coun-
tries, including various states in the United States, a period of six
months is required before finalization of the adoption unless a
judge waives this waiting period.
Moving on to February 23, 1976, the Council for the Welfare
of Children promulgated a series of rules and regulations on for-
eign adoption. The adoption of a Filipino child by someone from
another country would be allowed only when professionals could
not find a suitable home in the Philippines. The secretary of the
DSWD has the authority to approve placements and the travel of
children to the other country.
The laws have since changed many times. As is the case in
the United States, there are those who question whether or not an
114
Adoption around the World

American, Scandinavian, or Australian couple can fully meet the
cultural needs of a Filipino child. There is the question of “impe-
rialism,” and an observation that some foreign parents have a
feeling of “privilege” and that at times have been given “imme-
diate attention or preference over their Filipino counterparts”
(Balanon, 245). Foreign couples sometimes try to get require-
ments lifted and may have politicians intervene on their behalf.
They forget “that the Philippines is an independent nation and no
longer a colony of the United States” (Belanon, 245). However, ac-
cording to the U.S. State Department, which issues immigrant
visas to orphans coming to the United States, from 1995 to 2005
the number of adoptions of Filipino children to the United States
remained steady, at under 300 children per year. 
Poverty continues to be a serious problem in the Philippines.
Add to that high population growth, disruptions in family life,
unstable political situations, and inadequate social services,
which must cope with working children, street children, ex-
ploited and migrant children, and children who are “disabled,
abused, abandoned, and neglected” (Belanon, 241). Some schol-
ars estimate that approximately 8,000 children are in institutions
in the Philippines; they may be without parents or have parents
who cannot cope with their needs.
Extended families have tended to take care of orphaned chil-
dren, many of whom are never legally adopted. The concept of
adopting an unrelated child is somewhat new to Filipinos and is
evolving.
In the past, the concept of placing the child’s best interests at
the forefront may have been secondary to other concerns; for ex-
ample, prospective parents may have taken in a child who will
care for them in their old age or as a domestic helper. In recent
years, however, the government has shown a growing concern
for the best interests of the child. Even so, adoptions continue to
take place primarily within the extended family (i.e., relative
adoptions). For example, between 1986 and 1987, the govern-
ment recorded 2,500 adoptions. Of these, 82 percent were in-
country (or domestic) adoptions, and 18 percent were interna-
tional (or intercountry) adoptions. Of the domestic group, 75
percent involved relatives. Likewise, 30 percent of the interna-
tional adoptions were by relatives. Of the domestic adoptions
only 5 percent involved licensed child-placement agencies and
were children not related to the adopting family. The other 20
percent were private adoptions.
The Philippines
115

According to Lourdes Balanon, adopting families tend to
prefer a healthy female infant with fair skin, a high-bridged
nose, and a “fairly good” family background. (This preference,
at least for the sex of the child, is not very different from the
preference of adoptive families in the United States.) According
to Lisa Milbrand, most adoption agencies and adoption attor-
neys in the Philippines will not allow parents who want domes-
tic infants to choose the sex of the child. But she quotes Susan
Myers of the Lutheran Adoption Network as saying that 80 per-
cent of families, if given a choice, would choose to adopt a girl.
(Intercountry adoption is another matter, especially for those
adopting from China, where 95 percent of the available children
are girls.)
As in most countries with adoption programs, families in the
Philippines complete the application process, matching, place-
ment, and post-placement supervision (or support) before filing a
Petition to Adopt in court. The DSWD has local offices spread
throughout the country, and the Kaishang Buhay Foundation is a
licensed child-placement agency.
When adoption professionals in the Philippines cannot find
a family to meet a child’s needs, only then does the country turn
to intercountry adoption to keep a child from growing up in an
institution. More male children than female children are available
because of the preference of Filipino families for girls. Approxi-
mately 75 percent of the children available in this category go to
American families, including relative adoptions with Filipino
Americans. Most of the remaining children go to Norway, France,
Germany, and the Netherlands.
The government carefully regulates the process of interna-
tional adoption. The DSWD is the only agency authorized to
place Filipino children in other countries. This agency screens and
accepts applicants, endorses home studies, selects the best place-
ment for a child, approves the placement, prepares the child for
travel, processes travel documents, and monitors the placement
until finalization.
The whole process usually takes a year, not including the
waiting period. The DSWD requires regular reports on the chil-
dren in placement as the basis for consenting to the final adop-
tion. Even after finalization, the DSWD keeps in touch with the
children and their adoptive families through follow-up visits
from escort social workers, visits of the children and families to
the Philippines, and by an entity called the Motherland Tour.
116
Adoption around the World

The first Motherland Tour (July 1987) involved five young
adults who had left the Philippines for adoptive homes in the
United States when they were between the ages of nine and six-
teen years. The tour, as part of the postadoption services of Holt
International Children’s Services, brought the young people back
to their homeland to explore their roots and their cultural her-
itage. Feedback from their adoptive parents after the tour showed
the experience to have been a great success. The adoptees “expe-
rienced greater self-esteem and security; they have continued to
have contact with one another” (Balanon, 251). (Homeland tours
are available through many countries. The Ties Program provides
a travel experience for adoptive families who want to visit the
child’s country of origin with their child. More information on
this program is available through Adoptive Families magazine or
http://www.adoptivefamilytravel.com.)
India
In spite of progressive legislation in child welfare through its Ju-
venile Justice Act, India still has had difficulty implementing
some of its laws for the benefit of children. Part of the problem,
according to Deenaz Damania, of Bangalore, India, is poverty. If
40 percent of India’s population lives below the minimum sub-
sistence level, then approximately 108 million children are vic-
tims of poverty, she observes. The population of India is approx-
imately 42 percent children; about 22 million Indian children are
born each year.
Damania cites statistics from 1980 that estimate the number
of orphaned children under the age of fourteen at around 38 mil-
lion; by 1991 the total number of orphans was projected to be
about 30 million. Damania points out that not all orphans are des-
titute and not all destitute children are orphans. Nevertheless,
probably 12 million at the time of her writing were orphans.
So, she asks, what happens to an abandoned child found by
the wayside? Probably the child will appear before a juvenile
court magistrate, who will order the child placed in an institution
until he or she reaches the age of eighteen.
Generally in India, the government formulates policies but
leaves the implementation of these policies up to voluntary 
organizations. If the child is lucky, he will end up in an institu-
tion with progressive policies and practices. If the child is un-
India
117

lucky, he may end up in an institution in which caretakers are
unresponsive to the child’s needs.
In one study, Damania reports, researchers found that chil-
dren who lived in poverty before their entrance into institutions
had physical and nutritional health that actually got worse in in-
stitutional care. The researchers discovered that 85 percent of the
children suffered from malnutrition.
These statistics go along with the findings of Jennifer Cham-
bers, who reported in Pediatric Clinics of North America (1252) that
“there is a degree of neglect in all orphanages because it is im-
possible to provide one-on-one care for each child.” She goes on
to write that “neglect alone, even in the presence of adequate
calories, can cause global growth failure, but it affects height most
drastically” (1252). The longer a child suffers from nutritional as
well as emotional deprivation, the less likely the child will ever be
able to catch up to the normal range.
Damania believes that giving voluntary agencies decision-
making powers regarding the fate of orphaned and destitute chil-
dren may not be a good idea. In some cases, an institution had
made the decision that a particular child should stay in the insti-
tution even though alternatives for family placement in the com-
munity were available. Another scenario found institutions com-
bining the care of the very young with the care of the very old.
She calls for more governmental control, not only of policy for-
mulation but also of program implementation. As things stand,
duplication of services and waste exist. If government policy
gives preference to families as the best place for a growing child,
then the government must provide more funds for promoting
noninstitutional programs, such as in-country adoption, family
foster care, and sponsorship.
Mexico
If, over the years, citizens of the United States have had one major
misconception about adopting from Mexico, it is that the adoption
of a child from that country would be a simple process. Perhaps
someday it will be easy (or easier). Currently it is difficult. Ac-
cording to the U.S. Department of State, of the 22,728 children
adopted internationally in 2005 by U.S. families, only 98 came
from Mexico.
An estimated 350,000 abandoned or orphaned children live
118
Adoption around the World

in public or private institutions in Mexico. Many are crowded,
and funding is in short supply. With such a need for families, with
Mexico so close, and with so many Spanish speakers in the
United States, why is adoption from Mexico so hard?
Bureaucratic “layers” and legal differences, such as what
constitutes the definition of an orphan, are parts of the problem.
Until recently, Mexican officials pointed out that the United States
had signed the Hague Convention but had not implemented it. In
an article in the Denver Post (July 22, 2001), reporter Bruce Finley
quotes Cesar Sotomayer Sanchez, director of the System for Full
Development of the Family, Mexico’s federal office dealing with
family matters, as saying that for U.S. families interested in
adopting children from Mexico, “the only problem is that agree-
ment” (18A). However, another problem has been that Mexican
authorities want to retain the right to bring a child back to Mex-
ico if the adoption fails.
Some might say that Jim Polsfut was one of the lucky ones.
But luck was only part of the process. Polsfut, a financial manager
in Denver, had worked in Mexico and had supported a home for
street children there for ten years. Polsfut, who is single, had vis-
ited an orphanage, Casa del Sol, a relatively well-funded private
orphanage in Puebla, Mexico. One day, Polsfut saw a six-year-old
boy, Javier, who had reached the upper limit for living in the or-
phanage. When Polsfut mentioned that he had an interest in
adopting the boy, authorities were skeptical. Polsfut agreed to
provide Mexican authorities with a video of Javier, a report from
a social worker, and a school evaluation every six months for
three years. In addition to the paperwork involved with any in-
tercountry adoption, Polsfut had two long psychological inter-
views but appreciated the thoroughness of the Mexican profes-
sionals, who said they ultimately made an exception for Polsfut
because he agreed to raise Javier under Mexican supervision, and
they knew him. The U.S. consulate handled visa paperwork.
Javier eventually walked with Polsfut across the border to El
Paso, Texas.
Javier’s adoption raised the hopes of many of the other chil-
dren at Casa del Sol. One of these children was Juan Carlos, an-
other six-year-old, who said, “Yes, I’d like to have parents.”
“But,” wrote Finley in the Denver Post report, “his hopes almost
certainly will be crushed.”
Not if one person could help it. Valerie Moore, another Den-
verite, saw a picture of the smiling brown-eyed boy in the Denver
Mexico
119

Post. Valerie, too, had worked in Mexico and spoke fluent Span-
ish. She had a teenage daughter from a previous marriage and
wanted another child. She and her husband, Jeff, married for ten
years, had been unsuccessful in having a birth child. Moore, who
says she has “always had an infatuation with the Latin culture,”
went with her mother to Mexico to see Juan Carlos in person and
“fell in love with him” (discussion with the author, March 18,
2006). But the adoption was a “bureaucratic challenge. We didn’t
tell him about the possibility of adoption,” says Moore. “We just
visited him as often as possible for three or four days at a time
and shared his life—back and forth to Mexico about twenty times
over a 2 1/2 year period.” Although Juan Carlos had lived in the
orphanage for three years, the parental rights of his birth parents
had not yet been terminated. (Eventually this did happen, mak-
ing Juan Carlos free for adoption.)
Moore explains that the Departmento Integral Familiar tries
to do everything possible to find relatives or family friends who
would be able to adopt a particular child before turning to out-
siders. Even so, Europeans find adoption of children from Mexico
less of a challenge than do individuals from the United States.
Finally, everything came together and the Moores were able
to bring Juan Carlos “home.” When he arrived at age eight, says
Moore, he didn’t know English or how to write in Spanish. But
with three years of supplemental education in the Denver public
schools, Juan Carlos is now almost up to grade level. Although he
prefers to speak English, his mom speaks Spanish to him at home.
“He’s a very determined guy,” says his mother. “We’ve been
lucky with him; his teachers love him. He works very hard.”
Yes, the family has gone back to the orphanage. “We have
good friends there,” says Valerie Moore. Now at age eleven, Juan
Carlos has a mother, a father, and a big sister. He also has a godfa-
ther, Jim Polsfut. “Jim’s son Javier,” says Moore, “is like a brother.” 
References and Further Reading
Adamec, Christine, and William Pierce. 2000. The Encyclopedia of Adop-
tion, 2nd ed. New York: Facts on File.
Albers, L. H., E. D. Barnett, J. A. Jenista, and D. E. Johnson. 2005. “Inter-
national Adoption: Medical and Developmental Issues.” Pediatric Clinics
of North America 52, no. 5 (October).
Atwood, Thomas C. 2005. “Testimony of National Council for Adoption:
120
Adoption around the World

In the Best Interest of Children?” Security and Cooperation in Europe
Public Hearing: September 14. Available from National Council for
Adoption, http://www.adoptioncouncil.org.
Balanon, Lourdes G. 1989. “Foreign Adoption in the Philippines: Issues
and Opportunities.” Special issue. Child Welfare 68, no. 2 (March/April):
241–253.
Beauvais-Godwin, Laura, and Raymond Godwin. 2005. The Complete
Adoption Book: Everything You Need to Know to Adopt a Child, 3rd ed. Hol-
brook, MA: Adams Media.
Byung, Hoon Chun. 1989. “Adoption in Korea.” Special issue. Child Wel-
fare 68, no. 2 (March/April): 255–260.
Chambers, Jennifer. 2005. “Preadoption Opportunities for Pediatric
Providers.” Pediatric Clinics of North America 52, no. 5 (October): 1247–1269.
Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe. In the Best Interest of
Children? Romania’s Ban on Intercountry Adoption. Testimony of National
Council for Adoption. September 14, 2005.
Crowe, Sarah, with assistance of Sabine Dolan. “Helping Orphans in
Rwanda Build a Better Future.” Accessed at http://www.unicef.org/
infobycountry/rwanda_31013.html.
Damania, Deenaz. 1989. “Observations on the Child Welfare Scene in
India.” Special issue. Child Welfare 68, no. 2 (March/April): 141–144.
Dickens, J. 2002. “The Paradox of Inter-Country Adoption: Analysing 
Romania’s Experience as a Sending Country.” International Journal of So-
cial Welfare 11, no. 1 (January): 76–83.
Erwin, Steve. 2005. “Helping Ethiopia’s Lost Children.” People Weekly.
May 2: 89.
Finley, Bruce. 2001. “Adoption Gulf Strands Kids: Legal, Political Issues
Leave Mexico Orphans Homeless But Hoping.” Denver Post. July 22: 18A.
Finley, Bruce. 2005. “Orphaned by AIDS . . .Embraced by Strangers.”
Denver Post. November 13:  1A, 12A, 13A.
Ionescu, Carmiola. 2005. “Romania’s Abandoned Children Are Still Suf-
fering. Lancet 366, no. 9497 (November 5): 1595.
Johnson, Kay, Huang Banghan, and Wang Liyao. 1998. “Infant Abandon-
ment and Adoption in China.” Population and Development Review 24, no.
3 (September): 469.
Milbrand, Lisa. 2006. “Daughters in Demand.” Adoptive Families. April:
42–45.
Mukhina, Valeria Sergeevna. 1989. “Care of Children Brought up at
Boarding-Type Institutions in the USSR.” Special issue. Child Welfare 68,
no. 2 (March/April): 233–240.
References and Further Reading
121

News Focus. 2005. “Special Adoptive Families Update: Adoption from
Russia.” Adoptive Families. September/October: 11.
Ronstrom, Anitha. 1989. “Sweden’s Children’s Ombudsman: A
Spokesperson for Children.” Special issue. Child Welfare 68, no. 2
(March/April): 123–128.
USAID, UNAIDS, and UNICEF joint press release. 2002. “Number of
Children Orphaned by AIDS Will Rise Dramatically.” June 10. Accessed
at http://gbgm-umc.org/health/aids/childrenonthebrink.cfm.
Utriainen, Sirpa. 1989a. “Adolescent Pregnancy: Standards and Services
in Finland.” Special issue. Child Welfare 68, no. 2 (March/April): 167–182.
Utriainen, Sirpa. 1989b. “Child Welfare Services in Finland.” Special
issue. Child Welfare 68, no. 2 (March/April): 129–140.
Wallace, Sara R. 2003. “International Adoption: The Most Logical Solu-
tion to the Disparity between the Numbers of Orphaned and Abandoned
Children in Some Countries and Families and Individuals Wishing to
Adopt in Others?” Arizona Journal of International and Comparative Law 20,
no. 3: 684–724.
Weitzman, Carol, and Lisa Albers. 2005. “Long-Term Developmental, Be-
havioral, and Attachment Outcomes after International Adoption.” Pedi-
atric Clinics of North America 52, no. 5 (October): 1395–1419.
Wilson, Brenda. 2006. “A Painful Struggle over Nigeria’s Abandoned
Children.” National Public Radio. February 18.
Zurbrig-Tull, Sandy. “Adoption Information for Canadians.” Accessed at
http://www.canadianadoption.org. 
122
Adoption around the World

4
Chronology
T
his chapter gives a time line of important conferences; initia-
tion of child welfare policies, practices, and minimum stan-
dards; federal laws; ground-breaking books; and the found-
ing dates of organizations important in adoption history. The list
is necessarily selective, and students of adoption may know more
events to add to the list.
ca. 1780 BC
King Hammurabi of Babylonia puts forth the
Code of Hammurabi, which includes the oldest
written adoption law.
ca. 600 BC
The Athenian laws of Solon require the com-
mander of an army to protect and raise, at gov-
ernment expense, children of citizens killed in
battle.
ca. 200 BC
The Hindu laws of Manu mention the concept of
adoption.
AD 291
Under Roman law, women are allowed to
adopt—under special circumstances.
335
Emperor Constantine orders children born to
unmarried parents who later marry to be con-
sidered “legitimate.”
787
Datheu, archpriest of Milan, establishes the first
foundling hospital.
123

1597
England passes the first Poor Law, providing for aban-
doned, orphaned, and poor children in that country.
1648
The Massachusetts Bay Colony legislates that children
can be taken from their birth parents and put with new
families if the children are “rude, stubborn, and unruly.”
1691
Boston becomes the first U.S. city to offer incentives
for the poor to remain in their own homes rather than
to live in an institution.
Poorhouses, or almshouses, are the forerunners of or-
phanages.
1693
Sir William Phips, governor of Massachusetts, men-
tions his adopted son (actually his nephew) in his will
and is allegedly the first recorded adoptive father in
the original thirteen colonies.
1729
Ursuline nuns found the first orphanage in North
America after a massacre of adult settlers in Natchez,
Mississippi.
1783
In the state of Virginia, Thomas Jefferson eliminates
primogeniture, the practice in which the oldest son in-
herits the family property.
1850
Alabama law specifies the right of an adopted child to
inherit from his adoptive parents.
1851
Massachusetts passes an adoption law with focus on
the best interests of the child.
1853
Charles Loring Brace founds the Children’s Aid Soci-
ety of New York, the oldest formal child placement
agency in the United States.
1854
Brace begins the Orphan Train Movement, in which
thousands of homeless children between the ages of
two and fourteen are sent west from New York City to
adoptive homes.
124
Chronology

1868
The Massachusetts Board of State Charities begins to
pay for foster children to board in private homes, the
beginning of “placing out,” caring for children in fam-
ily homes rather than in institutions.
1869
The Massachusetts Board of State Charities begins
sending agents to visit the children in their place-
ments.
1872
The New York State Charities Aid Association, one of
the first organizations in the United States to have a
specialized child-placement program, begins its
work.
1883
The Reverend Martin Van Buren Van Arsdale founds
the National Children’s Home Society (originally the
American Education Aid Society), a nonprofit organi-
zation for the placement of children.
1886
With high standards for that time, Van Arsdale
founds his state’s organization, the Illinois Children’s
Home and Aid Society, to ensure proper homes for
children.
1891
Michigan’s law is the first to order an investigation of
prospective adoptive parents. Thus, the first official
“home study” is born.
1898
The St. Vincent De Paul Society organizes the
Catholic Home Bureau, the first Catholic agency to
place children in private homes rather than in or-
phanages.
1904
The first school of social work, the New York School of
Applied Philanthropy, opens.
1909
The first White House Conference on the Care of De-
pendent Children recommends the establishment of
the U.S. Children’s Bureau; it also suggests that
poverty alone should not be the sole grounds for re-
moving children from families.
Chronology
125

1909
President Theodore Roosevelt appeals for govern-
mental financial assistance to allow widowed mothers
to keep their homes and children.
1910
From approximately this date until 1925, the concept
of eugenics is popular. Eugenics is the belief (later dis-
credited) that some children are “defective” and there-
fore unsuitable for adoption.
1911
Dr. Arnold Gesell sets up a psychological clinic at the
New Haven Dispensary in Connecticut. He directs
this clinic, later known as the Clinic of Child Develop-
ment at Yale University, until 1948.
Alice Chapin, wife of prominent pediatrician Dr.
Henry Dwight Chapin, founds the Alice Chapin
Adoption Nursery, one of New York City’s first pri-
vate adoption agencies.
Illinois passes the first statewide mothers’ pension
law. Other states follow the lead of Illinois and pass
similar laws.
1912
Congress creates the Children’s Bureau in the De-
partment of Commerce and Labor to investigate and
report on “the welfare of children and child life.”
Julia Lathrop is appointed chief of the Children’s Bu-
reau, the first woman in history to head a federal
agency.
1915
The Bureau for Exchange of Information among
Child-Helping Organizations is founded. It is later re-
named the Child Welfare League of America.
Norway’s Castberg Law decrees that “legitimate”
and “illegitimate” children have equal rights before
the law.
1916
Louise Wise, wife of Reform rabbi Stephen Wise,
founds the Child Adoption Committee, which be-
comes Louise Wise Services, the largest Jewish adop-
tion agency in New York City.
126
Chronology
(cont.)

1917
The Children’s Code of Minnesota becomes the model
for state laws during the next twenty years. In addi-
tion to requiring a “home study” of the prospective
adoptive family, it also requires the state to check the
adoption petition and to give recommendations to the
court on each adoption matter. The statute requires a
six-month postplacement probationary period before
finalization of the adoption. It further orders that
adoption records be closed.
Sweden enacts its first adoption laws.
1919
The U.S. Children’s Bureau sets minimum standards
for child placing.
The Russell Sage Foundation publishes the first child-
placing manual.
1920
The Child Welfare League of America is formally re-
named; it is a national, nonsectarian, professional
child-advocacy organization composed of more than
600 private and public children’s agencies. The organ-
ization publishes standards of practice for child wel-
fare services.
The American Association of Social Workers is
founded.
1921
The Sheppard-Towner Infancy and Maternity Protec-
tion Act provides for federal appropriations to pro-
mote maternal and infant health.
1924
Sophie Van Senden Theis publishes the first major
outcome study, “How Foster Children Turn Out,”
based on her work with 910 children and the New
York State Charities Aid Association.
1926
The Adoption of Children Act, the first adoption leg-
islation in the United Kingdom, becomes law.
1929
In their legal statutes, all forty-eight states provide for
adoption.
Chronology
127

1930
The American Public Welfare Association (APWA) is
founded as a nonprofit professional organization rep-
resenting the interests of human services departments
across the United States. 
1933
Social reformer Edna Gladney leads the fight to have
references to illegitimacy removed from birth certifi-
cates in Texas.
1935
On August 14, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signs
into law the Social Security Act, which, in addition to
helping the elderly, forms the basis for subsequent
legislation benefiting children.
Justine Wise Polier, a later critic of matching in adop-
tion, is appointed to head the Domestic Relations
Court of Manhattan.
1937
The first Child Welfare League of America initiative
sets up separate standards for adoptive (permanent)
and foster (temporary) placements.
1938
The Child Welfare League of America endorses se-
crecy in adoption.
1939
A picture book and also an adoption “classic,” The
Chosen Baby by Valentina P. Wasson, seeks to tell a
child his or her adoption story. It attempts to fulfill a
need for a “universal” adoption story but becomes
controversial because it tends to simplify and
“mythologize” adoption. For example, the child may
believe that the chosen child was selected at a baby
store or was “made to order” for the adoptive parents.
1944
The U.S. Supreme Court hears a case involving Jeho-
vah’s Witnesses. In Prince v. Massachusetts, the Court
upholds the principle of parens patriae, in which the
state has the power to restrict parental control in order
to guard the general interest in the child’s well-being.
1948
The U.S. Congress passes the Displaced Persons Act,
which allows 3,000 orphans and more than 200,000
128
Chronology

adult European refugees to emigrate to the United
States.
Jim Casey and his siblings establish the Annie E.
Casey Foundation in honor of their mother. The foun-
dation is the nation’s largest philanthropy dedicated
exclusively to improving the lives of disadvantaged
children and families.
Minnesota records the first transracial adoption of an
African American child by Caucasian parents.
1949
Author Pearl Buck opens Welcome House, a nonprofit
organization for the care and adoption of Asian Amer-
ican children.
New York is the first state to pass a law (which proves
unenforceable) to prohibit black-market adoptions.
1953
The U.S. Congress grants 500 “special visas” for Ko-
rean orphans to be adopted by Americans; the
Refugee Relief Act of 1953 allows for 4,000 more or-
phan visas over the next three years.
The first version of a Uniform Adoption Act (UAA) is
drafted. The proposed act is an effort to achieve uni-
formity in adoption laws.
Jean Paton, an adoptee and social worker, founds the
Life History Center, as well as Orphan Voyage, the
first search-and-support network for adopted per-
sons.
1954
Paton publishes The Adopted Break Silence, a book that
records the thoughts and feelings of a varied group of
adopted persons and promotes the idea that they have
a distinct identity.
1955
The Child Welfare League of America sponsors the
first professional conference on adoption, leading to
reforms in adoption and foster care. Special-needs
adoption becomes a recognized entity.
Chronology
129

1955
Senator Estes Kefauver (D-TN) heads a U.S. Senate in-
quiry into black-market and interstate adoption prac-
tices. Kefauver and Senator Edward Thye (R-MN)
propose a federal law on black-market adoptions,
which does not pass.
Pearl S. Buck accuses religious institutions and some
social workers of maintaining the black market in
adoptions and holding back the adoption of children
in order to save their jobs.
The National Association of Social Workers is founded.
The National Urban League along with fourteen New
York agencies found Adopt-A-Child to promote the
adoption of African American children.
Bertha and Harry Holt, a farm couple from Oregon,
receive a special act of Congress to allow them to
adopt eight Korean War orphans.
1956
The Holts found Holt International Children’s Ser-
vices, a nonprofit organization devoted to finding
homes for children worldwide.
1957
The International Conference on Intercountry Adop-
tions issues a report on problems with international
adoptions.
Sweden recognizes child abuse as a pediatric problem.
The Swedish National Board of Health issues regula-
tions, offers counseling services, and sets up a re-
search institute to study child abuse
1958
The Child Welfare League of America publishes Stan-
dards of Adoption Service. (These standards are revised
in 1968, 1973, 1978, 1988, and 2000.) At this time, un-
married mothers, with some exceptions, are consid-
ered unable to care for their infants. Adoptive parents
are generally only given background information that
will not be too upsetting for them to know about their
child or his history.
130
Chronology
(cont.)

The Indian Adoption Project begins and continues
through 1967. The project, administered by the Child
Welfare League of America, is funded by a federal
contract from the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the
U.S. Children’s Bureau. It places Native American
children in non-Indian families.
1959
The United Nations General Assembly adopts the
Declaration of the Rights of the Child,  a nonbinding
resolution that delineates ten principles or rights for
every child, including a name and a nationality;
health and social security; love and understanding
from parents; free and compulsory education (at
least at the elementary level); protection from neg-
lect, cruelty, and exploitation; freedom from employ-
ment before a certain age; and a life lived with un-
derstanding, tolerance, friendship among peoples,
and universal brotherhood. A child who is handi-
capped in any way is expected to be given special ed-
ucation and treatment.
1960
The Golden Anniversary White House Conference on
Children and Youth endorses the above Declaration.
Marshall Schechter, a psychiatrist in Beverly Hills,
California, reports that adopted persons are a hun-
dred times more likely than nonadopted persons to
have or develop serious emotional problems.
Schechter’s research is based on a small number of pa-
tients in his practice, and his conclusions generate
much controversy.
1961
The Immigration and Nationality Act includes a per-
manent reference to the immigration of orphans from
other countries to be adopted by citizens of the United
States.
1962
A special conference of the U.S. Children’s Bureau on
child abuse generates proposals for new laws requir-
ing doctors to notify law enforcement agencies in
cases of suspected child abuse. In the coming years,
most states adopt such legislation.
Chronology
131

1962
Dr. C. Henry Kempe and his associates publish a
paper in the Journal of the American Medical Association
on the physical abuse of children and introduce the
term battered child syndrome to describe injuries result-
ing from repetitive nonaccidental trauma. (Battered
child syndrome later becomes a reason for terminat-
ing a parent’s rights.) 
1963
The National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development is established as part of the National In-
stitutes of Health.
1964
H. David Kirk publishes Shared Fate, an examination
of adoptive family relationships from a sociologi-
cal/psychological viewpoint. Before Kirk’s book,
people tended to ignore the differences between birth
and adoptive families. Kirk points out that families
who acknowledge the differences make a better ad-
justment as families than those who don’t. Shared Fate
paves the way for more openness in adoption.
1965
The Los Angeles County Bureau of Adoptions
launches the first organized program for prospective
single parents with the goal of locating more homes
for hard-to-place (so-called special needs) children.
1966
The Indian Adoption Project becomes the National
Adoption Resource Exchange and is later renamed the
Adoption Resource Exchange of North America
(ARENA). It is the first national “adoption exchange”
with a mission of finding homes for special needs or
hard-to-place children. Researcher David Fanshel
studies the outcomes of one-fourth of the children
adopted as a result of the program and their adoptive
families, and discovers that most have made a good
adjustment. However, Fanshel is able to look ahead
and anticipate objections from Native American
tribes, which are ultimately successful in passing the
Indian Child Welfare Act.
1967
Adoptive Families of America, Inc. is reestablished as
132
Chronology
(cont.)

the Organization for a United Response (OURS, Inc.).
The national nonprofit organization is the largest
adoptive parent group in the nation.
1968
The Children’s Home Society in St. Paul, Minnesota,
begins providing postplacement services for children
being adopted.
The Child Welfare League’s revised Standards come
out in favor of transracial adoption and continue to
recommend the confidentiality of adoption records.
Five hundred African American social workers found
the National Association of Black Social Workers
(NABSW) at the National Conference of Social Work-
ers in San Francisco.
1969
President Nixon creates the Office of Child Develop-
ment in the Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare (HEW) to coordinate functions of the U.S.
Children’s Bureau and Head Start.
1970
Adoptions peak at 175,000 per year, 80 percent of
which are arranged by adoption agencies.
1971
Florence Fisher, an adopted person, founds the
Adoptees’ Liberty Movement Association (ALMA), a
national search and support organization in favor of
open records.
1972
The National Association of Black Social Workers
takes a position against the adoption of black children
by white parents.
The Council of Adoptive Parents (CAP), an adoptive
parent support group, initiates the CAP Book, a photo
listing of waiting children.
The National Adoption Center in Philadelphia, Penn-
sylvania, is founded to promote the adoption of chil-
dren with special needs throughout the United States.
Chronology
133

1972
A court case, Stanley v. Illinois, increases the rights of
unwed fathers in adoption; it requires informed con-
sent and proof that the parent is “unfit” before termi-
nation of parental rights.
1973
Roe v. Wade, the U.S. Supreme Court decision legaliz-
ing abortion, is implemented.
Joseph Goldstein, Anna Freud, and Albert Solnit pub-
lish Beyond the Best Interests of the Child, which vali-
dates the “psychological parent” and focuses atten-
tion on the needs of children as the primary concern in
the adoption process.
Marian Wright Edelman founds the Children’s De-
fense Fund, an organization with the goals of educat-
ing the nation about the needs of children and en-
couraging preventive investment in children.
Barbara Eck Menning founds RESOLVE, Inc., for
those experiencing infertility.
Hope Marindin founds the Committee for Single
Adoptive Parents, a national organization for singles
involved in adoption.
1974
The North American Council on Adoptable Children
(NACAC) is formed to advocate for the placement of
waiting children.
Single Parents Adopting Children Everywhere
(SPACE) is formed to support single parents before,
during, and after an adoption.
Congress passes the Child Abuse and Prevention and
Treatment Act (CAPTA), P.L. 93–247, the key federal
legislation concerning the prevention of child abuse
and neglect. The act is subsequently amended in 1978,
1984, 1988, 1992, 1996, and 2003.
1975
Emma May Vilardi founds the International Soundex
134
Chronology
(cont.)

Reunion Registry (ISRR), a nonprofit organization for
the reunion of members of the adoption triad.
After the fall of Saigon, the Vietnam “Baby Lift” be-
gins bringing to the United States thousands of Viet-
namese orphans to be adopted by Americans.
The U.S. federal government stops keeping adoption
statistics.
Betty Jean Lifton’s book, Twice Born: Memoirs of an
Adopted Daughter, is published. Lifton, adopted at age
2 1/2, tells the story of her search for her birth parents.
Although Lifton’s reunion with her biological mother
does not have the hoped-for happy result, Liftons con-
tinues to believe strongly in open adoption records.
Great Britain passes the Children Act, which, among
other provisions, gives adult adopted persons the
right to obtain copies of their original birth certifi-
cates.
1976
Lee H. Campbell, a Massachusetts woman, founds
Concerned United Birthparents (CUB) to provide sup-
port for birth parents who have placed a child for
adoption.
Social workers Annette Baran and Reuben Pannor, in
conjunction with psychiatrist Arthur Sorosky, propose
the concept of “open adoption,” generally defined as
a process in which birth parents and prospective
adoptive parents meet, share identifying information,
and often keep in contact.
The Joint Council on International Children’s Services
is formed. Members include adoption agencies, child
welfare organizations, parent support groups, and
medical specialists with an interest in intercountry
adoption.
1977
West Germany enacts its first adoption laws.
Chronology
135

1977
A revised edition of Valentina P. Wasson’s book, The
Chosen Baby, omits references to the “choosing” of ba-
bies, except in the title.
1978
P.L. 95–608, The Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA), is
enacted to protect the best interests of Indian children
and families. It mandates special provisions for Na-
tive American children who are placed in foster and
adoptive homes. Under the act, preference must be
given first to persons from the child’s tribe and last to
those of another culture.
The American Adoption Congress (AAC) is formed as
a national umbrella organization of search groups
dedicated to achieving more openness with respect to
adoption records.
Louise Brown, the world’s first “test-tube baby,” is
born in England.
The Child Welfare League of America’s revised Stan-
dards recommends that adoption social workers pro-
vide nonidentifying information such as medical his-
tory and backgrounds of birth family members to the
prospective adoptive family.
1979
Betty Lanning, AnnaMarie Merrill, and Patricia Sex-
ton found International Concerns for Children (ICC),
a nonprofit organization with emphasis on support
for those involved in intercountry adoptions.
The Gay and Lesbian Parents Coalition International
(GLPCI) forms as a support group for gay fathers and
lesbian mothers.
Journalist Lorraine Dusky publishes Birthmark, an au-
tobiography, the first to give a birth mother’s perspec-
tive on the relinquishment of a child for adoption.
1980
The Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act (P.L.
96–272) is enacted to promote permanency for chil-
dren, including reasonable efforts to keep children
136
Chronology
(cont.)

with their birth parents or, when that fails, to provide
for out-of-home care in the least restrictive and most
permanent setting. The act also establishes the Adop-
tion Assistance Program, which partially subsidizes
special needs adoptions.
The U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
(HEW) proposes the Model State Adoption Act and
Model State Adoption Procedures. (The National Con-
ference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, a
group of varied law professionals, usually is the group
that proposes model statutes. States may then decide
whether to adopt all, part, or none of the model.) The
act originates in the mandate of P.L. 95–266, an amend-
ment to the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment and
Adoption Opportunities Act of 1978. An advisory panel
of representatives from various public and private
adoption organizations are interested in getting more
openness in adoption. However, procedures require
that HEW solicit commentary from the general public.
Of more than 3,000 comments received, 82 percent op-
pose the Model State Adoption Act. Not only that, but
a committee of the Child Welfare League of America re-
views the report and rejects it. The proposed statute
goes too far, too fast in the opinion of the committee.
One suggestion is that the Minnesota procedure, which
requires both parties involved in a search to agree to
sharing identifying information, be substituted. The
proposal is renamed the Model Act for Adoption of
Children with Special Needs, and the original sugges-
tions for openness are rewritten in order to protect the
privacy of birth parents.
The National Council for Adoption (NCFA) is formed
as a nonprofit organization to improve adoption stan-
dards and practices. It lobbies on behalf of adoption
and provides information and assistance in all areas of
adoption. The organization has historically favored
closed (confidential) records.
1981
Reverend George H. Clements initiates the One
Church, One Child project at the Holy Angels Church,
Chronology
137

a predominantly black Catholic Church in Chicago.
The project encourages black churches to recruit
members to adopt a waiting child.
1982
Minnesota’s legislature revises the state’s adoption
law to shift to the birth parent(s) responsibility for
keeping adoption records sealed. In other words, the
biological parents would now have to file an affidavit
denying consent to the release of information. In the
absence of this affidavit, the birth parents are assumed
to have consented to the release of information in the
adoption record.
1984
Carol Cocoa and seven other foster parents found the
National Coalition to End Racism in America’s Child
Care System. The nonprofit organization aims to
change policies at all levels of government and sup-
ports transracial foster parenting and adoption.
Rabbi Susan Abramson and Phyllis Nissen begin Stars
of David, a national support group for Jewish adop-
tive families.
1986
Congress establishes the National Adoption Informa-
tion Clearinghouse (NAIC) under the Omnibus Bud-
get Reconciliation Act (P.L. 99–509). This government-
funded organization provides professionals and the
general public with information on all aspects of
adoption, including infant and intercountry adoption
and the adoption of children with special needs.
1987
The Orphan Train Heritage Society of America
(OTHSA) is formed as a clearinghouse for information
regarding the approximately 150,000 children who
were sent west to new homes between the years 1854
and 1929.
The Reagan administration forms the Interagency
Task Force on Adoptions to “identify barriers to adop-
tion, propose appropriate solutions, and suggest
methods to promote adoption.”
138
Chronology
1981
(cont.)

1989
The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child is
adopted by the United Nations on the thirtieth an-
niversary of the Declaration of the Rights of the Child.
The 1989 convention spells out the basic human rights
to which children everywhere are entitled.
1990
The American Academy of Adoption Attorneys
(AAAA) is formed.
1991
The W. K. Kellogg Foundation launches Families for
Kids (FFK) to bring about fundamental reforms in the
U.S. adoption system.
1992
Dave Thomas, an adopted person and founder of the
Wendy’s International food chain, establishes the
Dave Thomas Foundation for Adoption, a not-for-
profit organization that gives grants to national and
regional adoption organizations and does other chari-
table activities for the benefit of “waiting” children.
1993
After a four-year drafting period, sixty-six nations ap-
prove the final text of the Convention on Protection of
Children and Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry
Adoption (the Hague Adoption Convention), a multi-
lateral treaty with the goal of protecting children,
birth parents, and adoptive parents involved in inter-
country adoptions.
1994
Congress passes the Multiethnic Placement Act
(MEPA), P.L. 103–382, which prohibits agencies re-
ceiving federal funds from denying transracial place-
ments solely on the basis of race. It permits the use of
race as one of the factors to be considered in adoptive
and foster placements.
The United States signs the Hague Adoption Conven-
tion on March 31, showing its intent to proceed with
efforts to ratify the convention.
Administered by the Children’s Bureau of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, the
Chronology
139

Court Improvement Program is established as a re-
sponse to dramatic increases in child abuse and neg-
lect cases and acknowledgment of the expanded role
of courts in achieving stable, permanent homes for
children in foster care. All fifty states, as well as the
District of Columbia and Puerto Rico, participate in
this program.
Norman and Judy Goldberg, with the help of a phi-
lanthropist friend, establish the National Adoption
Foundation, a nonprofit organization to provide fi-
nancial support, information, products, and services
for adoptive and prospective adoptive parents.
1995
On May 1, the Hague Adoption Convention enters
into force among the first three countries to ratify it—
Mexico, Romania, and Sri Lanka.
1996
Congress revisits the Multiethnic Placement Act in the
form of a revision, the Interethnic Provisions of the
Small Business Job Protection Act, P.L. 104–188, Re-
moval of Barriers to Interethnic Adoption, which
makes the consideration of race impermissible in fos-
ter and adoptive placements. Any entity that receives
funds from the federal government and is involved in
foster care or adoptive placements may not delay or
deny a child’s foster care or adoptive placement based
on race, color, or national origin of the parent or the
child.
President Bill Clinton signs the Personal Responsibil-
ity and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
(PRWORA), the so-called welfare reform act, which
among other things states a preference for permanent
kinship care when children cannot live with their
birth parents.
President Clinton launches his Adoption Initiative,
which has as one of its goals the doubling (to 54,000)
of the number of children adopted domestically or
placed in permanent homes by the year 2002.
140
Chronology
1994
(cont.)

The Evan B. Donaldson Adoption Institute is estab-
lished through the initiative of the board of Spence-
Chapin Services to Families and Children. The board
sees a need for an independent and unbiased adop-
tion research and policy organization. It is named in
honor of Evan B. Donaldson, a long-term advocate for
children and member of the board of directors of
Spence-Chapin from 1977 until her death in 1994.
Bastard Nation is founded to advocate for the rights of
adult citizens, adopted as children, to their own birth
records.
1997
The U.S. Congress approves the Adoption and Safe
Families Act (ASFA), P.L. 105–89. It amends Title IV-E
of the Social Security Act and aims to increase adop-
tions of waiting children by moving them more
quickly from foster care to permanent homes while
also keeping children safe.
1998
Oregon voters pass Ballot Measure 58, allowing adult
adopted persons to have access to their original birth
certificates.
1999
The Convention on the Rights of the Child is ratified
by 191 parties, including almost all of the nations of
the world except Somalia and the United States. The
prevailing view in the United States is that children
“belong” to their birth parents, and the notion that the
“entire community” must take care of its children is
not widely accepted.
The Foster Care Independence Act, P.L. 106–169, indi-
rectly affects adoption in that it increases funding of
adoption incentive payments, emphasizes permanent
placements, and mandates that state plans prepare
prospective parents for foster care and adoption.
2000
The Intercountry Adoption Act, P.L. 106–279, is de-
signed to provide implementation by the United
States of the Hague Adoption Convention. 
Chronology
141

The Child Citizenship Act of 2000 allows internation-
ally adopted children to automatically become citi-
zens when they enter the United States.
The Child Abuse Prevention and Enforcement Act,
P.L. 106–177, is passed by Congress to address con-
cerns regarding the level and quality of responses to
reports of child maltreatment.
The Children’s Health Act, P.L. 106–310, authorizes
funding for adoption awareness activities and public
awareness campaigns for adoption of infants and chil-
dren with special needs.
The Child Welfare League’s Standards for Excellence for
Adoption Services, revised for 2000, states that although
the current trend in adoption is for openness, a spec-
trum of options exists, from closed placement to open
adoption. If possible, all members of the triad, includ-
ing the child if old enough, should be consulted as to
the amount of openness desired.
The Census of 2000 includes the category “adopted
son/daughter” for the first time in U.S. history.
2001
At a meeting of the National Indian Child Welfare As-
sociation, the executive director of the Child Welfare
League of America, Shay Bilchik, officially apologizes
for the Indian Adoption Project, which placed many
Native American children in non-Indian homes.
Bilchik also goes on record as supporting the Indian
Child Welfare Act.
The Promoting Safe and Stable Families Amend-
ments, P.L. 107–133, extend and amend the Promoting
Safe and Stable Families Program and the Foster Care
Independent Living Program.
The Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation
Act, P.L. 107–16, includes provisions to permanently
extend the adoption tax credit.
142
Chronology
2000
(cont.)

2003
The Adoption Promotion Act, P.L. 108–145, reautho-
rizes the adoption incentive program under Title IV-E
and provides additional incentives for the adoption of
older children (ages nine and up) from foster care.
The Keeping Children and Families Safe Act, P.L.
108–36, extends and amends the Child Abuse Preven-
tion and Treatment Act, the Adoption Opportunities
Act, the Abandoned Infants Assistance Act, and the
Family Violence Prevention and Services Act.
The Prosecutorial Remedies and Other Tools to End
the Exploitation of Children Today Act (PROTECT),
P.L. 108–21, creates a national Amber Alert System
and provides for stronger penalties for child sexual
abuse, sexual exploitation, and child pornography.
On March 1, the service and benefit functions of the Im-
migration and Naturalization Service (INS) transition
into the U.S. Citizenship and Immigrations Services
(USCIS) in the Department of Homeland Security.
Ellen Herman, faculty member in the Department of
History at the University of Oregon, creates the Adop-
tion History Project. The website introduces the his-
tory of child adoption in the United States by profiling
individuals, organizations, topics, and studies that
have shaped adoption in the twentieth century.
The Dave Thomas Foundation for Adoption incorpo-
rates in Canada.
2005
The Adoption and Children Act of 2002 is imple-
mented in England and Wales.The law allows unmar-
ried couples, including gay couples, to adopt jointly
(as long as the two people are living in a secure and
stable relationship). Other provisions are special
guardianship orders and changes that include giving
birth mothers and other birth relatives the legal right
to ask for an intermediary service to trace an adoptive
adult to find out if contact is welcome.
Chronology
143

2006
On February 15, the U.S. Department of State issues
the final rule on the Accreditation and Approval of
Agencies and Persons to implement the Hague Adop-
tion Convention.
144
Chronology

5
Biographical Sketches
I
ndividuals in social work, psychology, sociology, medicine, law,
and theology have contributed to adoption as we know it today.
Some have made an impact without intending to or without
even knowing that they changed adoption. Not all who have in-
fluenced adoption are professionals. Adoptive parents, birth par-
ents, and adopted persons have helped move adoption in new di-
rections. They have shared their ideas and experiences in books,
articles, tapes, movies, and videos. The sharing continues on the
Internet.
This chapter presents sketches of thirty men and women.
Some are living; some have died. The goal is to present a cross-
section of “adoption pioneers” from the beginnings of the field to
the present. The alphabetical list is not all-inclusive but a sam-
pling of some of those who have influenced adoption philosophy
and practice.
Viola Wertheim Bernard (1907–1998)
The scope of the work of this pioneering psychiatrist/psychoan-
alyst is difficult to capture in a short summary. Born into a well-
to-do family in New York City, she was one of only four women
in her medical school class at Cornell University. She received her
medical degree in 1936. After her marriage to Theos Casimir
Bernard, an anthropologist and explorer, she traveled with her
husband. In 1946 she received her certification in psychiatry, hav-
ing already completed several psychiatric residencies.
Bernard used her intelligence, knowledge, and vision for the
145

good of all. She was a champion of civil rights, civil liberties, and
peace. During World War II she made her mother’s country home
at Nyack, New York, available to European refugees fleeing Nazi
persecution. As a social activist, she joined the battle against nu-
clear war. She was the founder and director of Columbia Univer-
sity’s Division of Community and Social Psychiatry, which
trained psychiatrists and public health specialists. She worked to
make psychiatric help available to the underprivileged and mi-
norities. Throughout her long career, she encouraged medical
professionals and organizations to open up to African American
participation.
At the same time she pursued an academic career and did
clinical work with patients; she won many professional awards.
Bernard’s work on behalf of children extended to those who were
already adopted or were to be adopted. Not only did she serve for
forty years as chief psychiatric consultant to the adoption agency
Louise Wise Services, she was also on its board of directors for
fifty years.
In an effort to understand the conflict over “nature versus
nurture,” she did studies of adopted twins separated at birth.
While championing the idea that children with disabilities,
older children, and children of all races were “adoptable,” she
knew that adoption had no guarantees. However, she opposed
the idea that adopted children were at greater risk than others
for maladjustment.
Bernard was a believer in telling children as soon as possible
in age-appropriate terms that they were adopted. She also re-
jected the “chosen baby” story, saying that parents did not choose
a baby; they chose an agency.
According to the Adoption History Project, Viola Bernard’s
ideas helped shape policy in psychiatry and adoption in the final
third of the twentieth century.
John Bowlby (1907–1990)
Dr. John Bowlby (Edward John Mostyn Bowlby), a British psy-
chiatrist, was a pioneer in “attachment theory” and the emotional
trauma that a disruption in a child’s bonding with his mother can
cause. Bowlby believed, however, that a warm, nurturing con-
stant presence could substitute for the mother figure. Without
such an adequate substitute, Bowlby believed that depression,
146
Biographical Sketches

pathological mourning, anxious attachment, delinquency, and the
inability to love could result. Bowlby’s theories have remained
generally intact and have formed the basis for today’s attachment
theories.
Bowlby attended Dartmouth Royal Naval College and Trin-
ity College, Cambridge, where he majored in psychology and the
natural sciences. He took his medical training at the University
College Medical School in London. During World War II he
served as a psychiatrist in the British army. From 1946 to 1972
Bowlby served as a consulting psychiatrist at the Tavistock Clinic
and Tavistock Institute of Human Relations in London.
While in medical school, Bowlby entered the field of psycho-
analysis; later, after observing animal behavior and the behavior
of children with their mothers, he “re-thought” some of the pre-
vailing psychoanalytic theories of the time. Bowlby’s most influ-
ential work was the three-volume series that included Attachment
(1969), Separation (1973), and Loss (1980). After serving as a con-
sultant to the World Health Organization in 1950 and studying in-
stitutionalized children, Bowlby wrote a best-seller, Child Care and
the Growth of Love (1953), which condemned institutions that de-
prived a child of a consistent mother figure. His last book, pub-
lished in the year he died, was Charles Darwin: A New Biography,
which proposed that childhood losses caused some of Darwin’s
many illnesses.
Charles Loring Brace (1826–1890) 
Charles Loring Brace is best known as the man who initiated “or-
phan trains.” Brace began the program called “placing out” in re-
sponse to overcrowded orphanages and almshouses in New York
City. Beginning in 1854, Brace’s agency, the Children’s Aid Soci-
ety, sent more than 100,000 homeless children to the West to be
fostered or adopted by farm families.
The program proved to be controversial for several reasons.
First, many of the children still had one or both parents. But Brace
believed that the urban environment harmed them, especially if
they lived on the streets or in orphanages. Not only would the
rural life be more healthy for them, Brace believed, but farm fam-
ilies would take better care of them than their birth families had.
However, reports surfaced that some farmers treated their new
children like slaves. Some of the rural residents complained about
Biographical Sketches
147

the numbers of children being “dumped” into their communities.
Also, in many cases, children lost all communication with their
birth families, and their parents never learned what had happened
to them. Sometimes, though, when parents were living, the agency
or the parents (either of which may have retained custody) could
have the children moved if they were mistreated. If the children
were orphans and met the legal requirements, their foster parents
could adopt them; many did. Although the new families had little
investigation before, or supervision during, the placement, many
of the children adapted well to their new families.
Brace received his undergraduate degree from Yale Univer-
sity and his postgraduate education from Yale Divinity School. As
a minister, he preached to the prisoners of Blackwell’s Island,
New York. Following a trip to Europe, he returned to New York
City and was moved by the numbers of homeless children he saw
on the streets. After helping to organize the Children’s Aid Soci-
ety of New York City, Brace served as its director for forty years.
The organization developed innovative programs for homeless
and needy children, including shelters, lodging houses for news-
boys, industrial schools, reading rooms, night schools, summer
camps, dental clinics, and special classes for disabled children.
Brace’s most famous book, The Dangerous Classes of New York and
Twenty Years’ Work among Them (1872), brought about positive
public sentiment on behalf of the needs of children. Reaction to
some of his methods led to reforms of the system.
Pearl S. Buck (1892–1973)
Pearl Buck was the first American woman to win a Nobel Prize in
Literature (1938). Earlier (in 1931) she had won a Pulitzer Prize
for her novel The Good Earth. Buck wrote at least eighty works of
literature for children, as well as books for adults. In addition to
her writing, Pearl Buck was active in child welfare work and in
work with developmentally disabled children.
Although born in West Virginia, Buck spent many of her first
forty years in China, where her parents were missionaries. As a
young child she received lessons from her American mother in
the morning and lessons from a Chinese tutor in the afternoon;
she spoke Chinese before she spoke English. In 1914 she gradu-
ated from Randolph Macon College in Virginia, and in 1926 she
received a master’s degree from Cornell University. Later in life
148
Biographical Sketches

she became a crusader for improved relations between the East
and the West.
Pearl Buck was married twice, first to John Lossing Buck, an
agricultural economist. Their birth daughter Carol had develop-
mental disabilities because of phenylkentonuria, a metabolic dis-
ease. The couple also adopted an infant, but the marriage ended
in divorce.
In 1935 Pearl Buck married Richard J. Walsh, president of the
Day Publishing Company. Together they adopted two infant boys
and, later, four mixed-race children.
In 1949 Buck started her own adoption agency, Welcome
House, because, as she said, other agencies had been unwilling to
place mixed-race children in her family. In 1991 Welcome House
merged with the Pearl S. Buck Foundation to form Pearl S. Buck
International. The latter organization has three distinct parts—
Welcome House, which carries on Buck’s mission of adoption
services, advocacy, and support; Opportunity House, which ex-
pands opportunities for health care, education, jobs, and psycho-
logical support to those who would otherwise be denied these
services; and Pearl S. Buck House, a National Historic Landmark
residence.
Reverend George Clements (1932–)
The Rev. George Clements began the One Church, One Child
project, a multidenominational organization, in 1981 at the Holy
Angels Church, a predominantly black Catholic church in
Chicago, Illinois. One Church, One Child urges every black
church to recruit from its members at least one family who will
adopt a waiting child.
Father Clements’s efforts led to a national recruiting cam-
paign in 1988. Currently more than half of the fifty states use all
or parts of the concept, and the organization has facilitated more
than 100,000 adoptions across the United States. As a single man,
Clements has adopted four children with special needs. The Father
Clements Story, a 1993 movie starring Louis Gossett Jr., Malcolm-
Jamal Warner, and Carroll O’Connor, tells the story of the organi-
zation’s start and the beginnings of the adoption of Clements’s
first son.
Clements was born in Chicago, the fourth of six children.
He received his BA and MA degrees from St. Mary of the Lake
Biographical Sketches
149

Seminary. Ordained in 1957, he was the first black graduate of
Quigley Seminary. The National Committee for Adoption in-
ducted Clements into its Hall of Fame in 1989 for his efforts on
behalf of the adoption of black children.
Dorothy DeBolt and Robert DeBolt
In 1973, Dorothy and Robert (Bob) DeBolt founded the organiza-
tion now called Adopt a Special Kid (AASK), one of the first na-
tional referral programs for children with special needs. AASK has
since placed more than 3,000 children in California alone. Requests
to replicate its program elsewhere led AASK to operate independ-
ently in other states, such as Arizona, Ohio, and New Mexico.
Widowed in 1963, Dorothy was left with seven children be-
tween the ages of three and fifteen, including two children
adopted from Korea. She then added two boys from Vietnam to
the family. Soon thereafter, she met Bob DeBolt, who had one
child. Together, the couple parented twenty children, fourteen of
them through adoption. The children had multiple challenges, in-
cluding developmental and physical disabilities. The children are
now adults with families of their own. The DeBolts are also great-
grandparents.
Dorothy and Bob are the subjects of a 1978 Academy Award–
winning documentary, Who Are the DeBolts? In 1996 they received
the Child Advocates of the Year Award from the North American
Council on Adoptable Children (NACAC).
Michael Dorris (1945–1997)
The author Michael Dorris made a large contribution to adoption
literature with the 1989 publication of The Broken Cord. The book
tells how he adopted as a single man Adam, a Sioux child with
fetal alcohol syndrome. The book focused public attention on the
effects a woman’s drinking during pregnancy can have on her un-
born child.
Since 1990 the federal government has required alcoholic
beverages sold in the United States to carry the following warn-
ing: “According to the surgeon general, women should not drink
alcoholic beverages during pregnancy because of the risk of birth
defects.” Dorris’s book also provides information on the less se-
150
Biographical Sketches

vere possible effects of a mother’s drinking, currently called fetal
alcohol spectrum disorder. Dorris tells of his struggles in raising
his son, as well as the role played by his wife (whom he married
after adopting Adam), the writer Louise Erdrich, during Adam’s
adolescent years.
Marian Wright Edelman (1939–)
Attorney, educator, activist, reformer, and children’s advocate
Marian Wright Edelman is best known for establishing (in 1968)
the Washington Research Project, which in 1973 became the Chil-
dren’s Defense Fund (CDF). The CDF aims to create a support
network so tightly woven that no child can slip through. The or-
ganization is a voice for poor and minority race children, as well
as for those with handicapping conditions. The agency not only
advocates for these children but also acts as a research center, doc-
umenting the problems as well as possible solutions for children
in need. It has advocated pregnancy prevention, childcare fund-
ing, health care funding, prenatal care, parental responsibility for
education in values, the reduction of violent images presented to
children, and selective gun control. Edelman has served as presi-
dent and administrative head of the organization; she has also
served as a public speaker and lobbyist in Congress.
Edelman was born in Bennettsville, South Carolina, and
grew up there as one of five children. Her father, a Baptist minis-
ter, taught his children about service in the world. Edelman at-
tended Spellman College, studied abroad on a Merrill scholar-
ship, and traveled to the Soviet Union on a Lisle fellowship. After
returning to the United States and becoming involved in the civil
rights movement, she studied law at Yale University. She married
Peter Edelman, an assistant to Robert Kennedy; the couple has
three sons. She has published several books, including The Mea-
sure of Our Success: A Letter to My Children and Yours. In 1998 she
was honored with a Hannah Neil World of Children award.
Vera Fahlberg (1934–)
Born in Madison, Wisconsin, Vera Fahlberg, MD, is editor of the
book Residential Treatment: A Tapestry of Many Therapies (1990) and
author of A Child’s Journey through Placement (1991), two influential
Biographical Sketches
151

books in adoption. She and her husband had two birth daughters
and many foster children.
Beginning in 1964, Dr. Fahlberg began to specialize in work-
ing with disturbed children, including some adopted children
and some in foster care. For thirteen years she was the medical di-
rector of Forest Heights Lodge, a psychiatric facility for children
and adolescents in Evergreen, Colorado. In 1974 she began focus-
ing her attention on treating children with separation issues and
attachment difficulties, giving extra attention to children in out-
of-home placement. She contributed to child welfare training ma-
terials, served as a psychological consultant, and conducted
workshops in most of the states, as well as in Canada, England,
Scotland, Ireland, Norway, Sweden, Australia, Greece, and Israel.
Her workshops addressed such topics as grief and loss, the iden-
tity issues of adopted persons, the social and emotional needs of
children after adoption, the effects of early trauma and/or fre-
quent moves in foster care, self-esteem issues, and many other
topics. Vera Fahlberg retired in 1998.
Florence Anna Fisher (ca. 1929–)
Florence Fisher was born in Brooklyn, New York, and adopted as
an infant. Fisher did not know she was adopted until she became
a young adult. The search for her birth mother took twenty years.
As the result of her search, Fisher founded the Adoptees’ Lib-
erty Movement Association (ALMA) to aid and support adopted
persons in their searches. Fisher admitted to being “militant” and
uncompromising. She would not stop short of getting free access
for adopted persons to their original birth certificates and their
adoption records. Fisher organized local ALMA branches in New
York, Florida, and California. In 1973 she published The Search for
Anna Fisher, the story of her search and reunion with her birth
family. Fisher’s efforts led eventually to the creation (in 1978) of
the American Adoption Congress (AAC), an umbrella group with
the goal of changing the public’s attitudes toward sealed records
and lobbying legislators to repeal sealed records laws.
Anna Freud (1895–1982)
Anna Freud was the youngest child of the famous Sigmund Freud,
152
Biographical Sketches

father of psychoanalysis, as well as his companion and colleague
through much of his life. Although the older Freud’s theories in-
fluenced adoption, the work of his daughter and her colleagues
had a more direct impact on adoption.
Born and educated in Austria, Anna Freud entered psycho-
analysis with her father (not an unusual arrangement at the time)
in 1918. In 1922 she joined the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society. Al-
though she followed in her father’s footsteps professionally, she
chose to specialize in child psychoanalysis.
Living in England during World War II, Freud and her friend
Dorothy Burlingham observed babies and preschoolers in three
nurseries in Hampstead. The Hampstead Child Therapy Training
Course and Clinic later became the Anna Freud Centre. The two re-
searchers discovered that children who were separated from their
parents as a result of the war rocked themselves obsessively,
banged their heads, and sucked their thumbs constantly. In their
book, Infants without Families, Freud and Burlingham pointed out
that attachment to the mother (or other constant parental figure)
was imperative for healthy development. They further concluded
that residential facilities could not offer this arrangement. Although
their attachment theories and observations were not new, Freud
and Burlingham gave psychoanalytic reasons for their conclusions.
Later, Freud’s travels to the United States took her to Yale
Law School. In the 1970s and 1980s she collaborated with Joseph
Goldstein and Albert Solnit. Their books include Beyond the Best
Interests of the Child (1973), Before the Best Interests of the Child
(1979), and In the Best Interests of the Child (with Sonja Goldstein,
1986). These professionals argued for permanent adoptive homes
in which a child, who could not grow up with an involved birth
parent, could attach to a “psychological parent.” But, according to
some experts, the authors still believed strongly in birth family
autonomy and family preservation. They believed that the state
should intervene only in cases of the most severe abuse. Even
then, they thought, every effort should be made to keep a child
with birth parents.
Sigmund Freud (1856–1939)
Although Anna Freud’s theories and practice had more of a direct
influence on adoption than those of her father Sigmund Freud, one
has to admit there would have been no Anna without Sigmund.
Biographical Sketches
153

Sigmund Freud was born in what is now the Czech Repub-
lic, but the family moved when he was of preschool age to Vi-
enna, Austria, where he lived for most of his life. Freud’s father
was already a grandfather when he married his second wife,
Amalie Nathanson. The couple had eight children; Sigmund was
the oldest and his mother’s favorite. By the time Sigmund was
eight years old, he was reading Shakespeare and could speak sev-
eral languages.
Freud studied medicine at the University of Vienna, gradu-
ated in 1881, and became a neuropathologist. In 1885 a grant en-
abled him to study in France with the famous neurologist Jean
Martin Charcot. The next year he started his own practice and
married his long-time fiancée, Martha. The couple had six chil-
dren; the youngest was Anna. In 1938 Freud, who was Jewish,
fled to London to escape the Nazis. He died there the next year.
Freud believed that memories from the subconscious influ-
ence a person’s behavior and that psychoanalysis could cure cer-
tain mental disturbances. He also believed that dreams were im-
portant in revealing the unconscious. Among other works, Freud
wrote The Interpretation of Dreams (1900), General Introduction to
Psychoanalysis (1920), Autobiography (1927), and Civilization and Its
Discontents (1930). Carl Jung, Alfred Adler, and Freud’s daughter
carried on his work (in modified ways) after his death.
Freud’s theories had many connections to adoption. For one
thing, Freud believed that children in general needed to mentally
“escape” from parental control, which they often did by having
an active fantasy life. In “family romance” images, children might
imagine an adoption scenario in which their imaginary parents
were kinder and more gentle than their real parents. But with
children who were adopted, the “story” was reality. Adopted
children’s questions such as “Who were my original parents?”
“What was wrong with me?” and “Why did they give me away?”
took on new meaning and often led to confusion, sadness, and
feelings of abandonment. No wonder, some thought, that given
these challenging questions, adopted persons faced special risks
of psychological problems.
Arnold Gesell (1880–1961)
The “normal” child’s development (which turned out to have im-
plications for adoption) was Arnold Gesell’s main interest. As-
154
Biographical Sketches

pects of his theories are still accepted today. For example, Gesell
believed that a child’s maturation follows regular developmental
pathways.
Born in Alma, Wisconsin, Gesell received his bachelor’s de-
gree from the University of Wisconsin. In 1906 he earned his PhD
at Clark University in Worchester, Massachusetts. He taught ele-
mentary school in New York City before moving on to Yale Uni-
versity, from which he received his MD in 1915. Earlier (in 1911)
he had set up a psychological clinic at the New Haven Dispen-
sary. He directed this clinic, which later became known as the
Clinic of Child Development, until 1948. In his “laboratory,”
Gesell did studies on hundreds of New Haven children, testing
them with specific developmental tasks, such as catching a ball or
climbing stairs. He was one of the first human behaviorists to use
photography and one-way mirrors in his observations.
Gesell had opinions on adoption and worked with influen-
tial organizations such as the United States Children’s Bureau
and the Child Welfare League of America. He believed in mini-
mum standards for adoption and thought that trained adoption
experts associated with reputable agencies should facilitate adop-
tions. Professionals used his norms to help them decide which
children they considered suitable for placement with which
prospective parents. Although Gesell espoused “matching,”
which was popular at the time, he did not agree with some other
experts about eugenics, the so-called science of superior blood-
lines, or as some have called it, “weeding out the weak.”
Some experts criticized Gesell for basing his work on the ob-
servations of middle-class Caucasian children from a single city
in New England and for not considering individual and cultural
differences. However, Gesell believed that clinical testing would
reveal a child’s native intelligence that might be hidden because
of poverty and/or neglect.
Clara McBride Hale (1905–1992)
Clara McBride Hale was the first director of Hale House, a nonprofit
childcare agency that she set up to serve children born addicted to
drugs and alcohol. She was born in Philadelphia and moved to
New York City after her marriage to Thomas Hale. Her husband
died at a young age, leaving her with three children to support.
Over the years, she did foster care for more than forty children.
Biographical Sketches
155

After her “retirement” in 1969, she founded Hale House, lo-
cated on 122nd Street in Harlem. Hale’s goal was to take in chil-
dren born addicted to drugs at birth, care for them until their
mothers graduated from a drug-treatment program, and then re-
unite them when their mothers were drug-free.
In 1985, Hale’s work attracted the attention of President
Ronald Reagan, who appointed her (at age eighty) to his Ameri-
can Commission on Drug-Free Schools. The same year, she was
awarded an honorary doctorate of humane letters by John Jay
College of Criminal Justice in New York City. She received the
Booth Community Service award from the Salvation Army in
1990.
Joan Heifetz Hollinger (1940–)
Joan Heifetz Hollinger is a prominent scholar and teacher on
adoption law and practice and on the psychosocial aspects of
adoptive family relationships. She has been active in efforts to
streamline laws governing intercountry adoptions, as well as do-
mestic adoptions, and has worked with legal issues related to
open adoption. She was a research consultant for the proposed
Uniform Adoption Act, which the National Conference on Uni-
form State Laws approved in 1994 and the American Bar Associ-
ation approved in 1995. Hollinger has served as a member of the
Children’s Bureau task force on Achieving Permanency for De-
pendent and Foster Children. She has also served on the U.S.
State Department’s advisory group on intercountry adoption,
and is the author of the American Bar Association’s guide to the
Multiethnic Placement Act. More recently she has worked on
drafting model parentage laws for the needs of children con-
ceived by assisted reproductive technology.
Hollinger was born in New York City. She earned a BA de-
gree with high honors from Swarthmore College in 1961, an MA
degree in history from the University of California at Berkeley in
1963, and a JD degree cum laude from SUNY Buffalo Law School
in 1973. After practicing law in New York State, she taught at the
law schools of SUNY Buffalo, Michigan, Stanford, UC Hastings,
and the University of Detroit. Since 1993 she has been a faculty
member at the Boalt Hall School of Law at the University of Cal-
ifornia at Berkeley.
Hollinger is the editor and principal author of the three-
156
Biographical Sketches

volume work Adoption Law and Practice. Her book Families by Law:
An Adoption Reader was published in 2004. She and her students
at Boalt Hall School of Law have worked on behalf of children
and have written amicus briefs on behalf of children in contested
adoption and custody cases.
Harry Holt (1905–1964) 
and Bertha Holt (1904–2000)
In 1954, soon after the end of the Korean War, Harry and Bertha
Holt saw a documentary film about Amerasian children in Ko-
rean orphanages. At the time, they were raising six birth children
on a farm near the Willamette Valley town of Creswell, Oregon.
In addition to farming, Harry ran a lumber company; Bertha,
trained as a nurse, took care of the children and the home. In spite
of their busy lives, they decided they would like to adopt some of
the orphaned children. But as Harry made plans to go to Korea,
the Holts discovered that nothing short of an act of both houses
of Congress would allow them to adopt children from Korea. Two
months later, the Holts had succeeded in conquering that chal-
lenge, and the “Holt Bill” had passed. In October 1955, Harry ar-
rived at the Portland airport with eight Korean orphans in tow.
In 1956 Harry and Bertha founded Holt International Chil-
dren’s Services, which some say was the beginning of intercoun-
try adoption. That same year, Bertha Holt wrote The Seed from the
East, an account of their adoptions. Her 1972 book, Outstretched
Arms, tells of the beginnings of the Holt organization. Bring My
Sons from Afar includes Bertha Holt’s observations (through jour-
nal excerpts) of the early days of Holt International’s work in
Korea. In Created for God’s Glory, she describes the lives of dis-
abled children at the Il San Center in South Korea.
Since then, Holt International Children’s Services has cast a
wide net in setting standards for excellence in adoption practice,
as well as fulfilling its mission to find families for children while
keeping in mind the question, “What is best for the child?”
After Harry died in 1964, Bertha—or “Grandma Holt,” as
many called her—carried on the mission of the organization until
her death from a stroke on July 31, 2000. Throughout her long life
she received nearly fifty awards, including the National Mother
of the Year Award in 1965, the Korean Order of Merit Award
Biographical Sketches
157

(1995), and the Hannah Neil World of Children Award (2000).
Harry and Bertha Holt chose to be buried together in Korea.
Patricia Irwin Johnston (1945–)
Patricia Irwin Johnston is an infertility and adoption educator
and publisher of Perspectives Press, which publishes books about
infertility and adoption. She was born in Indianapolis, Indiana,
and received her BA (1968) and BS (1973) degrees from Butler
University in Indianapolis.
Since the mid-1970s, she has written, spoken, volunteered,
and advocated for those interested in infertility and adoption. She
helped organize a local chapter of RESOLVE, Inc., in Indiana and
chaired the organization’s national board of directors for three
years. She also served on the national board of Adoptive Families
of America.
Her books include Understanding Infertility: Insights for Family
and Friends; Taking Charge of Infertility; Adopting after Infertility;
Launching a Baby’s Adoption; and Adoption Is a Family Affair! What
Relatives and Friends Must Know. She edited Perspectives on a
Grafted Tree: Thoughts for Those Touched by Adoption, a poetry an-
thology, and for five years wrote a column for Adoptive Families
magazine. She gives workshops on a variety of infertility, adop-
tion, and parenting issues for consumers and professionals.
Her awards include a 1989 Adoption Activist Award from
the North American Council on Adoptable Children, the 1992
Friend of Adoption Award from the Adoptive Parents Committee
of New York and New Jersey, a “110 percent” award from the
Joint Council on International Children’s Services (2005), and the
2006 Robert Todd Duncan Award from her alma mater in recog-
nition of personal and professional achievement that brings
honor and distinction to the University.
Patricia Johnston’s husband, Dave, was adopted, and they
are parents to three young adults (one son and two daughters)
who joined the family by adoption.
C. Henry Kempe (1922–1984)
Born in Breslau, Germany, C. Henry Kempe, MD, came to the
United States in the 1930s to escape Nazi oppression. He gradu-
158
Biographical Sketches

ated from the University of California School of Medicine in San
Francisco and, as a pediatrician, was famous for his interest in
protecting children. When he joined the University of Colorado to
chair the Department of Pediatrics, he introduced many pioneer-
ing practices for the good of children, including unlimited visit-
ing hours for hospitalized children and allowing parents to spend
the night in their children’s rooms.
In 1958 he created the Child Protection Team (along with
Elizabeth Boardman and Betty Elmer) at Colorado General Hos-
pital in Denver. He and  pediatrician Ray E. Helfer published the
first edition of their book The Battered Child in 1968; by that year
every state had passed a law mandating the reporting of child
abuse. In 1972 he was instrumental in founding the National Cen-
ter for the Prevention and Treatment of Child Abuse and Neglect
at the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center as a national
resource on issues of child abuse and neglect. He founded the In-
ternational Society for the Prevention of Child Abuse and Neglect
and edited The International Journal of Child Abuse and Neglect,
which the society publishes.
Kempe was the author or editor of many books and journal
articles on child abuse and neglect. Books include Helping the
Battered Child and His Family, with Ray Helfer (1972); Child Abuse
(1978); Sexually Abused Children and Their Families, with Patricia
Beezley Mrazek (1981); and The Common Secret: Sexual Abuse of
Children and Adolescents, with wife and child psychiatrist Ruth
Kempe (1984). The International Society for the Prevention of
Child Abuse and Neglect (ISPCAN) established the C. Henry
Kempe Award in 1984; it gives the award every two years to an
outstanding young professional or organization that works in
preventing child abuse and neglect. That same year, Kempe was
nominated for a Nobel Peace Prize for his work on behalf of
children.
H. David Kirk (1918–)
H. (Henry) David Kirk, adoptive parent and sociologist, is the au-
thor of Shared Fate: A Theory and Method of Adoptive Relations (pub-
lished in 1964 and revised in 1984) and Adoptive Kinship—An In-
stitution in Need of Reform (published in 1981 and revised in 1984).
Another book, Exploring Family Life (1988), is a collection of Kirk’s
papers, published in honor of his seventieth birthday. Topics 
Biographical Sketches
159

include adoption of children, the preference for girls, adoption
and child development, adopted children and stress, and the
legal application of the best interests of the child. The book also
includes Kirk’s original instruments for the Shared Fate studies.
In Shared Fate, Kirk used his studies of 2,000 adoptive fami-
lies in Canada and the United States to show that adoptive fami-
lies (usually those who could not have children by birth) are dif-
ferent from families created by birth. At the time, this concept of
“differentness” was a new idea.
Kirk points out that if adoptive parents ignored or tried to
conceal the differences in their way of family making, as many
had in the past, they may have escaped the “stigma” of not hav-
ing had children by birth. But if they joined with their adopted
children in acknowledgment of differences, they could “share”
their fate. Kirk’s research and observations based on his research
laid the foundation for the rejection of “matching” as a policy in
the placement of children and pointed toward policies of more
openness in adoption. While embracing adoption as a valuable
way of family-making, Kirk did not deny its “specialness” and
challenges.
Kirk was born into a Jewish family, the Kirchheimer family,
in Düsseldorf, Germany. When he was twenty years old, his
family escaped Nazi Germany and anglicized their name. Kirk
completed his undergraduate studies at the City College of New
York and received his PhD from Cornell University. His own ex-
perience with “forced migration” and his experiences as a foster
parent and adoptive parent of four children led to his subse-
quent research. From 1954 to 1964, Kirk was an associate pro-
fessor of sociology at McGill University in Montreal, Canada. In
1964, the year that his classic work Shared Fate was published,
Kirk moved his employment to the University of Waterloo in
Ontario, where as a professor of sociology he taught for twenty-
two years.
According to Kirk himself (Contemporary Authors Online), he
became a sociologist with historical interests because of his cu-
riosity about social change. The study of adoptive kinship, he be-
lieved, illustrated some of these patterns in microcosm.
Janusz Korczak (1878–1942)
Thanks to Betty Jean Lifton (profiled next) people in the United
160
Biographical Sketches

States and elsewhere can now join those in Europe who are more
likely to know the story of this hero of orphans. Lifton wrote The
King of Children: The Life and Death of Janusz Korczak, which was
published in 1988 and reprinted in 1997 with an introduction by
Elie Wiesel.
Even before World War II, Korczak was known as the “Pied
Piper” of poor and orphaned children. He was not only a pedia-
trician but also a writer and educator who fought for the rights of
children. As a Jewish person, he ran orphanages in Poland. But
his were not ordinary orphanages; they were progressive institu-
tions for both Jewish and Catholic children in Warsaw. Among
other innovative practices designed to protect and educate chil-
dren, he gave the residents a voice in decision making. He made
the orphanages into “just” communities with children’s courts
and legislative bodies.
Although Korczak could have escaped from the Nazis, he
chose to stay with “his” children. When the Nazis took two hun-
dred children under his care in the Warsaw Ghetto to die at the
Treblinka concentration camp, Korczak died with them in the gas
chambers.
According to the jacket of Lifton’s book, “Korczak founded
the first national children’s newspaper, testified in juvenile courts
on behalf of children, and trained teachers and parents in ‘moral
education’ with his books, How to Love a Child and How to Respect
a Child.”
Betty Jean Lifton (1926–)
Betty Jean Lifton was born in New York City and adopted by Oscar
and Hilda Kirschner. Lifton did not learn that she had been
adopted until she was seven years old. Although her mother told
her the truth at that time, she asked her daughter to keep her adop-
tion a secret. According to E. Wayne Carp in Family Matters: Secrecy
and Disclosure in the History of Adoption (1998, 162), these circum-
stances became an “obsession” for Lifton, motivated her search,
and affected all of her relationships and activities. Lifton graduated
from Barnard College in 1948. In 1952 she married Robert Jay
Lifton, a psychiatrist who later was awarded a Pulitzer Prize. The
couple has four children.
Betty Jean Lifton is well-known for her books about adop-
tion written for adults and young people. She has also written a
Biographical Sketches
161

biography about another adoption pioneer (Janusz Korczak)
and several plays.  From 1952 to 1954 Lifton and her husband
lived in Tokyo, Japan. From 1954 to 1956 they lived in Hong
Kong, and in 1960 they returned for another two-year stay in
Japan. These years and these experiences provided the setting
for many of Lifton’s children’s books.
But it was Lifton herself and her own experiences with adop-
tion that provided the impetus for her books about adoption for
adults and young people. Twice Born: Memoirs of an Adopted
Daughter was published in 1975. According to one critic, the book
was a “parable about a search for identity.” Lost and Found: the
Adoption Experience (1979) tells of Lifton’s search for her birth
mother and speaks to the need (in Lifton’s view) for open adop-
tion records. Lifton’s book Journey of the Adopted Self: A Quest for
Wholeness (1994) includes interviews with other adoptees inter-
woven with her own experiences. Again Lifton argues for open
adoption records.
For younger readers, Lifton wrote I’m Still Me (1986), which
tells the story of a junior in high school who explores her roots for
a history project. The project, which turns into a search for her
birth parents, includes the main character’s feelings of abandon-
ment and also her guilt at keeping the search secret from her
adoptive parents.
A picture book entitled Tell Me a Real Adoption Story was pub-
lished in 1994. In this tale, a little girl feels relieved when her
mother tells her the facts of her adoption rather than telling her a
made-up story. In dialogue, the book answers some of the ques-
tions young children frequently ask about adoption.
Lois Ruskai Melina (1952–)
Lois Melina, formerly editor and publisher of Adopted Child, a
monthly newsletter for adoptive parents, now writes a regular
column on “The Adopted Child” for Adoptive Families magazine.
She was born in 1952 in Cleveland, Ohio, and received her BA in
journalism in 1973 from the University of Toledo (Ohio) and her
MA in journalism from Ohio State University in 1976.
Melina is the author of several books about adoption, in-
cluding Raising Adopted Children: Practical Reassuring Advice for
Every Adoptive Parent (revised edition, 1998); The Open Adoption
Experience: A Complete Guide for Adoptive and Birth Families—From
162
Biographical Sketches

Making the Decision through the Child’s Growing Years, with Sharon
Kaplan Roszia (1993); and Making Sense of Adoption (1989). She
has produced several audiotapes on various aspects of adoption,
which include Rituals in Adoption, Raising a Child of a Different Race
or Ethnic Background, and While You Wait to Adopt.
In addition, she serves on the board of directors of the Evan
B. Donaldson Institute, which is dedicated to improving the qual-
ity of information about adoption and providing guidance for
practice and policy change in adoption. She speaks frequently
about adoption to professionals and adoptive parents in the
United States, Canada, and Australia.
Melina and her husband, who live in northern Idaho, are the
parents of two children by adoption.
Jean Paton (1908–2002)
Jean Paton, one of the first persons in the United States to ques-
tion the effects of sealed records on adoptees, was born in Detroit,
Michigan. As a social worker and adopted person, she devoted
much of her life to helping those who had been adopted.
She received her BA degree from the University of Wisconsin
in 1932 and her MA in 1933. In 1942 she was able to look up her
adoption records at the probate court in Detroit and found there
the full name of her birth mother. (At that time, nearly half the
states did not provide for confidentiality of birth records.) In 1945
she received her MSW from the Pennsylvania School of Social
Work in Philadelphia. In her early career, Paton was a researcher
in labor relations in Washington, DC. She worked for ten years in
child placement (social work) and after two years at the Philadel-
phia Child Guidance Clinic became qualified as a psychiatric so-
cial worker.
In 1953 Paton began her emphasis on adoption with a pro-
gram she initially called the Life History Study Center. In 1954
she privately issued The Adopted Break Silence, a book reviewing
the results of forty questionnaires from adopted adults about
their own feelings regarding adoption. According to E. Wayne
Carp in Family Matters: Secrecy and Disclosure in the History of
Adoption (1998, 140), “Paton’s legacy was to give adoptees a voice,
by collecting and publishing their life histories.” Her book Orphan
Voyage, published in 1968 under the pseudonym Ruthena Hill
Kitson, is a sequel to the first and contains reports of interviews
Biographical Sketches
163

with adopted persons in various parts of Lower Michigan. In sub-
sequent publications, Paton gave her views on such topics as in-
tercountry adoption, why adopted persons are “different,” the
destructiveness of sealed records, and a memorial statement
about her birth mother.
In her later years, Paton moved to Arizona, where she re-
named her program Orphan Voyage. She was involved in several
adoption-related programs, including Kinship, an alternative-to-
adoption program.
Justine Wise Polier (1903–1987)
Justine Wise Polier, a New York Family Court judge and adoption
advocate, was born in Portland, Oregon, to well-known parents.
Her father, Rabbi Stephen Wise, was one of the founders of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP). Her mother, Louise Waterman Wise, was an artist, hu-
manitarian, and community leader who started an adoption
agency for Jewish orphans in 1916. The Free Synagogue Child
Adoption Committee was one of the first specialized adoption
agencies in the United States at a time when Jewish adoption was
uncommon.
After Justine Wise’s first husband, a professor of criminal
law, died in 1932, she married Shad Polier, an attorney who
shared his wife’s passion for child welfare. In the 1930s and
1940s she criticized racial and religious “matching,” the prevail-
ing practice at the time. She equated matching with discrimina-
tion and believed in pluralism, as well as the separation of
church and state. Polier believed that children should not be
considered “property” of their birth parents or of any organized
religion.
Beginning in 1946 Polier served as president of the board of
the agency her mother had founded and renamed it Louise Wise
Services in honor of her mother. In the 1950s and 1960s Polier
helped revise the focus of the organization, changing from sectar-
ian practices to innovative practices in providing services for chil-
dren of color and in placing children transracially. In addition to
its value on a personal level, Polier believed in adoption for its
“civic value.” In other words, permanent, loving homes would
produce happier and more productive citizens.
164
Biographical Sketches

Jessie Taft (1882–1960)
In many ways, Jessie Taft was a woman ahead of her time. Born
in rural Iowa, she graduated from the University of Chicago in
1913 with a PhD in philosophy. In those days, few women pur-
sued such a high level of education. Although she might have
preferred teaching or research at a university, not many doors of
academia opened to women in the early 1900s.
Instead, Taft carved out a career in social work that lasted
twenty years. In 1934 she joined the faculty of the University of
Pennsylvania School of Social Work. She also worked for the Chil-
dren’s Aid Society of Pennsylvania, where she pioneered mod-
ernizing adoption practices. For example, she led a movement to
adopt minimum standards in adoption and to use empirical re-
search to evaluate outcomes for adopted children.
Taft, who had studied with Viennese psychoanalyst Otto
Rank, knew adoption from a personal perspective. She and her
life-partner, Virginia Robinson (also a child welfare professional),
adopted two children. Taft led the way in espousing her belief
that the adoption of children, though not second best, is different
from raising children a person has given birth to. She believed
that everyone involved in the adoption, including the birth par-
ents, the adoptive parents, and the children themselves, could
and should play an active role in making the adoption a success.
Jessie Taft believed in the concept of therapeutic adoption,
which included psychological therapy. In other words, love may
not be enough. Taft also believed that adoption could give chil-
dren love, belonging, and a sense of security.
Sophie van Senden Theis (1885–1957)
An acquaintance of Jessie Taft (above), Sophie van Senden Theis
graduated from Vassar College in 1907. At the time, little formal
training in social work existed. Theis worked for the New York
State Charities Aid Association for forty-five years. Some call her
“the first adoption social worker in the United States.”
In 1921, with her colleague Constance Goodrich, Theis pub-
lished one of the first training manuals for adoption profession-
als. The manual offered step-by-step advice to those who placed
Biographical Sketches
165

children in adoptive homes. The Child in the Foster Home helped
workers decide who would make adequate parents for foster chil-
dren and who might not, and why and how to reject inappropri-
ate candidates. It also gave advice on placing siblings and sug-
gested when and how to talk to the child about adoption.
In 1924, after documenting what had happened to children
placed by her association, she published a study called How Fos-
ter Children Turn Out. (In general, they “turned out” very well.)
Although the first of its kind, Theis’s study became a prototype
for later outcome studies.
A single woman herself, Theis encouraged single women
and female couples to adopt. In fact, she personally facilitated the
placement of Jessie Taft and Virginia Robinson’s children. Ac-
cording to the Adoption History Project, in some ways attitudes
about those who might make acceptable parents may have been
more flexible in the early twentieth century than they are today.
Dave Thomas (1932–2002)
The founder of Wendy’s International food chain, Dave Thomas
was born in Atlantic City, New Jersey, in July 1932. Six weeks later
a Michigan couple, Rex and Auleva Thomas, adopted him. When
Dave was five years old, his adoptive mother died. His father, not
an affectionate man, was a laborer who traveled widely and mar-
ried three more times. Dave Thomas’s grandmother, Minnie Sin-
clair of Michigan, influenced her grandson’s early life, teaching
him to do the right thing, to treat people well, and to serve others.
His grandmother was the person who decided, when Dave was
thirteen, to tell him of his adoption. Thomas believed in open
records for adoptees when they turned twenty-one and he thought
they should be able to initiate a search for their birth parents.
As an adoptee, Thomas was not bitter about his history. In
fact, the opposite was true. He realized many goals in support of
adoption, especially for older “waiting” children. He focused his
efforts on two main objectives: increasing adoptions from the
public system and persuading businesses to make adoption eas-
ier for their employees.
In 1990 President George H. W. Bush tapped Thomas to head
a White House Initiative on adoption. Through this experience,
Thomas discovered obstacles to the process that included over-
whelming amounts of paperwork, much “red tape,” and high ex-
166
Biographical Sketches

penses. As a result, he began to try to entice companies and states
to offer adoption assistance to those interested in adopting. For
example, he started a letter-writing campaign to Fortune 1000
CEOs, asking them to make adoption benefits available to their
employees. At the time of his death, approximately 75 percent of-
fered some kind of assistance to employees wanting to adopt.
In 1992 he established the Dave Thomas Foundation for
Adoption, a not-for-profit organization that gives grants to na-
tional and regional adoption organizations and also does out-
reach on behalf of waiting children. (In 2003 the foundation in-
corporated in Canada.)
In 1996 President Bill Clinton signed the Small Business and
Job Protection Act of 1996, which gave many adoptive parents of
hard-to-place children a one-time tax credit of $6,000 for their
adoption and $5,000 for all other types of adoptions. In signing
the bill, President Clinton recognized the contributions of Dave
Thomas.
In 1997 Clinton signed the Adoption and Safe Families Act,
which reduced the time children in foster care had to wait for
adoption and provides state incentives and accountability. To call
attention to adoption and to these laws, Thomas and his founda-
tion partnered with the U.S. Postal Service in making a first-class
stamp (available in 2000) featuring adoption.
Thomas and his wife, Lorraine, were married for forty-seven
years and had five children and sixteen grandchildren. Thomas
named Wendy’s after his second-youngest daughter.
Barbara Tremetiere (1939–)
Barbara Tremitiere, formerly an adoption specialist for Tressler
Lutheran Services in York, Pennsylvania, was born in Oak Park,
Illinois. (Tressler Lutheran is now part of Diakon Lutheran Social
Ministries.) Tremitiere received her BA in 1961 from Miami Uni-
versity in Oxford, Ohio; her MSW from the Graduate School of So-
cial Work at the University of Pittsburgh; and a PhD in social work
in 1991 from Union Institute, Cincinnati, Ohio. She served as an
adjunct faculty member at three Pennsylvania colleges: York Col-
lege, Lebanon Valley College, and Pennsylvania State University.
As the parent of fifteen children (including twelve adopted
as special needs children), Tremetiere gave practical, anecdotal,
and humor-filled trainings and workshops for adoptive parents,
Biographical Sketches
167

social workers, and others interested in the placement of “waiting
children.” She is the author or coauthor of a number of publica-
tions and training materials, including Kids in Batches (with Mar-
garet Ward, 1990) and The Large Adoptive Family: A Special Kind of
“Normal” (1994).
168
Biographical Sketches

6
Facts and Data
T
his chapter provides statistics and methods of data collection
on adoption, and discusses how federal laws and Supreme
Court verdicts have affected adoption. In several cases, ex-
cerpts of testimony from Senate hearings have been included.   
The Children’s Bureau
President William Howard Taft created the Children’s Bureau in
1912 to investigate and report on important social issues of his
time, such as infant mortality, birth rates, orphanages, and juve-
nile courts. The Children’s Bureau is one of several bureaus in the
Administration on Children, Youth and Families, in the U.S. De-
partment of Health and Human Services. The primary responsi-
bility of the Children’s Bureau is the administration of federal
child welfare programs. Its mission is to provide for safety (pre-
venting child abuse), permanency (finding “forever” homes for
children who cannot return to their birth parents), and for the
well-being of children through partnerships with states, tribes,
and communities. More information on policies of the Children’s
Bureau is available at http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb
and in chapter 7.
The Child Welfare Information Gateway 
Under the auspices of the Children’s Bureau, two separate but re-
lated information clearinghouses were available to students of
169

adoption. These two repositories of information were the Na-
tional Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect Information
(NCCANCH) and the National Adoption Information Clearing-
house (NAIC). Congress established the NCCANCH in 1974 with
the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act to collect, organ-
ize, and disseminate information on child mistreatment. Con-
gress later (1987) established the National Adoption Information
Clearinghouse to provide information on all aspects of adoption,
including domestic and intercountry adoption. On June 21, 2006,
the Child Welfare Information Gateway (CWIG) combined, con-
solidated, and expanded the resources of the NCCANCH and the
NAIC. It now offers a website, http://www.childwelfare.gov.
The following are three questions that reports from CWIG have
been able to answer.
How Many Children Were Adopted in 2000 and 2001?
In order to estimate trends in adoption, it is helpful to know how
many children are adopted in the United States in any given year.
This information is not easy to collect and takes years to assem-
ble. The Child Welfare Information Gateway has made available
an estimate of the number of children adopted in 2000 and 2001.
These figures are presented in Figure 6.1.
The number of adoptions, ranging from 118,000 to 127,000,
has remained relatively constant since 1987. The numbers in 2000
and 2001 were approximately 127,000.
•
Public agency adoptions and intercountry adoptions
together now account for more than half of all
adoptions. (Formerly, kinship adoptions and private-
agency adoptions dominated.)
•
Adoptions through publicly funded child welfare
agencies increased, accounting for two-fifths of all
adoptions. The more than 50,000 (40 percent of the total)
of these adoptions in each of the years (2000 and 2001)
was up from 18 percent in 1992 for the thirty-six states
reporting at that time.
•
Intercountry adoptions made up 15 percent of the total.
This represented an increase from 5 percent to 15
percent of adoptions in the United States between 1992
and 2001.
170
Facts and Data

•
The final two-fifths of the adoptions were private
agency, kinship, or tribal. (It was not possible to separate
the percentages within this group, although the
numbers have decreased.) For example, in 1992
stepparent adoptions (a form of kinship adoption)
accounted for 42 percent of all adoptions. 
How Many People Are Seeking to Adopt?
In a report entitled “Persons Seeking to Adopt: Numbers and
Trends,” CWIG (2005) reports that although most people in the
United States have favorable ideas about adoption, few have
taken steps to adopt a child and even fewer have adopted.
According to polls, more than a third of Americans have con-
sidered adopting. However, no more than 2 percent have actually
adopted. Figure 6.2 presents data from the 1995 National Survey
of Family Growth (NSFG).
•
In 1995, almost 10 million “ever-married” American
women between the ages of eighteen and forty-four had
considered adoption, which was more than one-fourth
(26.4 percent) of all ever-married women.
The Child Welfare Information Gateway
171
Public
Intercountry
Private, independent
kinship, and tribal
Percent of All Adoptions in the U.S. by Type
(N=126,951)
18%
5%
77%
39%
46%
15%
Public
y
Private, independent
kinship, and tribal
Percent of All Adoptions in the U.S. by Type
(N=127,407)
Intercountr
FIGURE 6.1
How Many Children Were Adopted in 2000 and 2001?
Source: Child Welfare Information Gateway. Accessed at
http://www.childwelfare.gov/pubs/s_adoptedhighlights.cfm. Reprinted with permission.

•
Approximately 16 percent of those who had considered
adoption (4 percent of the total of ever-married women)
had taken concrete steps to adopt.
•
Only 31 percent of those who had taken concrete steps
to adopt (1.3 percent of all ever-married women) had
completed an adoption.
The report goes on to say that the characteristics of those who
had adopted varied according to whether they adopted a related or
nonrelated child. Women who had problems with fertility and/or
had no other children, were Caucasian, and had higher income and
education levels were more likely to adopt an unrelated child.
Black families and families with lower levels of income and educa-
tion were more likely to adopt a child related to them.
Another survey (Harris Interactive, 2002) in a study of 1,400
Americans found that the highest percentages of Americans who
had considered adopting were between the ages of thirty-five and
fifty-five, married, and female. In contrast to the findings of the
National Survey of Family Growth, the Harris poll found that in-
come and education were not factors. The greatest differences
were that Hispanic populations had a higher likelihood of consid-
eration of adoption than African American or white populations.
172
Facts and Data
FIGURE 6.2
Persons Seeking to Adopt: Numbers and Trends
Source: Child Welfare Information Gateway, reprinted from Chandra et al., 1999. Accessed at
http://www.childwelfare.gov/pubs/s_seek.cfm.
Ever considered adoption
26%
4%
1.3%
Ever took concrete steps toward adoption
Ever completed adoption
Percent of women ever married, age 18–44ed, age 18–44

All of the studies found discrepancies between those who
considered adoption and those who actually adopted. Authorities
guessed (and also found some evidence) that the reason some
people do not continue with an adoption plan is that they are con-
cerned about the health or behavioral problems of children
adopted from the foster-care system. (The Harris poll found that
race and the age of the child did not play as big a part as might
have been expected.)
Trends include fewer ever-married women adopting in the
mid-1990s than in the mid-1970s, but an increasing proportion of
women adopting stepchildren and children of relatives. Also, the
interest in adoption seems to have remained relatively stable over
time.
The report suggests that future research might include stud-
ies to find out how many men seek to adopt, more information on
what keeps those who consider adoption from actually following
through, and an exploration of differences in reasons why people
of different ethnic/racial/socioeconomic groups adopt.
How Many Women Place Their Children for Adoption,
and Who Are the Women Who Place Their Children? 
“Voluntary Relinquishment for Adoption: Numbers and Trends”
(2005) is another report available from the Child Welfare Infor-
mation Gateway. The NSFG  collected statistics that show that the
number of voluntary relinquishments of infants for adoption in
the United States is very small and getting smaller.
According to the 1995 survey, less than 1 percent of children
born to never-married women were placed for adoption from
1989 to 1995. According to the CWIG report, since the mid-1970s
relinquishments declined from nearly 9 percent to less than 1 per-
cent. Estimates from researchers at the Centers for Disease Con-
trol and Prevention in 2004 show that birth mothers relinquished
fewer than 14,000 children in 2003. (The percentage of children re-
linquished by white never-married women—1.7 percent—is
higher than for black never-married women—close to zero per-
cent. Relinquishment by married and formerly married women is
even rarer, and percentages are not available.)
Figure 6.3 shows how rare voluntary relinquishment is for
both black and white women.
The Child Welfare Information Gateway
173

Very little additional data is available on which women vol-
untarily relinquish their children, except that unmarried teens
who do relinquish are usually Caucasian and have higher educa-
tional levels and perhaps stronger career aspirations than those
who do not relinquish. Another factor in a teen’s decision to vol-
untarily relinquish is a strong preference expressed by the teen’s
mother or by the birth father.
Researchers and professionals in adoption offer several pos-
sible reasons for the recent decline in relinquishments. One is that
social acceptance of single parents has increased, leading more
unmarried women to parent their children. Another is that infor-
mal adoptions have become more common than they were in the
past. Also, unmarried mothers are increasingly older (in their
twenties rather than in their teens), so they may have more finan-
cial security.
More research will probably be done in the future on the role
of birth fathers. However, the low numbers of infants being
placed for adoption make research (and generalizations based on
the research) difficult. Currently the courts have not given birth
fathers much power to veto a relinquishment if they have not
taken an active role before or immediately after the birth of the
174
Facts and Data
Before 1973
  
1973-81
1985-88
1989-95
25
20
15
10
5
0
Black
All women
White
FIGURE 6.3
Percent of Infants Relinquished for Adoption by
Never-Married Women Under 45 Years
Source: Child Welfare Information Gateway. Accessed at http://www.childwelfare.gov/pubs/s_place.cfm.

child. The report “Voluntary Relinquishment or Adoption: Num-
bers and Trends” is available from CWIG at http://www.child-
welfare.gov/ppubs/s_place.cfm.
Data Collection History and Sources
Since the 1940s, a number of sources have collected adoption
data. Through the Children’s Bureau (CB) and the National Cen-
ter for Social Statistics (NCSS), the federal government collected
data sporadically during the years from 1944 to 1957. From 1957
to 1975 the government compiled annual statistics on adoption.
In 1975, however, the NCSS dissolved, and data collection
stopped. Congress tried to address the problem of lack of data
with the enactment of the Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare
Act of 1980 (P.L. 96–272).
In 1982 the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS) funded the American Public Welfare Association to con-
duct a voluntary annual survey of the states. This survey was
called the Voluntary Cooperative Information System (VCIS) and
collected data only on children from the public child welfare sys-
tem. Beginning in 1995, federal statutes and regulations man-
dated the states to report adoptions through the public child wel-
fare system to the Children’s Bureau. These data are entered into
the Federal Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting
System (AFCARS), which replaced VCIS. AFCARS data, along
with other measures, monitor the states’ progress in achieving the
goals of the Adoption and Safe Families Act of 1997.
Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and
Reporting Systems (AFCARS) 
If state child welfare agencies have responsibility for placement,
care, or supervision of certain children, AFCARS collects case-
level information on these children. AFCARS also collects infor-
mation on children who are adopted under the auspices of a
state’s public child welfare agency. This data, available through
the Child Welfare Information Gateway, goes back to the first re-
port in 1999 and at press time was available through June 2006. 
(A “trends” document, which gives a summary of several years of
Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting Systems (AFCARS)
175

AFCARS information, is available at http://www.acf.hhs.gov/
programs/cb/stats_research/afcars/trends.htm.) The states are
required to submit AFCARS data semi-annually to the Adminis-
tration for Children and Families.
Some of the reports are preliminary, some are interim, and oth-
ers are final. Preliminary reports include data received by Sep-
tember 30 for the period ending March 31, and by March 31 for
the period ending September 30. Interim reports include subse-
quent data used to calculate awards for the Adoption Incentive
Program or the Children’s Bureau’s Annual Report to Congress.
Final reports are issued when it is likely that outcomes can no
longer be improved. Later AFCARS information as it becomes
available in the future will be found at http://www.acf.hhs.gov/
programs/cb/stats_research/index.htm#afcars.
Statewide Automated Child Welfare
Information System (SACWIS) 
The Statewide Automated Child Welfare Information System
(SACWIS) is a comprehensive case management tool that sup-
ports and assists case management practices of social workers in
adoption and foster care. The Children’s Bureau funded the states
to develop their individual SACWIS systems. Some states, how-
ever, did not choose to access that funding. With or without
SACWIS, states must submit certain data to the Children’s Bu-
reau on a mandated schedule.
What Is the Difference 
between AFCARS and SACWIS? 
SACWIS is a “case management” system that serves as an electronic
case file for children and families involved with the child welfare
programs of the states. One of the reports that these data generate is
the AFCARS information, which is then sent to the Administration
for Children and Families on a semi-annual basis. Of all of the po-
tential data sources, AFCARS is the only one that contains informa-
tion about the characteristics of children being adopted as well as
information on the birth families and adoptive families. 
176
Facts and Data

AFCARS Data
Tables 6.1 through 6.26 show results from the eleventh AFCARS re-
port. All of these tables are available from the Children’s Bureau
website at http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/stats_research/
afcars/tar/report11.htm.
AFCARS Data
177
TABLE 6.1
What were the ages of the children in foster care?
Mean Years
10.1
Median Years
10.9
Less than 1 Year
5%
26,642
1 Year
6%
30,749
2 Years
6%
28,446
3 Years
5%
26,263
4 Years
5%
23,638
5 Years
4%
22,338
6 Years
4%
21,382
7 Years
4%
20,495
8 Years
4%
20,242
9 Years
4%
20,292
10 Years
4%
21,151
11 Years
4%
23,051
12 Years
5%
25,194
13 Years
6%
29,406
14 Years
7%
33,929
15 Years
8%
39,041
16 Years
8%
41,872
17 Years
7%
38,379
18 Years
3%
14,706
19 Years
1%
6,185
20 Years
1%
3,601
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.
Note: Data from both the regular and revised submissions received by June 2006 are included in the data. Missing
data are not used in the calculation of percentages.

178
Facts and Data
TABLE 6.2
What were the lengths of stay in foster care?
Mean Months
30.0
Median Months
16.5
Less than 1 Month
5%
25,136
1 to 5 Months
18%
94,559
6 to 11 Months
17%
88,610
12 to 17 Months
18%
64,394
18 to 23 Months
9%
44,543
24 to 29 Months
7%
35,534
30 to 35 Months
5%
26,081
3 to 4 Years
12%
61,206
5 Years or More
15%
76,938
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.
TABLE 6.3
What were the placement settings of children in foster care?
Pre-Adoptive Home
4%
21,483
Foster Family Home (Relative)
24%
122,528
Foster Family Home (Nonrelative)
46%
238,084
Group Home
9%
45,609
Institution
10%
51,585
Supervised Independent Living
1%
5,858
Runaway
2%
10,931
Trial Home Visit
4%
20,923
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.

AFCARS Data
179
TABLE 6.4
What were the case goals of the children in foster care?
Reunify with Parent(s) or Principal Caretaker(s)
49%
255,280
Live with Other Relative(s)
4%
22,785
Adoption
20%
102,777
Long-Term Foster Care
8%
40,832
Emancipation
6%
32,370
Guardianship
3%
16,277
Case Plan Goal Not Yet Established
9%
46,679
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.
TABLE 6.5
What was the race/ethnicity of the children in foster care?
American Indian/Alaska Native—Non-Hispanic
2%
10,323
Asian–Non-Hispanic
1%
3,099
Black—Non-Hispanic
34%
175,089
Hawaiian/Pacific Islander—Non-Hispanic
0%
1,474
Hispanic
18%
93,759
White–Non-Hispanic
40%
205,561
Unknown/Unable to Determine
2%
12,050
Two or More Races–Non-Hispanic
3%
15,645
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.
Note: Using U.S. Bureau of the Census standards, children of Hispanic origin may be of any race. Beginning in FY 2000,
children could be identified with more than one race designation.
TABLE 6.6
What was the gender of the children in foster care?
Male
53%
271,780
Female
47%
245,220
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.

180
Facts and Data
TABLE 6.7
What were the ages of the children who entered care during FY 2004?
Mean Years
8.3
Median Years
8.1
Less than 1 Year
14%
43,721
1 Year
6%
19,667
2 Years
6%
17,614
3 Years
5%
16,246
4 Years
5%
14,631
5 Years
5%
13,803
6 Years
4%
12,957
7 Years
4%
12,069
8 Years
4%
11,473
9 Years
4%
11,129
10 Years
4%
11,366
11 Years
4%
11,897
12 Years
5%
13,943
13 Years
6%
16,993
14 Years
7%
20,445
15 Years
8%
23,164
16 Years
7%
20,636
17 Years
4%
12,394
18 Years
0%
703
19 Years
0%
112
20 Years
0%
37
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.

AFCARS Data
181
TABLE 6.8
What was the race/ethnicity of the children who entered care during FY 2004?
American Indian/Alaska Native–Non-Hispanic
2%
6,728
Asian–Non-Hispanic
1%
2,468
Black—Non-Hispanic
27%
81,253
Hawaiian/Pacific Islander–Non-Hispanic
0%
1,057
Hispanic
18%
54,433
White—Non-Hispanic
46%
141,506
Unknown/Unable to Determine
3%
7,830
Two or More Races–Non-Hispanic
3%
9,726
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.
Note: Using U.S. Bureau of the Census standards, children of Hispanic origin may be of any race. Beginning in FY 2000,
children could be identified with more than one race designation.

182
Facts and Data
TABLE 6.9
What were the ages of the children who exited care during FY 2004?
Mean Years
9.9
Median Years
9.8
Less than 1 Year
5%
13,413
1 Year
6%
17,882
2 Years
7%
18,522
3 Years
6%
17,012
4 Years
5%
15,143
5 Years
5%
14,137
6 Years
4%
12,733
7 Years
4%
12,076
8 Years
4%
11,429
9 Years
4%
11,781
10 Years
4%
11,059
11 Years
4%
11,191
12 Years
4%
11,499
13 Years
4%
12,522
14 Years
5%
14,531
15 Years
6%
16,403
16 Years
6%
17,599
17 Years
7%
19,762
18 Years
7%
19,608
19 Years
1%
3,514
20 Years
1%
2,073
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.

AFCARS Data
183
TABLE 6.10
What were the outcomes for the children exiting foster care during FY 2004?
Reunification with Parent(s) or Primary Caretaker(s)
54%
151,648
Living with Other Relative(s)
12%
33,397
Adoption
18%
51,413
Emancipation
8%
23,121
Guardianship
4%
12,519
Transfer to Another Agency
2%
6,126
Runaway
2%
4,261
Death of Child
0%
514
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.
Note: Deaths are attributable to a variety of causes including medical conditions, accidents, and homicide.
TABLE 6.11
What were the lengths of stay of the children who exited foster care during FY 2004?
Mean Months
21.5
Median Months
11.9
Less than 1 Month
18%
50,565
1 to 5 Months
16%
46,183
6 to 11 Months
16%
45,802
12 to 17 Months
12%
34,751
18 to 23 Months
9%
24,316
24 to 29 Months
6%
17,756
30 to 35 Months
5%
13,142
3 to 4 Years
10%
27,137
5 Years or More
8%
23,347
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.

184
Facts and Data
TABLE 6.12
What was the race/ethnicity of the children who exited care during FY 2004?
American Indian/Alaska Native–Non-Hispanic
2%
5,846
Asian–Non-Hispanic
1%
2,400
Black–Non-Hispanic
29%
82,373
Hawaiian/Pacific Islander–Non-Hispanic
0%
1,043
Hispanic
17%
47,832
White—Non-Hispanic
45%
127,866
Unknown/Unable to Determine
3%
7,191
Two or More Races—Non-Hispanic
3%
8,449
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.
Note: Using U.S. Bureau of the Census standards, children of Hispanic origin may be of any race. Beginning in FY 2000,
children could be identified with more than one race designation.
TABLE 6.13
What is the gender distribution of the waiting children? 
Male
53%
62,886
Female
47%
55,114
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.
Note: Waiting children are identified as children who have a goal of adoption and/or whose parental rights have been
terminated. Children sixteen years old or older whose parental rights have been terminated and who have a goal of
emancipation have been excluded from the estimate. 

AFCARS Data
185
TABLE 6.14
How many months have the waiting children been in continuous foster care?
Mean Months
43.8
Median Months
32.5
Less than 1 Month
1%
661
1–5 Months
4%
4,151
6–11 Months
8%
9,191
12–17 Months
11%
13,415
18–23 Months
11%
13,390
24–29 Months
11%
13,352
30–35 Months
9%
10,361
36–59 Months
21%
25,335
60 or More Months
24%
28,144
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.
TABLE 6.15
What is the racial/ethnic distribution of the waiting children?
American Indian/Alaska Native–Non-Hispanic
2%
2,316
Asian–Non-Hispanic
0%
484
Black–Non-Hispanic
38%
45,025
Hawaiian/Pacific Islander—Non-Hispanic
0%
357
Hispanic
14%
16,997
White—Non-Hispanic
38%
44,991
Unknown/Unable to Determine
3%
3,644
Two or More Races—Non-Hispanic
4%
4,186
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.
Note: Using U.S. Bureau of the Census standards, children of Hispanic origin may be of any race. Beginning in FY 2000,
children could be identified with more than one race designation.

186
Facts and Data
TABLE 6.16
How old were the waiting children when they were removed 
from their parents or caretakers?
Mean Years
5.1
Median Years
4.5
Less than 1 Year
24%
27,732
1 Year
8%
9,730
2 Years
7%
8,808
3 Years
7%
8,211
4 Years
7%
8,031
5 Years
7%
7,815
6 Years
7%
7,902
7 Years
6%
7,399
8 Years
6%
6,849
9 Years
5%
6,353
10 Years
5%
5,534
11 Years
4%
4,444
12 Years
3%
3,538
13 Years
2%
2,635
14 Years
1%
1,663
15 Years
1%
878
16 Years
0%
386
17 Years
0%
80
18 Years
0%
8
19 Years
0%
3
20 Years
0%
2
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.

AFCARS Data
187
TABLE 6.17
Where were the waiting children living on September 30, 2004?
Preadoptive Home
15%
17,165
Foster Family Home (Relative)
17%
20,510
Foster Family Home (Nonrelative)
55%
65,324
Group Home
4%
5,370
Institution
7%
8,282
Supervised Independent Living
0%
209
Runaway
1%
707
Trial Home Visit
0%
432
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.

188
Facts and Data
TABLE 6.18
How old were the children on September 30, 2004?
Mean Years
8.8
Median Years
8.7
Less than 1 Year
4%
4,207
1 Year
7%
8,079
2 Years
7%
8,358
3 Years
6%
7,870
4 Years
6%
7,011
5 Years
6%
6,672
6 Years
5%
6,403
7 Years
5%
6,148
8 Years
5%
5,950
9 Years
5%
6,145
10 Years
5%
6,397
11 Years
6%
6,800
12 Years
6%
6,956
13 Years
6%
7,062
14 Years
6%
6,931
15 Years
6%
6,553
16 Years
5%
5,976
17 Years
3%
3,252
18 Years
1%
899
19 Years
0%
237
20 Years
0%
90
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.

AFCARS Data
189
TABLE 6.19
As of September 30, 2004, how many months had elapsed since 
the parental rights of these foster children were terminated?
Mean Months
28.3
Median Months
16.8
Adoptions can be reported to the AFCARS adoption database at any time after the adoption has been finalized. This
report includes adoptions finalized in FY 2004 reported in regular and revised submissions by June 1, 2006.
Notes: The number of adoptions reported here do not equal the number of adoption discharges reported under foster
care exits because the adoptions reported here include adoptions of some children who were not in foster care but
received other support from the public agency. In addition, states have historically underreported adoption discharges.
In contrast, states tend to more accurately report the adoptions to the AFCARS adoption database because those are
the adoptions used to calculate adoption incentive awards. Missing data are not used in the calculation of the
percentages.
TABLE 6.20
What is the gender distribution of the children adopted from 
the public foster care system?
Male
51%
26,324
Female
49%
25,676
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.

190
Facts and Data
TABLE 6.21
How old were the children when they were adopted from 
the public foster care system?
Mean Years
6.9
Median Years
5.9
Less than 1 Year
2%
957
1 Year
2%
4,482
2 Years
12%
6,141
3 Years
11%
5,557
4 Years
9%
4,742
5 Years
8%
4,092
6 Years
7%
3,536
7 Years
6%
3,241
8 Years
5%
2,848
9 Years
5%
2,708
10 Years
5%
2,572
11 Years
5%
2,477
12 Years
4%
2,227
13 Years
4%
1,891
14 Years
3%
1,474
15 Years
2%
1,109
16 Years
2%
834
17 Years
1%
587
18 Years
0%
149
19 Years
0%
28
20 Years
0%
7
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.

AFCARS Data
191
TABLE 6.23
What is the racial/ethnic distribution of the children adopted from 
the public foster care system?
American Indian/Alaska Native—Non-Hispanic
1%
630
Asian–Non-Hispanic
0%
258
Black–Non-Hispanic
32%
16,726
Hawaiian/Pacific Islander–Non-Hispanic
0%
128
Hispanic
17%
8,719
White–Non-Hispanic
42%
21,971
Unknown/Unable to Determine
2%
1,280
Two or More Races–Non-Hispanic
4%
2,288
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.
Note: Using U.S. Bureau of the Census standards, children of Hispanic origin may be of any race. Beginning in FY 2000,
children could be identified with more than one race designation.
TABLE 6.22
What percentage of the children adopted receive an adoption subsidy?
Yes
89%
46,561
No
11%
5,469
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.

192
Facts and Data
TABLE 6.24
How many months did it take after termination of parental rights for 
the children to be adopted?
Mean Months
15.8
Median Months
11.3
Less than 1 Month
3%
1,511
1–5 Months
20%
10,642
6–11 Months
29%
15,257
12–17 Months
19%
9,673
18–23 Months
11%
5,512
24–29 Months
6%
3,203
30–35 Months
4%
1,901
3–4 Years
6%
2,998
5 Years or More
3%
1,304
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.
TABLE 6.25
What is the family structure of the child's adoptive family?
Married Couple
68%
35,578
Unmarried Couple
2%
812
Single Female
27%
14,240
Single Male
3%
1,370
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.
TABLE 6.26
What was the relationship of the adoptive parents to the child prior to the adoption?
Nonrelative
16%
8,435
Foster Parent
59%
30,884
Stepparent
1%
56
Other Relative
24%
12,624
Source: Adoption and Foster Care Analysis and Reporting System (AFCARS) data submitted for the FY 2004, October
1, 2003, through September 30, 2004.

Federal Laws and Policy 
In the United States, the primary responsibility for child welfare
services belongs to the individual states. Each state makes laws
and sets up administrative structures to address the needs of chil-
dren. In order to be eligible for federal funds for adoption, foster
care, and other child welfare services, the states must comply
with federal guidelines. In addition to state laws, the federal gov-
ernment also makes laws to try to improve the welfare of chil-
dren, and these laws impact adoption services in many ways.
In the middle of the 1900s, Congress passed laws that af-
fected intercountry adoption. For example, in 1948 Congress
passed the Displaced Persons Act, which permitted more than
200,000 European refugees to enter the United States. This act also
allowed 3,000 displaced orphans to emigrate from their countries
to the United States.  Congress periodically renewed the tempo-
rary provisions of the act for varying time periods—from one to
three years. In 1953 Congress allowed up to 500 special visas for
Korean orphans to be adopted by U.S. service personnel or civil
servants. (This was the first instance of the immigration of or-
phans other than European children.) The Refugee Act of 1953
opened the way for 4,000 additional orphans to enter the country
over the following three years. In 1957 Congress removed nu-
merical quotas from orphan visas, and in 1961 the Immigration
and Nationality Act included a permanent reference to orphans
Americans planned to adopt.
This section presents examples of more recent federal legis-
lation pertaining to adoption. The Child Welfare Information
Gateway has prepared a summary of major federal legislation
(beginning in 1974) that has had an impact on adoption in partic-
ular and child welfare in general. This information and a table
(“Timeline of Major Federal Legislation Concerned with Child
Protection, Child Welfare, and Adoption”) are available at
http://nccanch.acf.hhs.gov/pubs/otherpubs/fedlegis.pdf.
An index of federal child welfare laws is available at
http://childwelfare.gov/systemwide/laws_policies/federal/fed-
eralchildlaws.cfm. The Public Law (P.L.) numbers link to sum-
maries of the bills, which are provided by http://www.Thomas.
gov, a service of the Library of Congress. The Children’s Bureau
has a website that covers all federal and tribal laws concerning
child maltreatment, child welfare, and adoption at http://
Federal Laws and Policy
193

www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/laws_policies/index.htm#laws.
The present summary will address provisions of the acts that
specifically apply to adoption.
The Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act of 1974
(P.L. 93–274)
Congress enacted the original Child Abuse Prevention and Treat-
ment Act (CAPTA) of 1974 in response to the findings of medical
reports revealing large numbers of cases of child abuse, and the
government’s recognition of the problem of abused and neglected
children. The original act has been amended several times (in
1978, 1984, 1988, 1992, and 1996) and most recently was amended
and reauthorized on June 25, 2003, by the Keeping Children and
Families Safe Act (P.L. 108–36).
With the passage of the original CAPTA, which dealt in
many ways with the problem of child abuse, the U.S. Congress
subsequently implemented amendments that have helped pro-
tect children and have impacted adoption. As a response to the
lead of the federal government, the states have also enacted new
adoption laws and programs for the benefit of children.
The Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act and
Adoption Reform Act of 1978 (P.L. 95–266) 
This first reauthorization of CAPTA established the Adoption Op-
portunities Program, which aimed to facilitate the placement of
children with special needs in permanent adoptive homes, set
“quality standards” for adoptive placements and the rights of
adopted children, and provided for a national adoption informa-
tion exchange system.
The Child Abuse Amendments of 1984 (P.L. 98–457) 
One of the provisions of this amendment to CAPTA concerned
the care of disabled infants with life-threatening conditions. It re-
quired state-level programs to facilitate adoption opportunities
for these infants and also required the states to have protective
systems in place for response to reports of medical neglect of chil-
194
Facts and Data

dren. Another feature was a provision for the establishment and
operation of a federal adoption and foster care data-gathering
and analysis system.
The Child Abuse Prevention, Adoption, and Family
Services Act of 1988 (P.L. 100–294) 
This reauthorization of CAPTA included amendments to expand
the Adoption Opportunities Program. Included were require-
ments to increase the number of minority children placed in
adoptive homes with an emphasis on recruitment of minority
families, a provision for postlegal adoption services for families
who had adopted children with special needs, and a requirement
to increase the permanent placement of foster children who were
legally free for adoption.
The Child Abuse, Domestic Violence, Adoption, and
Family Services Act of 1992 (P.L. 102–295) 
Provisions of this amendment to CAPTA required the Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services to provide information and
services related to adoption and foster care, including on-site
technical assistance, awareness campaigns on a national level to
place children in need of adoption with appropriate adoptive par-
ents, and the operation of a National Resource Center for Special
Needs Adoption.
The Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act
Amendments of 1996 (P.L. 104–235) 
This law again reauthorized CAPTA and addressed false report-
ing of child abuse and neglect. It also required states to institute
an expedited “termination of parental rights” process for aban-
doned infants or for infants who had been subjected to serious in-
jury by their parents. It also authorized the continuation of such
programs as the Adoption Opportunities Act, the Abandoned In-
fants Assistance Act, the Victims of Child Abuse Act, and the
Children’s Justice Act Grants.
Federal Laws and Policy
195

The Keeping Children and Families Safe Act of 2003 
(P.L. 108–36) 
This reauthorization of CAPTA keeps several of the provisions of
previous acts but also implements programs aimed at increasing
the number of older foster children placed in adoptive homes.
Grants to programs that will eliminate barriers to placing chil-
dren across jurisdictions are included. The act also amends the
Abandoned Infants Assistance grants program to prohibit grants
unless the applicant gives priority to infants and young children
who have been exposed in utero to dangerous drugs or who have
a life-threatening illness or exposure to HIV/AIDS.
The Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 (P.L. 95–608) 
The Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) was the first major national
act legislating adoption in the United States. To some people it
was—and still is—controversial (see Chapter 2).
According to the Child Welfare Information Gateway, there
were two main reasons for the act. First, state courts at the time
removed 25 to 35 percent of Native American children from their
birth homes and put them in foster care; approximately 85 per-
cent of these children went to non-Indian homes. Second, there
was concern that these children would lose their Indian culture
and heritage.
The Indian Child Welfare Act requires adoption agencies to
make a concerted effort to find Native American families for Na-
tive American children. Under the provisions of the act, anyone
involved in the placement of a Native American child must first
notify the Bureau of Indian Affairs or the child’s tribe, so that the
tribe can make custody arrangements. Tribal courts have jurisdic-
tion over children living on reservations and some rights over
Native American children living off reservations. Even a Native
American birth mother who wants to place her child for adoption
must go through the process and receive the tribe’s permission.
Placement preference is given first to members of the child’s tribe
and last to those of another culture.
Both federal and state laws govern a child of Native Ameri-
can heritage. According to the ICWA, termination of parental
rights or involuntary relinquishment may be held before a tribal
court. If a state court hears the case, the child’s tribe has the right
to intervene and to object to the placement preferences of the
196
Facts and Data

child’s parents or those of an adoption agency. A birth parent who
initially agrees to the placement of a Native American child has a
chance to withdraw consent until a decree of adoption is entered
in court. If the consent to the adoption was obtained by fraud or
duress, the birth parent has at least two years to get the adoption
nullified. Prospective adoptive parents who have had a Native
American child in their home for months, or in some cases for
years, may have their adoption petitions denied. The Indian
Child Welfare law trumps all other adoption laws.
The Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act of 1980
(P.L. 96–272) 
The Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act has many goals,
including the requirement that reasonable efforts be made to pre-
vent the placement of a child in foster care and to reunite that
child with birth parents. Another of its goals was to get children
already in the foster-care system adopted as quickly as possible
and off the foster-care rolls. The act requires a foster-care review
every six months and a judicial review when the child has been in
foster care for eighteen months. At that time, the judge must de-
cide whether to return the child to his birth family, to make the
child legally free for adoption, or to authorize some other perma-
nent plan for the child.
Before 1980 many children were considered “unadoptable.”
They were children with special needs—older, part of a sibling
group, of an ethnic minority, or with elaborate medical or emo-
tional needs. In 1968, New York State started providing financial
benefits to families who adopted these children. Although some
other states followed the lead of New York, the programs cost the
states a great deal of money; each bore the entire financial brunt
of the adoption “subsidy.”
In 1961 the federal government first offered financial help to
the states for children in foster care through the Aid to Dependent
Children of the Social Security Act. In 1980, P.L. 96–272 amended
the Social Security Act. Since its implementation, many more chil-
dren have found permanent adoptive homes instead of growing
up in foster care.
The act established the Adoption Assistance Program
through which the federal government partially subsidizes some
adoptions. The federal share of adoption assistance varies from 50
Federal Laws and Policy
197

to 80 percent. The program has provided monthly financial assis-
tance, Medicaid coverage, and eligibility for Title XX social serv-
ices for certain children.
The adoption assistance agreement must be signed before the
finalization of the adoption. A subsidy may continue or be rene-
gotiated before finalization of the adoption. A subsidy may also
continue or be renegotiated until the child reaches the age of
eighteen or, in some cases, age twenty-one.
Those adopting older or special needs children have the right
to appeal an agency decision affecting subsidy benefits. In accor-
dance with federal law, every state has established a “fair hear-
ing” process to handle appeals.
An important amendment to P.L. 96–272 was the Tax Reform
Act of 1986 (P.L. 99–154). This amendment required the states to
reimburse adoptive parents for the “nonrecurring” expenses
(such as a home study) incurred in the adoption of a child with
special needs. Later, the Adoption and Safe Families Act of 1997
amended the original law by allowing children who were previ-
ously not eligible for Title IV-E adoption assistance to retain eligi-
bility in a subsequent adoption, in the event of the death of an
adoptive parent, or in a dissolution of an adoption.
On September 24, 2001, the Children’s Bureau released a
Child Welfare Policy Manual, which helps clarify many of the
confusing aspects of the Title IV-E Adoption Assistance Program.
For further information, parents and professionals can access
“Adoption Subsidy in the United States” from the North Ameri-
can Council on Adoptable Children at http://www.nacac.org/
subsidyusintro.html, contact NACAC’s Adoption Subsidy Re-
source Center, (800) 470-6665 or (651) 644-3036, or e-mail adop-
tion.assistance@nacac.org.
The Family Preservation and Family Support Services
Program Provision  of the Omnibus Reconciliation Act
(P.L. 103–66) 
On August 10, 1993, President Clinton signed the Omnibus Bud-
get Reconciliation Act (OBRA). This act added several provisions
of interest to adoption advocates. First, OBRA mandates health-
care coverage for adopted children whose parents receive health-
198
Facts and Data

care benefits from their employers. The law requires employer
group health plans covering dependent children to cover adopted
children at placement with no restrictions for preexisting condi-
tions. The act defines child as someone under the age of eighteen
and placement as a legal assumption of responsibility in anticipa-
tion of a final adoption.
Second, the 1993 act added a new “capped” entitlement for
family preservation and family support services to child welfare
programs under Title IV-B. Congress also amended Section 479, a
1986 Title IV-E provision requiring the establishment of a data
collection system for foster care and adoption. The amendment
authorizes an enhanced federal matching rate related to costs of
adoption data collection.
The Multiethnic Placement Act (P.L. 103–382) 
Congress passed the Multiethnic Placement Act (MEPA) in Octo-
ber 1994 to (1) decrease the length of time children waited for
adoptive and foster homes (especially those “other-than-Cau-
casian” children), (2) prevent discrimination on the basis of race,
color, or national origin in the placement of children, and (3) fa-
cilitate the identification and recruitment of foster and adoptive
families that could meet the children’s needs. This was another
controversial act (see Chapter2).
The Interethnic Adoption Provisions of the Small
Business Job Protection Act of 1996 (P.L. 104–188) 
The adoption-related provisions of this bill were initiated to elimi-
nate discrimination on the basis of race, color, or national origin for
the children who were waiting and for the parents who wanted to
adopt them. It repealed the language of MEPA that allowed the
consideration of “cultural, ethnic, or racial background” of a child,
as well as the “capacity” of the prospective parents to meet the
child’s needs. In other words, the newer provisions are supportive
of transracial adoption. States would be subject to penalties for
noncompliance. Further information about transracial adoption is
available from the Child Welfare Information Gateway at
http://www.childwelfare.gov/pubs/f_trans.cfm.
Federal Laws and Policy
199

The Adoption and Safe Families Act of 1997 (P.L.
105–89) 
According to many experts, the Adoption and Safe Families Act
(ASFA) was a landmark piece of legislation with provisions to
help children, many of whom were waiting several years for per-
manent placements. “Reasonable efforts” to reunite children with
their birth families had often been counterproductive. The act
gave the states stricter guidelines and forced more accountability.
Important provisions are detailed here. 
Acceleration of permanent placements meant that (with some ex-
ceptions) states must initiate court proceedings to free a child for
adoption if the child had been waiting in foster care for at least fif-
teen of the most recent twenty-two months.
Implementation of shorter time limits for making decisions about
permanent placements meant that permanency hearings would be
held no later than twelve months after the child entered foster
care (six months earlier than previously required). The law also
clarified that states could use concurrent planning, in which they
would work toward reunification with birth parents while simul-
taneously seeking potential adoptive families if reunification did
not work out.
Safety for abused and neglected children meant that the words
“safety of the child” would be included in every step of the case
plan and review process and that criminal record checks for fos-
ter and adoptive parents would be a part of the approval process.
Promotion of adoptions meant that states would get incentive
funds for increases in adoptive placements, that states must use
“reasonable efforts” to move children toward permanence, that
special needs children would get healthcare coverage, that place-
ments would not be denied on the basis of geographic location of
the prospective adoptive parents, and that states would docu-
ment and report child-specific adoption efforts.
Increased accountability meant that the Department of Health
and Human Services would establish new outcome measures to
monitor and improve the performance of the states, and that the
states would have to document child-specific efforts to move chil-
dren into adoptive homes.
For a retrospective view of the benefits of the Adoption and
Safe Families Act, see “Testimony of Wade F. Horn, PhD, Assis-
tant Secretary for Children and Families, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services before the Committee on Ways and
200
Facts and Data

Means, Subcommittee on Human Resources, U.S. House of Rep-
resentatives, April 8, 2003,” available on the Committee on Ways
and Means website at http://waysandmeans.house.gov/hear-
ings.asp?formmode=detail&hearing=71 or at http://cbexpress.
acf.hhs.gov/articles.cfm?article_id=713.
The Intercountry Adoption Act of 2000 (P.L. 106–279) 
The Intercountry Adoption Act of 2000 (IAA) is the implementing
legislation for the Hague Convention on the Protection of Chil-
dren and Cooperation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption
throughout the United States. As mentioned in Chapter 1, the
Hague Adoption Convention sets minimum standards and proce-
dures for adoptions between the countries that are parties to the
convention. This act provides for full implementation of the con-
vention in the United States. Provisions include the following: Es-
tablishment of the U.S. Central Authority. This entity within the De-
partment of State will have general responsibility for U.S.
implementation of the convention and will provide annual reports
to the U.S. Congress. Accrediting entities. These groups or persons
will (1) process applications, (2) be responsible for oversight and
enforcement of compliance, and (3) perform information-collec-
tion activities. Case registries. Every intercountry adoption will
have a case registry. Responsibilities of the Department of State: (1)
Will monitor each accrediting entity’s performance and its com-
pliance with the convention, the Intercountry Adoption Act, and
the applicable regulations, and (2) will issue certificates to cover
convention adoptions/placements. Recognition. Convention adop-
tions finalized in other countries that are also parties to the con-
vention will be recognized by the United States, and the proce-
dures and requirements must be followed for the adoption of a
child in the U.S. by persons who live in other countries and who
are parties to the convention. Verification. State courts will be pro-
hibited from finalizing convention adoptions or granting custody
for a convention adoption unless the court has verified that the
country of origin and the receiving country have verified the re-
quired determinations. Amendment. The Immigration and Nation-
ality Act is amended to provide for a new category of children
adopted, or to be adopted, under the Hague Adoption Convention
and meeting other requirements to qualify for immigrant visas.
The text of the Intercountry Adoption Act of 2000 is available
at http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/laws/index.htm.
Federal Laws and Policy
201

The Promoting Safe and Stable Families Amendments of
2001 (P.L. 107–133)
One of the provisions of the Promoting Safe and Stable Families
Amendments of 2001 that affected adoption was the amending of
the definition of family preservation services to include infant safe
haven programs. When Congress reauthorized the Promoting
Safe and Stable Families program, the new law included $305 mil-
lion per year in mandatory or guaranteed funding for state pro-
grams that assist in family reunification and preservation, family
support, and adoption assistance. The law also allows Congress
to appropriate an additional $200 million per year to a possible
total of $505 million.
The Adoption Promotion Act of 2003 (P.L. 108–45)
Among other provisions, this act reauthorized the adoption in-
centive program under Title IV-E of the Social Security Act. The
act, primarily aimed at achieving permanency for children nine
years of age and over, authorized $43 million per year for five
years to states who are successful in increasing the number of
children adopted from foster care. As part of the passage of this
act, Congress included the requirement for a report presenting
challenges and strategies to improve permanency outcomes for
children.
Challenges included not enough families willing to provide
permanency; lack of services for birth parents, children, and
prospective adoptive families; inadequate permanency planning;
youth resistance; staff issues; and court/legal issues. Strategies to
address these challenges included ways of recruiting permanent
families, such as general recruiting, targeted recruiting, and child-
specific recruiting. The full report is available online through the
Children’s Bureau.
Testimony and Statements
In a democracy, voting is only a small part of the action. Although
elected state and national representatives pass laws that affect the
lives of children, they expect to hear from professionals in adop-
tion and those on the “front lines,” such as adoptive parents and
former foster children who have grown up with or without a “for-
202
Facts and Data

ever family.” This testimony often is filled not only with facts  but
also emotion.  The testimony of one person may contradict the
testimony of another. But the opinions expressed help form the
basis for future laws.
U.S. Senate Hearing on the “Barriers to Adoption,”
1993 
On July 15, 1993, the Subcommittee on Children, Family, Drugs,
and Alcoholism of the Committee on Labor and Human Re-
sources of the U.S. Senate heard testimony on “Barriers to Adop-
tion”; some of these statements preceded the passage of the Mul-
tiethnic Placement Act of 1994. The purpose of the hearing was to
explore ways to find permanent, nurturing homes for children
with special needs. (A similar hearing, as part of the oversight of
the Adoption Opportunities Act, had been held six years earlier.)
During his opening statement, Senator Christopher J. Dodd
(D-CT), chairman of the Subcommittee on Family, Drugs, and Al-
coholism, testified that:
For children of color, foster care placements have
reached epidemic proportions, with rates of placement
three times those for the U.S. population as a whole.
More than half the children awaiting adoption nation-
ally are children of color. Today, in seeking ways to
open the doors to permanent homes for these children,
we will hear about programs that recruit minority par-
ents, particularly African American parents, for minor-
ity children.
In his opening statement, Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum
(D-OH), of the committee on Labor and Human Resources, said
the following:
As a person who has fought for civil rights all my life,
going back to my college days, even my high school
days, I simply could not believe that in this day and age,
we still have formal policies against transracial adop-
tions. That is unbelievable to me, incredible!
The testimony at the PBS hearing of a white foster
mother who encountered numerous obstacles in trying
Testimony and Statements
203

to adopt her black foster children summed up my feel-
ings with her statement that she did not spell love, 
“c-o-l-o-r.”
Since that hearing, I have made no secret of the fact
that I believe it is illegal, I believe it is unfair, cruel and
destructive to deny a child a caring and stable adoptive
home with parents of a different race when appropriate
parents of the same race are not available.
Yesterday Senator Carol Moseley-Braun and I intro-
duced legislation, the “Multi-Ethnic Placement Act,” S.
1224, that reaffirms basic civil rights principles that race
should not be the controlling factor in making foster care
and adoptive placements.
I believe that same race placement is always desirable
if the prospective parents are appropriate. For that rea-
son, our bill also states that “race, color or national ori-
gin may be one of the many factors to consider in deter-
mining placement that is in the best interest of the
child.”
Among those speaking on behalf of same-race placements
were Sidney Duncan from Homes for Black Children in Detroit,
Michigan, and the Reverend Wilbert Talley of One Church, One
Child.
The remarks of these and other senators were followed by a
statement read by Sidney Duncan, representing Homes for Black
Children in Detroit, Michigan:
As you know, I am from Homes for Black Children in
Detroit, and Homes for Black Children stands as an ex-
ample of what can happen when the African American
community is given the opportunity to solve the prob-
lem of its children in need of families.
When we started in 1969, adoption was not available
as an opportunity to most black children, and in our first
full year of operation, we placed more black children in
adoptive homes than the 13 existing local agencies com-
bined. What had never occurred to me until this morn-
ing when Senator Levin was speaking of this is that it
was also more black children in adoptive homes than all
of the agencies in the state of Michigan combined for
that time period.
204
Facts and Data

Since our beginning, we have placed 1,049 children
ranging in age from newborns as young as 3 days old, to
15 years of age. They have been all kinds of children—
children who were abused, children who were aban-
doned, children who were neglected, children who had
physical and emotional handicaps. The majority of them
were simply children who needed a family.
I should also note that the children were placed with
working class families, middle class families, two-parent
families. Sometimes we assume that when black families
come forth in large numbers, that in some way the stan-
dards have been altered. That is not true in terms of
Homes for Black Children’s experience.
Within 3 years of our beginning, the problem of not
enough families for Detroit’s black children was solved.
The private agencies were learning by that time from
our experience. The public agency instituted a special-
ized adoption program called Project 72 that was also
successful in placing black children.
Detroit had become a community that could provide
adoptive homes for its waiting children, and Homes for
Black Children was the catalyst for that change. Having
solved that problem, we reduced our adoption program
significantly in 1974 and moved into family preserva-
tion. And for very nearly 20 years, we were minimally
involved in adoption. However, in very recent years,
adoption in Detroit has reemerged as a serious commu-
nity problem, so Homes for Black Children has now re-
focused its energies on adoption. We have increased our
adoptive placements, and we are providing leadership
to the adoption community in planning and increasing
the adoption opportunities for black children. . . .
I want to just very quickly say that one of the main
problems in terms of African American children is that
they are in the care of and being planned for by agen-
cies that have traditionally served white children.
Many of them do not know the African American com-
munity; they do not respect the African American com-
munity; they don’t know of our diversity; they don’t
have any idea that there are families there who will
take the children.
There are other factors that are part of it. My main
Testimony and Statements
205

point is that the African American community, if given
the opportunity, can offer a solution to the needs of black
children. 
The Reverend Wilbert Talley represented One Church, One
Child, an organization that has been finding homes for African
American children since 1981. He provided the following testi-
mony:
What I’d like to say is that for years, the myth existed
that African American families did not adopt. The myth
has been proven false through concentrated efforts by
agencies and organizations such as One Church, One
Child that are culturally focused and culturally sensi-
tive. With the initiation of recruitment efforts geared to-
ward the African American community, African Ameri-
can families have responded in record numbers.
It is our contention that transracial adoption is not
the issue. It is the availability in the pool of potential
adoptive parents of African American families. . . . Our
position is that we want our children to be with fami-
lies of the same race, and we can find families for these
children.
Prior to implementing the legislation that would en-
courage multiethnic placement of children, considera-
tion should be given by Congress to providing finan-
cial incentives to encourage States to implement
concentrated recruitment efforts geared toward minor-
ity communities such as the examples that are funded
in Virginia. 
Following is an excerpt from the testimony of former foster
child and current adoptive parent Shane Salter of Washington,
DC:
I’d like to begin by letting you know that my mother
was 15 years old when I was born and 18 when she gave
birth to my brother Keith. When I was about 4 years old,
Keith and I were abandoned by my mother and left in a
basement apartment alone. When the police discovered
our situation, we were placed in an emergency foster
home for approximately 1 year, after which we were
206
Facts and Data

moved and placed in another foster home, where we re-
mained for over 7 years.
Although my mother was unable to recover from her
addictions, she was unwilling to relinquish her rights as
a parent. However, courts concerned with parental
rights allow parents who abandon their children to leave
them in a system supported by tax dollars indefinitely
while they make marginal attempts to demonstrate an
interest in regaining custody. Consequently, many chil-
dren like my brother and me live in uncertainty for most
of their childhood.
Foster care is supposed to be and should only be tem-
porary. So can you imagine what it feels like to grow up
without a permanent home? Let me tell you first-hand—
it destroys your self-esteem and creates another painful
obstacle for little ones to overcome.
Well, after 7 years in our foster home, the courts fi-
nally decided to terminate my mother’s rights and re-
lease my brother and me for adoption. At this time, I was
11 years old, and Keith was about 7. We had to be classi-
fied as “hard to place,” because we were two older black
boys and most people who are interested in adopting
prefer very young children. Therefore, an aggressive ef-
fort to find a permanent home for us was launched.
In other words, while my mom was struggling for
years with the hope of succeeding at rehabilitation, her
children were getting older and older, and fewer people
wanted them. With each year, our chances of getting a
permanent home decreased significantly. A family was
eventually found, but because of our ages and the diffi-
culty of adjusting to a new family when you are older,
this adoption was met with problems that resulted in a
traumatic disruption for Keith and me. We were left in
the lobby of the foster care agency, abandoned again,
while the family sped off in their car to resume their
lives.
Support services were not available to this family once
they received us, and consequently problems that I be-
lieve could have been resolved escalated to a point of no
return.
Before my childhood was complete, I lived in a total of
nine different foster, adoptive, and group homes. I don’t
Testimony and Statements
207

think this would have happened if the courts had termi-
nated parental rights of my parents within one or 2 years
after I was removed. It is a miracle, Senators, that I am
able to speak before this distinguished body as a func-
tioning adult. The system that was supposed to protect
me when my parents could not, did not.
This does not have to keep happening to innocent
children if we enact the following. Foster children who
are dependent on adults, especially legislative adults, to
act on their behalf must be given a fair shot at a perma-
nent home within the second year of foster care.
Whether that permanent home becomes an alternative
relative or an adoptive home, they deserve the security
of a loving, permanent home.
The rights of parents should not come before the
rights of children who have no control over their des-
tinies. It is this warped concept that increases the proba-
bility of next generation dependence on child welfare
systems and creates barriers to adoption.
Second, when families adopt children, they must have
access to federally funded support services such as
respite care to assist in keeping the family together.
Adopted children need access to support groups with
other adopted children.
For example, I wish I could have sent my adopted son
to a therapeutic camp this summer where he could have
his unique emotional issues addressed while my wife
and I recuperate and prepare for the upcoming school
year and the challenges we will again face.
Adoption is a lifelong adjustment for both the adoptee
and the adopting family. Therefore, therapeutic services
should be available to these special families throughout
the duration of these relationships.
Many more families would consider adoption of chil-
dren who are “hard to place” if we allocated funds for
subsidies that reflect the true cost of raising an addi-
tional child and held each local jurisdiction accountable
for providing them to families.
Last, but certainly not of least importance, social serv-
ice workers must be trained and be familiar with the cul-
ture of the children they wish to place. Only then will re-
cruitment efforts succeed.
208
Facts and Data

I thank you for the opportunity to share my experi-
ences and thoughts with you. It is my hope that the
countless numbers of children who are currently living
the life that I escaped won’t be destroyed by the system
that was designed to protect them. 
Lynn Gabbard, an adoptive parent from North Haven,
Connecticut, provided similarly emotion-filled moments in her
testimony:
During the past 18 1/2 years, my husband and I have
adopted seven children, now ranging in age from 2 to 19
years, all of whom were placed from situations some-
what conducive to the development of special needs. . . .
When I reflect on the “Barriers to Adoption” that we
personally have faced with respect to the adoptions of
our children, I think primarily of the societal, legislative
and bureaucratic factors that magnify and exacerbate
the physical and emotional injuries to children that ac-
tually result in their “special needs.”
Our oldest son, now 17 years old, was born to a 13-
year-old mother who, despite her young age, evident
emotional instability, and clear ambivalence toward par-
enting, was encouraged to take her baby home from the
hospital and assume the many responsibilities of par-
enthood. A birth defect that necessitated a full body cast
made the care of her baby an even more difficult task.
The extreme neglect and physical abuse that followed,
while not to be condoned, could almost be explained
when viewed from the perspective of the magnitude of
daily parenting tasks demanded of a 13-year-old child.
The neglectful and abusive treatment of our son was
to continue for nearly 2 years, interspersed with hospi-
talizations and foster placements, until the decision was
made to terminate parental rights and let both of these
children, mother and child, move on toward safer and
more productive lives.
Another of our children, our daughter, now 11 years
old, was born both heroin and methadone addicted, a
victim of fetal alcohol syndrome, a 2.5-pound baby born
at the bottom of a staircase following a domestic dis-
pute. This child, medically and intellectually fragile
Testimony and Statements
209

since birth, endured the disruption of 17 foster place-
ments during the first 3 years of her life, and severe
physical and sexual abuse in the care of a mother strug-
gling with substance abuse, family problems and her
own intellectual and emotional limitations in addition to
her child’s. These factors add severe and permanent
emotional injuries to the burden of handicapping condi-
tions which our daughter must struggle with daily.
Our youngest child, our baby’s, permanency has been
successfully impeded for several years by an incarcer-
ated parent whose parental rights are protected despite
a sentence of 75 years’ imprisonment for an extremely
violent crime. This man, who has lost the right to vote,
has not lost the right to further disrupt his child’s life.
Our laws and certainly our practice continue to place
young children in continued jeopardy and ultimately
cause long-term, often permanent damage. Our son . . .
is plagued by a devastating inability to trust that per-
vades every aspect to his life. His self-esteem and self-
confidence are severely undermined, and impairments
in such areas as cause-and-effect thinking make it im-
possible for him to generalize from one situation to an-
other, to learn from his mistakes, to grow and develop in
meaningful ways.
His relationships and interactions with others are im-
pacted by his anger and mistrust, and he struggles in so
many aspects of day-to-day life that come so easily to
the rest of us.
Our daughter’s emotional injuries appear to be even
more profound. While the physical effects of the drugs
and alcohol are difficult, they are correctable on some
level, and she has undergone frequent surgical and med-
ical treatments. The neurological, intellectual, and emo-
tional deficits are far more extreme. Intellectual retarda-
tion is a daily struggle. Seventeen foster placements and
numerous other disruptions appear to have perma-
nently impaired her ability to form intimate, meaningful
relationships. At best her relationships are superficial,
and she is virtually unable to relate to others in anything
other than a self-focused way.
Our children and the growing population of children
for whom we seek adoptive placement are dramati-
210
Facts and Data

cally and permanently affected by the significant trau-
mas of their young lives. These traumas are becoming
more far-reaching and more extreme as the years go on.
A national call for standards of child care in each state
may be a way to address such issues as how long sub-
stance-abusing parents can be allowed to place their
children’s immediate safety and future development at
risk while they struggle to solve sometimes insur-
mountable problems.
Should we continue to allow drug-addicted mothers
to leave the hospital with their drug-addicted babies?
Standards may also want to address minimum age re-
quirements for independent parenting. I believe that my
son’s life, and perhaps even his mother’s, would have
been positively affected if a system like this had been in
place at the time of his birth.
It was a painful learning experience for us as parents
to come to terms with the reality that there are some as-
pects of our children’s development that no amount of
love, nurturing and family stability can overcome. Since
it is so profoundly difficult for our son to trust, he is ab-
solutely unable to receive and therefore benefit from the
positive feelings of others. Family occasions are difficult
for him, as is communication and expression of affec-
tion. It is extremely painful to watch a child remain on
the periphery of a family that wants desperately to wel-
come him inside.
We have had to learn, with the help of other families,
not only to accept the inconsistent and minimal attempts
at connection that he makes, but to validate them for
him and to explain them to our other children. Each day
we watch him struggle to conform, or to appear to con-
form, to the world’s expectations of how a person needs
to act and react. We watch him struggle to control his
anger, to hide his mistrust of others, to build relation-
ships that don’t threaten and overwhelm him.
Too often, adoptive and foster families are viewed as
part of the problem and not part of the solution when
mental health issues arise. . . . We need to encourage
schools and other institutions to develop healthy envi-
ronments capable of accepting children who may
never be capable of conformity. We need therapists
Testimony and Statements
211

who understand the dynamics of adoption; pediatri-
cians and other practitioners who will accept Title XIX
subsidy for medical care; coaches, teachers and com-
munity members who understand that our children’s
actions and reactions may be inappropriate. We need
to help adoptive families to continue to emotionally
and legally parent children who can no longer live
within the family system.
If indeed we believe that children grow better in fam-
ilies, we need to nurture and respect those families. We
need to involve them in every aspect of the planning for
their children, understanding that they are not perfect
and do not need to be, and that they cannot repair the in-
juries and damages that their children have sustained.
The following questions and comments occurred after the
preceding testimony.
Senator METZENBAUM. “Did you have any feeling as
a child as to whether it mattered to you if the adopting
parents were white or black?”
Mr. SALTER. “As a child, I didn’t even think about it.
It really, honestly was just not—I was so concerned, I
think probably more than others, but so concerned. I
wanted my own parents. I wanted a mom and a dad.
And I am still to this day very angry because I don’t
have a mom and a dad. And it is probably the driving
force behind most of my life with my children. I wanted
a mom and dad, and I didn’t care who they were. I just
wanted parents. I wanted someplace that was safe and
loving for me, and it never happened.”
Senator METZENBAUM. “Lynn, do you have any
opinion on the question of allowing transracial adoptions
where no appropriate same race placement is available?”
Ms. GABBARD. “Yes. Many of my children are
adopted transracially, so I do feel strongly as Shane
does, that children do need families, that that is what
they need. And obviously, I think most people involved
in adoption agree that same race placement is preferable
and that we need to do more to try to achieve that, but
we certainly should not be leaving children to wait for
their whole lives while we look for that home.”
212
Facts and Data

Excerpt from Testimony by the Reverend Jesse Jackson,
Rainbow Coalition, Washington, D.C.
The Reverend Jesse Jackson, representing the Rainbow Coalition,
provided the following testimony at the “Barriers to Adoption”
hearing:
Senator Metzenbaum has introduced legislation, the
“Multi-Ethnic Placement Act of 1993,” which will serve
as a tool to eliminate race, national origin, or color from
being the only consideration in making foster care and
adoptive placements. The Act is basically a reaffirmation
of the Title VI ban on and remedies for discrimination.
Transracial adoption, like intermarriage, must be pro-
tected by law and must be open as an option for every-
one. Senators, I urge you to all support your colleague
from Ohio and actively seek to see this Act become law.
Because of the difficulties inherent in raising children,
I think the majority of us feel that same race and color
foster parenting and adoption must be the first choice.
But if this type of placement is not possible or if transra-
cial bonding has occurred, I believe that exceptions
should be made. No child should ever be abandoned.
There must be a firm commitment on the part of the
adoptive or foster family to make sure there is no further
loss of racial or ethnic identity. The prospective parent or
parents must be capable of and willing to love them, for
what they are, not for what they promise to be, in an en-
vironment free of constant fear and threat. An extra
amount of effort should be waged within the African
American, Asian and Hispanic communities to educate
potential parents about the children needing homes and
security, mental, physical and spiritual—not just a place
to sleep.
“Informal” adoption has always been common in
these families. Rare is the family that has not seen one of
its members raised by a grandmother or an aunt. I truly
believe that with the passing into law of Senator Met-
zenbaum’s Act, along with the re-education of social
workers, adoption professionals and our own people,
we will see far less warehousing and institutionalizing
of children.
Testimony and Statements
213

Source for the above section: Subcommittee on Children,
Family, Drugs, and Alcoholism, U.S. Senate, Barriers to Adoption,
103rd Cong., 1st sess., 1993.
U.S. Senate Hearings on Clarifying the Adoption
Assistance and Child Welfare Act, 1996
On November 20, 1996, the Committee on Labor and Human Re-
sources of the U.S. Senate (104th Congress, 2nd session) contin-
ued testimony begun in the House on improving the well-being
of abused and neglected children, exploring how the well-being
of abused and neglected children could be improved by clarifying
the reasonable efforts requirement of the Adoption Assistance
and Child Welfare Act to make the child’s health and safety the
primary concern. The main issue under discussion was the ques-
tion of birth parent rights versus children’s safety.
In his opening statement, Senator Mike DeWine (R-OH) said,
“We are sending too many children back to dangerous and abu-
sive homes. . . . Every day in America, three children actually die
of abuse and neglect at the hands of their parents or caretakers.
That is over 1,200 children every year. And almost half of these
children are killed after—after—their tragic circumstances have
come to the attention of child welfare agencies.”
Senator DeWine went on to say he believed some of the
tragedies were the result of unintended circumstances caused by
the misinterpretation of the 1980 Adoption and Child Welfare
Act. “While the law has done a great deal of good, I have come to
believe that the law is being frequently misinterpreted, with some
truly unintended and undesirable consequences.” The senator
added he believed the authors of the 1980 act had in their minds
the provision he would like to add: “In determining reasonable
efforts, the best interests of the child, including the child’s health
and safety, shall be of primary concern.”
Olivia A. Golden, acting assistant secretary for children and
families for the Administration for Children and Families of the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, agreed with
Senator DeWine that child abuse and neglect was a tragedy of
growing proportions. “The states report that in 1994, over one
million children were victims of neglect or abuse, an increase of
27 percent over the number of children who were found to be vic-
tims in 1990. In recent years, the number of children in foster care
214
Facts and Data

has increased to more than 450,000 children and, although ap-
proximately 20,000 children are adopted from foster care each
year, the number has failed to keep pace with the growing need.”
She suggested three means to reform the child welfare system:
community-based prevention and early intervention efforts; in-
creasing focus on permanence and timely decision making; and
accountability with emphasis on safety, permanence, and the
well-being of children.
After Golden’s testimony, Senator DeWine posed a hypo-
thetical situation. What if a family existed in which seven children
had already been removed from the parents’ care because of the
father’s active alcoholism and another child is born who tests
positive for crack cocaine? How long would it take for that child
to be eligible for adoption? The answers Senator DeWine received
in his home state were from two to five years.
The following testimonies tell the stories behind the statistics
quoted in the earlier testimony.
Richard J. Gelles, director of the Family Violence Research
Program at the University of Rhode Island, Kingston, and author
of The Book of David (about a fifteen-month-old boy suffocated by
his mother), said that the crisis in the public welfare system “is a
failure of inappropriate goals as well as a well-intentioned but
improperly implemented federal law, . . . the Adoption Assis-
tance and Child Welfare Act of 1980.” He added that five factors
contribute to society’s inability to get vulnerable children out of
harm’s way. The first is the overselling of intensive family preser-
vation services as a cost-effective and safe means of protecting
children. The second is that in the Adoption Assistance and Child
Welfare Act of 1980, the term reasonable efforts (to keep children
with birth parents whenever possible) was not spelled out. The
third erroneous belief is that children always do best when raised
by their biological caregivers. Fourth is the belief in the fiction
that one can actually balance family preservation and child safety.
According to Gelles, “such a balancing act almost inevitably ends
up tilting in the favor of parents and places many children at
risk.” The final myth is that it is easy to change parents who mis-
treat their children.
Gelles related the story of David:
David was a 15-month-old little boy who was smoth-
ered, suffocated, by his mother on one October morning.
He himself had been the subject of two or three reports
Testimony and Statements
215

to the child welfare system in his state, but what was of
greater concern to me as I did the review of his death
was that his older sister had had her skull fractured, her
ribs broken, her arms broken and her legs broken by the
same mother when she was 6 weeks of age. And in that
case, after many, many months of attempting to reunify,
the mother actually gave up the parental rights to the
older sister as she held David, who was then 1 week old,
in her arms.
What concerned me as that story unfolded was that
the case was closed, and the termination on the older
daughter took place, and mom was allowed to take home
this one-week-old baby without any further follow-up.
And that clearly was a preventable death had we applied
the most basic form of risk assessment in the child wel-
fare system, and that is that parents generally behave to-
morrow based on how they behaved yesterday.
And this was not a case that fell between little cracks.
This was a case that fell between cracks large enough to
serve as the Grand Canyon, and he should not have
died; he should be 7 years old and in school today. We
had him in our hands; we had the will, we had the abil-
ity. And the workers when we interviewed them said we
could not have gotten a court to act on this because we
had to make reasonable efforts to reunify David with his
mother.”
Helen Leonhart-Jones, executive director of the Montgomery
County Children Services Board of Dayton, Ohio, offered among
her remarks the following:
In its September 30, 1996 issue, U.S. News and World Re-
port shared some statistics based upon data from Health
and Human Services that talked about the numbers of
children who are “suffering amid the breakdown of fam-
ilies and the abuse of drugs and alcohol.” They have
showed that children of single families have a 77 percent
greater risk of being harmed by physical abuse and an
80 percent greater risk of suffering serious injuries than
kids who are living with two parents. It went on to say
that birth parents account for 72 percent of the physical
abuse and 81 percent of the emotional abuse. I would
216
Facts and Data

say to you that we live in a country where more than 3
million children a year are being abused and neglected
by the very people who should be ensuring their safety.
These children are then being subjected to a lifetime of
misery as a result of this maltreatment.
Finally, Sharon Aulton of Annapolis, Maryland, appeared be-
fore the committee to share her experiences as a grandmother at-
tempting to gain custody of her own grandchildren:
My name is Sharon Aulton, and I would like to thank
you for inviting me before the committee to share the
tragedy of my granddaughters, Christina Lambert and
Natalie Aulton.
My story begins with my daughter Rene. Rene has a
low I.Q. and is emotionally unstable. This condition re-
sulted in her receiving special education services as a
student all of her life. She has never lived on her own.
She has never been able to keep a job. She is an ex-
tremely needy person and gravitated toward boys and
men who were just as dysfunctional as she.
She subsequently became pregnant and gave birth 12
weeks prematurely to my grandson, Mark. The baby
was in a neonatal intensive care unit for 2 months, and
during that time, she visited him maybe three or four
times total. I visited him three or four times a week, plus
called every day from work to inquire as to how he was
doing.
Right from the beginning, I had to become this child’s
primary caretaker. I took Rene and the baby into my
home with certain ground rules. She found those rules
too restrictive and she did not like being told what to do.
While she was home, though, social services, because of
the baby’s medical condition, sent a visiting nurse to the
house a couple of times a week to check on the baby and
to see how Rene was taking care of him. I would also
come home from work at lunch time, as I work not far
from where I live, and I would check on the baby and
see how he was doing.
One afternoon, I came home to find Rene and Joe, the
baby’s father, packing up the baby’s things and prepar-
ing to run off with him. This was a baby who was
Testimony and Statements
217

hooked up to an apnea monitor because of respiratory
problems; he had just had emergency surgery and was
still considered a medical risk because of complications
of prematurity. Neither parent had a job, a place to live,
or resources to take care of this ill baby. When I at-
tempted to stop them, I was assaulted by Joe while being
restrained by my daughter.
Until the deaths of Christina and Natalie, the hardest
day that I ever had to face was deciding to press charges
and have my daughter arrested and having to give my
grandson to the custody of the department of social
services. My heart was broken, and I was grief-stricken
because I had to give up this baby that I had bonded
with and considered my own.
Mark was placed in a foster care home until I could
find day care, which was impossible because the child
was ill, and I could not find an appropriate day care
provider. When he was 9 months old, I found a day care
facility that would take care of him. I then made visits to
him on weekends. When he became a year old, I became
his full-time permanent foster mother.
After many hearings and attempts by the court to re-
unify the child with his parents with no success, I re-
ceived legal custody and have been raising my grand-
son. He will be 9 years old in January.
After the custody of the baby was transferred to me,
my relationship with his parents was strained and spo-
radic. The father received a sentence of 1 year, sus-
pended except for 1 month, for the assault on me. The
parents then moved from Anne Arundel County to Tal-
bot County, where she became pregnant with Christina,
the child with the red hair. It was only after Christina
was born that I resumed a relationship with them.
I adored Christina the minute I laid eyes on her, but
Rene and Joe were so dysfunctional that they could not
parent properly. I visited when I could, but our relation-
ship never got any better. If anything, it got worse, be-
cause I would tell them what they should do in order to
take care of themselves and the baby. They did not want
to hear it, and they hated me for “taking” their son. I
tried to explain that I did not take their son, but that the
218
Facts and Data

court gave him to me because they did not meet any of
the conditions of the plans to reunify the family. They
absolutely would not take any responsibility for their ac-
tions. They perceived me as being the person who
“took” their child.
Talbot County Social Services became involved when
they became homeless and called me and asked me to
take them all in—Rene, Joe and Christina. I said that I
would take Christina, but I would not take the parents.
They refused and said that they would not split up the
family and put them up in a motel until they could find
housing for them.
Joe was subsequently arrested for molesting three
young girls and was sentenced to 10 years. . . . Since
Rene could not or would not take care of herself, she
moved to Baltimore County with another man. I did not
know her whereabouts for 9 months and was frantic
with worry about Christina.
One day, out of the blue, I got a phone call from Rene.
“Guess what, Mom? I have another baby, and her name
is Natalie. Would you like to see your new granddaugh-
ter?” There was no mention of the fact that I had not
seen or heard from her for 9 months. She acted as if we
were having a conversation about the weather. Natalie
was already 1 month old.
I was overjoyed at seeing Christina again and seeing
the new baby, but shocked to see the conditions that they
were living in. She was living in a filthy slum. They slept
on mattresses on the floor, and they also ate their meals
sitting on the mattresses.
Natalie was a biracial child, and the only reason I
mention that is because the man she was living with was
white, so he was obviously not the father of the child.
Since I had not seen Christina for almost a year, I asked
to take her home with me for the weekend. I then began
a pattern where I would visit and play with Natalie and
take Christina on weekends and vacations. I became very
close to Christina, and she became extremely close to me
and to her brother. Her personality would change from a
sad, worried little girl to one who would smile, laugh and
play.
Testimony and Statements
219

I called Baltimore County protective services and told
them the children were being neglected and related the
parents’ history to them. The girls were living in horri-
ble conditions. When they investigated, they found the
apartment filthy, but the children were well-nourished
and appropriately clothed. The department was unable
to substantiate any neglect in the case, and I was told
that I was to blame because as long as I was rescuing
and buying clothes and food for the children, they were
not being totally neglected.
The man that she was living with kicked her out, and
the children and she wound up in Baltimore City. She
was living with a woman at that time who had two chil-
dren. Social services was called to investigate that fam-
ily, and those two children were removed from the
home. I assumed erroneously that they were also look-
ing at Rene and the children, but much to my surprise,
much later, I found out that they were not. How can they
remove one set of children from a home and not the
other? When I inquired, I was told that no one had filed
a formal complaint. I told them that there were com-
plaints on file from Baltimore County, and Anne Arun-
del County had a record of me having custody of the
first child. But I was told that Baltimore County was a
different jurisdiction from Baltimore City. And did they
follow up based on my conversations with them? No. I
later found out that because I had not filed a formal
complaint with the protective services people that they
did not investigate further. Because she moved from
place to place and from county to county, I had to start
the process all over again.
Rene was eventually evicted from the house and be-
came homeless again. She was on the street with the
children and stayed wherever someone would take her
in. She absolutely refused to let relatives take in the chil-
dren. I called protective services and begged them to
take the children. By this time, she was in a Salvation
Army homeless shelter, and 1 month before their death,
Baltimore City social workers told me that there was not
enough proof of neglect to take the children from their
mother. When I argued that they were living in a home-
less shelter and that Christina had been ill for some time,
220
Facts and Data

the social worker told me that being homeless was not a
reason to take the children, and that their mother was
“trying” and loved her children. I never doubted that
my daughter loved her children. She never abused
them. She never physically did any harm to them. But
she could not take care of herself. How did they expect
her to know how to take care of two little girls?
Another resident of the homeless shelter filed a com-
plaint with protective services as Rene was leaving them
alone in the room, as did the day care center where the
children went during the day. Eventually, somehow,
Rene got some subsidy from an agency—I do not know
what the agency was—and she was allowed to move
into an unsafe building.
On November 15, the caseworker assigned to investi-
gate the case arrived at the new address to find the fire
engines at the house and received the news that the chil-
dren had perished in the fire. This was 1 week after the
complaints were filed.
My granddaughters are dead because of a law that
says children should be reunified with their parents.
Parents have all the rights and the children have none.
My granddaughters are dead because of the many lay-
ers of bureaucratic bungling by the department of so-
cial services. My granddaughters are dead because of
the inefficiency of an agency that employs unskilled
and untrained social workers who did not seem to be
able to make appropriate decisions, but kept quoting
me the law. My granddaughters died 2 years and 5
days ago because the system failed to heed the warn-
ings of responsible people who were trying to protect
them.
My daughter was eventually convicted of two counts
of first degree murder and is now serving two life sen-
tences without the possibility of parole. It has been an
agonizing 2 years for me when I know it should not
have ended this way. I have buried two children, seen
my daughter put in prison for the rest of her life, and my
grandson, who is multihandicapped, is in a residential
school for disabled children. My losses are many, and
my grief is overwhelming—and it could have all been
prevented.
Testimony and Statements
221

Source for this section: Committee on Labor and Human Re-
sources, U.S. Senate, Improving the Well-Being of Abused and Ne-
glected Children, 104th Cong., 2nd sess., 1996, 1–61.
As a result of various testimonies, such as the ones above,
Congress paved the way for transracial placements, when indi-
cated, and has made and changed laws to allow children to move
more quickly into permanent adoptive homes. But the battle for
funding goes on, sometimes successfully and sometimes less so.
Litigation in Adoption
Finding homes for children who need them (rather than finding
children for people who want them, although this can also work
well for children) is the emphasis in adoption today. The classic
book Beyond the Best Interests of the Child (Goldstein, Freud, and
Solnit, 1973) was one of the first to call for recognition of the
child’s needs in adoption. Later, Andre Derdyn gave a detailed
explanation of this subject (in David M. Brodzinsky and Marshall
D. Schechter, eds., The Psychology of Adoption, New York: Oxford
University Press, 1990).
A child who must leave a birth home because of abuse and
neglect usually spends some time in a foster home. During that
time, the child often develops a relationship with the foster par-
ents; they become his “psychological parents,” or de facto par-
ents. A psychological parent is one who, through day-to-day in-
teractions with a child, fulfills the child’s needs for an “emotional
parent.” In other situations, the adoptive parents become the psy-
chological parents. The birth parent may contest this situation,
and the various parties involved call upon the courts to make de-
cisions about the child’s future. Sometimes the parties to a case
appeal the lower courts’ decisions all the way to the Supreme
Court.
Because a combination of state, federal, and, in certain cases,
international laws regulate adoption, various interpretations of
the law are complex. A review of state-decided court cases in-
volving adoption would fill several volumes; therefore, this chap-
ter will highlight only a few important cases in which the U.S.
Supreme Court reached a decision. These cases are in the cate-
gories of birth fathers’ rights, birth parents’ rights, foster parents’
rights, protecting individual rights, and rights involving racial
considerations.
222
Facts and Data

In adoption cases, courts must consider the needs of all
members of the triad (birth parents, adoptive parents, and the
child/children); this not an easy task. There are many reasons
why court rulings concerning adoption so often seem to contra-
dict each other, but two stand out: First, courts consider “the best
interests of the child” but must also consider the rights of other
parties; judges must take into consideration constitutional rights
that may appear to conflict in adoption—cases in which both
birth families and adoptive families have “rights.” For example,
can a judge extend the due process clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment to both a child’s birth family and his adoptive fam-
ily? Second, courts often base decisions on past legal precedents.
Birth Fathers’ Rights
For many years, state law disregarded the rights of a father not
married to the child’s mother. Later, the courts gave birth fathers’
rights equal consideration. Unmarried fathers’ rights are at issue
in the next four cases.
Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U.S. 645 (1972) 
Although Peter Stanley was not married to the birth mother of
their three children, he had lived with her off and on for eighteen
years and had served as a father to the children. When she died,
the state of Illinois denied Stanley a hearing and refused his rights
as a parent. The state took custody of the children and put them
in foster care.
The Supreme Court ruled that the state could not assume
Stanley was an unfit parent simply because he had not married
the children’s mother. The Court awarded custody of the children
to Stanley and returned them to his care because he had main-
tained a parental relationship with them, and because the birth fa-
ther has rights under the due process and equal protection
clauses of the Constitution.
Quilloin v. Walcott, 434 U.S. 246 (1978) 
In this case, a birth father not married to the child’s mother
sought parental rights. More than ten years after the child’s birth,
Quilloin, the birth father, wanted to block the adoption of the
child by the mother’s current husband of ten years, who lived as
family with the mother and the child. Although Quilloin had
taken some responsibility for the child (he had visited and had
Litigation in Adoption
223

made support payments), the Supreme Court granted the adop-
tion as serving the best interests of the child.
In ruling against the birth father, the Supreme Court distin-
guished this case from Stanley (discussed above) because in that
case the birth father had been a de facto member of the child’s
family; in other words, he was a “psychological parent” to the
child.
Caban v. Mohammed, 441 U.S. 380 (1979) 
An unmarried mother of two children had lived with the chil-
dren’s birth father (Caban) for five years. Subsequently, the
mother moved with the children and married another man (Mo-
hammed). Mohammed petitioned to adopt the children, and the
petition was granted despite the objections of the birth father. Ac-
cording to New York law, a birth mother could block such an
adoption by withholding her consent, but a birth father could not.
The father of a child born out of wedlock could only block such
an adoption if he could prove it was not in the best interests of the
child or children.
On appeal, the Supreme Court ruled that the equal protec-
tion clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution
had been violated by a sex-based distinction between unmar-
ried mothers and unmarried fathers. Caban was listed on the
children’s birth certificates, had supported the children, and had
a relationship with them. The Supreme Court found the New
York statute to be unconstitutional. In this case, Caban suc-
ceeded in blocking the adoption of his children by the prospec-
tive stepfather. The Court did, however, make a distinction be-
tween a birth father who has supported his children and one
who has not.
Lehr v. Robertson, 463 U.S. 248 (1983) 
The Supreme Court dealt with the issue of “notice” and whether
notice of an adoption must be given to putative fathers. This case
focused on the father’s commitment and responsibilities toward
the child. Lehr had not lived with the birth mother after the
child’s birth, had not provided financial support, his name was
not on the child’s birth certificate, and he had not registered with
New York State’s Putative Father Registry.
When Ms. Robertson later married and her husband sought
to adopt the child, Lehr tried to block the adoption. The Court
ruled that the father must have demonstrated commitment to
224
Facts and Data

parenthood and have been involved in child rearing. In this case,
the birth father did not have an automatic constitutional right to
block the adoption.
Birth Parents’ Rights 
The termination of parental rights is a difficult process. In termi-
nation cases the petitioning party, usually a public social service
department, must prove the birth parents unfit because of neg-
lect, abuse, abandonment, or other conduct endangering the
child. States differ as to their definitions of these terms, the per-
sons who may bring the action to the court, and the type of hear-
ing. When birth parents oppose the action and appeal the rules,
the process of termination of parental rights can take a long time.
Lassiter v. Department of Social Services, 452 U.S. 18, 68 (1981)
In 1981 the Supreme Court answered a question related to due
process. In this case, a lower court had terminated the parental
rights of Abby Gail Lassiter. She appealed the decision. The Court
upheld the termination in spite of the fact that counsel had not
been appointed for Lassiter. Among other things, the Court ruled
that the presence of counsel would not have made a determina-
tive difference for the petitioner.
Santosky v. Kramer, 455 U.S. 745 (1982) 
The due process clause and the “liberty interest” of the birth par-
ents took center stage in this case. (A liberty interest is an interest
recognized as protected by the due process clauses of state and
federal constitutions. Generally included are liberties guaranteed
by the first eight amendments of the U.S. Constitution.) The
Supreme Court struck down the “fair preponderance” of the evi-
dence standard that had formerly been the rule for terminating
parental rights. In this situation, due process required that allega-
tions supporting termination of parental rights be proven by
“clear and convincing evidence”; that is, the Court instituted the
“enhanced evidentiary requirement”—a much higher standard of
evidence. The case cites the liberty interest of natural parents,
which does not go away because these people have not been
model parents.
In this case, the children had not lived with their birth 
parents for four and a half years. Some say this decision, made on
a four-to-three vote of the Supreme Court, was an unfortunate
Litigation in Adoption
225

one for children in the foster care system, as many of these chil-
dren have spent years developing a relationship with their “psy-
chological parents,” only to be wrenched from their current
homes and returned to birth parents with whom they may have
had little or no relationship.
Rights of Foster Families
Smith v. OFFER, 431 U.S. 816 (1977)
In 1976, after many years of tradition in which foster parents had
few legal rights, a district court ruled as unconstitutional a provi-
sion of New York law authorizing the state to remove children
from foster homes without a prior hearing. In 1977, however, the
Supreme Court reversed the lower court’s decision in Smith v. Or-
ganization of Foster Families for Equality and Reform (OFFER).
In this case, the Supreme Court ruled that a full hearing is not
necessary when a child is removed from a foster home to be re-
turned to a birth home. In other words, the rights of the birth fam-
ily outweigh those of the foster family.
The Court identified two distinctions between birth families
and foster families. First, birth families’ origins are not involved
with state laws and contracts, whereas foster families do have a
contract with the state. Second, this and subsequent Court deci-
sions ruled that foster parents do not have constitutionally pro-
tected liberty interests. Therefore, foster parents still do not have
the legal standing most of them would like.
Protection of Individual Rights 
In 1923 the Supreme Court stated that the Constitution protects
an individual’s right “to marry, establish a home, and bring up
children,” among other freedoms. The rights of foster parents,
who may after a number of years become a child’s “psychologi-
cal parents,” are less clear. In other words, in the case of children
who have been in the care of foster parents who would like to
adopt them, whose “liberty” will be protected?
Meyer v. Nebraska, 262 U.S. 390 (1923) 
Meyer had been convicted of teaching German to a ten-year-old
child who was a pupil in the Zion Parochial School maintained by
the Zion Evangelical Lutheran Congregation. Nebraska law
stated that “languages, other than the English language, may be
226
Facts and Data

taught as languages only after a pupil shall have attained and
successfully passed the eighth grade.” The Supreme Court de-
cided the law was unconstitutional and deprived individuals
(teachers and parents) of liberty without due process of law in vi-
olation of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution. As
strange as it may seem to those unfamiliar with the law, this de-
cision formed the basis of an interpretation of an individual’s
right as a parent.
May v. Anderson, 345 U.S. 528 (1953) 
May v. Anderson was a case in which the Court upheld the rights of
birth parents. In a divorce action, a Wisconsin court had awarded
custody to the father. The mother’s appeal reached the Supreme
Court, which recognized that “a mother’s right to custody of her
children is a personal right entitled to at least as much protection
as her right to alimony.” (Because the mother did not live in the
state in which the decree was issued, the court could not cut off her
immediate right to custody of her children. A Wisconsin court did
not have jurisdiction over a mother who lived in Ohio.)
Racial Considerations 
Racial considerations in adoption have provided a subject for
lively debate since the 1960s. In the late 1960s and early 1970s,
white couples began (in significant numbers) to adopt black chil-
dren who needed homes. In 1972 the National Association of
Black Social Workers took a strong stand against transracial adop-
tion. In 1994 the Multiethnic Placement Act banned discrimina-
tion in the placement of children for adoption on the grounds of
race, color, or national origin.
Palmore v. Sidoti, 466 U.S. 429 (1984) 
In this 1984 adoption case, the Supreme Court disallowed racial
considerations. A white father attempted to take custody of a
child from his ex-wife, who lived with (and later married) a black
man; they lived in a black neighborhood. The Court’s position
was that race should not determine custody; the Court unani-
mously ruled that the state would not be justified in taking cus-
tody away from a fit mother just because she had married a man
of another race. Private biases and the possible harm they might
inflict were impermissible considerations under the equal protec-
tion clause of the Constitution.
Litigation in Adoption
227

Supporting Adoptive Families
Postlegal services (for families who have finalized an adoption) is
a concept whose time has come.  Figure 6.4 is a graphic depiction
of an idea long recognized as a need in adoption services. The fig-
ure has five levels. The first level illustrates guiding principles in
adoption. The second level puts adoptees, parents, peers, and
professionals together as a team. This team (the third level) deliv-
ers needed services. (Not everyone needs every service, but most
will benefit from some services.) The fourth level describes the
qualities desired in the various services. The bottom tier of boxes
shows the desired results.
A full narrative is available at http://www.childwelfare.
gov/pubs/conceptmodel.cfm.
228
Facts and Data
FIGURE 6.4
Concept Model for Post-Adoption Services
NATIONAL CONSORTIUM FOR POST LEGAL ADOPTION SERVICES
ADOPTION SUPPORT AND PRESERVATION
The following principles
Adoption is different.
The dynamics of a family
created by adoption are
different from the dynamics of
a family created by birth.
Adoption is lifelong and its
impact creates unique 
opportunities and challenges 
for families and communities.
A LOCAL CROSS-SYSTEM NETWORK OR TEAM
of
Adoptees, Parents, Peers and Professionals.
Adoption is mutally beneficial to
parent, child, and society.
Society is responsible for
supporting and aiding
integration and preservation of
adoptive families.
serve as a guide to
ADVOCACY
FAMILY
EDUCATION
INFORMATION
& REFERRAL
FINANCIAL
SUPPORTS
FAMILY
SUPPORTS
COMMUNITY
SUPPORTS
PSYCHO-
SOCIAL
SERVICES
REUNIONS
& RECORD
INQUIRIES
Community-
based
Family-
centered
Adoption-
sensitive &
competent
Multi-
disciplined
Strength-focused
& normalizing
Directed by 
family
Culturally
sensitive & 
competent
strengthened family
integration
strengthened
attachment
strengthened family
functioning
strengthened parental
entitlement and
claiming
strengthened identity
formation of 
family members
strengthened
community networks
MEDIATION
& PROBLEM
SOLVING
SERVICE
COORDIN-
ATION
that are
and that result in

7
Directory of Organizations
M
any organizations have formed around specialized concerns
in adoption—intercountry adoption, special needs adop-
tions, open adoption, closed adoption, adopted persons’
rights, the rights of “singles” or gays and lesbians to adopt, the
rights of birth parents—to name a few. Some organizations work
primarily as child advocates and for new policies to benefit chil-
dren in adoption and foster care. Some offer training online. In
addition, adoption “exchanges” network with individuals and
agencies to help find homes for waiting children.
This chapter begins with an overview of agencies of the fed-
eral government concerned with adoption. Following this is a
listing of national groups that take stands on issues, support
adoptive parents, organize regional and national meetings, and
inform their members through newsletters and other publica-
tions. Next is a listing of organizations in adoption concerned
with legal issues. The final list gives an address, telephone num-
ber, and website for a central government office in each of the fifty
states, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
Federal Agencies 
Concerned with Adoption 
Picture a huge umbrella with a group of other umbrellas in de-
scending order underneath. Be aware that each of the smaller um-
brellas performs enormous jobs of its own.
229

The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) 
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services is the
biggest agency and the highest branch of the U.S. government
concerned with adoption. Among the organizations under this
head umbrella are the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Adminis-
tration on Aging (AOA), the Indian Health Service (IHS), and the
Administration for Children and Families (ACF).
The Administration for Children and Families (ACF) 
The Administration for Children and Families brings together all
of the federal programs concerned with the needs of children and
families. It funds state, territorial, local, and tribal organizations
supporting children. State, country, city, and tribal governments
provide the direct services with the assistance of the ACF through
funding, policy direction, and information services.
The Administration on Children, Youth, 
and Families (ACYF)
The Administration on Children, Youth, and Families administers
the major federal government programs supporting children,
youth, and families; protective services for children and young
people in at-risk situations; child care for families; and adoption
services for children with special needs. The ACYF is divided into
several bureaus, each responsible for a different category of serv-
ices to children, youth, and families. These are the Child Care Bu-
reau, the Family and Youth Services Bureau, the Head Start Bu-
reau, and the Children’s Bureau. (Another bureau is responsible
for research and evaluation of the work of the others.) In addition,
ten divisions in the United States and its territories administer
ACYF’s programs in each of the regions.
The Children’s Bureau (CB) 
With an annual budget of more than $7 billion, the Children’s Bu-
reau undertakes many projects. It works with state, local, and
tribal agencies to develop programs to prevent child abuse in
troubled families, to protect children from all types of abuse, and
230
Directory of Organizations

to find permanent homes for children who cannot safely return to
their birth families. It is responsible for programs under Titles IV-
B and IV-E of the Social Security Act. The bureau also manages
the AFCARS and SACWIS data collection systems and is respon-
sible for the Child Welfare Information Gateway (which, as noted
earlier, integrated the National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse
and Neglect and the National Adoption Information Clearing-
house into one informational entity).
Another project of the CB (under the federal Department of
Health and Human Services) is the Collaboration to Adopt-
USKids. In October 2002 the Children’s Bureau contracted with
the Adoption Exchange Association and its partners to devise and
implement a national recruitment and retention program for
prospective adoptive parents. It operates the AdoptUSKids.org
website, conducts a variety of adoption-related research projects,
and works with adoptive family support organizations. The ini-
tial partners included:
The Adoption Exchange Association (AEA), the main contractor
for the project. The AEA administers and supervises the subcon-
tractors (below) and their projects. The website is http://www.
adoptea.org.
The Child Welfare League of America (CWLA), which facilitates
and reports on the workings of the National Adoption Advisory
Board, manages an annual Partnership Summit, and conducts
evaluations for the Collaboration to AdoptUSKids. The website is
http://www.cwla.org.
The Northwest Adoption Exchange (NWAE), which manages,
maintains, and enhances the AdoptUSKids.org website. For more
information, the website is http://www.nwae.org.
The Adoption Exchange Education Center, which provides on-
site training and technical assistance to the Collaboration to
AdoptUSKids for recruiting and retaining adoptive families. The
website is http://www.adoptex.org.
The University of Texas School of Social Work and the Center for
Social Work Research (CSWR), which conduct research for the col-
laboration. Studies include identification of barriers to the comple-
tion of the adoption process (especially for families of color) and
Federal Agencies Concerned with Adoption
231

identification of factors affecting favorable long-term outcomes for
families who adopt children with special needs. For further infor-
mation, the website is http://www.utexas.edu/ssw.
Holt International Children’s Services, which provides publica-
tion design and production for the collaboration, as well as assis-
tance with media contact and cooperation. The website is http://
www.holtintl.org.
The postal address of the Children’s Bureau is:
Children’s Bureau
Administration on Children, Youth, and Families
1250 Maryland Avenue SW, Eighth Floor
Washington, DC 20024
National Resource, Educational, Support,
Advocacy, and/or Policymaking
Organizations Concerned with Adoption 
Adopt America Network (AAN)
1025 N. Reynolds Road
Toledo, Ohio 43615
(800) 246-1731
http://www.adoptamericanetwork.org
Founded in 1983 by Richard K. Ransom, Adopt America Net-
work’s mission is to find homes for waiting children in foster
care. In addition to its headquarters in Toledo, Ohio, AAN volun-
teer specialists (parents of adopted children with special needs)
are located across the United States to help recruit prospective
adoptive parents and to help with the matching process. AAN
also works with the agencies who have custody of children on be-
half of prospective adoptive families, helps prepare families for
adoption, and helps with postadoption services. Another mission
is to increase public awareness of adoption.
The Adoption Exchange Association (AEA)
8015 Corporate Drive, Suite C
232
Directory of Organizations

Baltimore, MD 21236
(410) 933-5700
Fax: (410) 933-5716
aedney@adoptuskids.org
http://www.adoptea.org
The Adoption Exchange Association (AEA) has served adoption
in many ways over the years, always with the goal of finding per-
manent homes for children who need them. Currently it is the
main contractor for the Collaboration to AdoptUSKids, a project
of the Children’s Bureau under the Department of Health and
Human Services. AEA administers and supervises the subcon-
tractors and their individual projects. The organization not only
designs adoptive family recruitment and retainment strategies on
a national level but also helps build support groups throughout
the United States.
Publications: A variety of AEA publications are available at
low or no cost (except postage), including Standards for Adoption
Exchanges, How to Make Adoption an Affordable Option, You Can
Adopt! A Guide for Military Families, Adoption: A Guide for Military
Family Service Center Staff and Civilian Social Workers, Overcoming
Geographic Boundaries: A Guidebook for Families Pursuing Interstate
Adoption, and Placing Children across Geographic Boundaries: A Step-
by-Step Guide for Social Workers.
The ALMA Society
Adoptees’ Liberty Movement Association (ALMA)
P.O. Box 85
Denville, NJ 07834
(973) 586-1358
Fax: (973) 586-1358
Manderson@almasociety.com
http://almasociety.com
The Adoptees’ Liberty Movement Association (ALMA) is an in-
ternational organization founded in 1971 by Florence Anna
Fisher, author of The Search for Anna Fisher (1986). The society is
committed to helping adopted persons reunite with their birth
parents and also helps birth parents find the children for which
they made an adoption plan.
Publications: Available to members.
Organizations Concerned with Adoption
233

American Academy of Pediatrics Section on Adoption and 
Foster Care
141 Northwest Point Boulevard
Elk Grove, IL 60007
(847) 434-4000
adoption@aap.org
http://www.aap.org/sections/adoption
In June 2000 the American Academy of Pediatrics established its
Provisional Section on Adoption. It is dedicated to improving the
health and well-being of adopted children and those in foster
care. In addition to offering input to the academy’s board of di-
rectors on adoption and foster-care issues, it works with the
AAP’s Committee on Early Childhood, Adoption, and Depen-
dent Care to influence official academy policy. Membership in the
section is open to physicians, physicians’ assistants, registered
nurses, licensed practical nurses, speech and language patholo-
gists, occupational and physical therapists, social workers, and
educators.
Publications: Articles, policy statements, and books, such as
Caring for Your Baby and Young Child (Birth to Age Five).
American Adoption Congress (AAC)
P.O. Box 42730
Washington, DC 20015
(800) 888-7970 or (202) 483-3399
Ameradoptioncong@aol.com
http://www.americanadoptioncongress.org
Founded in 1978 as a volunteer nonprofit organization, the Amer-
ican Adoption Congress (AAC) is an international education and
advocacy network dedicated to promoting openness and honesty
in adoption. Its membership is made up of adult adopted per-
sons, birth parents, adoptive parents, professionals in adoption,
and others wanting to explore adoption-related issues. The AAC
holds regional and national conferences for all triad members.
Publications: Members receive The Decree, a quarterly publi-
cation highlighting adoption reform efforts.
American Humane Association (AHA)
National Headquarters
63 Inverness Drive East
234
Directory of Organizations

Englewood, CO 80112
(818) 501-0123
Fax: (303) 792-5333
http://www.americanhumane.org
Many people would be surprised to know not only that the
American Humane Association has existed since 1877 but also
that it works to protect children from abuse and neglect, as well
protecting animals. The organization offers consultation, training,
research, evaluation, advocacy, and the dissemination of informa-
tion on community, state, tribal, and national levels. Its programs
include the promotion of best practice among child welfare pro-
fessionals, a family group decisionmaking approach to working
with families in the child welfare system, and programs for the
prevention of child abuse and neglect.
Publications: The Humane Review, a quarterly newsletter; and
two professional journals, Protecting Animals and Protecting Chil-
dren. Reprints of individual articles from these journals are also
available.
American Public Human Services Association (APHSA)
810 First Street NE, Suite 500
Washington, DC 20002
(202) 682-0100
Fax: (202) 289-6555
http://www.aphsa.org
The American Public Human Services Association is a nonprofit,
bipartisan organization of individuals and agencies concerned
with human services. It strives to develop, promote, and imple-
ment human service policies and practices that improve the health
and well-being of families, adults, and children. Its members in-
clude state and territorial human services agencies, more than 150
local agencies, and thousands of individual members with an in-
terest in human services. In addition, two important associations
work under the umbrella of the APHSA. First is the Association of
Administrators of the Interstate Compact on the Placement of Chil-
dren (AAICPC), one of ten affiliates of the APHSA. The AAICPC
was established in 1974 and is made up of members from all fifty
states, as well as the District of Columbia and the U.S. Virgin Is-
lands. (The Interstate Compact on the Placement of Children, dis-
cussed in Chapter 1, establishes uniform legal and administrative
Organizations Concerned with Adoption
235

procedures that govern the placement of children across state
lines.) The website of the AAICPC is http://icpc.aphsa.org. Second
is the Association of Administrators of the Interstate Compact on
Adoption and Medical Assistance (AAICAMA). This organization,
established in 1986, though not an affiliate of the APHSA, has cho-
sen the APHSA to provide its secretariat services. (The Interstate
Compact on Adoption and Medical Assistance provides member
states with technical assistance and support and helps coordinate
the interstate delivery of services to children with special needs
who are adopted with adoption assistance agreements in place.)
The website of AAICAMA is http://aaicama.aphsa.org.
Publications: Magazines, books, periodicals, newsletters, sur-
veys, and monographs, including Policy & Practice, the quarterly
magazine of APHSA; the Human Services Directory; This Week in
Washington, a weekly publication when Congress is in session;
Crossroads I & II, dealing with directions in social policy; and MMI
Bulletin, an electronic monthly newsletter dealing with the latest
federal and state developments in Medicaid.
The Annie E. Casey Foundation
701 St. Paul Street
Baltimore, MD 21202
(410) 547-6600
Fax: (410) 547-6624
http://www.aecf.org
Since 1948 the Annie E. Casey Foundation, a philanthropic organ-
ization, has been devoted to improving the lives of disadvantaged
children and families. The goals of one of its projects (designed in
1992) include developing a system of neighborhood-based foster
care, reducing reliance on congregate or group care, increasing the
number and quality of foster homes, and speeding reunification
with birth families when possible. When not possible, the goal is
to find permanent families (often the current foster or relative
homes) in a timely manner.
Publications: A listing of the foundation’s diverse publica-
tions is available online and on request.
Bastard Nation
P.O. Box 271672
Houston, TX 77277
236
Directory of Organizations

(415) 704-3166
Fax: (415) 704-3166
bn@bastards.org
http://www.bastards.org
Bastard Nation is dedicated to full rights for adult adoptees. The
organization advocates for the opening (on request of the adoptee
at the age of majority) of any government documents pertaining
to the adopted person’s historical, genetic, and legal identity, in-
cluding the unaltered original birth certificate and legal decree of
adoption. (Bastard Nation does not support mandated mutual
consent registries or intermediary systems in place of uncondi-
tional open records.)
Publications: The Bastard Quarterly is published four times a
year for Bastard Nation members.
Black Administrators in Child Welfare (BACW)
1319 F Street NW, Suite 401
Washington, DC 20004
(202) 783-3714
Fax: (202) 783-7955
bacw@cwla.org
http://www.blackadministrators.org
Established in 1971 and incorporated in New York in 1975, Black
Administrators in Child Welfare is a national nonprofit organiza-
tion dedicated to improving the lives of African American chil-
dren and their families in the child welfare system. It is an advo-
cate for the employment of black executives in key administrative
positions and serves as a resource for positive change. Member-
ship is open to administrators and mental health and juvenile jus-
tice professionals who provide services to children and families.
The organization has a long list of accomplishments, including
policy statements on adoption and foster care, in-home services,
day care, residential care, and child protective services, which
serve as guidelines for agencies that serve African American chil-
dren and families. It developed a Cultural Competence Training
Seminar to train child welfare staff in agencies throughout the
United States; an analysis of the “Federal Report to Congress on
Kinship Foster Care”; one of the first family preservation models
as a result of findings from the “Services to Families in Their Own
Organizations Concerned with Adoption
237

Homes” study; and cosponsored of the Twelfth National Confer-
ence on Child Abuse and Neglect.
Publications: The BACW quarterly newsletter; an analysis of
the “Federal Report to Congress on Kinship Foster Care,” which
was published in the January 2000 Federal Register by the U.S. De-
partment of Health and Human Services Children’s Bureau; a
monograph, “Children in Social Peril: A Community Vision for
Preserving Family Care of African American Children and
Youth”; and a special issue of the Child Welfare League of Amer-
ica’s Child Welfare Journal, “Perspectives on Serving African
American Children, Youth, and Families.”
Center for Adoption Support and Education, Inc. (CASE)
4000 Blackburn Lane, Suite 260
Burtonsville, MD 20866
(301) 476-8525
Fax: (301) 476-8526
caseadopt@adoptionsupport.org
http://www.adoptionsupport.org
CASE, created in 1998 for postadoption support, is a national re-
source for families and professionals through its training, con-
sultations, and publications. In addition it is a support center for
families, educators, child welfare staff, and mental health
providers in Maryland, Northern Virginia, and Washington,
D.C. The center has developed several postadoption models as
part of its mission to ensure the healthy preservation of adop-
tive families.
Publications: In addition to an e-newsletter, CASE provides
Fact Sheets, articles, and books authored by CASE staff members.
An online store offers the sale of these publications.
Center for Family Connections (CFFC)
350 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02141
(800) KINNECT or (617) 547-0909
Fax: (617) 497-5952
cffc@kinnect.org
http://www.kinnect.org
The goal of the Center for Family Connections is to help families
touched by adoption, foster care, kinship care, guardianship, and
238
Directory of Organizations

other complex “blended” families. The organization offers clini-
cal treatment, consultation, training, education, and advocacy.
Training is generally done within the local area, but the CFFC has
developed the Adoption Connections Training Institute: One
World Network. In 2003 the organization collaborated with a
British organization, After Adoption, to host an international con-
ference, held in Dublin, Ireland, on adoption and postadoption.
In 2004 CFFC formed an institute with plans to host an interna-
tional conference every two years to discuss best practices in
adoption and postadoption worldwide.
Child Welfare Information Gateway (CWIG)
Children’s Bureau/ACYF
1250 Maryland Avenue SW, Eighth Floor
Washington, DC 20024
(800) 394-3366 or (703) 385-7565
info@childwelfare.gov
http://www.childwelfare.gov
The National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect Infor-
mation and the National Adoption Information Clearinghouse
have now merged into the Child Welfare Information Gateway.
By accessing the gateway website, professionals in adoption and
child welfare, as well as the general public, can obtain informa-
tion on all aspects of adoption. Various fact sheets on adoption is-
sues, an online library of more than 48,000 documents, directories
of adoption-related services, excerpts of state and federal laws on
adoption, listings of agencies, information on children waiting for
adoption, and much more information is available. Many of the
publications and services are free. The CWIG is a service of the
Children’s Bureau, Administration for Children and Families,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Child Welfare Institute (CWI)
111 East Wecher Drive, Suite 325
Chicago, IL 60601
(312) 949-5640
Fax: (312) 922-6736
http://www.gocwi.org
Since 1948 the Child Welfare Institute has put ideas into action to
help state and local government agencies, as well as private child
Organizations Concerned with Adoption
239

welfare agencies, administer systems that help children achieve
safety, permanence, and well-being.
Publications: The CWI developed its Professional Communi-
cations Series to provide practical resources for child welfare ad-
ministrators and practitioners. The complimentary publications
that comprise the series include Ideas in Action (published
monthly), Commentary (published bimonthly), and Making a Dif-
ference That Matters (an online series featuring brief practice arti-
cles by CWI staff and others). The publications examine the the-
ory, practice, and implementation of child welfare services.
Child Welfare League of America (CWLA)
440 First Street NW, Third Floor
Washington, DC 20001
(202) 638-2952
Fax: (202) 638-4004
http://www.cwla.org
The Child Welfare League of America, founded in 1920, is the old-
est and largest membership-based child-welfare organization in
the United States. Concerned with setting standards and improv-
ing practice, the CWLA also advocates on behalf of children, con-
ducts and encourages research on adoption, and provides con-
sultations and training programs. This nonprofit organization
unites approximately one thousand child-serving agencies
throughout the United States, which serve more than two million
abused and neglected children each year.
Publications: A large list of publications is available online;
the CWLA also publishes a monthly journal, Child Welfare: A Jour-
nal of Policy, Practice, and Programs.
Children Awaiting Parents, Inc. (CAP)
595 Blossom Road, Suite 306
Rochester, NY 14610
(888) 835-8802 or (585) 232-5110
Fax: (585) 232-2634
info@capbook.org
http://www.childrenawaitingparents.org
or http://www.capbook.org
Children Awaiting Parents (CAP) is a national not-for-profit char-
itable organization that recruits foster and adoptive families for
240
Directory of Organizations

special needs children. A new CAP initiative, “A Right to be
Heard,” empowers waiting children to tell in their own words
about themselves and their hopes for having a forever family.
Videos are available online.
Publications: The CAP Book is a national photo listing of spe-
cial needs children updated every two weeks and available on a
subscription basis to interested families.
Circle of Parents
500 N. Michigan Avenue, Suite 200
Chicago, IL 60611
(312) 334-6837
http://www.circleofparents.org
Circle of Parents groups, which meet weekly and are free of
charge, operate under different names across the country. They
offer an exchange of ideas, support, information, and resources
for individuals parenting children of all ages and for various rea-
sons. The Circle of Parents national network represents a part-
nership of parent leaders and statewide and regional organiza-
tions in approximately half of the states. The organization was
made possible by the Children’s Bureau, Administration on Chil-
dren, Youth, and Families, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services.
Concerned United Birthparents, Inc. (CUB)
P.O. Box 503475
San Diego, CA 92150
(800) 822-2777
Fax: (760) 929-1879
info@cubirthparents.org
http://www.cubirthparents.org
Concerned United Birthparents, Inc., is a national organization
founded in 1976. Its mission is to provide support for all family
members separated by adoption, to provide resources to prevent
unnecessary family separations, to educate the public about the
life-long impact of adoption, and to advocate for fair and ethical
adoption laws, policies, and practices. Local branches are avail-
able in many cities throughout the United States.
Publications: Heather Lowe’s booklet, “What You Should
Know if You’re Considering Adoption for Your Baby,” is available
Organizations Concerned with Adoption
241

online and as hard copies.  CUB also offers other educational ma-
terials and a newsletter for members, The Cub Communicator.
Congressional Coalition on Adoption Institute (CCAI)
6723 Whittier Avenue, Suite 406
McLean, VA 22101
(703) 288-9700
Fax: (703) 288-0999
info@ccainstitute.org
http://www.ccainstitute.org
In 1985 members of Congress created the bipartisan Congres-
sional Coalition on Adoption, dedicated to improving adoption
policy and practice and to alerting the public to the benefits of
adoption. In 2001 the active cochairs of the CCA created the cur-
rent Congressional Coalition on Adoption Institute (CCAI) to
more effectively raise public awareness of adoption issues. CCAI
is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization dedicated to eliminating
barriers to adoption for the children in the United States and to
those around the world who need permanent, safe, and loving
homes. Working toward that goal, CCAI serves as an informa-
tional and educational resource for policymakers as they draft
positive legislation having to do with adoption and foster care.
CCAI educates members of Congress and their staff members
about current domestic and international-related issues and
needs. It hosts a number of public awareness events each year for
members of Congress and other public leaders to do whatever
they can for the world’s most vulnerable children and to recog-
nize those who have done similar work.
Dave Thomas Foundation for Adoption
4150 Tuller Road, Suite 204
Dublin, Ohio 43017
(800) ASK-DTFA or (800) 275-3832
Fax: (614) 766-3871
adoption@wendys.com
http://www.davethomasfoundationforadoption.org
Dave Thomas, founder of Wendy’s International, created the
Dave Thomas Foundation for Adoption. He believed that every
child deserves a permanent home and a loving family. To that
end, he devoted his nonprofit, public charity to increasing the
242
Directory of Organizations

number of children adopted from the foster-care system. The
foundation give many grants to deserving adoption programs,
underwrites a one-hour television special on adoption each De-
cember, sponsors a fund-raising professional golf tournament
each year, launched a ground-breaking research project to meas-
ure attitudes to adoption in theUnited States, and promotes adop-
tion through Wendy’s restaurants.
Publications: The foundation supplies posters, educational
videos, public service announcements, and other materials at no
charge to adoption organizations. It also distributes A Child Is
Waiting . . . A Beginner’s Guide to Adoption to encourage adoption
and raise public awareness about adoption.
Evan B. Donaldson Adoption Institute
525 Broadway, Sixth Floor
New York, NY 10012
(212) 925-4089
Fax: (775) 796-6592
info@adoptioninstitute.org
http://www.adoptioninstitute.org
Founded in 1996, the Evan B. Donaldson Adoption Institute is a
national not-for-profit organization dedicated to promoting lead-
ership to improve adoption laws, policies, and practice in order to
better the lives of those touched by adoption. The institute also
cohosts conferences throughout the year.
Publications: A comprehensive list of publications, presenta-
tions, books, conferences, press releases, and testimonies is avail-
able online. Most documents are available free in pdf format. A
recent featured publication is Expanding Resources for Children: Is
Adoption by Gays and Lesbians Part of the Answer for Boys and Girls
Who Need Homes?
Family Pride Coalition (FPC)
P.O. Box 65327
Washington, DC 20035
(202) 331-5015
Fax: (202) 331-0080
http://www.familypride.org
The Family Pride Coalition is a national nonprofit organization
dedicated to equality for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
Organizations Concerned with Adoption
243

parents and their families. Members are formerly married, con-
sidering parenthood, considering or awaiting adoption, or cur-
rently parenting. Members also include grandparents, aunts and
uncles, straight spouses, neighbors, coworkers, clergy, profes-
sionals, and companies that support this family movement. FPC
is involved primarily in the areas of advocacy, education, and
support. It works with state-based as well as local parenting
groups to achieve family-friendly laws and to fight antifamily
laws; it facilitates understanding among parents, teachers, and
administrators to make schools safe and hospitable for all chil-
dren; and it gathers families across the United States for special
events throughout the year.
Hear My Voice: Protecting Our Nation’s Children
1100 N. Main Street, Suite 201
Ann Arbor, MI 48104
(734) 747-9653 or (734) 747-9654
Fax: (734) 747-9559
http://www.hearmyvoice.org
Hear My Voice is a nationwide nonprofit network of child advo-
cates, attorneys, mental health experts, and members of the
media that works for children in contested adoption cases, long-
term foster care, third-party placements, and de-facto parent situ-
ations. The organization works on local, statewide, and national
levels to help children whose well-being is threatened by the lack
of permanent, safe families. Hear My Voice began as the DeBoer
Committee for Children’s Rights in August 1993, on the day Jes-
sica DeBoer was returned by the courts to her birth parents. In
this case, back-and-forth legal battles ended with the child’s
court-ordered return to her birth parents at the age of two and a
half. The organization lists many of its awards on the website.
Insight: Open Adoption Resources and Support
721 Hawthorne
Royal Oak, MI 48067
(248) 543-0997
Fax: (248) 543-0997
brenr@openadoptioninsight.org
http://openadoptioninsight.org
Insight is based on several beliefs: that adoption is a lifelong
244
Directory of Organizations

process; that efforts should be made to preserve birth families
whenever possible; that in an adoption, maintaining relationships
with birth families (when possible) serves children well; that
adoption creates extended family relationships whether or not
there is contact; that for open adoption to work well for children,
all triad members need support and ongoing education; and that
adults have the insight and ability to put the needs of the children
above their own interests. Insight offers support for birth parents,
adoptive parents, and adopted children.
Publications: Great Articles, Poetry, and Stories for Everyone! is a
page on the website for all triad members.
Institute for Adoption Information, Inc. (IAI)
P.O. Box 4405
Bennington, VT 05201
(802) 442-2845
info@adoptioninformationinstitute.org
http://www.adoptioninformationinstitute.org
Founded in 1996 as Celebrate Adoption, the organization
changed its name to reflect the educational aspects of its mission.
One goal is to develop projects designed to dispel the myths and
stereotypes about adoption and to advocate for balanced and ac-
curate coverage by the media. The nonprofit IAI is made up of
adopted persons, birth parents, adoptive parents, adoption pro-
fessionals, and anyone else who shares its goals.
Publications: Guides to help with education about adoption
include An Educator’s Guide to Adoption and A Guide to Adoption for
Health Care & Counseling Professionals.
International Social Service–United States of America Branch,
Inc. (ISS-USA)
207 E. Redwood Street, Suite 300
Baltimore, MD 21202
(443) 451-1200
Fax: (443) 451-1220
iss-usa@iss-usa.org
http://www.iss-usa.org
ISS-USA is part of the International Social Service Network,
which (under different names) has provided social work services
internationally for many years. For decades, ISS had worked in
Organizations Concerned with Adoption
245

intercountry adoption, most often assisting those who were
friends or relatives of the children. With the passage of the
Refugee Relief Act in 1953, the U.S. Department of State con-
tracted with ISS-USA to help with the adoption process of chil-
dren coming to the United States. In the 1950s that adoption ex-
pertise led to two research studies in collaboration with the
Child Welfare League of America (CWLA). In 1957, ISS-USA con-
ducted the first study, “Korean-American Children in American
Adoptive Homes, which the CWLA published. In 1958 the or-
ganizations jointly sponsored “A Study of Proxy Adoptions.”
Over the years ISS-USA has continued to work with individuals
and organizations to assist families, adults, and children. The or-
ganization also works with family courts, with the Interstate
Compact on the Placement of Children, and with the U.S. gov-
ernment on aspects of intercountry adoption. The organization
participated in meetings leading to the Hague Convention on In-
ternational Adoption.
Publications: Annual reports are available online.
International Soundex Reunion Registry (ISRR)
P.O. Box 2312
Carson City, NV 89702
(775) 882-7755
http://www.ISRR.net
The International Soundex Reunion Registry, founded in 1975 by
Emma May Vilardi, is a system for matching persons who have
been separated by any number of reasons, including adoption.
This is a nonprofit, tax-exempt corporation funded by donations.
Those interested in registering may call for information.
Joint Council on International Children’s Services (JCICS)
117 S. Saint Asaph Street
Alexandria, VA 22314
(703) 535-8045
Fax: (703) 535-8049
jcics@jcics.org
http://www.jcics.org
First organized in 1976, the Joint Council on International Chil-
dren’s Services is the oldest group of licensed nonprofit interna-
tional adoption agencies in the world. Members include adoption
246
Directory of Organizations

agencies, child welfare organizations, parent support groups, and
medical specialists. Member agencies, who must be located in
North America, meet for an annual conference each year to share
concerns and formulate policy. The organization advocates for
moral and ethical standards in intercountry adoption and has
worked for the adoption of the Hague Convention on Intercoun-
try Adoption.
Publications: Members receive a quarterly newsletter, The 
Bulletin.
Latin American Parents Association (LAPA)
P.O. Box 339-340
Brooklyn, NY 11234
(718) 236-8689
info@lapa.com
http://www.lapa.com
The Latin American Parents Association (LAPA) is a national
nonprofit support organization for those considering adopting
from Latin America or for those who have already adopted from
Latin America. It provides information and resources.
National Adoption Center (NAC)
1500 Walnut Street, Suite 701
Philadelphia, PA 19102
(800) TO-ADOPT
http://www.adopt.org
The National Adoption Center expands adoption opportunities
throughout the United States, especially for children with special
needs and those from minority cultures. In 1972 the NAC began as
a volunteer organization to help social workers in the Philadelphia
area find homes for waiting children. Although it still serves the re-
gion of southern Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Delaware, NAC
has expanded its national programs (with the sponsorship of the
Dave Thomas Foundation for Adoption and the Freddie Mac Foun-
dation) to include (1) increasing public awareness and recruitment
for children waiting for permanent families, (2) information (online
and by mail) on a wide variety of adoption topics, and resource lists
of adoption agencies in all fifty states, Puerto Rico, and Canada, as
well as international agencies, (3) a Wednesday’s Child website,
which can be accessed through http://www.adopt.org, and (4) a
Organizations Concerned with Adoption
247

Learning Center (funded by the Dave Thomas Foundation for
Adoption) featuring an online parenting course.
Publications: The Adoption Update is printed twice a year and
focuses on NAC activities, as well as highlighting waiting chil-
dren and discussing current legislation and adoption practices
that impact adoptive families. NACzine is an online magazine.
The center also publishes brochures and booklets on a variety of
adoption topics.
National Adoption Foundation (NAF)
100 Mill Plain Road
Danbury, CT 06811
(203) 791-3811
http://www.nafadopt.org
The National Adoption Foundation is a resource for financial as-
sistance and support services to families who are adopting from
a spectrum of adoption programs, including domestic infant, in-
tercountry, or children from the foster care system. Besides pro-
viding financial help to families, the foundation attempts to edu-
cate the public and various policymakers about financial barriers
to adoption.
National Association of Black Social Workers, Inc. (NABSW)
2305 Martin Luther King Avenue, SE
Washington, DC 20020
(202) 678-4570
Fax: (202) 678-4572
Nabsw.harambee@verizon.net
http://www.nabsw.org
The National Association of Black Social Workers, established in
1968, addresses and advocates for important social issues that af-
fect the health and welfare of the black community. One of four
task forces, the Task Force on Family, has addressed adoption is-
sues. The NABSW considers adoption with nonrelated families
the last option to be considered for African American children,
preferring family preservation or kinship placement with sup-
portive services.
National Child Welfare Resource Center for Adoption
Spaulding for Children
248
Directory of Organizations

16250 Northland Drive, Suite 120
Southfield, MI 48075
(248) 443-0306
Fax: (248) 443-7099
nrc@nrcadoption.org
http://www.nrcadoption.org
This organization is a service of the Children’s Bureau, U.S. De-
partment of Health and Human Services, one of seven such re-
source centers. It assists states, tribes, and other federally funded
child welfare agencies in improving their ability to help with the
safety, well-being, and permanency of abused and neglected chil-
dren. These services include program planning, policy develop-
ment, and postlegal services. In addition, the center offers train-
ing and consultation services.
Publications: Include informational materials for parents, pro-
fessionals, and organizations, as well as an e-newsletter.
National Council for Adoption (NCFA)
225 N. Washington Street
Alexandria, VA 22314
(703) 299-6633
Fax: (703) 299-6004
Membership e-mail: cjohnson@adoptioncouncil.org
http://www.adoptioncouncil.org
Founded in 1980, the nonprofit, nonsectarian NCFA seeks to pro-
mote the well-being of children, birth parents, and adoptive fam-
ilies by serving as a research, advocacy, and education organiza-
tion. Its “Adoption First Principles” (available online) are:
adoption should serve the best interests of children; making an
adoption plan for a child is a loving act; growing up adopted is
healthy and normal; adoptive parents are the real parents; there is
no right to adopt, only the right of the child to be adopted; chil-
dren’s interests, not ideologies, should come first; preference in
adoption placements should be given to families that offer mar-
ried mother-and-father parenting; single-parent adoption is in the
best interests of some children; and mutual consent should decide
issues of privacy and openness. Among other activities, the or-
ganization holds an annual conference, an Adoption Hall of Fame
Awards Banquet, and a Kids at Heart festival during National
Adoption Month.
Organizations Concerned with Adoption
249

Publications: White papers, editorials, monographs, and Na-
tional Adoption Reports, as well as a quarterly newsletter for
members. The Adoption Factbook is available by order or online
and reports on various aspects of adoption policy and practice
and adoption data based on original research.
National Council of Birthmothers (NCOB)
P.O. Box 99769
Seattle, WA 98199
NCOBHdqtr@aol.com
Established in 1998, the National Council of Birthmothers sup-
ports the rights of birth mothers in regard to adoption issues. The
council believes that everyone has the right to an unaltered birth
record.
National Resource Center for Family-Centered Practice and
Permanency Planning (NRCFCPPP)
Hunter College School of Social Work
129 E. 79th Street
New York, NY 10021
(212) 452-7053
http://www.hunter.cuny.edu/socwork/nrcfcpp
This National Resource Center, a service of the Children’s Bu-
reau, works in collaboration with the Child Welfare League of
America and the National Indian Child Welfare Association, fo-
cusing on increasing the capacity and resources of tribal and
other publicly supported child welfare agencies to promote fam-
ily-centered practices and to keep children safe and in perma-
nent families. The NRCFCPPP offers onsite training and techni-
cal assistance. Areas of training and technical assistance in
regard to adoption include permanency planning and goal
achievement, concurrent permanency planning, engaging fa-
thers and paternal resources in permanency planning, trying to
achieve permanency for older adolescents, helping to achieve
placement stability, giving postplacement services, facilitating
IV-E agreements between states and tribes, and providing link-
ages with courts and legal personnel.
Publications: The NRCFCPPP Weekly Update is an electronic
newsletter published on Wednesdays for child welfare profes-
sionals, foster and adoptive parents, kinship providers, and other
250
Directory of Organizations

interested parties. Permanency Planning Today is published twice a
year and addresses key issues in permanency planning, family-
centered practice, and foster care. Training curricula in English
and Spanish are available free online.
North American Council on Adoptable Children (NACAC)
970 Raymond Avenue, Suite 106
St. Paul, MN 55114
(651) 644-3036
Fax: (651) 644-9848
info@nacac.org
http://www.nacac.org
Founded in 1974 by a group of adoptive parents, the North Amer-
ican Council on Adoptable Children is committed to meeting the
needs of waiting children and the families who adopt them.
NACAC divides its services into four general areas: advocacy in-
cludes supporting groups for waiting children and adoptive fam-
ilies, offering testimony at congressional hearings and communi-
cating with policy makers, and identifying ways to help foster
children find adoptive families. Education includes hosting an an-
nual comprehensive training conference with over one hundred
accredited workshops; publishing its quarterly newsletter,
Adoptalk; and providing numerous training sessions and work-
shops throughout the year on adoption subsidy, child welfare re-
form, transracial adoption, and other issues related to special
needs adoption and foster care. Leadership includes offering lead-
ership training to adoptive, foster, and kinship families so that
they can create and operate support groups for families in their
communities. Adoption support includes publications and tele-
phone consultations, especially having to do with questions
about adoption subsidies in the various states.
Publications: Quarterly newsletter, Adoptalk, and educational
publications covering such topics as adoption subsidies, transra-
cial adoptive parenting, and concurrent planning.
PACT, An Adoption Alliance
4179 Piedmont Avenue, Suite 330
Oakland, CA 94611
(800) 750-7590 (Birth Parent Line)
(510) 243-9460
Fax: (510) 243-9970
Organizations Concerned with Adoption
251

info@pactadopt.org
http://www.pactadopt.org
A nonprofit organization begun in 1991 by two adoptive parents,
PACT serves all members of the adoption triad. It offers educa-
tional events and provides free crisis consultations to birth par-
ents and also counsels and supports prospective adoptive par-
ents. It specializes in adoptive services to children of color, their
birth parents, and their adoptive parents. It offers extensive post-
placement services.
Publications: PACT specializes in articles regarding adopted
children of color. The Internet site offers links to other Internet re-
sources and has a book reference guide with a searchable data-
base. The site also provides reprints of past Pact Press issues.
Parents Network for the Post-Institutionalized Child (PNPIC)
P.O. Box 613
Meadow Lands, PA 15347
(724) 222-1666
thais1@earthlink.net
http://www.pnpic.org
Founded in 1993, this international network works to connect
families whose children came from maternity hospitals, orphan-
ages, and institutions in economically disadvantaged countries. It
helps parents deal with a variety of problems, such as learning
disorders or aggressive behaviors, that an early history of depri-
vation can cause.
Publications: The Post, a newsletter, was published between
1995 and 2001 but has been discontinued. Some past issues are
available for purchase through an online listing. Also available
is a book, International Adoption: Challenges and Opportunities.
The website provides links to other recommended books and 
articles.
RESOLVE
7910 Woodmont Avenue, Suite 1350
Bethesda, MD 20814
(301) 652-8585
Fax: (301) 652-9375
info@resolve.org
http://www.resolve.org
252
Directory of Organizations

RESOLVE is the national infertility association. The organization
provides information on adoption and offers member-to-member
contacts.
Publications: Members receive Family Building, an infertility
magazine, and many other educational and supportive publica-
tions about infertility. Registered users can receive RESOLVE’s e-
updates online. 
Stars of David International, Inc.
3175 Commercial Avenue, Suite 100
Northbrook, IL 60062
(800) 782-7349 or (847) 274-1527
info@starsofdavid.org
http://www.starsofdavid.org
Founded in 1984, this is a nonprofit support, information-sharing,
and advocacy network for Jewish and interfaith adoptive fami-
lies, as well as extended families, clergy, adoption agencies, and
professionals in adoption. Stars of David provides a wide range
of services, from helping to establish and support local chapters
to international mailings.
Publications: Provides online resources (e.g., articles and
book reviews) for school-age adoptees, teens and young adults,
and adult adopted persons, as well as a quarterly newsletter for
members.
National Legally Oriented Organizations
with Adoption Connections
American Academy of Adoption Attorneys (AAAA)
P.O. Box 33053
Washington, DC 20033
(202) 832-2222
info@adoptionattorneys.org
http://www.adoptionattorneys.org
The American Academy of Adoption Attorneys is made up of ap-
proximately 330 attorneys who work in adoption law. This work
includes promoting adoption law reform and distributing infor-
mation related to ethical practice in adoption. The AAAA holds
National Legally Oriented Organizations with Adoption Connections
253

educational seminars and an annual meeting. It is also a resource
for locating and choosing an adoption attorney.
Publications: A newsletter and a printable brochure are avail-
able through the website.
American Bar Association (ABA)
321 N. Clark Street
Chicago, IL 60610
(800) 285-2221 or (312) 988-5000
http://www.abanet.org
With more than 400,000 members, the ABA is the largest volun-
tary professional organization in the world. The ABA Center on
Children and the Law, established in 1978, is a program of the
American Bar Association’s Young Lawyers’ Division. It aims to
improve the lives of children through advances in law, justice,
knowledge, practice, and public policy. An associated resource is
the National Child Welfare Resource on Legal and Judicial Issues,
which is funded by the Children’s Bureau and is part of the ABA
Center on Children and the Law. The latter organization helps
agencies, courts, and bar organizations with information on child
maltreatment, foster care, permanency planning, and adoption.
Publications: ABA Journal, as well as many articles and publi-
cations related to adoption.
Children’s Rights
330 Seventh Avenue, Fourth Floor
New York, NY 10001
(212) 683-2210
http://www.childrensrights.org
This watchdog group is dedicated to reforming child welfare
services in the United States. As such, it is one of the country’s
leading child advocacy organizations, and attempts to hold state-
run welfare agencies accountable for providing quality services to
abused and neglected children. In addition to legal advocacy, the
organization does research and analysis to ensure improved poli-
cies and practices, and it uses public education to promote and
protect the rights of children. It aims to create meaningful and
lasting reforms in government systems so that all children can be
safe and grow up in loving families. A link to its online adoption
section provides easy-to-digest statistics, such as the fact that
254
Directory of Organizations

two-thirds of children waiting to be adopted are six years of age
or older, that the average length of time a child in foster care waits
to be adopted is 44 months, and that only 18 percent of children
who left foster care in 2003 were adopted.
Publications: Include those written and/or produced inde-
pendently by Children’s Rights or in collaboration with other
child welfare professionals and organizations. Recent publica-
tions in adoption include Ending the Foster Care Life Sentence: The
Critical Need for Adoption Subsidies (2006), Lasting Impressions: A
Guide for Photolisting Children (2004), and Post Permanency Services
(2003).
Legal Advocates for Permanent Parenting (LAPP)
3182 Campus Drive, Suite 175
San Mateo, CA 94403
(650) 712-1441
Fax: (650) 712-1637
info@lapponline.org
http://www.lapponline.org
LAPP was founded in 2003 by experienced dependency attorneys
who have cared for foster children in their own homes; many
have become permanent adoptive or kinship parents. The organ-
ization addresses the need for legal information, training, refer-
rals, and support for kinship parents, foster parents, adoptive
parents, and those with whom they work in the child welfare sys-
tem. LAPP also works to improve communication among all of
the parties associated with the children. Although the organiza-
tion works mostly in California, members are often asked to
speak at conferences and training sessions throughout the nation.
National Association of Counsel for Children (NACC)
1825 Marion Street, Suite 242
Denver, CO 80218
(888) 828-NACC or (303) 864-5320
Fax: (303) 864-5351
advocate@naccchildlaw.org
http://www.naccchildlaw.org
Founded in 1977, the National Association of Counsel for Children
is a nonprofit advocacy and professional membership organiza-
tion dedicated to representing and protecting children involved
National Legally Oriented Organizations with Adoption Connections
255

with the legal system. In addition to its home base in the Kempe
Children’s Center on the campus of the Children’s Hospital in
Denver, Colorado, it has a policy representative in Washington,
D.C. Members include those who work with children, such as at-
torneys, physicians, therapists, social workers, teachers, law-en-
forcement officers, and other concerned citizens.
Publications: A quarterly newsletter/magazine is free to
members; subscriptions are also available to others. A 2005 book,
published by the Bradford Press and the NACC, is Child Welfare
Law and Practice: Representing Children, Parents, and State Agencies
in Abuse, Neglect, and Dependency Cases.
National Center for Adoption Law and Policy (NCALP)
Capital University Law School
303 E. Broad Street
Columbus, OH 43215
(614) 236-6730
Fax: (614) 236-6958
adoption@law.capital.edu
http://www.law.capital.edu/adoption
The mission of the National Center for Adoption Law and Policy
is to improve the policies, laws, and practices associated with the
systems that govern child protection and adoption in order to
help the children have safe, healthy, and permanent homes.
Changes in the law and the way the law is implemented are part
of the advocacy efforts. Education is aimed toward passing along
strategies for making the laws work to judges, attorneys, social
workers, and government managers.
Publications: The Weekly Adoption News and CASE Services.
National Center for Youth Law (NCYL)
405 14th Street, 15th Floor
Oakland, CA 94612
(510) 835-8098
Fax: (510) 835-8099
Info@youthlaw.org
http://www.youthlaw.org
Founded in 1970, the nonprofit National Center for Youth Law
aims to improve the lives of poor children. It acts as a resource (on
a pro bono basis) for attorneys, legal services programs, social
256
Directory of Organizations

service organizations, community groups, healthcare profession-
als, teachers, and others who work with poor children. NCYL em-
ploys three attorneys who have expertise in the areas of adoption,
foster care, abuse, and neglect. The organization supports the ad-
vocacy of others by providing training, technical assistance, and
published legal analyses and information.
Publications: A quarterly journal, Youth Law News, which
helps keep youth advocates throughout the United States abreast
of new developments in the law as well as key policies. The or-
ganization also publishes the national Foster Care Reform Litigation
Docket, which tracks foster care reform litigation throughout the
country. Many other publications are listed on the NCYL website.
National Council of Juvenile and Family Court Judges
(NCJFCJ)
P.O. Box 8970
Reno, NV 89507
(775) 784-6012
Fax: (775) 784-6628
staff@ncjfcj.org
http://www.ncjfcj.org
In l937 a group of judges dedicated to improving the effectiveness
of the juvenile courts in the United States founded the National
Council of Juvenile and Family Court Judges. The mission of the
nonprofit organization is to improve court practices and raise
awareness of the core issues that affect the lives of many of the na-
tion’s families and children. These core issues related to adoption
practice include child abuse and neglect, termination of parental
rights, custody and visitation, adoption and foster care, domestic
violence, substance abuse, juvenile delinquency, and victims of
juvenile offenders. Since 1969 the NCJFCJ has had its headquar-
ters on the campus of the University of Nevada in Reno. It pro-
vides up-to-date training, technical assistance, and research to
help the nation’s courts, judges, and staff. Working with the Uni-
versity of Nevada and the National Judicial College, the NCJFCJ
participates in advanced degree programs for judges and other
court professionals.
Publications: Resources including monographs, journals,
benchcards, bulletins, briefs, and CDs (catalogued online by
topic). Also available: NCJFCJ’s weekly electronic newsletter,
Brevity on the Net. Members and subscribers receive the monthly
National Legally Oriented Organizations with Adoption Connections
257

Juvenile and Family Law Digest, the quarterly Juvenile and Family
Court Journal, and the quarterly Family Justice Today magazine.
National Court Appointed Special Advocate (CASA) 
Association 
100 West Harrison
North Tower, Suite 500
Seattle, WA 98119
(800) 628-3233
Fax: (206) 270-0078
inquiry@nationalcasa.org
http://www.nationalcasa.org
The mission of the National CASA Association (with its state and
local chapters) is to support and promote court-appointed volun-
teer advocacy for abused and neglected children and to help
these children do well in safe and permanent homes. A judge in
Seattle came up with the idea of using trained community volun-
teers to work with state or local judges and courts on behalf of
children. Today more than nine hundred CASA program offices
across the country train volunteers to work with and for children.
The National CASA Association helps start new CASA programs
and gives ongoing assistance to established programs. It also or-
ganizes an annual conference.
Publications: A quarterly newsletter, The Powerful Voice.
State Offices
Because adoption is largely regulated by state laws and policies,
individuals with questions about licensing may need to contact
one of the fifty state offices (plus Puerto Rico and the Virgin Is-
lands) listed below. A state licensing specialist maintains a record
of the licensed child-placing agencies in each state and territory.
(This record is available through the Child Welfare Information
Gateway, http://www.childwelfare.gov.)
Alabama Department of Human Resources
50 N. Ripley Street
Montgomery, AL 36130
(334) 242-9500
Fax: (334) 242-0939
http://www.dhr.state.al.us
258
Directory of Organizations

Alaska Department of Health and Social Services
404 Spruce Street
Craig, AK 99921
(907) 826-3433
http://www.hhs.state.ak.us
Arizona Department of Economic Security
Office of Licensing Certification & Regulation—
Child Welfare Licensing
1951 W. Camelback Road, Suite 400
Phoenix, AZ 85015
(602) 347-6346, (602) 347-6340, or (888) 229-1814
Fax: (502) 336-9603
Arkansas Department of Health and Human Services—
Division of Child and Family Services
Child Welfare Agency Licensing Unit
P.O. Box 1437, Slot 570
Little Rock, AR 72203
(501) 683-4322
California Department of Social Services
Community Care Licensing
744 P Street, MS 17-17
Sacramento, CA 95814
(916) 657-2346
Fax: (916) 657-3783
http://ccld.ca.gov/default.htm
Colorado Department of Social Services
Division of Child Care
1575 Sherman Street
Denver, CO 80203
(800) 799-5876 or (303) 866-5958
Fax: (303) 866-4453
http://www.cdhs.state.co.us/childcare/licensing.htm
Connecticut Department of Children and Families
505 Hudson Street
Hartford, CT 06106
(860) 550-6306
Fax: (860) 566-6726
State Offices
259

Delaware Department of Services for Children, Youth, and
Their Families
Office of Child Care Licensing
Barrett Building
821 Silver Lake Boulevard, Suite 103
Dover, DE 19904
(800) 822-2236 or (302) 739-5487
Fax: (302) 739-6589
Delaware Youth and Family Center
1825 Faulkland Road
Wilmington, DE 19805
(302) 892-5800
Fax: (302) 633-5112
http://www.state.de.us/kids/occl.htm
District of Columbia Department of Health—Licensing and
Regulatory Administration
Human Social Services Facility Division
825 N. Capital Street NE
Washington, DC 20002
(202) 442-5929
Fax: (202) 442-9430
Florida Department of Children and Families
Office of Family Safety
1317 Winewood Boulevard, Building 6
Tallahassee, FL 32399
(850) 921-1928
Georgia Department of Human Resources
Office of Regulatory Services
2 Peachtree Street NW
Atlanta, GA 30303
(404) 657-9644
Fax: (404) 657-5708
http://www.ors.dhr.state.ga.us
Hawaii Department of Human Services
810 Richards Street, Suite 400
Honolulu, HI 96813
(808) 586-5698
260
Directory of Organizations

Fax: (808) 586-4806
http://www.state.hi.us/dhs
Idaho Department of Children and Family Services
Division of Family and Community Services
450 W. State Street
P.O. Box 83720
Boise, ID 83720
(208) 334-5534
Fax: (208) 334-6699
Illinois Department of Children and Family Services
Division of Foster Care and Permanency Services
406 E. Monroe Street
Springfield, IL 62701
(217) 785-2688
http://www.state.il.us/dcfs
Indiana Department of Child Services
402 W. Washington Street
Room W-364
Indianapolis, IN 46204
(317) 232-3476
Fax: (317) 232-4436
http://www.state.in.us/dcs/protections/lcpa.html
Iowa Department of Human Services
Adult, Children, and Family Services
Hoover State Office Building, Fifth Floor
Des Moines, IA 50319
(515) 281-6802 or (515) 281-6220
Fax: (515) 281-4597
http://www.dhs.state.ia.us/dhs2005/dhs_homepage/chil-
dren_family/adoption/index.html
Kansas Department of Health and Environment
Child Care Licensing and Regulation
Curtis State Office Building
1000 SW Jackson, Suite 200
Topeka, KS 66612
(785) 296-8892
Fax: (785) 296-7025
State Offices
261

Kentucky Cabinet for Health and Family Services
Division of Regulated Child Care
275 E. Main Street 6E-B
Frankfort, KY 00004
(502) 564-7962
Fax: (502) 564-9350
http://chfs.ky.gov/dcbs/dpp/permanency+services+
branch.htm
Louisiana Department of Social Services
Bureau of Licensing
P.O. Box 3078
Baton Rouge, LA 70821
(225) 922-0015
Fax: (225) 922-0014
http://www.dss.state.la.us/departments/os/Licensing_.html
Maine Department of Health and Human Services
Bureau of Child and Family Services
221 State Street, Station 11
Augusta, ME 04333
(207) 287-5060 or (207) 287-4139
Fax: (207) 287-5282
http://www.afamilyforme.org/foster.html
Maryland Department of Human Resources
311 W. Saratoga Street
Baltimore, MD 21201
(410) 767-7382
Fax: (410) 333-0566
http://www.dhr.state.md.us/ssa/privadop.htm
Massachusetts Department of Early Education and Care
Central Office
600 Washington Street, Suite 6100
Boston, MA 02211
(617) 988-6600
http://www.eec.state.ma.us
Michigan Department of Human Services
Office of Child and Adult Licensing
262
Directory of Organizations

7109 W. Saginaw
P.O. Box 30650
Lansing, MI 48909
(517) 335-6124
Fax: (517) 335-6121
http://www.cis.state.mi.us/brs_cwl/sr_cwl.asp
Minnesota Department of Human Services
Division of Licensing
Human Services Building
444 Lafayette Road North
St. Paul, MN 55155
(651) 296-3971
Fax: (651) 297-1490
Mississippi Department of Human Services
Division of Family and Children Services
750 N. State Street
Jackson, MS 39202
(601) 359-4599 or (601) 359-4656
Missouri Division of Family Services
Department of Social Services
P.O. Box 88
Jefferson City, MO 65103
(573) 751-4247
http://www.dnss.mo.gov
Montana Department of Public Health and Human Services
P.O. Box 8005
Helena, MT 59604
(406) 444-5919
Fax: (406) 444-5956
http://www.dphhs.mt.gov
Nebraska Department of Health and Human Services
Child and Family Services Division
301 Centennial Mall South
P.O. Box 95044
Lincoln, NE 68509
(402) 471-9331
State Offices
263

Fax: (402) 471-9034
http://www.hhs.state.ne.us/chs/adp/adpindex.htm
Nevada Department of Human Services
Division of Child and Family Services
4220 S. Maryland Parkway
Building B, Suite 300
Las Vegas, NV 89119
(702) 486-7633
Fax: (702) 486-7626
http://www.dcfs.state.nv.us/DCFS_Adoption.htm
New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services
Division of Children, Youth, and Families
129 Pleasant Street
Brown Building
Concord, NH 03301
(603) 271-4711
Fax: (603) 271-4729
http://www.dhhs.state.nh.us/DHHS/FCADOPTION/default.htm
New Jersey Department of Human Services
Office of Licensing—Youth and Family Licensing
P.O. Box 707
Trenton, NJ 08625
(609) 987-1985
http://www.state.nj.us/humanservices/adoption/resource/
frame.html
New Mexico Department of Children, Youth, and Families
PERA Building
P.O. Drawer 5160
Santa Fe, NM 87502
(505) 476-0343
Fax: (505) 827-8480
http://www.cyfd.org
New York State Office of Children and Family Services
Riverview Center, Sixth Floor
52 Washington Street
Rensselaer, NY 12144
264
Directory of Organizations

(800) 345-5437 or (518) 474-9406
Fax: (518) 486-6326
http://www.ocfs.state.ny.us/adopt/agcymenu.asp
North Carolina Division of Social Services
Regulatory and Licensing Services
932 Old U.S. 70 Highway, Building 17–Black Mountain Center
Black Mountain, NC 28711
(828) 669-3388
Fax: (828) 669-3365
North Dakota Department of Human Services
Children and Family Services Division
State Capitol, Department 325
Bismarck, ND 58505
(800) 245-3736 or (701) 328-4805
Fax: (701) 328-3538
http://www.staate.nd.us/humanservices/services/childfam-
ily/adoption
Ohio Department of Job and Family Services
Office for Children and Families
255 E. Main Street, Third Floor
Columbus, OH 43215
(614) 466-1213
Fax: (614) 466-6185
http://jfs.ohio.gov/oap/index.htm
Oklahoma Department of Human Services
Division of Child Care
P.O. Box 25352
2400 N. Lincoln Boulevard
Oklahoma City, OK 73125
(800) 347-2276 or (405) 521-3561
Oregon Department of Human Services
Treatment Services and Licensing Unit
500 Summer Street NE, E83
Salem, OR 97310
(503) 947-5140
Fax: (503) 947-5084
State Offices
265

http://www.dhs.state.org.us/children/adoption/inadoptions/l
icensedag.htm
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare
Office of Children, Youth, and Families
P.O. Box 2675
Harrisburg, PA 17105
(717) 705-2908
Fax: (717) 346-9663
http://www.dpw.state.pa.us/Child/AdoptionFosterCare
Puerto Rico Department of the Families
P.O. Box 11398
Santurce, PR 00910
(787) 722-7450
Fax: (787) 723-1223
Rhode Island Department of Children, Youth, and Families
101 Friendship Street, Fourth Floor
Providence, RI 02906
(401) 528-3605
Fax: (401) 528-3650
http://www.dcyf.ri.gov/licensing.htm
South Carolina Department of Social Services
1535 Confederate Avenue
P.O. Box 1520
Columbia, SC 29202
(803) 898-7254
http://www.state.sc.us/dss/adoption/index.html
South Dakota Department of Social Services
Child Protection Services
700 Governor’s Drive
Pierre, SD 57501
(605) 773-3227
Fax: (605) 773-6834
http://www.state.sd.us/social/cps/services/licensing.htm
District Office
Division of Child Protective Services
811 E. Tenth Street, Department 10
Sioux Falls, SD 57103
266
Directory of Organizations

(605) 367-5600
Fax: (605) 782-3149
http://www.state.sd.us/social/cps/services/licensing.htm
Tennessee Department of Children’s Services
1272 Foster Avenue
Nashville, TN 37210
(865) 594-2836
http://www.state.tn.us/youth
Texas Department of Family and Protective Services
P.O. Box 149030, E-550
Austin, TX 78714
(512) 438-3269
Fax: (512) 438-3848
http://www.dfps.state.tx.us
Utah Department of Human Services
Office of Licensing
120 N. 200 West, #303
Salt Lake City, UT 84103
(801) 538-4242
Fax: (801) 538-4553
http://www.hslic.utah.gov
Vermont Department for Children and Families
103 S. Main Street
Waterbury, VT 05671
(802) 241-2159
http://www.projectfamilyvt.org/adoption.html
Virgin Islands Department of Human Services
1303 Hospital Ground
Building A–Knud Hansen Complex
St. Thomas, VI 00802
(340) 774-0930, ext. 4243
Fax: (340) 774-0082
Virginia Department of Social Services
7 N. Eighth Street
Richmond, VA 23219
(804) 726-7137
http://www.dss.virginia.gov/family/ap/index.html
State Offices
267

Washington Department of Social and Health Services
Division of Licensed Resources
P.O. Box 45700
Olympia, WA 98504
(360) 902-7967
West Virginia Department of Health and Human Resources
Bureau for Children and Families
350 Capitol Street, Room 691
Charleston, WV 25301
(304) 558-8839
Fax: (304) 558-4563
Wisconsin Department of Health and Family Services
Bureau of Regulation and Licensing
1 W. Wilson Street
P.O. Box 8916
Madison, WI 53708
(608) 266-0415
Fax: (608) 267-7252
http://www.dhfs.state.wi.us/licensing.htm
Wyoming Department of Family Services
851 Werner Court, Suite 200
Casper, WY 82601
(307) 473-3924
Fax: (307) 473-3967
http://dfsweb.state.wy.us/certlist.htm
The Child Welfare Information Gateway assisted in the prepara-
tion of these listings.
268
Directory of Organizations

8
Selected Print and 
Nonprint Resources
T
he list of resources on adoption topics (of which the following
is only a part) seems never-ending. This “wealth” may be the
result of the various perspectives (e.g., birth parent, adoptive
parent, adopted person), programs (e.g., domestic infant, special
needs/older, intercountry), and methods (e.g., open, closed) from
which adoption can be viewed. The following selective list in-
cludes both recent information and classic/historical works.
In this chapter, students of adoption will find a listing of
books, journals, websites, videos/DVDs, CD-ROMs, software,
and databases having to do with adoption.
Books
For ease of locating information, books are listed in alphabetical
order by subject in the following categories: Adopted Persons, At-
tachment/Bonding, Birth Parents, Communication/Understand-
ing, Controversy, Infant Adoption, General, Infertility, Intercoun-
try/International, Open Adoption, Special Adoptive Parent
Categories/Special Needs Children/Older/From Foster Care/
and Transracial/Transcultural. Most of the books are still in print;
a few are out of print but readily available.
269

Adopted Persons
Fisher, Florence. The Search for Anna Fisher. New York: Fawcett
Books, l986. 224 pages.
This is the story of a woman’s twenty-year search to find her birth
parents, which culminated in the founding of a national organi-
zation for adopted persons, the Adoptees’ Liberty Movement As-
sociation.
Lifton, Betty Jean. Journey of the Adopted Self: A Quest for
Wholeness. New York: Basic Books, 1994. 336 pages.
In trying to explain the psychological complexity of being
adopted, Lifton pleads for more openness in the adoption process.
She uses the phrase cumulative adoption trauma to explain the “in-
jury” and attempts (sometimes unhealthy) that the adopted per-
son may make to justify his or her existence and identity.
Lifton, Betty Jean. Lost and Found: The Adoption Experience, rev.
ed. New York: Harper and Row, 1988. 320 pages.
Lifton has written this book for adoptees and “brave new babies,”
those conceived with the help of the latest reproductive technolo-
gies. With real-life stories from adopted persons,  the author con-
tinues the quest begun in her earlier book to answer such ques-
tions as: Who is my real mother? Who is my real father? Who is
the authentic mother or father? Although most people consider
themselves alienated from others in some ways, the author con-
siders an adopted person “cut off” from others in many ways and
“different” from the nonadopted person.
Lifton, Betty Jean. Twice Born: Memoirs of an Adopted Daughter,
rev. ed. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1998. 288 pages.
Lifton describes her life as an adopted person: her doubts, ques-
tions, and fantasies; her search and reunion; and her anger about
the closed adoption process.
Paton, Jean. The Adopted Break Silence: Forty Men and Women
Describe Their Search for Their Natural Parents. Philadelphia:
Life History Study Center, 1954. 
270
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

The author began this classic work by publishing a notice in the
Saturday Review of Literature: “Were you adopted before 1932?
Your experience may assist research in adoption from the point
of view of the experienced adult.” Paton, an adopted person her-
self, was one of the first to realize that adults who have been
adopted not only have something to say but also have unfin-
ished business.
Attachment/Bonding 
Bowlby, John. Attachment. 3 vols. New York: Basic Books, 1983.
464 pages.
Bowlby’s classic trilogy (Attachment, 1969; Separation, 1973; and
Loss, 1980) addresses the role attachment (or the lack of it) plays
in the life of any child. In commemoration of its fiftieth year, Basic
Books reissued a selection of the most influential and distin-
guished books by its authors. John Bowlby’s trilogy focuses on
the mother-child bond and what happens when it is broken (for
one reason or another). In this new edition, Allen Schore, a neu-
robiologist/attachment theorist, shows how the recent research
validates many of Bowlby’s ideas.
Eyer, Diane E. Mother-Infant Bonding: A Scientific Fiction. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992. 237 pages.
The author disputes widely held beliefs about maternal-infant
bonding. Eyer claims that research on goats, who reject their ba-
bies if separated from them after birth, is not necessarily applica-
ble to humans. She seeks to relieve the guilt of women who for
reasons such as adoption, maternal illness, or infant prematurity
cannot spend the requisite amount of “bonding” time with their
infants.
Gray, Deborah D. Attaching in Adoption: Practical Tools for
Today’s Parents. Indianapolis, IN: Perspectives Press, 2002. 400
pages.
This book provides practical tips for dealing with the challenges
presented by children who have to leave one home (e.g., a birth
parent’s, a foster family’s, or an orphanage) and adjust to another.
Books
271

James, Beverly. Handbook for Treatment of Attachment-Trauma
Problems in Children. New York: Free Press, 1994. 290 pages.
James discusses how to assess attachment difficulties and how to
treat them. She describes the role of trauma in attachment disor-
ders, gives a “brief treatise” against coercive therapies, and in-
cludes chapters on dynamic play therapy. She ends by suggesting
to prospective adoptive parents that if they do not want the “ride
of their life,” they should consider getting a pet instead of a child.
Those who have “been there” with attachment-disordered chil-
dren may find themselves nodding in recognition at the case his-
tories added (by thirty-five contributors) to the text of this book.
Welch, Martha G. Holding Time. New York: Simon and Schuster,
1989. 254 pages. 
Written by a psychiatrist who specializes in attachment, the
book’s central message is that regular sessions of mother-child
holding decrease anger, conflict, temper tantrums, and sibling ri-
valry while increasing self-esteem, self-confidence, and content-
ment in infants through the preteen years.
Birth Parents
Collins, Pauline. Letter to Louise: The Story of the Daughter She
Gave for Adoption More Than Twenty-Five Years Ago. New York:
HarperCollins, 1992. 224 pages. (Also available on audiocassette.)
British actress Pauline Collins (Upstairs Downstairs) relinquished
her daughter for adoption in 1964. This is the story of the next
twenty-two years, ending in a happy reunion.
Fessler, Ann. The Girls Who Went Away: The Hidden History of
Women Who Surrendered Children for Adoption in the Decades
before Roe v. Wade. New York: Penguin Press, 2006. 355 pages.
Through an audio and video installation project, Ann Fessler
began interviewing women who had made an adoption plan for
their children. (Fessler is a professor of photography at the Rhode
Island School of Design.) The book is filled with anecdotes and
true stories of women caught up in a “revolution” in which birth
272
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

control was restricted and abortion was illegal in many states. At
the same time, in those post–World War II years, families
shunned single pregnant women, schools expelled them, and
they were sent away to “maternity homes” to have their babies,
where they were told that “surrendering” their babies was their
best option and that they would soon “forget.” But they didn’t
forget; the majority of the women Fessler interviewed were
haunted by their loss for the rest of their lives. An adopted person
herself, Fessler ends the book with her own successful search for
her birth mother.
Finnegan, Joanne. Shattered Dreams—Lonely Choices: Birthpar-
ents of Babies with Disabilities Talk about Adoption. Westport,
CT: Bergin and Garvey, 1993. 183 pages.
The author shares her personal experiences (giving birth to a
baby with Down syndrome), the process of “making a plan,” and
life after the decision. She includes stories of others with similar
experiences.
Gritter, James L. Lifegivers: Framing the Birthparent Experience
in Open Adoption. Washington, D.C.: Child Welfare League of
America, 2000. 
Although this is a book about open adoption, it is also a book
about birth parents. Society tends to either ignore birth parents or
marginalize them, Gritter writes. A strong advocate of open adop-
tion, Gritter gets into the minds and emotions of birth parents and
says that children’s interests are best served when birth parents
and adoptive parents work together to keep birth parents part of
the children’s lives.
Perkins, Ann, and Rita Townsend. Bitter Fruit: Women’s Experi-
ences of Unplanned Pregnancy, Abortion, and Adoption.
Alameda, CA: Hunter House, 1992. 286 pages.
This is a collection of true stories (some in poetry) of women “in
a bind,” forced to make what appears to be at the time a no-win
decision. Perkins and Townsend allow the women—some now
grandmothers, some still very young—to speak for themselves
about what it means to face an unwanted pregnancy.
Books
273

Communication/Understanding 
Keefer, Betsy. Tell the Truth to Your Adopted or Foster Child:
Making Sense of the Past. Westport, CT: Bergin and Garvey, 2000.
256 pages.
Most parents today understand the importance of telling the
truth to children. As hard as that rule may be to live by, foster and
adoptive parents must also tell the truth to all of their children—
biological, foster, or adoptive—even if the truth is confusing,
complicated, and/or painful. Various chapters discuss principles
and strategies for telling the truth, as well as communication with
adolescents and talking to the child’s teachers. The book also
presents developmental stages, useful to know when trying to
figure out what to say and when. (The authors are both training
consultants in human services.)
Kumar, Miriam. Communicating with the Adopted Child. Lin-
coln, NE: iUniverse, 1978. 300 pages.
With assistance help of stories and anecdotes, the author tries to
help adoptive parents understand the meanings behind an
adopted child’s words and actions. In addition, she points out
how adoption colors ongoing events in a child’s life, such as dis-
cipline, independence, and sexuality.
Lanchon, Anne. All About Adoption: How to Deal with the
Questions of Your Past. New York: Amulet Books, 2006. 104
pages.
Anyone who is a teenager or who wonders what a teen may be
thinking about adoption would likely learn something from this
book, originally published in French. With lively illustrations by
Monike Czarnecki and edited by Tucker Shaw, the book tackles
common and not-so-common questions young people may have,
such as “Who am I?” and “Where did I come from?”
Riley, Debbie, with John Meeks, MD. Beneath the Mask: Under-
standing Adopted Teens: Case Studies and Treatment Considera-
tions for Therapists and Parents. Silver Spring, MD: CASE Pub-
lications, 2005. 260 pages.
274
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Being a teenager can be difficult, but adding adoption issues to
the mix can be hard on parents and children alike. Issues such as
rejection, depression, and identity confusion arise, and help is
needed. The authors give clinical examples and case studies that
show how professionals can work successfully with parents and
their children.
Watkins, Mary, and Susan Fisher. Talking with Young Children
About Adoption, rev. ed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
1995. 270 pages.
The authors, both adoptive parents, believe that to communicate
effectively with young children, the adults must do some psy-
chological work first. Knowing how to interpret past and current
research is an important first step. The bulk of the book gives ac-
counts of conversations between adoptive parents and their chil-
dren regarding adoption. The book also documents changes in
adoption practices and how these changes affect adoptive parents
and their children.
Controversy
Bartholet, Elizabeth. Family Bonds: Adoption and the Politics of
Parenting. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1994. 276 pages.
Considered controversial by some, this book takes a careful look
at adoption policies that leave waiting children without parents
and waiting parents without children. The author discusses infer-
tility treatments and surrogate parenting, as well as transracial
and transnational families, single and same-sex parents, and
older parents.
Cahn, Naomi, and Joan H. Hollinger. Families by Law: An Adop-
tion Reader. New York University Press, 2004. 282 pages.
The authors cover much diverse ground in this volume, which
presents various perspectives on adoption law and practice. In-
cluded is a historical overview of adoption in American law and
society. The authors then explore “new frontiers” in adoption,
such as transracial and intercountry adoption, the adoption of
children with special needs, adoption by same-sex couples, a
Books
275

trend toward openness with records, and continued postadoption
contact between birth families and adoptive families. Not omitted
is a presentation of the relationship between adoption and as-
sisted reproductive technologies, as well as feminist, economic,
and philosophical perspectives on adoption. Also included are
statutes and legal cases, statements from advocacy organizations,
and a great deal of information about contemporary controver-
sies in adoption.
Dudley, William, ed. Issues in Adoption: Current Controversies.
Farmington Hills, MI: Greenhaven Press, 2004. 208 pages.
Various experts on “both sides of the question” explore such is-
sues as “Should adoption be encouraged?” “Does America’s
adoption system need more government regulation?” “Should
adoptees be given open access to adoption and birth records?”
and “Should adoption by gays and lesbians be permitted?”
Harnack, Andrew, ed. Adoption: Opposing Viewpoints. San
Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press, 1995. 306 pages.
As part of the Opposing Viewpoints series, this book offers chap-
ters from adoption writers and experts such as Elizabeth Bartholet,
Annette Baran, Reuben Pannor, Arthur Sorosky, and Kenneth Wat-
son. It also presents opinions from organizations such as the North
American Council on Adoptable Children and Concerned United
Birthparents. Some of the subjects that elicit differing viewpoints
are: “Should the orphanage system be reestablished?” “Should in-
tercountry adoptions be discouraged?” “Should transracial adop-
tion be forbidden?” and “Is an open adoption policy best?”
Liptak, Karen. Adoption Controversies. Danbury, CT: Franklin
Watts, 1993. 160 pages.
There are at least two sides to every story. This book provides
those two sides in relation to such issues as search and reunion,
which may be faced by all members of the adoption triad—birth
parents, adoptive parents, and adopted children.
Pertman, Adam. Adoption Nation: How the Adoption Revolution
Is Transforming America. New York: Basic Books, 2000. 349 pages.
276
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

As executive director of the Evan B. Donaldson Adoption Insti-
tute, Pertman knows his subject from a professional viewpoint.
He also understands it from the viewpoint of an adoptive parent;
he and his wife have two adopted children. Although this book is
packed with historical facts, it does not shrink from current con-
troversies. Pertman’s book advocates for reforms in confusing
and sometimes conflicting rules, regulations, and laws. He looks
at adoption from the perspective of birth parents, adoptive par-
ents, and children. He examines international, transracial, do-
mestic infant, and special needs adoption, as well as adoption by
same-sex couples and single persons. Pertman’s message is that
adoption touches much of society, not just the 80 million Ameri-
cans with adoption in their immediate families. Adoption today
is a revolution that is transforming society.
Smith, Jerome. The Realities of Adoption. Lanham, MD: Madison
Books, 1997. 158 pages.
Acknowledging that the adoption of a child can be a joyous ex-
perience, the author (a former professor of social work and the fa-
ther of two adopted children) discusses the many controversies in
adoption. Smith tackles such issues as openness in adoption, chil-
dren’s rights, the role of the birth father, and transracial adoption.
He uses case examples, including the Baby Jessica case in which
he was an evaluator of the parent-child bond.
Infant Adoption
Adamec, Christine. There Are Babies to Adopt: A Resource Guide
for Prospective Parents, rev. ed. New York: Citadel Press, 2002.
288 pages.
This book covers territory for all adoptive parents but focuses on
adopting infants and young children. Information for U.S. fami-
lies living overseas who want to adopt as well as use of the Inter-
net in an adoption process are useful sections not always in-
cluded in other books.
Johnston, Patricia I. Launching a Baby’s Adoption: Practical
Strategies for Parents and Professionals. Indianapolis, IN: Per-
spectives Press, 1998. 257 pages.
Books
277

Written for single parents as well as for couples, this book covers
everything the new adoptive parents of an infant need to know—
the extended family’s reactions, society’s reactions, how to en-
courage bonding and attachment, the impact of infertility, the re-
lationship with birth parents, and much more.
General
Adamec, Christine A. Complete Idiot’s Guide: Adoption, 2nd ed.
New York: Penguin Group, 2005. 432 pages.
This comprehensive resource (updated) includes new listings for
adoptive parent support groups, adoption attorneys, adoption
agencies, and adoption publications. It also includes information
on cyber adoption, financial considerations in adoption, and the
latest in adoption laws.
Adamec, Christine A. The Encyclopedia of Adoption, 3rd ed.
New York: Facts on File, 2006. 432 pages.
From A (abandonment) to Z (zygote adoption) the author, an
adoptive parent herself, includes entries on every conceivable
adoption topic, including a history of adoption.
Beauvais-Godwin, Laura, and Raymond Godwin. The Complete
Adoption Book: Everything You Need to Know to Adopt a Child,
3rd ed. Avon, MA: Adams Media, 2005. 690 pages.
The expertise of an adoption agency director joins with that of an
adoption attorney to provide adoption professionals and those
who wish to adopt with a comprehensive range of information
about the adoption process. The stories of experienced adoptive
parents add to the updated information regarding court/legal
processes and the latest resources.
Blau, Eric. Stories of Adoption: Loss and Reunion. Portland, OR:
New Sage Press, 1994. 132 pages.
With black-and-white photographs and first-person accounts of
adoption, this book is similar to How It Feels to Be Adopted, by Jill
Krementz. Unlike Krementz’s book, which explores feelings
about adoption from the perspective of children, this volume ex-
278
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

plores the viewpoints of adults—adopted persons, adoptive par-
ents, and birth parents.
Bothun, Linda. Dialogues about Adoption: Conversations be-
tween Parents and Their Children. Chevy Chase, MD: Swan Pub-
lications, 1994. 216 pages.
This book uses true-life conversations in a chapter for each devel-
opmental stage of the adopted child’s life to illustrate questions
the children may ask. Sometimes there is no “pat” answer, but par-
ents will find support and good ideas in other parents’ answers.
Bothun, Linda. When Friends Ask about Adoption: A Question
and Answer Guide for Non-Adoptive Parents and Other Caring
Adults. Chevy Chase, MD: Swan Publications, 1996. 96 pages.
Questions and answers for friends, relatives, neighbors, teachers,
coaches, counselors, and others who are friends of the adoptive
family fill the pages of this book.
Brodzinsky, David M., and Marshall D. Schechter, eds. The Psy-
chology of Adoption. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
416 pages.
Adoption cuts across many disciplines (social work, psychology,
psychiatry, sociology, special education, and the legal system, to
name a few); the editors bring together thirty experts to discuss
theory, research, clinical issues, and social policy as they relate to
adoption. One question the book raises is this: Are adopted per-
sons more vulnerable to emotional difficulties than those who
have not been adopted? If so, what is the reason or reasons? The
book may be of interest to adoptive parents, psychologists and
psychiatrists, social workers, and other social service providers.
Brodzinsky, David M., Marshall D. Schechter, and Robin M.
Henig. Being Adopted: The Lifelong Search for Self. New York:
Doubleday, 1993. 224 pages.
The authors use anecdotes from adopted persons to explore the
effects of adoption throughout the life cycle. Erik Erikson’s seven
stages of life serve as a focus for observations having to do with
the ways adoption affects a person’s life and relationships.
Books
279

Canape, Charlene. Adoption: Parenthood without Pregnancy,
rev. ed. New York: Avon Books, 1988. 320 pages.
The author says it took seven years to write this book because it
took that long for her to become a mother by adoption. Starting
with infertility and its heartbreak, the book ends with ideas for
improving the adoption process. In between are chapters on the
search for an agency, the adoption process itself, and various cat-
egories of adoption, such as independent adoption, intercountry
adoption, the adoption of older children and those with special
needs, and adoption by single parents.
Fahlberg, Vera I., MD. A Child’s Journey through Placement. In-
dianapolis, IN: Perspectives Press, 1991. 432 pages.
With abundant case examples, the author attempts to show how
attachment develops, what normal child development consists of,
and some of the effects of separation and loss. Dr. Fahlberg sug-
gests ways to minimize the trauma of children’s moves in the
child welfare system. Subsequent chapters look at children’s com-
mon behavior problems and their coping skills. Fahlberg includes
a section on the “life book,” which is a pictorial and written rep-
resentation of a child’s life history.
Gilman, Lois. The Adoption Resource Book: All the Things You
Need to Know and Ought to Know about Creating an Adoptive
Family, 4th ed. New York: Morrow/Avon, 1998. 592 pages.
This edition is a comprehensive guide to all types of adopting, in-
cluding agency and independent adoption, intercountry adop-
tion, special needs adoption, and open adoption. It features a
state-by-state guide to agencies and a discussion about raising an
adopted child with all of the necessary adjustments.
Kirk, H. David. Adoptive Kinship: A Modern Institution in Need
of Reform, rev. ed. Port Angeles, WA: Ben-Simon Publications,
1985. 200 pages.
The culmination of three decades of research, Kirk bases Adoptive
Kinship on his earlier pioneering work, Shared Fate. This later book
attempts to prove that some of the difficulties of adoptive family
280
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

life are caused by mistaken laws and administrative practices. For
example, “Why can’t adopted siblings marry?” is one of the fas-
cinating questions this book poses.
Kirk, H. David. Shared Fate: A Theory and Method of Adoptive
Relationships, rev. ed. Brentwood Bay, BC: Ben-Simon Publica-
tions, 1984. 215 pages.
This classic book studies family relationships from a sociologi-
cal/psychological point of view. To fully appreciate Kirk’s contri-
bution, it helps to realize that before this book’s publication,
people considered families by birth and those formed by adop-
tion to be basically the same. Kirk points out that there are differ-
ences, and that those who acknowledge the differences are likely
to have a more successful adjustment than those who don’t.
Kruger, Pamela, and Jill Smolowe, eds. A Love Like No Other.
New York: Penguin Group, 2006. 272 pages.
Some well-known and other not-so-well known adoptive parents
discuss their parenting experiences with the children placed in
their families through adoption. These are not “pie-in-the-sky”
stories with fairy-tale endings, but stories of real life by twenty es-
sayists who have “been there.”
McColm, Michelle. Adoption Reunions: A Book for Adoptees,
Birth Parents, and Adoptive Families. Toronto: Second Story
Press, 1993.
McColm, an adoptee from Canada, gives advice on searching for
birth families and what to do after the reunion. She is nonjudg-
mental as she considers the feelings of each member of the adop-
tion triad.
Melina, Lois R. Making Sense of Adoption: A Parent’s Guide.
New York: HarperPerennial, 1989. 288 pages.
This book for adoptive families gives helpful tips on how, when,
and what to say when children ask the inevitable questions about
adoption. It includes situations, role-plays, conversations, and ac-
tivities not only for families formed by traditional adoption but
Books
281

also for those formed by in vitro fertilization, donor insemination,
and surrogacy. Melina maintains that children conceived through
such methods as donor insemination share issues and questions
with those adopted in more “traditional” ways.
Melina, Lois R. Raising Adopted Children: A Manual for Adop-
tive Parents. New York: HarperPerennial, 1986. 288 pages.
This handbook for adoptive parents gives practical advice on
such topics as adjustment, attachment, talking with children
about adoption, dealing with sexuality, and coping with adoles-
cents, birth relatives, and behavior problems.
Mewshaw, Michael. If You Could See Me Now: AChronicle of Iden-
tity and Adoption. Denver: Unbridled Books, 2006. 225 pages.
In this memoir, Michael Mewshaw, a travel writer, novelist, and
investigative reporter, tells the story of a quest for identity and an
obsession with the past. In a look at the culture of the early 1960s,
he tells of his involvement in a baby’s birth and adoption and,
years later, in her search for her biological parents.
O’Halloran, Kerry. The Politics of Adoption: International Per-
spectives on Law, Policy, and Practice. New York: Springer, 2006.
334 pages.
This scholarly work provides a comparative analysis of adoption
law, policy, and practices in England, Wales, Ireland, the United
States, and Australia. It explores both intercountry adoption and
open adoption.
O’Hanlon, Tim, and Rita Laws. Adoption Digest: Stories of Joy,
Loss, and the Journey. Westport, CT: Bergin and Garvey, 2001. 216
pages.
These stories illustrate the saying that adoption is a life-long
process that changes the lives of those involved. The narrative
tells of young children and older ones, their families, and the pro-
fessionals who work with them. Written for anyone who has
worked in adoption, who has been adopted, who has thought of
adopting, or has adopted.
282
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Rosenberg, Elinor B. The Children and Their Families through the
Years, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: DIANE Publishing, 2000. 209 pages.
Rosenberg uses case examples to show what adoption means to
all members of the adoption triad throughout the lifespan. She gives
examples in which the lives of birth parents, adoptive parents,
and children interact and affect each other, and gives practical ad-
vice on how to handle conflicts if they arise. A distinctive feature
of the book is the outline of developmental tasks for each mem-
ber of the triad.
Schooler, Jayne, and Betsie Norris. Journeys after Adoption: Un-
derstanding Lifelong Issues. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publish-
ing, 2002. 312 pages.
With help from birth parents, adoptive parents, and adopted per-
sons, the authors explore lifelong issues in adoption such as
search, reunion, and postreunion. From these triad members, in-
sights arise about the joys and pains and concerns of anyone who
has a connection with adoption.
Siegel, Stephanie E. Parenting Your Adopted Child: A Complete
and Loving Guide, 2nd ed. SES Publishers, 1997. 242 pages.
The author, a family therapist and mother of three adopted chil-
dren and one birth child, begins the book with a couple’s discov-
ery of infertility and a decision to adopt. She tackles the stages of
a child’s life and the ways parents can help guide their children.
Next, she deals with identity issues that are certain to arise in the
adopted child’s teenage years. Finally, she touches on relation-
ships and concerns about birth parents, as well as how it feels to
be a grandparent.
Smith, Eve P., and Lisa A. Merkel-Holguin, eds. A History of
Child Welfare. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1996.
313 pages.
The chapters that make up this book were originally published in
the January/February 1995 issue of Child Welfare, a special vol-
ume commemorating the Child Welfare League of America’s sev-
enty-fifth anniversary. Themes recycle throughout history, say the
editors, and society is currently experiencing a recurrence of the
Books
283

social and economic conditions that lead to child abuse, neglect,
and out-of-home care. Chapter titles include “Factors and Events
Leading to the Passage of the Indian Child Welfare Act,” “Adop-
tion and Disclosure of Family Information: A Historical Perspec-
tive,” “From Family Duty to Family Policy: The Evolution of Kin-
ship Care,” “A History of Placing-Out: The Orphan Trains,” and
“Bring Back the Orphanages? What Policymakers of Today Can
Learn from the Past.”
Infertility
Bartholet, Elizabeth. Family Bonds: Adoption, Infertility, and the
New World of Child Production. Boston: Beacon Press, 1999. 286
pages.
Explores how adoption and treatments for infertility fit together.
While fertility treatments are expensive, increasingly complex,
and often frustrating, children are waiting to be adopted.
Johnston, Patricia I. Adopting after Infertility. Indianapolis, IN:
Perspectives Press, 1992. 320 pages.
For couples with infertility problems, this book provides a guide
through three stages of the adoption process. Part One (The Chal-
lenge) explores the losses that accompany infertility. Part Two
(The Commitment) discusses decisions and choices. Part Three
(Adoption through a Lifetime) presents ongoing issues for adop-
tive parents and their children.
Intercountry/International
Alperson, Myra. The International Adoption Handbook: How to
Make an Overseas Adoption Work for You. New York: Henry
Holt, 1997. 208 pages.
The author, who has adopted from China, focuses on procedural
issues in adopting from that country as well as intercountry
adoption procedures when adopting from Eastern Europe or
Latin America. The book provides information on useful re-
sources and interviews from adoptive families.
Dodds, Peter F. Outer Search/Inner Journey: An Orphan and
284
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Adoptee’s Quest. Puyallup, WA: Aphrodite Publishing, 1997. 280
pages.
This is a story of an international adoption but also a story of a
search. The author, adopted at age three from Germany by an
American couple, describes his lifelong search for a sense of iden-
tity. Returning to his country of birth to find his birth mother
proves disappointing. His conclusion is not supportive of inter-
country adoption.
Erichsen, Jean, and Heino R. Erichsen. Butterflies in the Wind:
Spanish-Indian Children with White Parents. The Woodlands,
TX: Los Ninos International Adoption Center, 1992. 355 pages.
This is one family’s story involving the adoptions of Rosana and
Tatiana, infant twins from Colombia, and later of Omar at age
nine from the same country. Through their own story, the authors
offer tips to others wanting to adopt from Latin America.
Erichsen, Jean, and Heino R. Erichsen. Butterflies in the Wind:
The Truth about Latin American Adoptions. Lincoln, NE: iUni-
verse, 2004. 387 pages.
This book follows the Erichsens’ children into young adulthood.
Although told from the point of view of the parents, the authors
explore the emotions of the young people and what they have to
face in and out of school, including culture clashes, gang prob-
lems, and school dropout.
Erichsen, Jean, and Heino R. Erichsen. How to Adopt Interna-
tionally: A Guide for Agency Direct and Independent Adoptions,
rev. ed. Fort Worth: Mesa House Publishing, 2003. 296 pages.
The authors take readers through every phase of the intercountry
adoption process, from choosing an agency to adjusting to a life
changed by a child. The book covers possible costs and provides
samples of forms and documents. This updated version provides
in-depth information on laws and requirements for adopting in
sixty-eight countries. In addition it provides Internet addresses
for use in finding sites for various necessary forms, how to con-
tact an embassy, finding country-specific adoption support
groups, and travel information.
Books
285

Miller, Laurie C. The Handbook of International Adoption Medi-
cine: A Guide for Physicians, Parents, and Providers. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2004. 464 pages.
This book gives an overview of specialized medical and develop-
mental conditions that may affect children adopted from other
countries. In addition to serving as a guide for physicians, it of-
fers advice and support to adoptive families before and after the
adoption. The text gives information on how to perform an initial
assessment of the new child and how to manage special develop-
mental issues if they arise.
Register, Cheri. Beyond Good Intentions: A Mother Reflects on
Raising Internationally Adopted Children. St. Paul, MN: Yeong
and Yeong, 2005. 183 pages.
This is a collection of essays about the joys and risks of raising
children adopted internationally. Each essay begins with an exag-
gerated version of words or practices adoptive families often use
that may not serve their best interests or those of the children. Ex-
amples are “believing adoption saves souls,” “ judging our coun-
try superior,” and “believing race doesn’t matter.” One of the au-
thor’s goals is to help readers look at practices that they may not
previously have questioned.
Reid, Theresa. Two Little Girls: A Memoir of Adoption. New
York: Berkeley Books, 2006. 297 pages.
The author, who spent years working with abused and neglected
children, tells the story of Natalie and Lana and their entry into
the Reid family, as well as the “before” and the “after.” Infertility,
decisions to adopt, and “adventures” in orphanages in Russia
and Ukraine are among the topics discussed. 
Open Adoption
Caplan, Lincoln. An Open Adoption. New York: Houghton Mif-
flin, 1991. 160 pages.
As a personal history, this book tells of one couple’s experience
with open adoption. It also includes a history of the open adop-
tion movement. Included are aspects of the debate over how
286
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

much adoptive families and birth parents should know about
each other.
Gritter, James L. The Spirit of Open Adoption. Washington, DC:
Child Welfare League of America, 1997. 314 pages.
After showing that children of open adoption have done well, the
author decries the apparent growth of commercialism in infant
adoption. He is concerned about the high costs that threaten to
turn infant adoption from a professional service into a high-
priced business. Unlike many other books on adoption, this one
deals with spiritual and philosophical questions.
Gritter, James L., ed. Adoption without Fear. San Antonio, TX:
Corona Publishing, 1989. 176 pages.
Seventeen families tell of their experiences with open adoption.
Melina, Lois, and Sharon K. Roszia. The Open Adoption Experi-
ence: A Complete Guide for Adoptive and Birth Families—From
Making the Decision through the Child’s Growing Years. New
York: HarperPerennial, 1993. 416 pages.
This comprehensive guide begins with an explanation of the con-
cept of open adoption and the reasons the authors believe it
works. The two adoption veterans then take the reader through
the stages of an open adoption—before, during, and after the
birth—then on through the adopted child’s adolescent years.
Rappaport, Bruce M. The Open Adoption Book: A Guide to Mak-
ing Adoption Work for You, 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and
Sons, 1998. 208 pages.
In this updated version of an earlier classic, Rappaport, founder
of the Independent Adoption Center in California, discusses the
reasons for open adoption and the ways in which birth parents
and adoptive parents can develop positive relationships.
Sorosky, Arthur D., Annette Baran, and Reuben Pannor. The
Adoption Triangle: Sealed or Open Records: How They Affect
Adoptees, Birth Parents and Adoptive Parents, 2nd ed. San An-
tonio, TX: Corona Publishing, 1989. 236 pages.
Books
287

This book, which sees adoption as a lifelong process, sounds a call
for more openness in adoption. The authors studied the particu-
lar needs of adult adoptees (e.g., issues such as search and re-
union), the long-term effects of relinquishment of a child on birth
parents, and the effects of sealed records on adoptive parents.
Stephenson, Mary. My Child Is a Mother: A True and Happy
Story of Open Adoption. San Antonio, TX: Corona Publishing,
1994. 253 pages.
This is the true story of a young woman’s unplanned pregnancy,
her decision to relinquish her child, and her experiences with
open adoption.
Special Adoptive Parent Categories
Bozett, Frederick W., ed. Gay and Lesbian Parents. New York:
Greenwood Publishing, 1987. 263 pages.
This book poses the following questions: Is homosexuality com-
patible with effective parenting? Can homosexuals establish
healthy family units? Does the sexual orientation of a parent af-
fect a child’s sexual orientation? Bozett presents answers to these
types of questions on many contemporary gay and lesbian par-
enthood issues. These include mental health considerations of
lesbian mothers, counseling gay husbands and fathers, legal is-
sues in gay and lesbian parenting, children of gay fathers, and
children of lesbian mothers. Chapter 6, “The Adoptive and Foster
Gay and Lesbian Parent,” will be of special interest to students of
adoption. In an epilogue, the editor discusses future perspectives
for gay and lesbian parents. Since Bozett edited this book, many
more authors and editors have weighed in on this subject. And
now that “the future” is here, Bozett’s observations are even more
interesting than they were when he wrote them.
Hauschild, Myra, and Pat Rosier. Get Used to It! Children of Gay
and Lesbian Parents. Christchurch, New Zealand: Canterbury
University Press, 1999. 128 pages.
The authors interviewed and photographed young people be-
tween the ages of fifteen and thirty-four, each of whom had
grown up with a gay or lesbian parent.
288
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Miller, Naomi. Single Parents by Choice: A Growing Trend in
Family Life. New York: Plenum Press, 1992. 239 pages.
In an objective manner, Miller examines the many ways single
persons, male as well as female, have chosen to be (or find them-
selves being) parents, not just in the United States but in countries
such as Sweden, Israel, and the United Kingdom. She describes
the joys and frustrations of single parenthood and raises the ques-
tion as to how children fare in single-parent families.
Morrissette, Mikki. Choosing Single Motherhood: The Thinking
Woman’s Guide. New York: Be-Mondo Publishing, 2005.
Morrissette calls women who choose to become parents on their
own “Choice Moms.” She estimates that more than 50,000 single
women choose each year to become mothers. For this book, she
interviewed more than one hundred of them. Domestic and in-
tercountry adoption are two of the options for single women who
want to become parents. Morrissette tries to answer as many of
their questions as possible. She also looks at the stereotype of sin-
gle mothers as “less able” to parent than married ones. She ob-
serves that studies showing single moms in a negative light are
often looking at women from “disrupted” relationships or very
young women. Morrissette also gives a history of the single
motherhood “movement.”
Varon, Lee. Adopting on Your Own: The Complete Guide to
Adopting as a Single Parent: A How-To for Single Parents. New
York: Farrar, Straus & Geroux, 2003. 432 pages.
This book covers the wide range of issues unmarried women and
men face when they want to adopt. Using exercises and actual ex-
periences, the book tries to answer the equally wide range of
questions these prospective parents might ask. The author, codi-
rector of the Adoption Network, an agency that helps single par-
ents adopt, attempts to help prospective singles decide if adop-
tion is the right choice for them and a good choice for their
prospective child.
Special Needs Children/Older/From Foster Care
Babb, L. Anne; Rita Laws; and Bruce I. Gudmundsson. Adopting
Books
289

and Advocating for the Special Needs Child: A Guide for Parents
and Professionals. Westport, CT: Bergen and Garvey, 1997. 280
pages.
The authors, adoptive parents of older special needs children, are
advocates for adoption who know whereof they speak. They
wrote the book because of a desire to help bridge the gap between
a prospective adoptive parent’s desire to help a waiting child and
the realities of the U.S. adoption system, which can be as frustrat-
ing as the child himself may be at times.
Barth, Richard P., David Brodzinsky, and Madelyn Freundlich,
eds. Adoption and Prenatal Alcohol and Drug Exposure: Re-
search, Policy, and Practice. Washington, D.C.: Child Welfare
League of America, 2000. 302 pages.
National and international experts in adoption and in the effects
of prenatal substance abuse contribute to this book, which adds
much to the understanding of the complexities of the subject.
The research section presents information about children ex-
posed to drugs, alcohol, or both, some of whom are being raised
by relatives. The bottom line is that all of these children and fam-
ilies need support services, but that children raised in kinship
homes may get less support. This is a book that adoptive parents,
adoption professionals, judges, and medical personnel will find
useful.
Bartholet, Elizabeth. Nobody’s Children: Abuse and Neglect, Fos-
ter Drift, and the Adoption Alternative. Boston: Beacon Press,
2000. 304 pages.
Bartholet examines the prevailing view of children as the “prop-
erty” of their parents. Sometimes, she writes, family preservation
ideology ignores the facts of severe child abuse and neglect. Bart-
holet not only presents the problems but offers some suggestions
for change.
Blank, Joseph P. 19 Steps Up the Mountain: The Story of the De-
Bolt Family. New York: Penguin Group, 1982. 234 pages.
This book tells of the experiences of the DeBolt family. After their
marriage, Bob and Dorothy DeBolt added thirteen children of
290
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

various races and handicapping conditions to Dorothy’s original
group of children. Through a combination of tenderness and
toughness, the DeBolts prepared all of their children for inde-
pendent living. In addition, they started a nonprofit foundation,
Aid to the Adoption of Special Kids (AASK), later changed to
AASK America (Adopt a Special Kid), to find homes for physi-
cally and/or mentally handicapped children of all races.
Capper, Lizanne. That’s My Child: Strategies for Parents of Chil-
dren with Disabilities. Washington, DC: Child Welfare League of
America, 1996. 208 pages.
This book contains information on coparenting, healthcare pro-
fessionals, rights and services under federal law, school programs
and systems, how to get started in special education, recreational
opportunities, daycare providers, family, and friends—in other
words, where to get informal, as well as formal, support.
Carney, Ann. No More Here and There: Adopting the Older Child.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1976. 88 pages.
In this adoption classic, Carney interweaves her own family’s ex-
periences with the adoption of a five-year-old son with practical
advice on such issues as the phases of an adoption, sibling rivalry,
talking about the past, dealing with feelings, relationships with
the “outside world,” and the effects of a special needs adoption
on a marriage.
Dorris, Michael. The Broken Cord. New York: Harper Trade, 1990.
320 pages.
Like a novel but actually a true story, this book tells of a father’s
devotion to his adopted son, a Native American child with fetal
alcohol syndrome.
Edelstein, Susan B., et al. Children with Prenatal Alcohol and/or
Other Drug Exposure: Weighing the Risks of Adoption. Washing-
ton, DC: Child Welfare League of America, 1995. 320 pages.
The decision to adopt a child with prenatal drug or alcohol expo-
sure adds an extra dimension to the already big decision to adopt.
This book, designed mostly for professionals, gives practical 
Books
291

suggestions and recommendations for counseling preadoptive par-
ents about children with these conditions.
Gelles, Richard. The Book of David: How Preserving Families
Can Cost Children’s Lives. New York: Basic Books, 1996. 200
pages.
David, a boy suffocated by his birth mother, changed Richard
Gelles’s mind about the preservation of birth parents’ rights at the
expense of children’s lives. Gelles offers suggestions for changes
in the system that include making child safety a priority.
Goldstein, Joseph, Albert J. Solnit, Sonja Goldstein, and Anna
Freud. The Best Interests of the Child: The Least Detrimental Al-
ternative. New York: Free Press, 1996. 311 pages.
Combining their three classic works into one volume, the 
authors address the question, What is the least detrimental alter-
native for assuring continuity of the psychological parent-child
relationship in any child custody case? (The earlier ground-
breaking works, each available in a separate edition published
by the Free Press, are Beyond the Best Interests of the Child, rev. ed.,
1979; Before the Best Interests of the Child, 1979; and In the Bests In-
terests of the Child, 1986.) The authors maintain that continuity of
care is the most important factor in the promotion of a child’s
well-being.
James, Beverly. Treating Traumatized Children: New Insights and
Creative Interventions. New York: Free Press, 1989. 269 pages.
The author, a specialist in evaluating and treating traumatized
children, believes that counselors must help children “work
through” their trauma so that the children can move on with their
lives. In addition to case examples, James presents a variety of ex-
ercises and techniques (including art, play, and drama) for “join-
ing” with the children. Some of the exercises may be useful for
adults traumatized as children.
Jewett, Claudia L. Adopting the Older Child. Cambridge: MA:
Harvard Common Press, 1978. 320 pages.
Using the stories of four hypothetical families and the older chil-
292
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

dren they adopt, the author describes problems potential
adopters are likely to encounter and ways to solve them.
Jewett, Claudia L. Helping Children Cope with Separation and
Loss, rev. ed. United Kingdom: B. T. Batsford, 1994. 230 pages.
This book gives advice on identifying short-term and long-term
behaviors resulting from loss and for helping a child through the
grief process.
Keck, Gregory C., and Regina M. Kupecky. Adopting the Hurt
Child: Hope for Families with Special Needs Kids: A Guide for
Parents and Professionals. Falls Church, VA: NavPress Publish-
ing, 1998. 256 pages.
The authors use case studies to show the toll that impermanence
takes on children. Also included are symptoms of attachment dis-
order, discussions of phases in the adoption process, the use of
psychological therapy, ways families can make sure that their
children have a “history,” and stories of successful and unsuc-
cessful adoptions. Includes a bibliography and information on in-
tercountry adoptions.
Keck, Gregory C., and Regina M. Kupecky, with Lynda G. Mans-
field, ed. Parenting the Hurt Child: Helping Adoptive Families
Heal and Grow. Falls Church, VA: NavPress Publishing, 2004.
Suggestions for parents who wonder after they bring a “hurting”
child into their home, Can they can manage to raise that child into
a healthy adult? The authors believe that with stability, wisdom,
tenacity, and love, everyone can “make it.”
Kempe, C. Henry, MD, and Ray E. Helfer, MD, eds. The Battered
Child, 4th ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987. 440
pages.
This classic text, first published in 1968, helped alert the public to
the problems of child abuse and neglect. Part I includes historical
aspects of child abuse, psychodynamic factors, and the influence
of parental drug and alcohol abuse. Part II includes chapters by
various authorities on neglect, failure to thrive, child abuse by
burning, and incest. Part III details efforts at intervention and
Books
293

treatment with a chapter on guidelines for placing a child in fos-
ter care. Part IV focuses on prevention of child abuse.
Kleinfeld, Judith, and Siobhan Wescott. Fantastic Antone Suc-
ceeds! Experiences in Educating Children with Fetal Alcohol Syn-
drome. Anchorage: University of Alaska Press, 1993. 380 pages.
“Bathing the fetal brain in alcohol is a lot like spilling a drink on
a computer,” says Judith Kleinfeld. “The electrical circuitry gets
scrambled in unpredictable ways.” Nevertheless, children with
fetal alcohol syndrome can learn. When the adoptive mother of
nine-year-old Antone asks if he knows the meaning of the initials
FAS, he says “Fantastic Antone Succeeds!” Hence the title of the
book, which the authors divide into four parts: How Prenatal Al-
cohol Exposure Affects Children and Their Families, Parents’
Know-How, Teachers’ Techniques, and Working with Families of
Alcohol-Affected Children.
Laws, Rita, and Tim O’Hanlon. Adoption and Financial Assis-
tance: Tools for Navigating the Bureaucracy. Westport, CT:
Bergin and Garvey, 1999. 288 pages.
Putting the federal Title IV-E adoption assistance program to
work for families can be a challenge to all involved. This book
guides parents and professionals through the state adoption
maze, so that everyone can deal with an adoption assistance con-
tract and be prepared for administrative hearings and adoption
subsidy appeals.
Lindsay, Caroline. Nothing Good Ever Happens to Me: An Adop-
tion Love Story. Washington, DC: Child Welfare League of Amer-
ica, 1996. 107 pages.
This is one family’s story of the adoption of an older child, an
adoption that took ten years to complete. Lee Ann joined the
Lindsay family at age seven after bouncing from one foster home
to another. The book describes her struggle to “grow” and to be-
come secure with her adoptive parents, siblings, friends, coun-
selors, teachers, lawyers, and judges.
Merkel-Holguin, Lisa. Children Who Lose Their Parents to AIDS:
294
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Agency Guidelines for Kinship Care and Adoption Placement.
Washington, DC: Child Welfare League of America, 1996.
Topics include outreach to HIV-positive birth parents, education
and training of professionals, and services to prospective adop-
tive parents, birth parents, and extended family members. Also
included are practice and policy issues related to the recruitment
of adoptive families, preparation of children and families, and
support for families after placement.
O’Hanlon, Tim. Accessing Federal Adoption Subsides after Le-
galization. Washington, DC: Child Welfare League of America,
1995. 67 pages.
This is a guide to help adoptive families of special needs children
to go back and apply for adoption assistance after finalization, if
necessary, so that they may receive retroactive assistance regard-
less of their state of residence.
Transracial/Transcultural
Comer, James, MD, and Alvin Toussaint, MD. Raising Black
Children. New York: Penguin Books, 1992. 448 pages.
Using a question-and-answer format, two psychiatrists confront
educational, social, and emotional issues in each developmental
stage, from infancy through adolescence. A short adoption sec-
tion addresses inracial, as well as transracial, adoptions.
Lander, Joyce. Mixed Families: Adoption across Racial Bound-
aries. Lincoln, NE: iUniverse, 1978. 300 pages.
This is a book for those who want to delve more deeply into the
reasons people adopt across racial lines, what their expectations
are, and what the reactions of relatives, friends, and neighbors
will be. For this work the author interviewed more than one hun-
dred couples who adopted transracially, as well as their relatives.
The author, an adoptive mother, sociologist, and African Ameri-
can, presents an objective view of the issues involved in transra-
cial adoption, with a focus on black social workers’ concerns
about the black child’s identity.
Books
295

Pohl, Constance, and Kathleen Harris. Transracial Adoption:
Children and Parents Speak. Danbury, CT: Franklin Watts, 1992.
128 pages.
Stories of families involved in transracial adoptions make up the
“meat” of this book. Those involved tell of their difficulties and
their joys.
Rothman, Barbara K. Weaving a Family: Untangling Race and
Adoption. Boston: Beacon Press, 2006. 288 pages.
As the white mother of a black child, Rothman brings a personal
perspective as well as a sociological and historical perspective to
the subjects of race and family.
Simon, Rita, and Howard Alsteins. Adoption: Serving the Chil-
dren in Transracial and Intercountry Adoptions. Lanham, MD:
Rowan and Littlefield Publishers, 2000. 176 pages.
The book summarizes (and compares with other studies) the
findings of these researchers who have studied transracial and
transcultural adoptions for thirty years.
Steinberg, Gail, and Beth Hall. Inside Transracial Adoption:
Strength-Based, Culture-Sensitizing Parenting Strategies for Inter-
country or Domestic Adoptive Families That Don’t “Match.”
Indianapolis, IN: Perspectives Press, 2000. 405 pages.
The codirectors of PACT: An Adoption Alliance put forth some of
their agency’s tools for fostering honesty in race and adoption
and give tips for helping with issues that arise from infancy to
young adulthood.
Journals and Other Periodicals
Listed below are some of the more well-known journals and other
periodicals to help students of adoption stay current on adoption
issues. Entire journals devoted to adoption are rare. However,
journals in related fields, such as sociology, social work, medicine
and nursing, psychology, and law, occasionally publish articles
on adoption topics. Because of the overwhelming number of
296
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

adoption-related articles appearing in professional journals and
periodicals, they are not listed here.
Most of the organizations listed in Chapter 7 will send sam-
ple newsletters free of charge, and many others are available on-
line. The journals listed here will be of interest to members of the
adoption triad, professionals in foster care and adoption, and
those doing research in these areas. Subscription information,
such as the current price, is usually available online or by tele-
phone.
In addition, the Child Welfare Information Gateway, a serv-
ice of the Children’s Bureau, offers information on the latest child
welfare publications, as well as free subscriptions online and free
monthly e-mail services. The subscriptions page on the Child
Welfare Information Gateway website is http://www.childwel-
fare.gov/admin/subscribe/index.cfm. One of the choices under
My Child Welfare Librarian is “adoption.” As web addresses and
journal titles change, the library keeps the list updated. Also
available free of charge are the Child Welfare Information Gate-
way E-lert! and the Children’s Bureau Express.
Adoptalk. This quarterly newsletter contains articles on a wide
variety of subjects related to adoption and foster care, including
information on policy issues, postadoption support, recruitment
of adoptive families, parenting techniques, and more. Subscrip-
tions are available to members of the North American Council on
Adoptable Children. Web address: http://www.nacac.org.
Adoption & Fostering. The British Association for Adoption &
Fostering has published this journal for more than fifty years.
Since 1953, when it was first published as Child Adoption, the
quarterly peer-reviewed journal has given practitioners, academ-
ics, and others concerned with adoption a forum in which to
share discussion on current research and practice from the United
Kingdom and overseas. Subscribers can also receive the journal
online. Web address: http://www.baaf.org.uk.
Adoption Quarterly: Innovations in Community and Clinical
Practice, Theory, and Research. This academic and scholarly jour-
nal focusing on adoption has been published by Haworth Press
since its inception. It is an international multidisciplinary forum
featuring conceptual and empirical work, commentaries, and
book reviews from the social sciences, humanities, biological sci-
Journals and Other Periodicals
297

ences, law, and social policy. Web address: http://www.
haworthpress.com.
Adoption Today. This publication presents issues and answers to
questions about international and domestic adoption. It is written
by adopted persons, adoptive parents, and adoption profession-
als in medicine, law, education, social work, and child develop-
ment. Web address: http://adoptinfo.net.
Child and Adolescent Social Work Journal. This journal (one vol-
ume, six issues) focuses on clinical social work with children,
adolescents, and their families, addressing problems affecting
specific populations in specific settings. Web address:
http://www.springerlink.com.
Child and Youth Care Forum. This bimonthly, international, peer-
reviewed journal is committed to articles focusing on improving
child and youth care practices, early childhood education, and
youth development policy, practice, and research. It is an inter-
disciplinary channel of communication, including debate on is-
sues in child welfare, child and youth services, and mental health.
Web address: http://www.springerlink.com.
Child Welfare Journal. Begun in 1921, this scholarly bimonthly
journal published by the Child Welfare League of America high-
lights problems and possible solutions for children who are
homeless, abused, disabled, and new to the country. For child
welfare and associated professionals, it links the latest findings in
child welfare with related research on best practice, policy, and
program development. Web address: http://www.cwla.org/
pubs/periodicals.htm.
Children’s Voice. A magazine for foster and adoptive parents,
frontline professionals, agency executives, and child and family
advocates, this publication of the Child Welfare League of Amer-
ica offers practical news and special features. Web address:
http://www.cwla.org/pubs/periodicals.htm.
The Future of Children Journal. The journal is published twice a
year by the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Af-
fairs at Princeton University or the Brookings Institution. It offers
298
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

comprehensive cross-disciplinary articles on a variety of issues re-
lated to children. Web address: http://www.futureofchildren.org.
Journal of Child and Family Studies. This is an international
forum (one volume, six issues) for problems having to do with the
mental well-being of children, adolescents, and their families.
Original papers deal with child abuse and neglect, respite care,
foster care, mental health care financing, homelessness, family
stress, AIDS, substance abuse, and other issues of topical interest.
Web address: http://www.springerlink.com.
Social Work. Published quarterly in January, April, July, and Oc-
tober, this is the official journal of the National Association of So-
cial Workers (NASW) and is provided to members as a member-
ship benefit. The journal’s major emphasis is on social policy and
the solutions to serious human problems. Web address:
http://www.naswpress.org.
Websites
The websites listed here are adoption-related sites that were not
included with the organizations listed in the previous chapter.
About.com
http://adoption.about.com/parenting/adoption
A “full service” site with up-to-the minute stories and articles on
adoption and foster care. About.com is part of the New York
Times Company.
Adopting.com
http://www.adopting.com
This site helps prospective adoptive parents find a path to adop-
tion that fits them. It offers information on how to get started in
adoption, links to adoption agencies and attorneys, letters to birth
parents from families hoping to adopt an infant, support groups,
information on the rights of adopted persons, e-mail lists, news
groups, bulletin boards and chat rooms, and photo listings of
waiting children.
Websites
299

Adoption Advocates—Adoption Policy Resource Center
http://www.fpsol.com/adoption/advocates.html
This service provided by Adoption Subsidy Advocates helps
adoptive families with subsidy questions and provides technical
assistance to organizations and professionals.
Adoption: A Gathering
http://www.pbs.org/weblab/adoption
This site is a safe place for anyone touched by adoption to gain a
sense of community from shared experiences. It is a project of
Web Lab in cooperation with PBS Online.
Adoption . . . Assistance, Information, Support
http://www.adopting.org
Features information, education, and profile presentations on-
line for prospective adoptive parents and support for those who
have already adopted. Also assists birth parents considering
placing a child and provides resources for professionals working
in adoption.
The Adoption History Project
http://darkwing.uoregon.edu/~adoption/about.html
This website, launched on June 1, 2003, by Ellen Herman, faculty
member of the Department of History at the University of Ore-
gon, is a digital public history resource. It covers individuals, or-
ganizations, issues, and studies that shaped adoption in theory
and practice in the twentieth century.
Adoption.com
http://www.adoption.com
In existence since 1996, this website is committed to helping as
many children as possible both in the United States and through-
out the world find loving, permanent homes. The site also pro-
vides information for women facing crisis pregnancies and helps
prospective adoptive parents find children. It features an adop-
tion site search with more than 500,000 pages of content, daily
adoption news and blogs, message boards and chat rooms, adop-
300
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

tion resources by location, a photo listing of thousands of waiting
children, profiles of waiting parents, more than a thousand adop-
tion products, an adoption registry for finding birth families, sup-
port from others of the same faith, searches for professionals (e.g.,
attorneys), and a weekly e-magazine.
Gift of Adoption
www.giftofadoption.org
Gene and Lucy Wyka cofounded this 501(c)(3) charity in 1996 to
give grants in the form of subsidies to help prospective adoptive
parents cover the costs associated with adopting a child.
Homes4Kids
http://www.homes4kids.org
Adoption issues can be found under “parenting” in the lifestyle
category. This site offers related links to a variety of adoption-re-
lated organizations.
Thomas—Legislative Information on the Internet
www.http://thomas.loc.gov
For following bills in Congress, this is an official source of U.S.
federal legislation.
U.S. State Department—International Adoptions
http://www.travel.state.gov/family/adoption/adoption_485.html
Offers a guide for U.S. citizens interested in adopting a child from
another country and applying for an immigrant visa for the child
to come to the United States. The site tells what the State Depart-
ment can and cannot do and offers a full text of the International
Adoption Booklet online.
The Urban Institute
http://www.urbaninstitute.org
A nonpartisan economic and social policy research organization,
the Urban Institute has links to Child Welfare and offers many
publications on this subject and its relationship to adoption, in-
cluding several publications on kinship care.
Websites
301

Videos and DVDs
The list below, compiled with assistance from the Child Welfare
Information Gateway, is a sampling of the many videos and
DVDs available on all aspects of adoption.
AdoptUSKids Public Service Announcement: Bruce Willis and
Jamie Foxx: Change a Child’s Life
Videotape
Copyright 2003
To view: http://www.onthescene.com/wm/+6
Actors Bruce Willis and Jamie Foxx encourage prospective adop-
tive parents to adopt children from foster care. Contact informa-
tion for AdoptUSKids is provided.
Caring for Caregiver Families
KinNET (Project) Generations United and Richfield Productions
Videocassette
Copyright 2003
Length: 10 minutes
Generations United
1333 H Street NW, Suite 500 W
Washington, DC 20005
(202) 289-3979
http://www.gu.org
Sponsoring organization: The Children’s Bureau
This videotape comes from KinNET, a national initiative that has
established a network of support groups for relatives who care
for kin in foster care. KinNET focuses on the unique needs of kin-
ship providers, who receive education on topics relative to the
goals of the Adoption and Safe Families Act with special empha-
sis on permanency options. The videotape emphasizes care of
caregiver families through support groups.
“The Caseworker Files” and “A National Dialogue,” Failure to Pro-
tect
PBS Frontline and WGBH (a Boston TV station)
Videocassette
Copyright  2003
302
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

WGBH
125 Western Avenue
Boston, MA 02134
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/foster-
care/
Parts 2 and 3 of a Frontline series about the child protective sys-
tem tackles the process of removal of a child from the home
and/or custody of his or her birth parents. Part 2 features child
protective workers in Bangor, Maine, as they manage several
cases in which these difficult decisions must be made. Casework-
ers, supervisors, and parents reveal their different perspectives.
Television crews also filmed meetings between supervisors and
caseworkers and between caseworkers and birth parents. Part 3
features a panel discussion with child welfare professionals and
news journalists.
The Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978: A Child Welfare Profes-
sional Training Video
Loyola University of Chicago, School of Social Work
Videocassette
Copyright  2002
Length: 75 minutes
Loyola University of Chicago
School of Social Work
820 N. Michigan Avenue
Chicago, IL 60611
(312) 915-7005
http://www.luc.edu/socialwork
Sponsoring organization: The Children’s Bureau
A 233-page curriculum guide designed to educate child-welfare
professionals accompanies this videotape. The focus of the cur-
riculum is on training professionals to understand and be able to
work with urban Native American communities. A young adult
tells his story of being placed in a non–Native American home
and learning of his Native American heritage later.
Is Anyone in There?: Adopting a Wounded Child
Videocassette
Copyright 2004
The Infant-Parent Institute
Videos and DVDs
303

328 N. Neil Street
Champaign, IL 61820
(217) 352-4060
http://www.infant-parent.com
Presents a mother’s thoughts as she meets her adopted baby and
has concerns about the lack of eye contact. The text and pictures
show the mother’s sense of rejection, guilt, and shame. Along
with her expectations of raising a child who may have difficult
behaviors, she hopes that “love will always triumph.” The video
package includes a booklet about reactive attachment disorder
and its prevalence in children adopted from Eastern Europe. The
videotape also discusses characteristics of children with reactive
attachment disorder and the effects on adoptive families. In-
cluded are thirty-four references.
Is This Job for ME?
DVD
Copyright 2005
Michigan Department of Human Services, Personnel Services
235 S. Grand Street, Suite 708
Lansing, MI 48909
Contains interviews with child protective services workers and
foster care workers. Introduces the viewer to child welfare work
by giving a sense of the type of interactions that go on in a typi-
cal caseworker’s day.
Listening to Birth Families: Forming Kinship
DVD 
Copyright 2003
Length: 80 minutes
Northwest Media, Inc.
326 W. 12th Avenue
Eugene, Oregon 97401
(541) 343-6636 or (800) 777-6636
http://www.sociallearning.com
Dr. Vera Fahlberg stresses the importance of social service agen-
cies helping to facilitate the formation of relationships between
birth parents and foster parents. For foster parents, birth parents,
and social workers, this training DVD shows a panel discussion
with a birth mother, her oldest daughter, and the two foster moth-
304
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

ers who are part of their kinship care group. A viewer’s guide in-
cludes questions for discussion, exercises for foster parents and
birth parents, strategies for working with birth parents, and a re-
view questionnaire with answer key.
Making Your Support Group Work for You
Professional Association of Treatment Homes, National Foster
Parent Association, and FosterParentNet 
Videocassette
Copyright 2003
Length: 24 minutes
Professional Association of Treatment Homes
2324 University Avenue West, Suite 120
St. Paul, MN 55114
(612) 259-1600
http://www.pathinc.org
Sponsoring organization: The Children’s Bureau
This videotape provides information on how foster and adoptive
parents can strengthen their social support network and support
groups while at the same time positively impacting the lives of
their foster or adoptive children.
Parent Leadership/Circle of Parents
Videocassette
Copyright 2004
Length: 7 minutes
Circle of Parents
200 S. Michigan Avenue, 17th Floor
Chicago, IL 60604
(312) 334-3520
http://www.circleofparents.org
Sponsoring organization: The Children’s Bureau
This videotape features national parent leaders from Circle of
Parents, a support group, as well as parent leaders from a local
parent support group in Illinois. The participants discuss how
parents can become leaders in parent support groups, why par-
ents should become leaders, opportunities for becoming leaders,
and the challenges parents face in becoming leaders.
Partners in Permanency: Achieving Permanency for Children
Socios en Permanencia: logrando permanencia para los ninos
Videos and DVDs
305

DVD or VHS
Copyright 2004
Philadelphia Department of Human Services
1515 Arch Street
Philadelphia, PA 19102
(215) 633-4DHS
http://www.phila.gov/dhs
Designed to show the importance of clear and consistent com-
munication among all partners about the options available to
those who have children in foster care, as well as families caring
for children in foster care. The goal is to convey that the future of
children depends on collaboration with families. Available in
English and Spanish and includes a facilitator’s guide.
Reeducation of Foster and Adoptive Children: Prospects for a
Healthy Life
DVD
Copyright 2003
Length: 70 minutes
Northwest Media, Inc.
326 W. 12th Avenue
Eugene, OR 97401
(541) 343-6636 or (800) 777-6636
http://www.northwestmedia.com
Social workers, foster and adoptive parents, and birth parents
will learn how they can help foster and adopted young people
overcome negative behavioral and emotional patterns in adult-
child relationships. Needing work are the acceptability of feelings
opposed to the unacceptability of certain behaviors, the worth of
the child as a person, the reciprocity of relationships, taking care
of oneself physically and emotionally, caring for and about oth-
ers, and how to have fun. A viewer’s guide includes a discussion
of the topics addressed on the DVD, a list of negative parent mes-
sages, and an answer key to the review questionnaire.
Separation and Loss Issues for Foster and Birth Families
DVD
Copyright 2003
Length: 80 minutes
Northwest Media, Inc.
326 W. 12th Avenue
306
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Eugene, OR 97401
(541) 343-6636 or (800) 777-6636
http://www.sociallearning.com
For social workers, foster parents, and birth parents, this DVD ex-
plores the feelings of loss and rejection experienced by children in
foster care. It begins with the journey of three children through
the foster care system. The stages of grief include shock and de-
nial, anger, bargaining, sadness, despair, and finally acceptance.
Next, Dr. Vera Fahlberg talks with three teenagers about the feel-
ings they had when they entered foster care. The next segment
features three adults who spent many of their teen years in foster
care. Fahlberg then interviews foster parents who discuss grief
and loss in young children and point out the importance of main-
taining contact with foster children even when they move. Fi-
nally, a birth mother who had three of her children in foster care
in three separate homes shares her experiences. Includes a
viewer’s guide with a synopsis of the DVD, discussion questions,
a fact sheet on separation and loss, and a review questionnaire.
Understanding Childhood Trauma: A Parent’s Guide to Identify-
ing and Responding to Childhood Trauma
Videocassette  
Copyright 2002
Length: 45 minutes
Child Trauma Academy, Linkletter Media
Distributed by Magna Systems, Inc.
95 W. County Line Road
Barrington, IL 60010
(800) 203-7060
http://www.maganasystems.videos.com
Dr. Bruce Perry describes the neurobiological impact of child neg-
lect and the effect of loss of experience on a child’s normal devel-
opment. He defines neglect as sensory deprivation or the lack of
stimulation at key points in a child’s developmental stages. Re-
lated videos (also available on DVD) are, Understanding Childhood
Trauma: Identifying and Responding to Trauma, Ages 0-5 Years Old
and Understanding Childhood Trauma: What Is Childhood Trauma?
Unlocking the Heart of Adoption
Videocassette plus booklet (discussion guide)
Copyright  2003
Videos and DVDs
307

Length: 56 minutes
Pandora’s Box Productions
1546 Great Highway, Suite 44
San Francisco, CA 94122
(415) 564-3691
http://www.unlockingtheheart.com
Combining the history of adoption with personal stories, this
video describes the impact of adoption on birth parents, adoptive
parents, and adopted persons. Those interviewed share feelings
of loss, pain, shame, guilt, abandonment, and identity confusion.
Some adoptees share feelings about their adoption by parents of
a different race. Searching for birth relatives presents a range of
challenges and outcomes.
In addition to the above sampling of videos and DVDs avail-
able from a variety of sources, Adoption.com has a link to audio
and video (under “adoption products”), which presents more
than 400 audio and video resources arranged under such head-
ings as Adoption Support and Preservation, Adoptive and Par-
ent Support Groups, Advocacy and Public Policy, Agency 
Issues and Concerns, Documentaries & Instructional, Interna-
tional Adoption, Kinship Care, Openness in Adoption, Parent-
ing Children with Challenges, Permanency Options, Preparing
Parents for Adoption, Race and Culture in Adoption, Recruit-
ing Permanent Families, Search & Reunion, and Supporting
Children.
CD-ROMs
The Child Welfare Information Gateway assisted in the prepara-
tion of this list.
All in the Family: Achieving Excellence in Adoption, November
8–10, 2004
Copyright 2004
Child Welfare League of America
440 First Street NW, Third Floor
Washington, DC 20001
(202) 638-2952
http://www.cwla.org
308
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Prepared for the Child Welfare League of America’s Achieving
Excellence in Adoption conference, November 2004, this CD-
ROM contains proceedings papers and PowerPoint presenta-
tions. Sessions address topics such as legal services for adoptive
parents, postadoption support, clinical interventions, assistance
for relatives caring for children, cultural competency, and subsi-
dized guardianships. A workshop by Casey Family Services iden-
tifies federal, state, and other sources of funding for various types
of adoption support projects.
Child Abuse, Child Welfare, and Adoption 1965–2002
Copyright 2002
Child Welfare Information Gateway
1250 Maryland Avenue SW, Eighth Floor
Washington, DC 20024
(800) 394-3366 or (703) 385-7565
http://www.childwelfare.gov
This CD-ROM, produced by the National Clearinghouse on Child
Abuse and Neglect Information, contains the Child Abuse and
Neglect Documents Database, a searchable database of resources
about child abuse and neglect and adoption. Records include ab-
stracts, distributor information, and links to the online full text
(when available). It also includes a thesaurus of terms used to
index documents, a User’s Guide, and a Quick Guide.
Fifteenth National Conference on Child Abuse and Neglect: Sup-
porting Promising Practices and Positive Outcomes; A Shared
Responsibility  Resource Guide 
Copyright 2005
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Admin-
istration for Children and Families; Administration on Children,
Youth, and Families; Children’s Bureau; and the Office on Child
Abuse and Neglect
Available from: Child Welfare Information Gateway
1250 Maryland Avenue SW, Eighth Floor
Washington, DC 20024
(800) 394-3366 or (703) 385-7565
http://www.childwelfare.gov
Provides summaries of more than 450 papers, posters, seminars,
and workshops presented at the Fifteenth National Conference
CD-ROMs
309

on Child Abuse and Neglect. It also gives contact information for
the presenters, websites of the federal partners, and the confer-
ence national sponsors and cosponsors.
When Love Takes You In: A Music Video for the 2004 Adopt-
USKids Summit
Copyright 2004
Adoption Exchange Association
8015 Corporate Drive, Suite C
Baltimore, MD 21236
(888) 200-4005
http://www.adoptuskids.org
Sponsoring organization: The Children’s Bureau
Presents a slideshow of photos of adoptive families, as well as
children waiting for adoption. The accompanying song, “When
Love Takes You In,” by Steven Curtis Chapman, tells of the im-
portance of love and belonging. Viewers can visit the Adopt-
USKids website for information about waiting children.
Software
Adoption Information and Reporting Software (AIRS)
Powered by Pinnacle Development Group
18 Common Street
Waterville, ME 04901
(207) 873-7540
http://www.adoptsoft.com
This system was developed for adoption case management and
related purposes in adoption at the request of Maine Adoptive
Placement Services (MAPS). Version 6 was released in May
2006. AIRS helps track and manage an array of management is-
sues in domestic and intercountry adoption as well as foster-
care activities.
Databases
Adoption: Public Agency Adoptions
Child Welfare League of America, National Data Analysis System
310
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

50 F Street NW, Sixth Floor
Washington, DC 20001
(202) 638-2952
http://ndas.cwla.org
Provides access to statistics on public agency adoptions in the
United States from 1998–2001. Links to information on the Multi-
ethnic Placement Act, the number of children waiting to be
adopted, the number of children adopted, the number of public
agency adoptions from 1995–2000, the mean and median months
between the time of termination of parental rights and adoption,
the number of children adopted who receive any kind of adop-
tion subsidy, the number of children who receive Title IV-E adop-
tion subsides, adoption subsides by age, specialized adoption
subsidy rates, reimbursement rates for nonrecurring adoption ex-
penses, and state use of subsidized guardianship. The informa-
tion is provided by state and year and also nationally.
Adoption Dynamics: The Impact of the Adoption and Safe Fami-
lies Act
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of
the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation
Distributed by: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation
Humphrey Building, Room 404
E. 200 Independence Avenue SW
Washington, DC 20201
(202) 619-0257 or (877) 696-6775
http://aspe.hhs.gov
Adoptions from foster care were studied using data from the
Multistate Foster Care Data Archive, which is a database contain-
ing administrative information about children in foster care from
a number of states. Children in the study were admitted to foster
care for the first time between 1990 and 1999. The goal of the
study was to try to understand what effects, if any, the federal
Adoption and Safe Families Act had on the proportion of children
admitted to foster care who were later adopted and the time
needed to complete these adoptions.
Children in America/First Star
First Star
Databases
311

1666 K Street NW, Suite 700
Washington, DC 20006
(202) 293-3703
http://www.firststar.org
The First Star website presents statistics on reports of child abuse
or neglect (and child fatalities) in the United States. Statistics are
presented by state and include the rank of the state in number of
child abuse and neglect reports, child fatalities, child victims with
court action, children in foster care, the type of the child’s repre-
sentation in court, whether the court hearings were closed or
open, whether court records were open or sealed, the number of
child victims by age and race, outcomes of investigations, the
number of cases in which parental rights were terminated, and
the number of children waiting for adoption.
Database of Parent Support Groups
North American Council on Adoptable Children
970 Raymond Avenue, Suite 106
St. Paul, MN 55114
(651) 644-3036
http://www.nacac.org/pas_database.html
This parent group database contains approximately nine hundred
adoption-related support groups across the United States and
Canada. The database is searchable by state or province, by the
type of group, or by the group’s activity. Group types include
preadoption, postadoption, foster care, transracial/transcultural,
international, single parent, special needs, and infertility.
Kids Count State-Level Data Online
Annie E. Casey Foundation
701 St. Paul Street
Baltimore, MD 21202
(410) 547-6600
http://www.aecf.org
Contains state-level data for more than seventy-five measures of
child well-being, including those used in the Annie E. Casey
Foundation’s KIDS COUNT Data Book. This online database al-
lows searchers to generate custom reports for geographic areas
312
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

(profiles) or to compare various geographic areas on a certain
topic (ranking, maps, and line graphs).
NASW Practice Snapshot: Promising Practices in Foster Care for
Recruiting and Retaining Resource Families
National Association of Social Workers
705 First Street NE, Suite 700
Washington, DC 20002
(800) 227-3590
http://www.socialworkers.org
This “brief” summarizes the findings of a study that investigated
promising practices in recruitment and retention of foster (and
adoptive) families. The study found that few of the materials
used to recruit families were culturally and/or linguistically spe-
cific, which might partially explain why families of various cul-
tural backgrounds did not respond to publicity messages.
Changes and their outcomes were entered into a searchable data-
base; the need for more professional training in cultural compe-
tence is emphasized.
Preserving Adoption Support Programs: Parents Can Make a
Difference
North American Council on Adoptable Children
970 Raymond Avenue, Suite 106
St. Paul, MN 55114
(800) 470-6665 or (651) 644-3036
http://www.nacac.org
To alleviate budget shortfalls, many states are reducing alloca-
tions for adoption assistance. What can adoptive parents do to
protect financial supports for adopted children with special
needs? NACAC’s fact sheet urges parents to respond immedi-
ately to proposed cuts by obtaining information about legislation,
contacting other concerned families, and communicating with
legislators. The database tracks volunteers as well as legislators.
Summaries of State Legislation Enacted in Response to the
Adoption and Safe Families Act
National Conference of State Legislatures
444 N. Capitol Street NW, Suite 515
Databases
313

Washington, DC 20001
(202) 624-5400
http://www.ncsl.org
This searchable database provides links to summaries of state leg-
islation enacted in response to the Adoption and Safe Families
Act. The database gives information for each of the states on leg-
islation that addresses permanency hearings, adoption across
state lines, assurances of child safety, clarification of reasonable
efforts, termination of parental rights, criminal record checks,
health insurance for children with special needs, notice require-
ments, and effective date of implementation.
314
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Glossary
M
ost of the terms used to describe various facets of adoption
have their origins in psychology, sociology, law, and social
work. In addition, the field of adoption has “coined” some
of these terms. This glossary lists some of the words that might
need clarification for students of adoption.
Adoptee
An adopted person. Some adopted persons object to
being called an “adoptee” because it seems to distinguish an
adopted child from a birth child in the same family (a parent does
not say, “This is my birth son, Johnny”), and it implies that adop-
tion is the central fact of the adopted person’s life. (It may or may
not be.)
Adoption
A court action in which an adult assumes legal and
other responsibilities for another person, usually a minor.
Adoption agency
An organization that helps birth parents,
adoptive parents, and children in need of homes with placement
in an adoptive home. Agencies may be public or private, secular
or religious, for profit or nonprofit.
Adoption assistance
Generally refers to monthly subsidy pay-
ments to help adoptive parents raise children with special needs.
These payments were made possible by the passage of the Adop-
tion Assistance and Child Welfare Act of 1980. In a larger sense,
“adoption assistance” could refer to any help given to parties in
an adoption.
Adoption disruption
The interruption of an adoption prior to
finalization, usually within a year of placement. A “disrupted
adoption” is sometimes called a “failed placement.”
315

Adoption dissolution
When an adoption fails after finalization;
in this circumstance, court action is required.
Adoption exchanges
Organizations that help find homes for
waiting children by getting out the word on children available for
adoption. Adoption exchanges use all types of media plus adop-
tion “parties,” which bring together waiting parents and waiting
children in a child-focused setting. Adoption exchanges may be
local, state, regional, national, or international.
Adoption plan
The preferred terminology for the decision of
the birth parents to allow their child to be placed for adoption.
Adoption triad
The three major parties in an adoption: birth
parents, adoptive parents, and the adopted child. Also called
“adoption triangle” or “adoption circle.”
Artificial insemination
A procedure leading to pregnancy by
other than the usual means.
Attachment
The process of emotional connection that occurs (or
does not occur) between parents and their children. Some say the
word attachment is synonymous with the word bonding and can
happen at any age; others make a distinction, reserving bonding
for a process that occurs in infancy between biological parents
and their babies.
Attachment disorder
A situation, usually resulting from breaks
in the early connection with the mother figure, in which children
have problems accepting parents and other authority figures;
sometimes called reactive attachment disorder or RAD.
Attention deficit disorder (ADD)
A neurological condition of
unknown cause that may reveal itself in inattentiveness (not lis-
tening), distractibility (difficulty concentrating), impulsivity (act-
ing quickly without prior thought), and disorganization.
Attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity (ADHD or
ADDH)
A condition that includes the problems of attention
deficit disorder (see above) plus hyperactivity (relatively speak-
ing, the inability to sit still).
316
Glossary

Birth parent
A child’s biological mother or father.
Black-market adoption
An independent adoption in which
someone makes an unearned profit from an adoptive placement.
Boarder babies
Infants abandoned in hospitals because of the
parents’ inability to take care of them. These babies may be born
HIV-positive or drug addicted.
Certification
The process that takes place to ensure (insofar as
possible) that adoptive parents (or foster parents) are suitable, de-
pendable, and responsible.
Closed adoption
An adoption that involves total confidential-
ity and sealed records.
Concurrent planning
A process used in some adoptions in-
volving foster-care case management. In this case, professional
staff works to reunify the child with birth family (if possible)
while at the same time giving the child a permanent family if ef-
forts at reunification fail. The rationale is to decrease the time a
child spends in foster care.
Confidentiality
The process of keeping identifying information
secret.
Consent to adopt or consent to adoption
Legal permission by
whomever has custody of the child.
Co-parenting
A situation in which there are community-based
alternatives, such as extra caregivers, for parenting adopted (or
foster) children with special needs such as developmental dis-
abilities. In some cases the term is used to describe any arrange-
ment in which a number of caregivers share the duties of parent-
ing a child with whom they have a signifiant relationship.
Decree of adoption
A legal order finalizing an adoption.
De facto
In fact; actually. Refers to a situation that is “reality
based” even if it is not based on the law. A de facto family is a
“psychological family” in which members have ties to each other
Glossary
317

even though they are not blood relatives and do not have a legal
document recognizing their relationship.
Dossier
A file of legal documents used in an intercountry adop-
tion to process the child’s assignment to an adoptive family.
Eugenics
A “science” concerned with improving a species, es-
pecially the human species, by such measures as influencing re-
production by persons thought to have desirable genetic traits.
Extended family
A child’s relatives, other than birth parents;
includes such relatives as aunts, uncles, grandparents, and some-
times even close friends.
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD)
A range of disabilities,
usually not as severe as FAS, that may have resulted from a
mother’s alcohol use during pregnancy.
Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS)
A developmental disability
caused by a mother’s use of alcohol during her pregnancy.
Finalization
The legal process of making an adoption permanent.
Foster-adoption
A child’s placement in which birth parents’
rights have not yet been completely severed by the court or in
which birth parents are appealing the court’s decision. Social
workers place the child in a foster-adopt home (sometimes called
a “fost-adopt” or “permanency planning” home) when they be-
lieve the foster-adopt parents will adopt the child when the child
is available for adoption. The main reason for making such a
placement (also called a “legal-risk” adoption) is to spare the
child another move.
Genealogy
A family’s genetic line or a record of such ancestry.
Group home
A homelike setting in which a number of unre-
lated children live for varying periods. Group homes may have
one set of house parents or may have a rotating staff.
Guardian ad litem
A person, often an attorney, appointed by
the court to represent the child’s best interests.
318
Glossary

Home study
Another name for the certification process that de-
termines if a potential adoptive family will be a good home for a
child. Because it is not a study of the home per se, some profes-
sionals have substituted other terms, such as family assessment.
Independent adoption
An adoption facilitated by those other
than caseworkers associated with an adoption agency. Facilitators
may be attorneys, physicians, or other intermediaries. In some
states, independent adoptions are illegal.
Infertility
The inability to produce birth children. Sometimes
one person in a couple has problems with infertility; sometimes
both do.
Interstate Compact on the Placement of Children (ICPC)
An
agreement to which all of the states and U.S. territories have sub-
scribed. Its aim is the safe placement of children across state lines.
Kinship care
The full-time nurturing of a child by someone re-
lated to the child by family ties or earlier relationship.
Legal-risk adoption
See foster-adoption.
Life book
Any child who moves into an adoption has a history.
Social workers and foster parents can help the older child make
this book, a pictorial and written representation of the child’s life
before adoption.
Nonidentifying information
Facts about the birth parents or
adoptive parents that would not lead to their discovery by an-
other person.
Nonrecurring adoption costs
One-time adoption expenses,
such as the cost of a home study, which through provisions of the
Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act of 1980 may be at
least partially reimbursed to families who adopt children with
special needs.
Open adoption
An arrangement with varying degrees of ongo-
ing contact (usually decided upon by the involved parties)
among birth parents, adoptive parents, and adopted child.
Glossary
319

Parens patriae
The state is the protector of its people. In other
words, the state has a legal duty to protect children who cannot take
care of themselves. For example, if birth parents cannot take care of
their children, the state must step in to protect those children.
Permanency planning
Efforts to allow a child to stay in his birth
family, if possible, or to return him to his birth family as soon as
possible, and if neither plan works, to find him a permanent fam-
ily. This latter step, finding a legally permanent family, often in-
volves adoption.
Placement date
The time at which the child comes to live with
the adoptive family.
Post-traumatic stress disorder
A condition in which victims of
overwhelming and uncontrollable experiences are psychologi-
cally affected by feelings and fears of loss of safety, loss of control,
helplessness, and extreme vulnerability.
Psychological parent
A person who (although not biologically
related to a child) takes care of the child on a daily basis; a person
the child considers his parent; sometimes called a de facto parent.
Putative
Generally regarded as true.
Relinquishment
Voluntary termination of parental rights;
sometimes referred to as “making a plan” for one’s birth child.
Respite care
For parents who need a rest, this short-term care is
given (usually for pay) on a voluntary basis.
Semi-open adoption
Usually, an adoption in which the birth
family and the adoptive family communicate in a confidential
manner through an intermediary.
Substitute care
In general, any kind of sanctioned care in which
the child does not live with the birth parents.
Surrender
“Making a plan” for a child, “relinquishing” a child,
or “giving up” a child for adoption.
320
Glossary

Surrogate mother
A woman who carries another’s child by pre-
arrangement.
System
Often referred to as “the system.” Refers to the gov-
ernmental organization of facilities for foster care and/or child
welfare.
Termination
The legal ending of birth parents’ rights.
Traditional adoption
Most often used to refer to a domestic in-
fant adoption in which confidentiality is preserved.
Transracial adoption
Generally refers to the adoption of a black
or biracial (e.g., black/white) child by white parents; the adoption
of an Asian child by white parents would be considered both
transracial and transcultural. Hispanic/Latino children are not,
technically speaking, a racial group. However, the term transracial
is often used (rightly or wrongly) to describe any adoption cross-
ing racial or ethnic lines.
Glossary
321


Abandoned children:
family preservation versus,
207
girls in China, 100–102
hospital “walk-aways,” 77–78,
107, 317
in Romania, 105
Abandoned Infants Assistance
grants program, 196
Abortion, 48
Abramson, Susan, 138
Adamec, Christine, 277–278
Administration for Children and
Families (ACF), 230
Administration on Children,
Youth, and Families
(ACYF), 230
Adopt a Special Kid (AASK), 150
Adopt America Network (AAN),
232
“Adopt-A-” programs, 32–33
Adopt-A-Child, 130
Adoptalk, 297
Adopted children,
communicating with. See
Communicating with
adopted children
Adopted persons’ stories,
270–271, 278–279
“Adoptee,” 31–32, 315
Adoptees’ Liberty Movement
Association (ALMA), 44,
46, 133, 152, 233
Adoption, critiques and defenses
of, 79–81, 283
Adoption, defined, 315
Adoption, lifelong issues, 2, 283
Adoption & Fostering, 297
Adoption agency, defined, 315.
See also Placement agencies
or organizations
Adoption Alliance, 8, 73
Adoption and Children Act of
2002, 93, 143
Adoption and Foster Care
Analysis and Reporting
Systems (AFCARS) data,
175–192, 231
Adoption and Safe Families Act
of 1997, 74–75, 141, 167,
200–201
Adoption assistance, 28–29
database resource, 313
defined, 315
employer benefits, 28–29, 167,
199
in Britain, 95
postlegal services, 228
print resources, 294, 295
statistical data, 191
tax credit, 28, 142, 167
Title IV-E program, 28, 143,
198, 202, 231, 294
Index
323

Adoption Assistance and Child
Welfare Act, 136, 175,
197–198
Senate hearings and
testimony, 214–221
Adoption Assistance Program,
137, 197–198
Adoption Connections Training
Institute: One World
Network, 239
Adoption costs, 25–26
nonrecurring, 198, 311, 319
Adoption decree, 24, 25, 41, 45,
52, 197, 317
Adoption disruption, 26–27, 315
Adoption dissolution, 27–28, 198,
316
Adoption Exchange Association
(AEA), 231, 232–233
Adoption Exchange Education
Center, 231
Adoption exchanges, 6, 132,
231–233, 316
Adoption facts and statistics:
adoptive family structure, 192
AFCARS data, 175–179
birth mothers, 173–175
data collection history and
sources, 175
databases, 310–314
foster child demographics,
177–183
numbers of adoptions,
170–171
numbers of people
considering adoption,
171–173
SACWIS, 176
See also Foster care data and
statistics
Adoption fraud, 72
Adoption hearings, 25
Adoption History Project, 143,
300
Adoption Information and
Reporting Software (AIRS),
310
Adoption Initiative, 140
Adoption law. See Law and legal
issues
Adoption month, 33
Adoption Opportunities
Program, 194
Adoption plan, 13, 316
abandonment and, 100
birth parent counseling and,
24
child health/behavior
concerns and, 173
closed adoption and, 38
open adoption and, 41
Adoption Promotion Act of 2003,
143, 202
Adoption Quarterly, 297
Adoption records access. See
Open records
Adoption Resource Exchange of
North America (ARENA),
132
Adoption screening, 3
British requirements, 94
intercountry adoption health
screening, 22
matching, 155, 164
same-sex couples and, 71–72
See also Home study
Adoption terminology, 31–32
Adoption terminology glossary,
315–321
Adoption Today, 298
Adoption triad, defined, 316
Adoption with contact, 42–44
Adoption-related journals and
periodicals, 296–299
Adoptive Families magazine, 162
324
Index

Adoptive parent screening. See
Adoption screening
Adoptive parents, 303
characteristics of, 2–3, 172
counseling, 12, 27
educational resources, 29
religious requirements, 8
support organizations,
132–133, 255
testimony on experiences of,
206–212
training, 4
See also Gay or lesbian
adoptive parents; Single-
parent adopters or
prospective adopters
AdoptUSKids, 231, 233, 302, 310
Adult adoption, 33
AFCARS data, 175–192, 231
Africa, 89–90
African-American children. See
Children of color;
Transracial/transcultural
adoption
After Adoption, 239
Agency accreditation, 73
Agency adoption, 11–12
Ages of children in foster care
(table), 177, 180, 182, 186,
188, 190
AIDS. See HIV/AIDS
Alcohol-exposed children. See
Fetal alcohol syndrome
Alcohol-related birth defects
(ARBD), 19
Alcohol-related
neurodevelopmental
disorder (ARND), 19
Alice Chapin Adoption Nursery,
126
ALMA, 44, 46, 133, 152, 233
Alperson, Myra, 284
Alstein, Howard, 54, 296
Amber Alert System, 143
American Academy of Adoption
Attorneys (AAAA), 139,
253–254
American Academy of Pediatrics,
67, 68, 234
American Adoption Congress
(AAC), 45, 47, 49, 136, 152,
234
American Association of Social
Workers, 127
American Bar Association (ABA),
254
American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU), 68–70
American College of Pediatrics
(ACP), 68
American Humane Association
(AHA), 234–235
American Public Human Services
Association (APHSA),
235–236
American Public Welfare
Association (APWA), 128,
175
Annie E. Casey Foundation, 129,
236, 312
ARENA, 132
Aronson, Jane, 90
Artificial insemination, 31, 316
Asia, 90
Assisted reproductive
technologies, 30–31
Association of Administrators of
the Interstate Compact on
Adoption and Medical
Assistance (AAICAMA),
236
Association of Administrators of
the Interstate Compact on
the Placement of Children
(AAICPC), 235–236
Attachment, defined, 316
Index
325

Attachment disorders, 6, 16–19,
146
case examples, 16–17
definition, 316
Attachment theory, 16, 18,
146–147, 153
print resources, 271–272
Attention deficit disorder (ADD),
316
Attention deficit disorder with
hyperactivity (ADHD), 316
Attorney’s role, 26
Atwood, Thomas, 45, 106
Audiovisual resources:
CD-ROMs, 308–310
DVDs and videos, 302–308
Aulton, Sharon, 217–221
Babb, L. Anne, 289
Baran, Annette, 135, 287–288
“Barriers to Adoption” hearings,
203–214
Barron, Annette, 45
Barth, Richard P., 290
Bartholet, Elizabeth, 54, 76, 81,
275, 284, 290
Bastard Nation, 45, 141, 236–237
Battered child syndrome, 132,
159, 293–294. See also Child
abuse and neglect
Beauvais-Godwin, Laura, 278
Berger, Vivian, 70
Bernard, Viola Wertheim,
145–146
Beverly, James, 272
Bilchik, Shay, 142
Biographical sketches, 145–168
Birth certificates, 45, 152
Birth father’s rights, 23, 174
court decisions, 134, 223–225
notification of child’s
adoption, 224
“safe haven” laws and, 78
Birth mothers:
autobiography, 136
facts and statistics, 173–175
support organizations, 250
two-parent family preferences,
61
See also Birth parents
Birth parents:
challenging adoptive
placement, 27
closed adoption versus, 38–40
consent and consent
revocation, 23–24
consent to releasing birth
information, 138
counseling, 12, 13, 24, 26, 112
definition, 317
infant adoption process, 4–5
open adoption and, 40–42
payments from adopting
parents, 26
stories and experiences,
272–273
support organizations, 45–49,
80–81, 135, 241–242, 250
See also Birth father’s rights;
Birth mothers
Birth parents’ rights, Supreme
Court decisions, 225–226,
227
Birth relatives, searching for. See
Search and reunion
Black Administrators in Child
Welfare (BACW), 237–238
Black-market adoptions, 26, 129,
130, 317
Blank, Joseph, 290
Blau, Eric, 278
Boarder babies, 317
Bonding, 16, 18. See also
Attachment theory
326
Index

Books about adoption, 269–276.
See also Print resources;
specific authors
Bothun, Linda, 279
Boudreaux, Donald, 75–76
Bowlby, John, 16, 146–147, 271
Bozett, Frederick W., 288
Brace, Charles Loring, 89, 124,
147–148
British Association for Adoption
and Fostering, 93, 297
Brodzinsky, David M., 279, 290
Brown, Louise, 136
Buck, Pearl S., 10, 129, 130,
148–149
Burke, Kate, 47
Bush, George H. W., 166
Business model for adoption, 80
Caban v. Mohammed, 224
Cahn, Naomi, 275
Cameron, Paul, 67, 68
Campbell, Lee H., 135
Canada, 91–92, 143
Canape, Charlene, 280
Caplan, Lincoln, 286–287
Capper, Lizanne, 291
Carney, Ann, 291
Carp, E. Wayne, 49, 163
CASA, 258
CASE, 238
Case management tools, 176, 310
Catholic Home Bureau, 125
CD-ROMs, 308–310
Cecere, Laura, 75
Center for Adoption Support and
Education, Inc. (CASE), 238
Center for Family Connections
(CFFC), 238–239
Center for Social Work Research
(CSWR), 231–232
Certification, defined, 317
Chambers, Jennifer, 118
Chapin, Alice, 126
Child abuse and neglect, 130
Amber Alert System, 143
battered child syndrome, 132,
159, 293–294
birth parents and, 216–217
CD-ROM resource, 309
Court Improvement Program,
140–141
family preservation versus,
214–221
mandatory reporting laws,
131, 159
print resources, 293–294
psychoemotional
consequences, 6, 132, 159
statistical resource, 312
Child Abuse Prevention and
Enforcement Act, 142
Child Abuse Prevention and
Treatment Act (CAPTA),
194–196
Child Abuse Prevention and
Treatment and Adoption
Opportunities Act, 48, 134,
194
Child Adoption Committee, 126
Child and Adolescent Social Work
Journal, 298
Child and Youth Care Forum, 298
Child Citizenship Act of 200, 142
Child consent to adoption, 15
Child development, 154–155
Child Protection Team, 159
Child safety, family preservation
versus, 214–221, 292
Child Welfare Information
Gateway (CWIG), 39–40,
169–170, 231, 239, 297
contact information, 239
Index
327

Child Welfare Institute (CWI),
239–240
Child Welfare Journal, 298
Child Welfare League of America
(CWLA), 49, 126–130, 155,
231, 240
birth family information
reporting and, 136
contact information, 240
database, 310–311
intercountry adoptions and,
246
open adoption and, 142
publication of, 298
transracial adoption and, 133
Children Awaiting Parents, Inc.
(CAP), 240–241
Children of color:
adoption trends and
estimates, 50–51
advocacy and support
organization, 237–238
foster care/adoption data,
179, 181, 184, 185, 191
intercountry adoptions and,
10
One Church, One Child
project, 137–138, 149–150,
206
racial identity issues, 54
special needs, 5
testimony on placement
issues, 203–206
See also Intercountry
(international) adoption;
Native American children
“Children on the Brink” report,
89
Children with emotional or
physical disabilities. See
Psychological and
emotional problems;
Special needs children
Children’s Aid Society, 89, 92,
124, 147–148, 165
Children’s Bureau. See U.S.
Children’s Bureau
Children’s Code of Minnesota,
127
Children’s Defense Fund (CDF),
134, 151
Children’s Health Act, 142
Children’s Home Society, 132–133
Children’s legal advocacy
organization, 255–256
Children’s Rights, 254–255
Children’s Voice, 298
China, 8, 98–105
domestic laws and practices,
102–105
“missing girls” problem,
99–102
China Adoption Organization
(CAO), 99
The Chosen Baby (Wasson), 128,
136
Chronology, 123–144
Circle of Parents, 241
Clements, George H., 137,
149–150
Clinton, Bill, 140, 167
Closed adoption, 38–40
definition, 317
Closed records, 44–49, 163
mutual consent registries,
46–47
Cohen, Mary Anne, 44
Collins, Pauline, 272
Comer, James, 295
Comfort, Randy, 93
Committee for Single Adoptive
Parents, 134
328
Index

Communicating with adopted
children:
print resources, 128, 274–275,
279
video/DVD resources, 306
Concerned United Birthparents
(CUB), 45, 49, 80–81, 135,
241–242
Concurrent planning, 13–14,
94–95, 250
definition, 317
Confidential adoption. See
Closed adoption
Confidential adoption records,
44–49. See also Open
records
Confidentiality, defined, 317
Congressional Coalition on
Adoption Institute, 242
Consent:
of birth parents, 23–24, 317
of children, 15
revocation, 23–24
Control, feelings of loss of, 42
Cooperative adoption, 42–44
Coparenting, 6, 317
Costs of adoption, 25–26
Council of Adoptive Parents
(CAP), 133
Counseling:
adoptive parents, 12, 27
at-risk pregnant teens or
women, 78
birth parents, 12, 13, 24, 26,
112
lesbians, 66
Court Improvement Program,
140–141
Court-appointed volunteer
advocacy, 258
Cushman, Candi, 70–71
Dailey, Tim, 65–66
Damania, Deenaz, 117
Databases, 310–314
Dave Thomas Foundation for
Adoption, 139, 143, 167,
242–243
De facto family, 317–318
“Dear Birth Parent” letter, 5
DeBolt, Dorothy and Robert, 150,
290–291
Deceptive or unethical adoption
practices, 74
Declaration of the Rights of the
Child, 131, 139
Decree of adoption, 24, 25, 41, 45,
52, 197, 317
Derdyn, Andre, 222
Designated adoption, 12–13
Displaced Persons Act, 128, 193
Disruption, 26–27, 315
Dissolution, 27–28, 198, 316
Dodd, Christopher J., 203–214
Dodds, Peter F., 285
Domestic (in-country) adoption,
4–7
Donovan, Linda, 73
Dorris, Michael, 150–151, 291
Dossier, defined, 318
Drug-exposed children:
adoptive parent’s testimony,
209–212
Hale House and, 155–156
methamphetamine, 21–22
print resources, 290, 291–292,
294
special needs, 5
See also Fetal alcohol
syndrome
Dudley, William, 276
Due process, 225
Duncan, Sidney, 204
Dusky, Lorraine, 136
Index
329

DVD and video resources,
302–308
Economic Growth and Tax Relief
Reconciliation Act, 142
Edelman, Marian Wright, 134,
151
Edelstein, Susan B., 291
Educational resources, 29, 238,
245, 251. See also Print
resources
Egypt, 89
Embryo “adoption,” 31
Emotional problems. See
Psychological and
emotional problems
Employer benefits, 28–29, 167,
199
Erichsen, Heino R., 285
Erichsen, Jean, 285
Eugenics, 126, 155, 318
Evan B. Donaldson Adoption
Institute, 70–71, 140–141,
163, 243
contact information, 243
safe-haven laws and, 78
Extended family, defined, 318
Extended family support, 60
Eyer, Diane E., 18, 271
Fahlberg, Vera I., 151–152, 280
Families for Kids (FFK), 139
Family and Medical Leave Act,
29
Family assessment, 3. See also
Home study
Family preservation, 80–81
abandoned children’s status
versus, 207
child safety versus, 214–221,
292
critiques of, 113–114
Family Preservation and Family
Support Services Program,
198–199
Family Pride Coalition (FPC),
243–244
Family Research Institute, 67
Fanshel, David, 132
Federal agencies, 229–232
Children’s Bureau, 155, 169,
175, 176, 230–232
See also specific agencies
Federal laws and policies,
193–202, 213
intercountry adoptions and,
8–11, 193
Native American adoption
and, 51–53
Senate hearings and
testimony, 202–221
unethical/deceptive adoption
practices and, 74
See also specific laws and
legislation
Fees for agency services, 12
Feigelman, William, 54, 58
Fessler, Ann, 272
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder
(FASD), 19–20, 151, 318
Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS),
19–20, 150–151, 209, 291,
294, 318
Finalization, 11, 25, 43, 114, 
318
parental rights termination
and, 23
Financial assistance. See
Adoption assistance
Finland, 109–112
Finnegan, Joanne, 273
Fisher, Florence, 44, 133, 152, 233,
270
Fisher, Susan, 275
330
Index

Foster care data and statistics
(tables), 177–192
adoptive family structure, 192
case goals, 179
child ages, 177, 180, 182, 186,
188, 190
child gender, 179, 184, 189
lengths of stay, 177, 183, 185
outcomes, 183
placement settings, 178
race/ethnicity, 179, 181, 184,
185, 191
Foster Care Independence Act,
141
Foster care, personal experiences
in, 206–209
Foster parent training resource,
304–305
Foster parents’ rights, Supreme
Court decisions, 226
Foster-adoption, 13–14, 318
Free Synagogue Child Adoption
Committee, 164
Freidmutter, Cindy, 73
Freud, Anna, 134, 152–153
Freud, Sigmund, 153–154
Freundlich, Madelyn, 290
The Future of Children Journal,
298–299
Gabbard, Lynn, 74, 209–212
Gamete intrafallopian transfer
(GIFT), 30
Gay and Lesbian Parents
Coalition International
(GLPCI), 136
Gay or lesbian adoptive parents,
62–72
British law and, 93, 95, 143
intercountry adoptions and,
65
print resources, 288
screening, 71–72
second-parent adoption, 63–64
support organizations, 136,
243–244
terminology preferences, 62
Gelles, Richard J., 215–216, 292
Gender of children in foster care,
179, 184, 189
Gender preferences, 4
Chinese “missing girls”
problem, 99–101
Philippines adoption culture,
116
Genealogy, 318
Germany, 135
Gerow, Darlene, 79–80
Gesell, Arnold, 126, 154–155
Gill, Owen, 53
Gilman, Lois, 280
Gladney, Edna, 128
Glossary, 315–321
Godwin, Raymond, 278
Goldberg, Norman and Judy, 140
Golden, Olivia A., 214–221
Goldstein, Joseph, 134, 153, 292
Goldstein, Sonja, 292
Goodman, Denise, 72
Gray, Deborah D., 271
Great Britain, 93–96, 127, 135, 143
Gritter, James L., 80, 273, 287
Group home, defined, 318
Guardian ad litem, 318
Guardianship. See Legal
guardianship
Guatemala, 50
Gudmundsson, Bruce I., 289
Hague Convention on
Intercountry Adoption, 11,
73, 107, 139, 140, 201
U.S. policy and, 144
Hale, Clara McBride, 155–156
Index
331

Hale House, 155–156
Hall, Beth, 55
Hammurabi’s Code, 1, 123
Harnack, Andrew, 276
Harris, Kathleen, 296
Hauschild, Myra, 288
Health issues:
HIV/AIDS, 5, 20–21, 89–90
intercountry adoptions and,
22
See also Drug-exposed
children; Fetal alcohol
syndrome; Medical history;
Psychological and
emotional problems
Hear My Voice: Protecting Our
Nation’s Children, 244
Helfer, Ray E., 293–294
Henig, Robin M., 279
Herman, Ellen, 143
HIV/AIDS:
African orphan problem,
89–90
birth parents with, 20–21
children testing positive, 5
print resources, 294–295
Hogan, Maureen, 74
Holliman, Beth, 296
Hollinger, Joan, 73, 77–78,
156–157, 275
Holt, Bertha, 157–158
Holt, Harry, 157–158
Holt International Children’s
Services, 10, 49–50, 130,
157–158, 232
Home study, 3, 25
definition, 319
early state law, 125, 127
in Canada, 91
Homes for Black Children,
204–206
Homosexual adoptive parents.
See Gay or lesbian adoptive
parents
Hospital “walk-aways” (“boarder
babies”), 77–78, 107, 317
I-600 applications, 10–11
Illegitimacy, 46, 126, 128
Immigration and Nationality Act,
9, 10, 131, 193
Immigration and Naturalization
Service (INS), 143
In vitro fertilization (IVF), 30
Independent adoption, 12, 319
India, 117–118
Indian Adoption Project, 131,
132, 142
Indian Child Welfare Act, 51–53,
132, 136, 142, 196–197, 303
Indonesia, 89
Infant abandonment laws, 76–79,
202
Infant adoption, 4–5
commercial aspects, 80
print resources, 277–278
regulation, 75–76
traditional adoption, 321
Infertility, 3
assisted reproductive
technologies, 30–31
Chinese culture and, 103
definition, 319
resources, 29, 134, 158, 253,
284
trends, 80
Insight: Open Adoption
Resources and Support,
244–245
Institute for Adoption
Information, Inc. (IAI), 245
Interagency Task Force on
Adoptions, 138
332
Index

Intercountry (international)
adoption, 7–11, 72–74
African children and, 90
Canadian rules and
regulations, 92
case history, 9–10
definition of orphan, 10
facts and statistics, 170
fraud, 72
gay couples and, 65
Hague Convention, 11, 73,
107, 139, 140, 144, 201
historical context, 7
International Conference on,
130
laws and policies, 10–11, 75,
193
Mexico and, 118–119
motherland tours, 117
online resource, 301
Philippines policies, 114–115,
116
placement agencies and, 8
potential health concerns, 22
print resources, 284–286
racial/cultural concerns,
56–57
regulation, 8–11, 72–74
Romanian policies, 105–107
Russia and, 96, 98
single-parent adopters and, 8,
61
slavery parallels, 56
South Korean policies,
108–109
special needs children and, 8
statistics, 7
support organizations, 136,
157–158, 245–247
United Kingdom and, 95
Intercountry Adoption Act of
2000 (IAA), 11, 141, 201
International adoption. See
Intercountry (international)
adoption
International adoption clinics, 22
International Concerns for
Children (ICC), 136
International Social Service USA
(ISS-USA), 245–246
International Soundex Reunion
Registry (ISRR), 46,
134–135, 246
Interracial adoption. See
Transracial/transcultural
adoption
Interstate Compact on Adoption
and Medical Assistance
(ICAMA), 7, 236
Interstate Compact on the
Placement of Children
(ICPC), 6–7, 235–236, 319
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection,
30
Involuntary disruption, 27
Iran, 89
Islam and adoption, 89
Jackson, Barbara, 53
Jackson, Jesse, 213
Jamaica, 8
James, Beverly, 292
Jefferson, Thomas, 124
Jehovah’s Witnesses, 128
Jervey, Gay, 80
Jewett, Claudia L., 291–292
Jewish adoption services, 126,
138, 164, 253
Johnson, Dana, 22
Johnston, Patricia Irwin, 158,
277–278, 284
Joint Council on International
Children’s Services (JCICS),
72–73, 135, 246–247
Index
333

Journal of Child and Family Studies,
299
Journals and periodicals, 296–299
Juvenile courts, 257
Kaishang Buhay Foundation, 116
Keck, Gregory C., 293
Keefer, Betsy, 274
Keeping Children and Families
Safe Act, 143, 194, 196
Kefauver, Estes, 130
Kempe, C. Henry, 132, 158–159,
293
KIDS COUNT, 312
KinNET, 302
Kinship adoption, 2
Kinship care, 14–15, 302, 319
Kinship program, 164
Kirk, H. David, 45, 132, 159–160,
280–281
Kleinfeld, Judith, 294
Koran, 89
Korczak, Janusz, 160–161
Korean orphans, 129, 130,
157–158, 193, 246
Kruger, Pamela, 281
Kumar, Miriam, 274
Kupecky, Regina M., 293
Lanchon, Anne, 274
Lander, Joyce, 295
Lassiter v. Department of Social
Services, 225
Latin American Parents
Association (LAPA), 247
Law and legal issues, 23
attorney roles, 26
black-market adoptions, 26
court-appointed volunteer
advocacy, 258
disruption and dissolution,
26–28
due process and parental
rights termination, 225
for adoptive parents, 24–25
for birth parents, 23–24
historical context, 1
intercountry adoptions and,
10–11, 72–74
interstate adoptions, 6–7
liberalized adoption market,
75–76
more versus less regulation,
72–76
newborn “safe haven” laws,
76–79, 202
open adoption records, 45–46
print resource, 275
Supreme Court decisions, 128,
134, 222–227
transracial/transcultural
adoption and, 51–54
See also Federal laws and
policies; State laws; specific
countries, issues, laws
Laws, Rita, 282, 294
Legal Advocates for Permanent
Parenting (LAPP), 255
Legal guardianship, 15
guardian ad litem, 318
HIV positive parent and,
20–21
standby guardianship, 20–21
Legally oriented organizations,
139, 253–258
Legal-risk placement, 13–14, 319
Lehr v. Robertson, 224–225
Leonhart-Jones, 216
Lesbians as adoptive parents. See
Gay or lesbian adoptive
parents
Levin, Carl, 46
Life book, 319
Life History Center, 129
334
Index

Lifton, Betty Jean, 135, 160–162,
270
Lindsay, Caroline, 294–295
Lindsay, Jean Warren, 12
Liptak, Karen, 276
Litigation in adoption, 222–227.
See also U.S. Supreme Court
decisions
Los Angeles County Bureau of
Adoptions, 132
Loss of control, 42
Louise Wise Services, 126
Marindin, Hope, 134
Maskew, Trish, 72
Matching, 155, 164
Maternity homes, 273
Mattes, Jane, 59
May v. Anderson, 227
McColm, Michelle, 281
Mediated adoption, 38
Medicaid, 7
Medical assistance, 7
Medical history:
closed adoption and, 39
confidential adoption records
versus, 46
open adoption and, 41
Melina, Lois, 42, 162–163,
281–282, 287
Menning, Barbara Eck, 134
Merkel-Holguin, Lisa A., 283
Methamphetamine, 21–22
Metzenbaum, Howard, 53,
203–204, 212
Mewshaw, Michael, 282
Mexico, 118–120
Meyer v. Nebraska, 226–227
Milbrand, Lisa, 55
Miller, Laurie C., 286
Miller, Naomi, 62, 289
Minority children. See Children
of color; Native American
children
“Missing girls” problem, 99–102
Mixed families. See
Transracial/transcultural
adoption
Model Act for Adoption of
Children with Special
Needs, 48
Model State Adoption Act, 48, 137
Model State Adoption
Procedures, 48, 137
Morrissette, Mikki, 289
Motherland tours, 117
Mukhina, Valeria Sergeevna,
96–97
Multiethnic Placement Act,
53–54, 139, 140, 199, 204,
213, 227
Multistate Foster Care Data
Archive, 311
Mutual consent registries, 46–47
National Adoption Center
(NAC), 133, 247–248
National Adoption Foundation
(NAF), 140, 248
National Adoption Information
Clearinghouse (NAIC), 138,
170
National Association of Black
Social Workers (NABSW),
50, 133, 227, 248
National Association of Counsel
for Children (NACC),
255–256
National Association of Social
Workers (NASW), 130, 299,
313
National Center for Adoption
Law and Policy (NCALP),
256
Index
335

National Center for Social
Statistics (NCSS), 175
National Center for Youth Law
(NCYL), 256–257
National Child Welfare Resource
Center for Adoption,
248–249
National Children’s Home
Society, 125
National Clearinghouse on Child
Abuse and Neglect
Information (NCCANCH),
170, 231, 239
National Council for Adoption
(NCFA), 45, 137, 249
National Council of Birthmothers
(NCOB), 250
National Council of Juvenile and
Family Court Judges
(NCJFCJ), 257–258
National Court Appointed
Special Advocate (CASA)
Association, 258
National Institute of Child
Health and Human
Development, 132
National Resource Center for
Family-Centered Practice
and sPermanency Planning
(NRCFCPPP). See also Birth
parents
National Urban League, 130
Native American children, 50
adoption laws and policies,
51–53
ARENA and, 132
boarding schools, 51
Indian Adoption Project, 131,
142
Indian Child Welfare Act,
51–53, 132, 136, 142,
196–197, 303
training video, 303
Nature versus nurture, 146
Nigeria, 90
Nissen, Phyllis, 138
Nonidentifying information, 46,
136, 319
Nonrecurring adoption costs,
198, 311, 319
Norris, Betsie, 283
North American Council on
Adoptable Children
(NACAC), 92, 134, 251, 297,
313
Northwest Adoption Exchange
(NWAE), 231
Norway, 126
O’Halloran, Kerry, 282
O’Hanlon, Tim, 282, 294, 295
Older children, 5
adult adoption, 33
consent to adoption, 15
maintaining connections with
birth relatives, 43
print resources, 291, 292–293
See also Special needs children
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act (OBRA), 198–199
One Church, One Child project,
137–138, 149–150, 206
Online resources, 299–301,
312–313
Open adoption, 40–42, 135, 142
definition, 319
organizations supporting,
244–245
print resources, 286–288
Open records, 44–49
Bastard Nation and, 45, 141,
237
birth parent’s consent, 138
Dave Thomas and, 166
legislation, 45–46
336
Index

organizations supporting,
44–45
Organization for a United
Response (OURS, Inc.),
132–133
Organizations, 232–253
adoptive parent support,
132–133, 255
advocacy for children of color,
237–238
birth parents support, 45–49,
80–81, 135, 241–242, 250
education and support
resources, 238, 245, 251
federal agencies, 229–232
gay and lesbian support, 136,
243–244
infertility support, 29, 134,
158, 253
intercountry adoption
resources, 136, 157–158,
245–246
legally oriented, 139, 253–258
state offices, 258–268
supporting open adoption
records, 44–45
See also Placement agencies or
organizations; specific
organizations
Orphan Ranger program, 91
Orphan Train, 32, 89, 124,
147–148
Orphan Train Heritage Society of
America (OTHSA), 138
Orphan Voyage, 44, 129, 164
Orphanages and institutions:
history, 123, 124
in India, 117–118
in Mexico, 119
in Romania, 106–107
in Russia, 96–97
Nazis and, 161
Orphans:
global problem, 89–91
in Finland, 110
in India, 117
intercountry adoptions, 7
international advocacy and
support organization, 252
Korean, 8, 10, 49–50, 108–109,
129, 130, 157–158, 193, 246
legal definition, 9
“Pied Piper” of, 161
South Korean policies, 108
Vietnamese, 135
Our Place, 93
PACT, An Adoption Alliance,
251–252
Palmore v. Sidoti, 227
Pannor, Reuben, 45, 135, 287–288
Parens patriae, 320
Parent support groups. See
Support groups and
services
Parental leave, 29
Parental rights termination. See
Termination of parental
rights
Parenting classes, 29
Parent-initiated adoption, 13
Parents Network for the Post-
Institutionalized Child
(PNPIC), 252
Passive registries, 46–47
Paton, Jean, 44, 129, 163–164, 270
Pearce, Jonathan, 95
Pearl S. Buck International, 149
Pedophilia, 70
Perkins, Ann, 273
Permanency planning, 13–14,
250, 320
Perrin, Ellen, 67–68
Pertman, Adam, 80, 81, 276–277
Index
337

Petition to Adopt, 25
Philippines, 114–117
Pictures of child to be adopted, 5
Placement agencies or
organizations, 232–233,
240–241
accreditation, 73
adoption exchanges, 6,
231–233, 316
intercountry adoptions and, 8
international agencies, 72–73,
246–247
public and private adoption
agencies, 11–12
See also specific agencies or
organizations
Placement date, 24, 320
Planned sharing, 6
Pohl, Constance, 296
Polier, Justine Wise, 128, 164
Politically correct terminology,
31–32
Poorhouses, 124
Post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), 320
Primogeniture, 124
Prince v. Massachusetts, 128
Print resources:
adopted persons’ stories,
270–271, 278–279
adopting older children, 291,
292–293
adoption financial assistance,
294, 295
adoption lifelong issues, 283
adoption reunions, 281
attachment/bonding, 271–272
battered children, 293–294
books, 269–276
child welfare, 283–284
controversial issues, 275–277
gay and lesbian parents, 288
general, 278–284
HIV/AIDS, 294–295
infant adoption, 277–278
infertility, 284
intercountry adoption,
284–286
journals and periodicals,
296–299
open adoption, 286–288
parent’s guides, 281–282, 283
psychology of adoption, 279
single-parent adopters and,
289
special needs, 289–295
substance-exposed children,
290, 291–292, 294
transracial/transcultural
adoption, 295–296
See also specific authors
Private adoption, 12
Private agencies, 12. See also
Placement agencies or
organizations
Promoting Safe and Stable
Families Amendments, 25,
75, 78, 142, 202
Psychological and emotional
problems:
adoptive parent’s story,
209–212
attachment disorders, 6,
16–19, 146
battered child syndrome, 132,
159
lifelong issues in adoption, 2
post-institutionalized
children, 97
print resources, 279
Schechter’s research, 2, 131
separation and loss issues,
147, 152, 271, 280, 293
338
Index

transracial/transcultural
adoption and, 55
Psychological parents, 134, 153,
222, 226, 320
Public agencies, 11–12
Putative, 320
Quilloin v. Walcott, 223–224
Racial identity issues, 54. See also
Transracial/transcultural
adoption
Rappaport, Bruce, 42, 287
Reactive attachment disorder
(RAD), 16–19. See also
Attachment disorders
Reagan, Ronald, 156
Refugee Relief Act of 1953, 129,
193, 246
Register, Cheri, 286
Reid, Theresa, 286
Relative adoptions, 2
Religious requirements, 8
Relinquishment, 23–24
cooperative adoption and, 43
counseling and, 111
defined, 320
Native Americans and, 196
statistical data, 173–175
See also Termination of
parental rights
Removal of Barriers to
Interethnic Adoption, 53
RESOLVE, Inc., 29, 134, 158,
252–253
Respite care,208, 320
Reunion registries, 46, 134–135,
246
Revocation of consent, 23–24
Riley, Debbie, 274
Roe v. Wade, 134
Romanchik, Brenda, 40
Romania, 8, 105–108
Ronstrom, Anitha, 113
Roosevelt, Franklin D., 128
Roosevelt, Theodore, 126
Rosenberg, Elinor B., 283
Rosier, Pat, 288
Roszia, Sharon, 42, 287
Rothmann, Barbara K., 296
Rozsia, Sharon Kaplan, 2
Russell Sage Foundation, 127
Russia, 8, 96–98
Rwanda, 90
SACWIS, 176, 231
“Safe haven” laws, 76–79, 202
St. Vincent De Paul Society, 125
Salter, Shane, 206–209, 212
Same-sex couples, 62–72. See also
Gay or lesbian adoptive
parents
Santosky v. Kramer, 225
Schechter, Marshall, 2, 131, 279
Schooler, Jayne, 283
Screening prospective adoptive
parents. See Adoption
screening
Sealed adoption records, 44–49
Search and reunion, 39–40
British law and, 93
mutual consent registries,
46–47
open versus closed adoption
records and, 46–48
outcomes, 39
personal stories and
experiences, 135, 161–162,
270
resources for, 39–40, 152, 233,
246, 281
reunion registry, 46, 134–135,
246
Second-parent adoption, 63–64
Index
339

Self-esteem, 58
Semi-open adoption, 38, 320
Separation and loss issues, 147,
152, 271, 280, 293, 307. See
also Attachment disorders
Sexual orientation, 62–63. See also
Gay or lesbian adoptive
parents
Sexually abused children, 6
Amber Alert System, 143
kinship care case, 15
See also Child abuse and
neglect
Shared Fate (Kirk), 132, 159–160
Shawyer, Joss, 79
Sheppard-Towner Infancy and
Maternity Protection Act,
127
Siblings, 5, 166, 197
Siegel, Stephanie E., 283
Silverman, Arnold, 54, 58
Silverstein, Deborah, 2
Simon, Rita J., 54, 296
Single Mothers by Choice, Inc.,
59
Single-parent adopters or
prospective adopters, 59–62
birth parent preferences
versus, 61
extended family support, 60
intercountry adoptions and, 8,
61
print resources, 289
second-parent adoption, 63–64
support organization, 134
See also Gay or lesbian
adoptive parents
Slavery, 56
Small Business Job Protection
Act, 199
Smith, Eve P., 283
Smith, Jerome, 44, 81, 277
Smith v. OFFER, 226
Smolowe, Jill, 281
Social Security Act, 128
Social Work, 299
Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals, 125
Software resource, 310
Solnit, Albert, 134, 153, 292
Sorosky, Arthur, 45, 135, 287–288
South Korea, 8, 108–109
Special needs children, 5–6
Adoption Assistance Program,
137, 197–198
adoption exchanges, 6
adoptive parent’s stories,
209–212, 290–291
Chinese society and, 105
coparenting, 6
dissolution of adoption, 27–28
early placement programs,
132, 133
financial assistance or
subsidies, 28
intercountry adoptions and, 8
placement and referral
support, 150
print resources, 289–295
Senate “Barriers to Adoption”
hearings, 203
video/DVD resources, 305
See also Psychological and
emotional problems
Standards of Adoption Service, 130
Standby guardianship, 20–21
Stanley v. Illinois, 223
Stars of David, 138, 253
State laws, 193
consent to termination of
parental rights, 23–24
cooperative adoption and,
43–44
database resource, 313–314
340
Index

home study requirements,
125, 127
Minnesota’s Children’s Code
model, 127
Model State Adoption
Procedures, 48, 137
Native American adoption
and, 52
newborn “safe havens,” 76–79
private agency oversight, 12
Uniform Adoption Act, 129,
156
State offices, 258–268
State registries, 47
Statewide Automated Child
Welfare Information
System (SACWIS), 176, 231
Steinberg, Gail, 55, 296
Stephenson, Mary, 288
Stepparent adoptions, 2, 15
Subsidies and financial
assistance. See Adoption
assistance
Substance abuse. See Drug-
exposed children; Fetal
alcohol syndrome
Substitute care, 111, 320
Sullum, Jacob, 75
Support groups and services, 25,
29–30
database, 312
video resources, 305, 306
Supreme Court decisions. See
U.S. Supreme Court
decisions
Surrender, defined, 320. See also
Relinquishment
Surrogate mothers, 31, 320
Sweden, 127, 130
Syria, 89
System, defined, 321
Taft, Jessie, 165
Talley, Wilbert, 206
Tax credits, 28, 142, 167
Teenage birth mothers, 174
Termination of parental rights
birth father’s rights, 23
consent and consent
revocation, 23–24
definition, 321
due process considerations,
225
foster-adoption and, 14
See also Relinquishment
Test-tube babies, 136
Theis, Sophie van Senden, 127,
165–166
Therapeutic adoption, 165
Thomas, Dave, 139, 166–167, 242
Title IV-E program, 28, 143, 198,
202, 231, 294
Toussaint, Alvin, 295
Townsend, Rita, 273
Traditional adoption, 321
Training:
coparents, 6
foster parent resources,
304–305
prospective adoptive parents,
4
Transracial/transcultural
adoption, 49–58, 129, 204
case example, 56
Child Welfare League’s
Revised Standards, 133
definition, 321
Jesse Jackson and, 213
Multiethnic Placement Act,
53–54, 139, 140, 199, 204,
213, 227
National Association of Black
Social Workers and, 50, 133,
227, 248
Index
341

Transracial/transcultural
adoption, continued
organizations supporting, 138
outcomes, 55
print resources, 295–296
questions to consider, 57–58
racial identity issues, 54
related law, 51–54, 139–140,
199, 201, 204, 227
Senate “Barriers to Adoption”
hearings, 203–206
slavery parallels, 56
trends and estimates, 50–51
See also Children of color;
Intercountry (international)
adoption
Tremetiere, Barbara, 167–168
Tunisia, 89
Twins, 146
U.N. Convention on the Rights of
the Child, 139, 141
Uniform Adoption Act, 129, 156
United Kingdom, 93–96, 127, 135,
143
United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), 90, 91
Urban Institute, 301
U.S. Children’s Bureau, 125, 126,
127, 131, 155, 169, 175,
230–232
state information systems and,
176
U.S. Citizenship and
Immigrations Services
(USCIS), 10
U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (HHS),
230
U.S. law. See Federal laws and
policies
U.S. Office of Child
Development, 133
U.S. Supreme Court decisions,
128, 134, 222–227
birth parents’ rights, 225–226,
227
foster parents’ rights, 227
racial considerations, 227
unmarried birth fathers’
rights, 223–225
Utriainen, Sirpa, 113
Van Arsdale, Martin Van Buren,
125
Varon, Lee, 289
Video and DVD resources,
302–308
Vietnamese children, 8, 135
Villardi, Emma, 46, 134
Voluntary Cooperative
Information System (VCIS),
175
Voluntary disruption, 27
Volunteer caregivers, 6
Wasson, Valentina P., 128, 136
Watkins, Mary, 275
Websites, 299–301, 312–313
Weitzman, Carol, 97
Welch, Martha G., 272
Welcome House, 10, 129, 149
Welfare reform act, 140
Wescott, Siobhan, 294
Wise, Louise, 126
Worldwide Orphans Foundation
(WWO), 91
Zygote intrafallopian transfer
(ZIFT), 30
342
Index

About the Author
Barbara Moe, MSW, is a consultant to Adoption Alliance, a pri-
vate nonprofit agency in Denver, Colorado, where she directed
the Special Needs Program for sixteen years. She is the author of
twenty-four books, including the first edition of Adoption: A Ref-
erence Handbook. She and her husband have two adopted children.

