
Advanced Technologies 
for Meat Processing


Advanced Technologies 
for Meat Processing
Second Edition
Edited by
Fidel Toldrá and Leo M. L. Nollet

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2018 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-5459-0 (Hardback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts 
have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers 
have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to 
copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has 
not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, 
transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval 
system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.
com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood 
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and 
registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, 
a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used 
only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

v
Contents
Preface .................................................................................................................... vii
About the Editors ...................................................................................................ix
Contributors ......................................................................................................... xiii
 1. Genetically Modified Farm Animals: Control and Traceability...........1
Antoon Lievens and Mauro Petrillo 
 2. Hyperspectral Imaging Technique for Online Monitoring of 
Meat Quality and Safety .............................................................................17
Jun-Li Xu and Da-Wen Sun
 3. Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits ....................83
Stephanie M. Fowler, Heinar Schmidt, Rico Scheier, and David L. Hopkins
 4. Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and 
Meat Products .............................................................................................. 113
Alicia Rodríguez, María J. Andrade, Mar Rodríguez, and Juan J. Córdoba
 5. Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety: Recent Advances in 
Nanotechnology Integration ....................................................................153
Rosa Pilolli, Nicoletta Ditaranto, and Linda Monaci
 6. Meat Decontamination by Irradiation ................................................... 197
Dong U. Ahn, Eun Joo Lee, and Aubrey Mendonca
 7. Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat 
Processing .................................................................................................. 227
Sencer Buzrul
 8. Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality 
and Safety .....................................................................................................259
Tomás Bolumar and Stefan Toepfl
 9. Emerging Technologies for the Meat Processing Industry ................297
Kumari Shikha Ojha, Joseph P. Kerry, and Brijesh K. Tiwari
 10. Reduction of Contaminant’ Content in Processed Meats .................. 319
Peter Šimko

vi
Contents
 11. Nutrigenomics in Food-Producing Animals.........................................355
Werner G. Bergen
 12. Bioactive Properties of Peptides Generated from Meat Proteins .....371
Keizo Arihara and Yusuke Komiya
 13. New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat 
Products ........................................................................................................403
Francisco Jiménez-Colmenero, Milagro Reig, and Fidel Toldrá
 14. Salt Reduction in Processed Meats .........................................................443
Fidel Toldrá and José M. Barat
 15. Fat Reduction in Processed Meats ........................................................... 461
Marise A. Rodrigues Pollonio
 16. Processing of Nitrite-Free Cured Meats ................................................ 513
Fereidoon Shahidi and Ronald B. Pegg
 17. Proteomic Tools for Improved Processing of Dry-Cured Meats ......535
Leticia Mora and Fidel Toldrá
 18. The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens ....................559
Carmen A. Campos, Marcela P. Castro, María E. Cayre, and Franco P. Rivas
 19. Functionalities of Meat Bacterial Starters .............................................597
Régine Talon and Sabine Leroy
 20. Modified Atmosphere Packaging ............................................................ 615
Joseph G. Sebranek and Terry A. Houser
 21. Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and 
Processed Meats ..........................................................................................647
Brandon Guild, Hans Bernard Tee, and Loong-Tak Lim
Index .....................................................................................................................689

vii
Preface
Meat and meat products constitute some of the most important foods in 
Western societies and their presence is also increasing very rapidly in the 
Asian countries. The processing technology has been developing very fast 
over the last decade, as can be observed in the number of publications, which 
is growing exponentially year by year. The meat industry is progressively 
incorporating such technological advances and it is evident that an updated 
compilation of these recent developments is really needed by meat scientists 
and technologists.
The first edition of this book dates back to 2006 and the contents were 
spread throughout 18 chapters. The second edition brings 21 chapters with 
new approaches to a dynamic field, combining updated and revised versions 
of several chapters with new chapters dealing with new online monitoring 
techniques such as hyperspectral imaging and Raman spectroscopy, the use 
of nanotechnology for sensor devices or new packaging materials, and the 
application of omics technologies such as nutrigenomics and proteomics for 
meat quality and nutrition.
The main goal of this book is to provide the reader with recent develop-
ments in new advanced technologies for the full meat processing chain. The 
book starts with the control and traceability of genetically modified farm 
animals, followed by four chapters reporting the use of online nondestruc-
tive monitoring techniques such as hyperspectral imaging and Raman spec-
troscopy, real-time polymerase chain reaction for pathogen detection, and 
nanotechnology-based sensors. Then, the following five chapters describe 
different advanced technologies for meat decontamination, such as irradia-
tion, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic pressure processing, other nonthermal 
technologies, and reduction in contaminant generation. One chapter covers 
nutrigenomics in animal nutrition and production, and this is followed by 
six chapters dealing with nutrition-related issues such as bioactive peptides, 
functional meats, fat and salt reduction, processing of nitrite-free products, 
and the use of proteomics for the improved processing of dry-cured meats. 
The last four chapters report the latest developments in bacteriocins against 
meat-borne pathogens, the functionality of bacterial starters, modified atmo-
sphere packaging, and the use of new nanotechnology-based materials for 
intelligent and edible packaging.
This book is written by distinguished international contributors with 
recognized expertise and strong reputations, and brings together all the 
advances in varied and different technologies such as biotechnology, hyper-
spectral imaging and Raman spectroscopy, nanotechnology, decontami-
nation technologies, omics technologies, and packaging for application in 
different stages of meat processing.

viii
Preface
We would like to thank very cordially all the authors of this book for all 
their efforts and for sharing their knowledge on these different topics, as 
well as the production team at CRC Press for their dedication to the publica-
tion of this new edition.

ix
About the Editors
Fidel Toldrá  obtained his BSc in chemistry (1980) and PhD in chemistry (1984) 
from the University of Valencia. Since 2001, he has been a research professor 
and head of the Laboratory of Biochemistry, Innovation, and Technology of 
Meat and Meat Products at the Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de 
Alimentos, in Paterna, Valencia, Spain.
He has filed 11 patents and directed 24 PhD theses and is currently direct-
ing one PhD theses. He has published over 270 manuscripts in worldwide 
recognized scientific journals and 120 book chapters. His work is quite cited 
(>700 citations in 2016) and he holds an h-index of 47.
Prof. Toldrá has received numerous awards such as the 1992 Iber Award 
on food and cardiovascular diseases; the 2001 Danone Institute Award to 
the best scientific trajectory within the last 10 years in food, nutrition, and 
health; the 2002 International Prize for meat science and technology from the 
International Meat Secretariat, Paris, France; the 2002 GEA Award on R&D 
activity in agro-food in the Valencia community; the 2010 Distinguished 
Research Award and the 2014 Meat Processing Award, both from the 
American Meat Science Association; and the 2015 Dupont Science Award. In 
2008, he was elected as a fellow of the International Academy of Food Science 
and Technology in Shanghai, China; in 2009, he was elected as a fellow of the 
Institute of Food Technologists.
Prof. Toldrá is the European editor of Trends in Food Science and Technology 
(Elsevier, since 2005) and an associate editor of Meat Science (Elsevier, since 
2014); he was editor-in-chief of Current Nutrition and Food Science (Bentham, 
2005–2012) and section editor of the Journal of Muscle Foods (Wiley-Blackwell, 
2009–2010). He is a member of the Editorial Boards of Food Chemistry 
(Elsevier, since 1999), Journal of Food Engineering (Elsevier, since 2011), 
Journal of Muscle Foods (Wiley-Blackwell, 2001–2010), Food Analytical Methods 
(Springer, since 2008), Journal of Food and Nutrition Research (VUP, since 2008), 
The Open Nutrition Journal (Bentham, since 2008), The Open Enzyme Inhibition 
Journal (Bentham, since 2008), Recent Patents in Agriculture, Food and Nutrition 
(Bentham, since 2009), Food Science and Nutrition (Wiley, since 2012), and 
Current Opinion in Food Science (Elsevier, since 2014).
In 2002, he authored a book entitled Dry-Cured Meat Products (Wiley-
Blackwell) and has worked as an editor or associate editor of numerous 
books for major publishers, such as Springer, CRC Press, Wiley-Blackwell, 
and Elsevier. He was an associate editor of the Handbook of Food and Beverage 
Fermentation Technology and the Handbook of Food Science, Technology and 
Engineering, both published by CRC Press (2004 and 2006, respectively), 
Handbook of Food Product Manufacturing (John Wiley & Sons, 2007), and the 
third edition of Food Biochemistry and Food Processing (Wiley-Blackwell, 2012). 

x
About the Editors
In 2006, he coedited two books with Dr. Nollet: Advanced Technologies for Meat 
Processing (CRC Press) and Advances in Food Diagnostics (Blackwell Publishing). 
He was the editor of Meat Biotechnology (Springer, 2008) and Safety of Meat and 
Processed Meat (2009, Springer), the editor-in-chief of first and second edi-
tions of the Handbook of Fermented Meat and Poultry (Wiley-Blackwell, 2007 
and 2015), and editor of the Handbook of Meat Processing (Wiley-Blackwell, 
2010). With Leo M. L. Nollet, he has published several books on food analysis 
published by CRC Press: Handbook of Muscle Foods Analysis (2009), Handbook 
of Processed Meats and Poultry Analysis (2009), Handbook of Seafood and Seafood 
Products Analysis (2010), Handbook of Dairy Foods Analysis (2010), Handbook of 
Analysis of Edible Animal By-Products (2011), Safety Analysis of Foods of Animal 
Origin (2011), Sensory Analysis of Foods of Animal Origin (2011), Handbook of 
Analysis of Active Ingredients in Functional Foods (2012), Food Analysis by HPLC 
(2013), and the third edition of the Handbook of Food Analysis (2015). He also 
coedited Proteomics in Foods: Principles and Applications for Springer (2013). 
He is one of the three editors-in-chief of the Encyclopedia of Food and Health 
with five volumes published by Academic Press/Elsevier (2016). He is the 
editor of the eighth edition of the famous book Lawrie´s Meat Science pub-
lished by Woodhead/Elsevier (2017). Since 2016, he has been the editor of the 
prestigious series of books entitled Advances in Food and Nutrition Research 
(Academic Press/Elsevier).
Prof. Toldrá has been a member, by strict selection within the European 
Union, for two mandates on the scientific panel on food additives (2003–2008) 
and three mandates on the panel on flavorings, enzymes, processing aids, 
and materials in contact with foods (2008–2015) of the European Food Safety 
Authority where he was chairman of the Working Groups on Irradiation 
(2009–2010), Processing Aids (2011–2014), and Enzymes (2010–2015). In 2008–
2009, he joined a group of Food and Agriculture Organization/World Health 
Organization experts to evaluate chlorine-based disinfectants in the pro-
cessing of foods.
Leo M. L. Nollet  obtained his MS (1973) and PhD (1978) in biology from the 
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium. He is an editor and associate edi-
tor of numerous books. He edited for M. Dekker, New York—now CRC Press 
of Taylor & Francis—the first, second, and third editions of the books Food 
Analysis by HPLC and Handbook of Food Analysis. The last edition is a two-
volume book. He also edited the Handbook of Water Analysis (first, second, and 
third editions) and Chromatographic Analysis of the Environment, third edition 
(CRC Press).
With Fidel Toldrá, he coedited two books published in 2006 and 2007: 
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing (CRC Press) and Advances in Food 
Diagnostics (Blackwell Publishing—now Wiley). With M. Poschl, he coed-
ited the book Radionuclide Concentrations in Foods and the Environment, also 
published in 2006 (CRC Press). Dr. Nollet has also coedited several books 
with Y. H. Hui and other colleagues: Handbook of Food Product Manufacturing 

xi
About the Editors
(Wiley, 2007), Handbook of Food Science, Technology and Engineering (CRC 
Press, 2005), Food Biochemistry and Food Processing (first and second editions; 
Blackwell Publishing—now Wiley—2006 and 2012), and the Handbook of 
Fruits and Vegetable Flavors (Wiley, 2010). In addition, he edited the Handbook 
of Meat, Poultry and Seafood Quality, first and second editions (Blackwell 
Publishing—now Wiley—2007 and 2012).
From 2008 to 2011, he published five volumes on animal product–related 
books with Toldrá, namely, the Handbook of Muscle Foods Analysis, Handbook of 
Processed Meats and Poultry Analysis, Handbook of Seafood and Seafood Products 
Analysis, Handbook of Dairy Foods Analysis, and Handbook of Analysis of Edible 
Animal By-Products. In 2011, also with Toldrá, he coedited two volumes for 
CRC Press: Safety Analysis of Foods of Animal Origin and Sensory Analysis of 
Foods of Animal Origin. In 2012, they both published the Handbook of Analysis 
of Active Compounds in Functional Foods.
Dr. Nollet coedited, with Hamir Rathore, the books Handbook of Pesticides: 
Methods of Pesticides Residues Analysis in 2009, Pesticides: Evaluation of 
Environmental Pollution in 2012, and Biopesticides Handbook in 2015. Other 
finished book projects include Food Allergens: Analysis, Instrumentation, and 
Methods (with A. van Hengel, CRC Press, 2011) and Analysis of Endocrine 
Compounds in Food (Wiley-Blackwell, 2011).
Dr. Nollet’s recent projects include Proteomics in Foods with Toldrá (Springer, 
2013) and Transformation Products of Emerging Contaminants in the Environment: 
Analysis, Processes, Occurrence, Effects and Risks with D. Lambropoulou 
(Wiley, 2014). In the series Food Analysis and Properties, he edited Flow Injection 
Analysis of Food Additives with C. Ruiz-Capillas (CRC Press, 2015) and Marine 
Microorganisms: Extraction and Analysis of Bioactive Compounds (CRC Press, 2016).


xiii
Contributors
Dong U. Ahn
Department of Animal Science
Iowa State University
Ames, Iowa
María J. Andrade
Department of Veterinary Science, 
Food Hygiene and Safety, Meat 
and Meat Products Research 
Institute
University of Extremadura
Cáceres, Spain
Keizo Arihara
Laboratory of Food Science
Kitasato University
Towada-shi, Japan
José M. Barat
Departamento de Tecnología de 
Alimentos
Universitat Politècnica de València
Valencia, Spain
Werner G. Bergen
Department of Animal Sciences
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama
Tomás Bolumar
Group of Food Structure, Meat 
Science Team
CSIRO Agriculture and Food 
Queensland, Australia
Sencer Buzrul
Tütün ve Alkol Piyasası Düzenleme 
Kurumu (TAPDK) Auditing 
Department
Ankara, Turkey
Carmen A. Campos
Universidad de Buenos Aires
Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y 
Naturales
Departamento de Industrias 
Buenos Aires, Argentina 
and 
CONICET
Buenos Aires, Argentina
Marcela P. Castro
Departamento de Ciencias Básicas y 
Aplicadas
Laboratorio de Microbiología de 
Alimentos
Universidad Nacional del Chaco 
Austral
Presidencia Roque Sáenz Peña, 
Chaco, Argentina
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones 
Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET)
Buenos Aires, Argentina
María E. Cayre
Departamento de Ciencias Básicas y 
Aplicadas
Laboratorio de Microbiología de 
Alimentos
Universidad Nacional del Chaco 
Austral
Presidencia Roque Sáenz Peña, 
Argentina
Juan J. Córdoba
Food Hygiene and Safety, Meat and 
Meat Products Research Institute
University of Extremadura
Cáceres, Spain

xiv
Contributors
Nicoletta Ditaranto
Dipartimento di Chimica
Università degli Studi di Bari Aldo 
Moro
Bari, Italy
Stephanie M. Fowler
NSW Department of Primary 
Industries
Centre for Sheep and Red Meat 
Development
Cowra, Australia
Brandon Guild
Department of Food Science
University of Guelph
Guelph, Ontario, Canada
David L. Hopkins
NSW Department of Primary 
Industries
Centre for Sheep and Red Meat 
Development
Cowra, Australia
Terry A. Houser
Animal Sciences and Industry
Kansas State University
Manhattan, Kansas
Francisco Jiménez-Colmenero 
Products Department
Instituto de Ciencia y Tecnología 
de Alimentos y Nutrición 
(ICTAN-CSIC)
Madrid, Spain
Joseph P. Kerry
Food Packaging Group
School of Food and Nutritional 
Sciences
University College Cork
Cork, Ireland
Yusuke Komiya
Laboratory of Food Science
Kitasato University
Towada-shi, Japan
Eun Joo Lee
Department of Food and 
Nutrition
University of Wisconsin-Stout
Menomonie, Wisconsin
Sabine Leroy
INRA
UR454 Microbiologie
Centre de Recherche
Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes, France
Antoon Lievens
European Commission 
Joint Research Centre
Directorate F – Health, Consumers 
and Reference Materials
Unit F4 – Fraud Detection and 
Prevention
Geel, Belgium
Loong-Tak Lim
Department of Food Science
University of Guelph
Guelph, Ontario, Canada
Aubrey Mendonca
Department of Food Science and 
Human Nutrition
Iowa State University
Ames, Iowa
Linda Monaci
Istituto di Scienze delle Produzioni 
Alimentari
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche
Bari, Italy

xv
Contributors
Leticia Mora
Department of Food Science
Instituto de Agroquímica y 
Tecnología de Alimentos (CSIC)
Valencia, Spain
Kumari Shikha Ojha
Food Chemistry and Technology 
Department
Teagasc Food Research Centre
Dublin, Ireland
Ronald B. Pegg
Department of Food Science and 
Technology
University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia
Mauro Petrillo
European Commission
Joint Research Centre
Directorate F – Health, Consumers 
and Reference Materials
Unit F7 – Knowledge for Health & 
Consumer Safety
Ispra, Italy
Rosa Pilolli
Istituto di Scienze delle Produzioni 
Alimentari
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche
Bari, Italy
Marise A. Rodrigues Pollonio
Department of Food Technology
School of Food Engineering
University of Campinas
Campinas, Brazil
Milagro Reig
Instituto de Ingeniería de Alimentos 
para el Desarrollo
Universidad Politécnica de Valencia
Valencia, Spain
Franco P. Rivas
Departamento de Ciencias Básicas y 
Aplicadas
Universidad Nacional del Chaco 
Austral
Presidencia Roque Sáenz Peña, 
Argentina and
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones 
Científicas y Técnicas
Presidencia Roque Sáenz Peña, 
Argentina
Alicia Rodríguez
Food Hygiene and Safety, Meat  
and Meat Products Research 
Institute
University of Extremadura
Cáceres, Spain
Mar Rodríguez
Food Hygiene and Safety, Meat and 
Meat Products Research Institute
University of Extremadura
Cáceres, Spain
Rico Scheier
Department of Bioanalytical Science 
and Food Analysis
University of Bayreuth
Kulmbach, Germany
Heinar Schmidt
Department of Bioanalytical Science 
and Food Analysis
University of Bayreuth
Kulmbach, Germany
Joseph G. Sebranek
Animal Science and Food Science 
and Human Nutrition
Iowa State University
Ames, Iowa

xvi
Contributors
Fereidoon Shahidi
Department of Biochemistry
Memorial University of 
Newfoundland
St. John’s, Newfoundland, Canada
Peter Šimko
Institute of Food Science and 
Nutrition
Slovak University of Technology
Bratislava, Slovakia
Da-Wen Sun
Food Refrigeration and 
Computerised Food Technology 
(FRCFT)
School of Biosystems and Food 
Engineering
University College Dublin
National University of Ireland
Agriculture and Food Science 
Centre
Dublin, Ireland
Régine Talon
INRA
UR454 Microbiologie
Centre de Recherche
Auvergne Rhône Alpes, France
Hans Bernard Tee
Department of Food Science
University of Guelph
Guelph, Ontario, Canada
Brijesh K. Tiwari
Food Chemistry and Technology 
Department
Teagasc Food Research Centre
Dublin, Ireland
Stefan Toepfl
Process Technologies
German Institute of Food 
Technologies
Quakenbrueck, Germany
Jun-Li Xu
Food Refrigeration and 
Computerised Food Technology 
(FRCFT)
School of Biosystems and Food 
Engineering
University College Dublin
National University of Ireland
Agriculture and Food Science 
Centre
Dublin, Ireland

1
1
Genetically Modiﬁed Farm Animals: 
Control and Traceability
Antoon Lievens and Mauro Petrillo 
1.1 Introduction
Traceability is one of the current key aspects of the European food safety 
policy. It has rapidly gained importance in the wake of the bovine spongi-
form encephalopathy (BSE) crisis, and currently, there is a widespread adop-
tion of control and traceability systems in the entire agri-food industry.
Transparent and trustworthy regulatory and traceability processes are a 
cornerstone in addressing consumer concerns and providing a wider accep-
tance of animal biotechnology. In addition, proper traceability increases 
CONTENTS
1.1 
Introduction ....................................................................................................1
1.1.1 Authorization Process .......................................................................2
1.1.2 Field Use of GM Animals .................................................................3
1.1.3 Modification Strategies .....................................................................4
1.1.4 Detection Options ..............................................................................7
1.1.4.1 Visual Inspection ................................................................7
1.1.4.2 Protein Detection ................................................................7
1.1.4.3 DNA Detection ....................................................................7
1.1.5 Protein-Based Detection Strategies .................................................7
1.1.5.1 Flow Strip .............................................................................8
1.1.5.2 Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay .........................9
1.1.5.3 Mass Spectrometry ........................................................... 10
1.1.6 DNA Bases Detection Strategies .................................................... 10
1.1.6.1 Polymerase Chain Reaction-Based Methods ................ 10
1.1.6.2 Sequencing ......................................................................... 11
1.1.7 Quantification Strategies ................................................................13
1.1.7.1 Quantitative Protein Methods .........................................13
1.1.7.2 Quantitative PCR Methods ..............................................13
1.1.8 Outlook .............................................................................................. 14
References ..................................................................................................... 14

2
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
safety and quality control and allows faster identification and resolving 
of problems, and it also allows correct labeling, which provides consum-
ers with information that is important for health and lifestyle choices. 
Traceability also forms an essential aspect of risk management and will be 
a major requirement for postmarketing surveillance when genetically mod-
ified (GM) animals enter the consumer market. However, before any GM 
product may enter the European market, it needs to be officially authorized 
(Frewer et al., 2013).
The main traceability legislation is stipulated in European Commission 
(EC) regulation 1830/2003 concerning the traceability and labeling of geneti-
cally modified organisms (GMOs) and the traceability of food and feed prod-
ucts produced from GMOs.* It requires member states to take measures to 
ensure traceability and labeling of authorized GMOs at all stages of their 
placing on the market. The European Union (EU) law further requires that 
foods and ingredients that contain, or are directly produced from, (autho-
rized) GMOs must be clearly labeled as such. These requirements do not 
apply to foods containing GM material at <0.9%, provided that this presence 
is adventitious or technically unavoidable.
Although member states are free to choose how to implement these regu-
lations, most have chosen a strategy of sampling and analysis throughout the 
food chain to check the labeling claims (note that, depending on the member 
state, it may or may not be allowed to label as “GMO-free”). This is carried 
out by member-state-run laboratories (Reference labs) that together with the 
European Reference Laboratory for GM Food and Feed (EURL GMFF) make 
up the European Network of GMO Laboratories (ENGL), a platform that 
develops, validates, and shares methods and information to harmonize the 
identification and quantification of GM samples. It is expected that the man-
date of this current network will be expanded to also encompass samples 
derived from animal products.
In the following sections, we take a closer at the procedure for GMOs to 
enter the European market and discuss what methods will allow for control 
and verification of labeling claims at various stages of the food chain. Ideally, 
such methods should allow us to accurately distinguish GM from non-GM, 
and should preferably be fast and not require extensive sample preparation. 
In addition, the ideal detection method should be mobile and allow on-site 
control (be it on the farm, in the supermarket, or in the restaurant) (Loftus, 
2005). However, as we see, depending on the case, only certain of these boxes 
may be checked.
* Regulation (EC) 1830/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 
2003 concerning the traceability and labelling of genetically modified organisms and the 
traceability of food and feed products produced from genetically modified organisms and 
amending directive 2001/18/EC.

3
Genetically Modiﬁed Farm Animals: Control and Traceability
1.1.1 Authorization Process
Before a GMO is allowed to enter the European food or feed market, an 
authorization application it must be submitted to a national authority. The 
requirements for authorization are stipulated in regulation (EC) 1829/2003,* 
(EC) 641/2004,† and (EU) 503/2013.‡ Among other requirements, an application 
must include a monitoring plan, labeling proposal, and detection method.
The national authority will send the application to the European Food 
Safety Agency (EFSA) for a risk assessment. EFSA then makes the applica-
tion summary available to the public.
In the risk assessment procedure, the safety of the gene product is assessed 
on a case-by-case basis. In the case of well-characterized proteins, a limited 
evaluation, such as amino acid sequence and expression rates in different tis-
sues, may suffice. In the case of less well-documented proteins, there may be 
extensive toxicity testing, since, theoretically, GM animals may contain new 
proteins for which there is no history of safe use in the human diet.
Once EFSA has published its risk assessment, the public has 30 days to 
comment on the EC’s website for applications, after which the commission 
will produce its final decision (within 3 months). The authorizations are 
valid for a maximum of 10 years and are renewable.
1.1.2 Field Use of GM Animals
Currently, the main European legislation consists of directive 2001/18/EC§ on 
the deliberate release of GMOs into the environment and directive 2015/412¶ 
amending the former, which allows member states to restrict or prohibit the 
cultivation of GMOs in their territory.
These directives explicitly incorporate the precautionary principle, and 
state that the introduction of GMOs into the environment should be car-
ried out according to a “step-by-step” principle. Thus, the containment 
* Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and Council of 22 September 2003 
on genetically modified food and feed.
† Regulation (EC) No 641/2004 of 6 April 2004 on detailed rules for the implementation of 
Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the 
application for the authorization of new genetically modified food and feed, the notifica-
tion of existing products and adventitious or technically unavoidable presence of genetically 
modified material which has benefited from a favourable risk evaluation.
‡ Commission implementing regulation on applications for authorisation of genetically 
modified food and feed in accordance with regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 of the European 
Parliament and of the council amending commission regulations (EC) No 641/2004 and (EC) 
No 1981/2006.
§ Directive 2001/18/EC of the European Parliament and of the concould of 12 March 2001 on 
the deliberate release of genetically modified organisms and repealing council directive 
90/220/EEC.
¶ Directive (EU) 2015/412 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2015 
amending Directive 2001/18/EC as regards the possibility for the member states to restrict or 
prohibit the cultivation of genetically modified organisms in their territory.

4
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
of a GMO should be gradually reduced and the scale of its release 
increased, step by step, but only after a positive evaluation of the previous 
step (in terms of the protection of human health and the environment) 
(Garcia, 2006).
A person or company applying for an authorization for “deliberate release” 
of a GMO must submit its application to the competent national authority of 
the member state where the release is to take place, and the eventual authori-
zation will only be valid in this member state. Among other requirements, an 
application for deliberate release should contain a technical dossier includ-
ing a full environmental risk assessment, a monitoring plan, and appropriate 
safety measures.
In practice, such safety measures will probably boil down to treating the 
GM animals as a completely different species than their non-GM counter-
parts. This may include separate housing and transport facilities and manda-
tory animal identification systems (Kok and Jones, 2003). However, member 
states may impose additional restrictions on the use and cultivation of GM 
animals.
1.1.3 Modification Strategies
To fully understand the complications that may arise in detecting GMOs, 
one has to have a basic understanding of the origin of their modifications 
and their effects on the microbiological level.
Historically, the most common methods for generating GM animals 
are probably microinjection (injecting DNA into the nucleus of fertilized 
egg cell) and retrovirus-mediated gene transfer. The success rate is rather 
low and the results are variable: the insertions are highly random in 
terms of location and number of copies inserted, making the disrup-
tion of essential genetic information a possibility (Houdebine et al., 2009; 
Robl et al., 2007; Kues and Niemann, 2011). Even in plants, where the 
existence of Agrobacterium tumefaciens makes for a more straightforward 
transformation, the random nature of the insertions complicates GMO 
production.
These technical limitations favored the insertion of larger sequence con-
structs that could operate independently from the region of insertion and 
carry selection markers to distinguish successfully modified cells. As a con-
sequence, such inserts tend to come with easy targets for detection, either on 
the protein level or on the DNA level.
The advent of clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat 
(CRISPR) technology (see Figure 1.1) is changing all this by allowing tar-
geted insertion, thus taking part of the randomness out of the equation. In 
addition, CRISPR may allow for site-specific mutagenesis that can create 
variants of one specific protein (Go and Stottmann, 2016). As we see, such 
small changes may be problematic for detection.

5
Genetically Modiﬁed Farm Animals: Control and Traceability
Independent of the desired final effect (e.g., faster growth, virus resistance), 
we can divide the current types of modification into classes relevant to their 
detection as follows:
At the DNA level the following can occur:
• Insertion of a sequence into the host genome inevitably generates two 
unique junctions in addition to the (usually foreign) inserted gene, 
making this the most straightforward type of modification to detect. 
Even if the donor organism is the same species, the junctions at the 
insertion sites are unique to the GM and specific detection is possible.
• Deletion of a sequence yields, similar to insertions, a new, unique, junc-
tion that may be targeted for detection. Theoretically, exceptions are 
possible if the deletion took place in a high-repeat region; this might 
create an undetectable (nonunique) junction region.
• Mutation of a sequence consists of changing very few bases in the 
DNA, resulting in a highly similar variant of gene. Depending on 
Targeted double-stranded DNA cleavege
ACGCCAATATGGAAAATCGTCACCATAAAA
AACGGGAGAAGGTCCATCCCCACCGGACA
TCGTTACTCTAGCGGTTAAGCTAATCTAA
GAGCAACAAGGCTCTTATACCCCAATATG
GAAAATCGTCACCATAAAAAACGGGAGAA
GGTCCATCCCCACCGGACATCGTTACTCTAG
CGGTTAAGCTAATCTAAGAGCAACAAGGCT
CTTATACCACACCGGACATCGTTACGGCTAC
Transfection
All-in-one vector
Target sequence
Cas9 protein
Guide
RNA
RNA
scaffold
Cut in other 
chromosome
Downstream cut
Repair break
DNA
template
DNA
insert
?
Host
genome
Host
genome
Cas9
Cas9
or
Target sequence
PAM (NGG)
Host DNA
Nucleus
Cell
G
u
i
d
e
 
R
N
A
 
e
x
p
r
e
s
s
i
o
n
C
a
s
9
 
e
x
p
r
e
s
s
i
o
n
C
a
s
9
FIGURE 1.1
The clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR) system consists ini-
tially of a single (circular) piece of DNA into which the target sequence is coned. Upon trans-
fection into the cell, it is the cell’s own which builds and assembles the protein complex. The 
CRISPR/Cas9 system recognizes specific DNA sequences using a guide RNA/protein com-
plex based around a protospacer adjacent motif (PAM). The complex creates a double-stranded 
break in the DNA at the target site. The latter is subsequently repaired by the cell’s DNA repair 
system, which will incorporate a template provide (homology-directed repair) or just close the 
break(s) (nonhomologous end joining).

6
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
the kind of change and its sequence context, the design of a rou-
tine detection method can be anything from straightforward to near 
impossible.
At the protein level there the following possible options:
• A new protein is produced, which has no equivalent in the wild-type 
organism. This is the most straightforward type of modification to 
detect. Independent of the technology used, a novel protein is an 
excellent detection marker.
• A protein is no longer produced. Essentially, the same situation as in 
the above, but with the GM and non-GM roles reversed. A nega-
tive test will now indicate a GMO. However, such a strategy will not 
work in mixed samples.
• A modified version of an existing protein is produced. Depending on 
if the modification results in unique protein-surface features, this 
protein may be detected using immunological methods, otherwise 
more complicated methods will be required.
• Changes in protein timing or dosage. GM animals may produce more 
or less of an endogenous protein, or may produce the protein in a 
different tissue or at a different stage of their life. Protein quantifica-
tion approaches may yield a workable strategy in some stages of the 
food chain, but may not be a universal solution.
• No change at all. Not all DNA modifications yield proteomic changes 
and in these cases, protein testing will not be able to distinguish 
between GM and non-GM.
The classes of DNA modification are not causally linked to the classes of 
proteomic change: the insertion of DNA may not lead to the production of 
a protein, or may even prevent the production of a protein, and the deletion 
of part of the DNA may modify rather than suppress the protein produc-
tion. And even more complicated constructs exist, for example, recombi-
nase-mediated deletions where, depending on the construct, the resulting 
organism may or may not be mosaic for the deletion.
Theoretically, all modifications can be detected at the DNA level, but it is 
more difficult to develop detection methods for small changes than for large 
insertions. Likewise, some protein changes are more readily detected than 
others (e.g., a change in protein level vs. a new protein).
Overall, small changes are harder to detect than large changes. Because 
of the limitations of the techniques involved in producing GMOs, small 
changes were never much of an option . . . until recently. The advent of 
CRISPR has the potential to greatly accelerate the production of more subtle 
GMOs and threatens to throw the proverbial wrench in the current detec-
tion strategies.

7
Genetically Modiﬁed Farm Animals: Control and Traceability
1.1.4 Detection Options
Depending on the place in the food chain, there may be different needs for 
detection. In the early part of the chain where animals are whole or their 
meat is unprocessed, qualitative detection (positive/negative) may suffice. 
Near the end of the chain, in processed materials or mixed samples, quanti-
tative analysis may be required (How much of the sample is GM?) (Bonfini 
et al., 2002; Corbisier et al., 2007).
1.1.4.1 Visual Inspection
In live animals, visual identification of GM animals may be possible: fluores-
cent light can be used to recognize GloFish™ and featherless chickens are easily 
identified as such. However, other traits (disease resistance, meat composition) 
are not so straightforward to confirm, and one has to resort to other means.
1.1.4.2 Protein Detection
Changes in the proteome form an attractive target for detection. “New” or mod-
ified proteins are often suitable for immunological detection (see Figure 1.3). 
Such methods are highly specific, fast, and can be made in portable formats. 
However, not all proteins resits processing well and by the end of the food 
chain they may no longer be detectable.
1.1.4.3 DNA Detection
As changes to the DNA are the very definition of GMOs, the detection of 
these changes is a reliable way to detect and identify GMs (Holst-Jensen, 
2009). As a consequence, DNA forms the current gold standard in detection 
and quantification of GMOs. In addition, its resistance to processing and its 
amplifiable nature (see Figure 1.2) makes for a low limit of detection through-
out the entire production chain. As a drawback, DNA detection methods 
often require extensive sample preparation and highly specified equipment.
1.1.5 Protein-Based Detection Strategies
Proteins are manufactured in the cell according to the information coded 
by DNA. This DNA can be completely transgenic (GMO) and the protein 
produced can be foreign to the species (e.g., a bacterial toxin, CryIAb, in 
insect-resistant maize) (Magg et al., 2001) or it could be a modified version 
of a natural protein (e.g., a glyphosate-tolerant version of a plant enzyme, 
CP4-epsps, in herbicide-resistant soy) (Funke et al., 2006). The changes to the 
proteome can also be temporal (e.g., growth hormone at lower temperature 
in aquadvantage™ salmon) (Du et al., 1992) or in the amount of protein pro-
duced (e.g., sheep overexpressing insulin-like growth factor 1 in their skin to 
improve wool growth) (Damak et al., 1996).

8
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Proteins that have surface characteristics that are unique to GM animals 
are usually detectable by immunological methods (using antibodies that 
bind specifically to that protein) whereas other changes may only be detect-
able by more elaborate methods such as 2D gel electrophoresis and mass 
spectrometry (MS).
1.1.5.1 Flow Strip
The most commonly used immuno- or antibody-based test for GMO detec-
tion is the strip test (also known as a lateral flow device). The “devices” are 
thin strips of a nitrocellulose membrane covered by a sample pad on one end 
and a wicking pad on the other end (see Figure 1.3).
The business end of the strip is submersed in a solution of homogenized 
test sample (usually an aqueous solution). The solution wicks up the strip, 
passing the fluid over an area containing an excess of gold-labeled antibody 
specific to the GM protein being tested. If this protein is present then it will 
bind to the gold-labeled antibodies, and the antibody–protein complex will 
continue moving up the strip with the flow of fluid.
Cycle 1
2n molecules
22n molecules
23n molecules
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Target
sequence
Total DNA
5′
3′
3′
5′
3′
5′
3′
5′
5′
3′
5′
3′
Step 2:
Annealing
Primers
Polymerase
Step 1:
Denaturation
Step 3:
Elongation
n molecules
FIGURE 1.2
Enzymatic amplification of DNA (polymerase chain reaction [PCR]). An amplification cycle 
typically consists of three steps that allow duplication of the target DNA. The denaturation 
step consists of heating the reaction to a temperature of 95°, which disrupts the hydrogen 
bonds between complementary bases, yielding single-stranded DNA molecules. During the 
annealing step, the temperature is lowered to 60°, allowing binding of the primers to the 
single-stranded DNA template. For the elongation step, the temperature is raised to the opti-
mum activity temperature of the polymerase enzyme (72° for Taq polymerase). At this step, the 
DNA polymerase synthesizes a new DNA strand complementary to the DNA template strand 
by adding nucleotides present in the reaction mix.

9
Genetically Modiﬁed Farm Animals: Control and Traceability
The sample fluid then passes over two additional areas on the strip: 
(1) the test line, containing a second (immobilized) antibody specific for the 
GM protein that captures the antibody–protein complex, which results in 
formation of a visible line on the strip indicating the presence of the GM pro-
tein in the sample, and (2) the control line, containing a third (immobilized) 
antibody that will bind any other antibody (free or carrying protein) and 
which indicates that the strip has functioned correctly.
1.1.5.2 Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) is a more sensitive antibody-
based protein detection method. Here, the sample solution is added to a 
multiwell plate on which GM-protein-specific antibody has been immobi-
lized (capture antibodies). If the GM protein is present in the sample, it will 
bind to the capture antibody. After washing, the detector antibody, also spe-
cific for the GM protein and tagged with an enzyme, is added to the well. 
The enzyme-linked detection antibody will bind any GM protein already 
immobilized to the well by the capture antibody, forming an antibody–
protein–antibody sandwich. After another round of washing to remove any 
unbound antibody, a substrate is added, which is converted by the enzyme 
inducing a color change in the solution. Not only does the enzymatic reac-
tion amplify the signal, but it also lowers the detection limit; the intensity of 
the color change is proportional to the amount of protein present, allowing 
quantification.
1. Incubate sample
2. Incubate detector antibody
Capture antibodies
Target protein
Detector antibody
Enzyme
Colloidal gold
Detector antibody
Target protein
Capture antibodies
3. Substrate solution
    and read-out
96-well plate
Wicking pad
Control line
Test line
Gold-labeled
antibodies
Sample flow
Sample
FIGURE 1.3
Immunological protein detection methods: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
(left) and flow strips (right) employ a common mechanism of capturing the protein of interest 
using an immobilized capture antibody and visualizing the protein using a second enzyme/
gold-linked antibody.

10
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
1.1.5.3 Mass Spectrometry
Although antibody-based approaches are powerful and versatile, their main 
bottleneck is the availability of antibodies with high specificity. The develop-
ment of high-quality antibody-based assays can be costly, time consuming 
and resource intensive. Another disadvantage of antibody-based assays is 
that they may not be able to discriminate between closely related proteins. 
MS provides a powerful alternative and complementary approach.
Essentially, a mass spectrometer measures the masses of the molecules 
within a sample. The technique relies on magnetic and electric fields 
which exert forces on charged particles (ions) in vacuum in order to deter-
mine their mass–charge ratio. Therefore, the sample must be ionized prior 
to be analysis. In addition, the ions must be introduced into the system as 
a gas so that the molecules are individualized, allowing the determination 
of their single masses. However, proteins are nonvolatile and thermally 
unstable, and require special “soft” ionization methods that do not cause 
extensive degradation. Beside the ionization source, a mass spectrome-
ter also consist of a mass analyzer, a detector, and the data processing 
electronics.
The workflow usually consists of breaking down the protein in smaller 
parts (peptides), which yields a spectrum of masses (a peptide mass finger-
print) which is used as input for a search in a database that holds the pre-
dicted masses for each protein. Complex samples can hold an overwhelming 
number of components that yield spectrums that are very difficult to inter-
pret. Therefore, it is usually necessary to enrich, purify, or separate the 
proteins prior to MS analysis (e.g., via 2D gel or high-performance liquid 
chromatography [HPLC]).
As MS is a much more versatile tool for protein analysis, it is able to see 
very small differences between proteins and is not limited to any specific 
protein. Unfortunately, a mass spectrometer is an expensive, very much non-
portable piece of equipment that may require extended sample preparation, 
and relies on the availability of databases for the identification of proteins.
1.1.6 DNA Bases Detection Strategies
As mentioned above, DNA analysis forms the current gold standard in 
detection and quantification of GMOs within the EU. The technology has 
been optimized to produce a high-throughput screening and quantification 
system that has been harmonized between member states and has been stan-
dardized in terms of performance.
1.1.6.1 Polymerase Chain Reaction-Based Methods
At present, (real time) polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based analysis is 
the method of choice for the routine analysis of food and feed samples for 

11
Genetically Modiﬁed Farm Animals: Control and Traceability
their GMO content and authenticity (Loftus, 2005; Mafra et al., 2008). They 
work by targeting specific DNA sequences (between 60 and 200 bp long) for 
enzymatic amplification (also see Figure 1.2), revealing the presence (ampli-
fication) or absence (no amplification) of the target sequence. By following 
the amplification process fluorometrically (in real time,) quantification of the 
initial amount of target sequence becomes possible.
Traditionally, three levels of specificity are distinguished within GMO-
detection methods (Figure 1.4):
Screening methods target DNA sequences that are frequently inserted 
into GMOs, for example, promoters, terminators, sequences of genes 
conferring certain tolerances, or resistances. These methods allow 
the detection of a broad range of GMOs, but they do not allow 
identification with absolute certainty of which GM event(s) is (are) 
present in the sample.
Construct-specific methods target two or more adjacent genetic elements 
in a transgene construct by amplifying their junction. These meth-
ods are more informative in terms of presence or absence of specific 
events, but cannot distinguish between different events containing 
the same (or similar) constructs.
Event-specific methods target the host-transgene DNA junction. As a 
consequence, these methods are highly specific and amplify only a 
single event. They are usually applied in downstream confirmation 
of GM-positive samples.
The current workflow surrounding GM sample processing includes the fol-
lowing steps: (1) analysis of the meta information surrounding a sample in 
order to decide which screening methods to used (e.g., only markers related to 
a single crop or a full screening), (2) running of these screening methods and if 
all are negative, stopping the testing, (3) in case of positive results, identifying 
possible events and running the event-specific tests, possibly quantifying any 
positive result in the same run, and (4) if no event-specific tests show a positive 
result, declaring the sample contaminated with a nonauthorized GMO.
The downside of PCR-based detection is that, much like immunological 
methods, you can only find what you are looking for: each reaction tests the 
absence/presence of a specific sequence. Any GM sequence that is present 
but not tested for cannot be detected. In addition, PCR-based tests are dif-
ficult to design and optimize for small sequence changes.
1.1.6.2 Sequencing
Where PCR cannot distinguish between GM and non-GM, or when a com-
plete characterization of a sample is required, direct DNA sequencing may 
offer a solution (Lievens et al., 2015). Sequencing has come a long way in 

12
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
recent decades, and the current state of the art allows the massive paral-
lel sequencing of entire genomes (so-called “next generation sequencing” 
[NGS]).
Several approaches exist (semiconductor sequencing, pyro-sequencing, 
nanopore sequencing, etc.), but the common strategy entails “reading” many 
short sequences (usually 100–400 bp depending on the technology). From the 
overlap between the millions of “reads” generated the original sequence is 
rebuilt. The technology allows either concentrating on a specific sequence 
(captured or preamplified) or addressing the entire sequence diversity of the 
sample.
Much like MS, the equipment is expensive compared to standard PCR 
(although prices are steadily declining) and may require extended sample 
preparation. In addition, there is a bioinformatics bottleneck in the process-
ing of the “reads,” which may be challenging without dedicated software 
and computing cluster. On the plus side, most sequencing platforms have the 
Host wild-type 
DNA
?
Insertion
Deletion
Point mutation 
FIGURE 1.4
Schematic overview of detection targets. DNA is represented in different ways for 
explanatory purpose. Insertions are represented as outlined stretches of DNA, dele-
tions as the omission of dashed stretches of DNA, grey is used to help indicate the new 
junction after modification. Depending on the type of modification (insertion, deletion, 
and point mutation), there are different options for event-specific identification (circular 
crosshairs) or construct-specific detection (square crosshairs).

13
Genetically Modiﬁed Farm Animals: Control and Traceability
ability to “tag” DNA with specific short sequences (barcoding), which allows 
pooling of samples since the software can use the barcode to distinguish 
which sequence came from which sample.
1.1.7 Quantification Strategies
The current European labeling requirement applies to food and feed when 
their GM content is higher than 0.9% (weight/weight) on a per ingredient 
base. Other thresholds exist (e.g., 5% in Japan and 1% in Brazil) but irrespec-
tive of their exact value, there is a need for accurate quantification (Zel et al., 
2012; Trapmann et al., 2010).
Most quantification strategies are relative in nature and require standards 
or reference materials to which a sample is compared and, generally speak-
ing, a quantification result is often only as good as the standard that has been 
used. Materials of high purity and well-defined GM content are key in the 
process of efficiently controlling for a threshold.
1.1.7.1 Quantitative Protein Methods
The current GM quantification strategies are almost exclusively nuclear 
DNA based, which has the advantage that each (somatic) cell carries the 
exact same amount of target copies. Although not straightforward, the 
relation between the number of DNA targets and sample weight is more 
direct than for proteins. Protein levels can change over time and may differ 
between tissues. Compared to DNA, a lot less work has been done in the 
establishment of a protein-based GM quantification approach. Nevertheless, 
ELISA, MS, and even strip tests can be made to function quantitatively and 
combined with the right sampling strategies may provide a useful tool in 
quality assurance.
1.1.7.2 Quantitative PCR Methods
Real time PCR-based GM quantification involves the parallel detection 
of two targets: a wild-type endogene and an event-specific transgene. 
Calibration curves for both genes are constructed using reference materials. 
The complete result then allows accurate quantification of the GM content 
of the sample over a wide dynamic range. Digital PCR, on the other hand, 
allows the direct absolute quantification of the target and could function 
without the need for reference materials.
The current quantification approach is based on the assumption of equiva-
lence of the percentage of GM target in DNA and the weight/weight percent-
age of GM in the ingredient of the original sample. Even though there are 
many factors that may complicate this assumption (cell size varies between 
plant tissues, fruits and seeds may be (partially) haploid, etc.) a large body of 

14
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
practical experience currently justifies its use and its existence as an official 
recommendation from the EC (i.e., EC 2004/787).*
In animals, there are again several biological facts that complicate the 
assumption of equivalence between DNA ratio and mass percentage. The 
most straightforward relating to the nature of muscle tissue is that muscle 
consists of multinucleated myofibers and their growth mainly happens by 
increases in length and width of the muscle fibers rather than by an increase 
of the number of fibers (and therefore, in the number of cell nuclei). However, 
there is significant postnatal DNA accumulation in muscle tissue insofar 
that there is a quite linear relation between the number of nuclei and the 
muscle. Transferability of the equivalence of DNA and weight percentages to 
animals thus seems likely but will have to be confirmed and validated before 
it can be put to practice at the regulatory level.
1.1.8 Outlook
Traceability is currently well established as a key risk management tool 
and component of the agri-food quality system. Animal identification sys-
tems are already mandatory in several regions worldwide and GMO test-
ing is commonplace where labeling requirements have been installed. These 
developments have largely paved the way for the advent of biotech-derived 
animals, as most of the building blocks are already in place. The further 
adoption of molecular-based systems in the food production process has the 
potential to answer most traceability challenges GM animals will pose. It is 
likely that the biggest bottleneck in the introduction of biotech animals will 
not be of a technical nature, but rather regulatory.
References
Bonfini, L., Kay, S., Heinze, P. and Van den Eede, G. (2002). Report on GMO detection 
identification and quantification methods submitted to collaborative studies. 
European Communities, EUR 20383 EN, 1–29.
Corbisier, P., Broothaerts, W., Gioria, S. et al. (2007). Toward metrological traceabil-
ity for DNA fragment ratios in GM quantification. 1. Effect of DNA extraction 
methods on the quantitative determination of Bt176 corn by real-time PCR. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 55, 3249–3257.
Damak, S., Sul, H.-Y., Jay, N. P. and Bullock, D. W. (1996). Improved wool production 
in transgenic sheep expressing insulin-like growth factor 1. Biotechnology, 14(2), 
185–188.
* Commission recommendation 2004/787/EC of 4 October 2004 on technical guidance for sam-
pling and detection of genetically modified organisms and material produced from geneti-
cally modified organisms as or in products in the context of Regulation (EC) No 1830/2003.

15
Genetically Modiﬁed Farm Animals: Control and Traceability
Du, S. J., Gong, Z., Fletcher, G. L., Shears, M. A., King, M. J., Idler, D. R. and Hew, 
C. L. (1992). Growth enhancement in transgenic Atlantic salmon by the use of an 
“all fish” chimeric growth hormone gene construct. Nature Biotechnology, 10(2), 
176–181.
Frewer, L., Kleter, G., Brennan, M. et al. (2013). Genetically modified animals from 
life-science, socio-economic and ethical perspectives: Examining issues in an 
EU policy context. New Biotechnology, 30, 447–460.
Funke, T., Han, H., Healy-Fried, M. L., Fischer, M. and Schönbrunn, E. (2006). 
Molecular basis for the herbicide resistance of roundup ready crops. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(35), 13010–13015.
Garcia, P. R. (2006). Directive 2201/18/EC on the deliberate release into the environ-
ment of GMOs: An overview and the main provisions for placing on the market. 
Journal for European Environmental and Planning Law, 3, 3–12.
Go, D. E. and Stottmann, R.W. (2016). The impact of CRISPR/Cas9-based genomic 
engineering on biomedical research and medicine. Current Molecular Medicine, 
16(4), 343–352.
Holst-Jensen, A. (2009). Testing for genetically modified organisms (GMOs): Past, 
present and future perspectives Biotechnology Advances, 27, 1071–1082.
Houdebine, L.-M. (2009). Methods to generate transgenic animals. In: Engelhard, M., 
Hagen, K. and Boysen, M. (eds.) Genetic Engineering in Livestock (Vol. 34).  Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag, 31–48.
Kok, E. J. and Jones, W. (2003). The food safety risk assessment of GM animals. Topic 
Paper 4. FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Safety Assessments of Foods 
Derived From Genetically Modified Animals, Including Fish. FAO, Rome.
Kues, W. and Niemann, H. (2011). Advances in farm animal transgenesis. Preventive 
Veterinary Medicine, 102, 146–156.
Lievens, A., Petrillo, M., Querci, M. and Patak, A. (2015). Genetically modified ani-
mals: Options and issues for traceability and enforcement. Trends in Food Science 
and Technology, 44, 159–176.
Loftus, R. (2005). Traceability of biotech-derived animals: Application of DNA tech-
nology. Revue Scientifique et Technique, Office International des Epizooties, 24, 
231–242.
Mafra, I., Ferreira, I. and Oliveira, M. (2008). Food authentication by PCR-based 
methods. European Food Research and Technology, 227, 649–665.
Magg, T., Melchinger, A. E., Klein, D. and Bohn, M. (2001). Comparison of Bt maize 
hybrids with their non-transgenic counterparts and commercial varieties for 
resistance to European corn borer and for agronomic traits. Plant Breeding, 120, 
397–403.
Robl, J., Wang, Z., Kasinathan, P. and Kuroiwa, Y. (2007). Transgenic animal produc-
tion and animal biotechnology. Theriogenology, 67, 127–133.
Trapmann, S., Corbisier, P., Schimmel, H. and Emons, H. (2010). Towards future 
reference systems for GM analysis. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 396, 
1969–1975.
Zel, J., Milavec, M., Morisset, D., Plan, D., Van den Eede, G. and Gruden, K. (2012). 
How to Reliably Test for GMOs. New York, NY: Springer.


17
2
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique for Online 
Monitoring of Meat Quality and Safety
Jun-Li Xu and Da-Wen Sun
CONTENTS
2.1 
Introduction .................................................................................................. 18
2.2 
Fundamentals of Hyperspectral Imaging ................................................20
2.2.1 Basic Principles .................................................................................20
2.2.2 Data Structure ..................................................................................22
2.2.3 Image Sensing Modes .....................................................................23
2.2.4 Acquisition of Hyperspectral Images ...........................................24
2.3 
Hyperspectral Imaging Instruments ........................................................26
2.3.1 Illumination Unit .............................................................................27
2.3.2 Wavelength Dispersion Devices ....................................................28
2.3.2.1 Imaging Spectrographs ....................................................28
2.3.2.2 Filter Wheels ......................................................................29
2.3.2.3 Tunable Filters ...................................................................29
2.3.3 Area Detectors ..................................................................................30
2.3.4 Hyperspectral Imaging System Calibration ................................30
2.3.4.1 Spatial Calibration ............................................................31
2.3.4.2 Spectral Calibration ..........................................................31
2.3.4.3 Flat-Field Correction .........................................................32
2.4 
 Hyperspectral Imaging Data Processing and Multivariate Analysis ..33
2.4.1 Image Segmentation ........................................................................33
2.4.1.1 Thresholding and Morphological Processing ...............34
2.4.1.2 Spectral Image Segmentation ..........................................36
2.4.2 Spectral Preprocessing ....................................................................37
2.4.3 Multivariate Analysis ......................................................................39
2.4.3.1 Multivariate Classification ...............................................39
2.4.3.2 Multivariate Regression ...................................................41
2.4.3.3 Model Evaluation ..............................................................43
2.4.4 Selection of Important Wavelengths .............................................44
2.5 
 Online Applications for Meat Quality and Safety Assessment ............45
2.5.1 Poultry Carcass ................................................................................48

18
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
2.1 Introduction
Accurate and rapid assessment of meat quality parameters has always been 
a big concern because consumers are always demanding and expecting safe 
meat and meat products with superior quality. To meat consumers’ needs, it 
is significant for the meat industry to ensure the safe production of meat dur-
ing processing operations and the correct labeling of products with regard 
to safety, quality, authenticity, and compliance. Quality and safety of meat 
are normally defined by physical attributes (e.g., color, texture, tenderness, 
and marbling), chemical attributes (e.g., moisture, protein, and fat content), 
and microbiological attributes (e.g., total viable count [TVC]). Traditionally, 
assessment of meat quality and safety involves human visual inspection 
which, however, is subjective, laborious, and inconsistent. Currently, differ-
ent techniques such as sensory analysis, chemical procedures, instrumental 
methods, and screening methods, such as mass spectrometry (MS) and high-
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), are commonly used to provide 
information about meat quality. These methods play a pivotal role in cur-
rent industrial meat quality and safety inspection, and some of them have 
been applied as old standards and regulation methods in scientific research 
because of their relative accuracy and validity. However, they have some 
unavoidable limitations, such as being destructive, tedious, time consuming, 
sometimes environmentally unfriendly, and unable to handle a large num-
ber of samples. These obvious disadvantages of conventional methodologies 
necessitate the need for rapid, accurate, fast, noninvasive, and real-time detec-
tion techniques, so as to optimize quality and assure safety of meat.
In order to surmount the aforementioned disadvantages, the meat indus-
try has experienced dramatic changes by adopting the most advanced 
2.5.1.1 Contamination Detection .................................................49
2.5.1.2 Tumor and Bone Detection ..............................................52
2.5.1.3 Microbiological Spoilage Detection ................................55
2.5.2 Fish .....................................................................................................56
2.5.2.1 Freshness ............................................................................57
2.5.2.2 Chemical Compositions ...................................................58
2.5.2.3 Parasites and Defects ........................................................60
2.5.2.4 Microbial Spoilage ............................................................ 61
2.5.2.5 Differentiation and Classification/Sorting ....................62
2.5.3 Red Meats ..........................................................................................62
2.5.3.1 Sensory Attributes ............................................................64
2.5.3.2 Chemical Compositions ...................................................67
2.5.3.3 Microbiological Properties ...............................................69
2.5.3.4 Technological Attributes ..................................................70
2.6 
Conclusions ...................................................................................................72
References ...............................................................................................................73

19
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
technological innovations. A great number of methods, which are based on 
different principles, procedures, and/or instruments, are available now to 
measure meat traits. One of these methods is a spectroscopic technique that 
depends on the interaction between incident light and molecules in matters. 
Recently, near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) has received considerable atten-
tion as a fast and noncontact analytical tool in food quality assessment. NIRS 
is a useful and reliable technique and is relatively easy to implement for both 
offline and online applications. Meanwhile, NIRS has the potential for the 
measurement of multiple attributes at the same time. In other words, NIRS 
is capable of simultaneously collecting the physical, chemical, and microbio-
logical information within the tested products by scrutinizing the changes of 
spectra. However, this spectroscopic technique is not able to provide impor-
tant spatial information because it analyzes the sample in bulk and evaluates 
an average composition across the whole sample. In order to obtain spatial 
information, a smart technology, that is, computer vision (Sun, 2007) has been 
developed for automated visual inspection to replace the traditional inspec-
tion by human inspectors. Computer vision imitates the principle of human 
vision, using three bands (red, green, and blue) to acquire the characteristics 
of the tested object, such as color, shape, size, and texture. Unfortunately, com-
puter vision has some limitations that make certain industrial applications 
unavailable. External attributes such as shape, size, texture, color, and exter-
nal defects can be easily detected by ordinary computer vision, yet internal 
attributes are difficult to evaluate with the traditional imaging means. Work-
ing in visible range, it is generally not efficient to predict chemical and biolog-
ical parameters and detect invisible defects. Both spectroscopy and computer 
vision techniques have found a wide range of applications in the food indus-
try even though they have their own inherent drawbacks (Brosnan and Sun, 
2004). As an integrated alternative, hyperspectral imaging was developed to 
obtain both spectral and spatial information from the target.
In recent years, the hyperspectral imaging technique, also known as imag-
ing spectroscopy or imaging spectrometry, has been considered a promising 
and versatile analytical tool for the food research and industry. Hyperspec-
tral imaging was originally developed in the early 1970s for mainly remote 
sensing applications (Adam et al., 2010). The invention of the first charge-
coupled device (CCD) detector by George Smith and Willard Boyle played a 
crucial role in moving hyperspectral imaging technology forward. It started 
blooming in many other different fields, such as pharmaceutical research, 
food science, forensic science, and agriculture (ElMasry and Sun, 2010). 
Indeed, the feasibility of measuring a whole spectrum over the ultraviolet 
(UV), visible, and near-infrared (NIR) spectral regions (300–2600 nm) for 
every single pixel within the sample has made it very attractive for many 
different applications.
Hyperspectral imaging goes beyond conventional imaging and spectros-
copy through obtaining a spatial map of spectral variation (Gowen et al., 
2015). Therefore, the merits in spectroscopy and computer vision are both 

20
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
reflected in hyperspectral imaging. In addition, more benefits are obtained 
besides these aggregated advantages from both methods. For example, 
hyperspectral imaging can generate distribution maps to visualize differ-
ent biochemical constituents presented in a tested sample based on their 
special spectral signatures. The huge spectral information stored in the 
hyperspectral images allows different objects to be identified and distin-
guished even if they have similar morphological features, colors, and over-
lapping spectra. Compared to conventional methods for evaluation of meat 
quality parameters, hyperspectral imaging is a fast, sensitive, noninvasive, 
and chemical-free analytical technique with minimal sample preparation, 
providing both qualitative and quantitative measurements for numerous 
meat properties simultaneously. For example, it can be used as an automatic 
inspection protocol to identify contaminants with the capability of causing 
illness in humans in meat and meat products. The pioneering research of 
applying hyperspectral and multispectral imaging techniques to determine 
various contaminants on poultry carcasses was carried out by the United 
States Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Agricultural Research Service, 
and some of them have already been set up in an online monitoring line 
(ElMasry and Sun, 2010). Additionally, research on meat safety inspection 
using hyperspectral imaging has been extended to reach the area of micro-
bial spoilage detection. Some other fundamental applications, such as bone 
fragments detection, overall quality inspection, grade classification, and 
fraud authentication have also been investigated in many published works 
and good results were collected (Wu and Sun, 2013b). Therefore, hyperspec-
tral imaging is a powerful analytical technique in the meat industry with 
great potential for inspection, monitoring, control, quantification, classifica-
tion, and identification purposes. In this chapter, a comprehensive overview 
of the recent developments in using hyperspectral imaging systems for the 
online applications of monitoring meat quality and safety parameters is pre-
sented. Basics and theoretical aspects of this technique, the main features of 
the instrumentation, and the commonly used chemometrics algorithms to 
handle the hyperspectral data are also provided and briefly discussed. In 
particular, the latest research and online applications using hyperspectral 
imaging on white meat (poultry and fish) and red meat (pork, lamb, and 
beef) are described and highlighted in detail.
2.2 Fundamentals of Hyperspectral Imaging
2.2.1 Basic Principles
At the molecular level, all sample materials continuously absorb and emit 
energy by reducing or raising their molecular energy levels. Thus, spectro-
scopic tools provide detailed fingerprints by using physical characteristics 

21
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
of the interaction between electromagnetic radiation and physicochemical 
materials of foods, such as absorbance, reflectance, transmittance, phos-
phorescence, fluorescence, and radioactive decay. Electromagnetic waves 
usually consist of UV radiation, visible light (VIS), NIR, mid-infrared, and 
far-infrared (FIR) (Huang et al., 2014). NIRS is one of the most popular strat-
egies among these spectroscopic techniques within the food industry. As 
with any biological material, food tissues are the combination of many vari-
ous pure compounds with different molecular bonds and forces. Water, fats, 
and carbohydrates are rich in C–H or O–H bonds, while organic compounds 
and petroleum derivatives contain many C–H or N–H bonds. The absorp-
tion bands in the NIR range arise from overtones and combination bands 
of C–H, O–H, N–H, and S–H stretching and bending vibrations, enabling 
NIRS to provide characteristic and detailed fingerprints of food samples by 
using these observed changes in molecular energy levels. Since all the bio-
logical substances consist of thousands of molecular bonds, the exposure 
of a sample to electromagnetic waves accounts for a complex spectrum that 
provides the detailed qualitative and quantitative information about the 
physical and chemical changes of that sample. At the macro level, the elec-
tromagnetic wave is observed as light, and the change of the incident elec-
tromagnetic wave is presented as the scattering, reflection, and transmission 
of light. After the light penetrates into the tissue of samples, the emerging 
light obtained is converted to a spectrum, which could indicate the chemical 
constituents and physical properties of the food samples.
On the other hand, measurement of the external features, such as color, 
texture, shape, and size parameters, of food products can be achieved by a 
conventional imaging system or more specifically computer vision. Computer 
vision involves the capturing, processing, and analyzing of images, accounting 
for the rapid, objective, and nondestructive assessment of visual quality char-
acteristics (Timmermans, 1995). Images are first acquired with a sensor and 
dedicated computing hardware and software are implemented to analyze the 
images with the aim of performing a predefined visual task. This technology 
attempts to duplicate the effect of human vision by electronically perceiving 
and understanding an image (Brosnan and Sun, 2004). It has been tested suc-
cessfully for objective measurement of various agricultural and food products 
(Wang and Sun, 2001). Nevertheless, a computer vision system is incapable of 
inspecting targets with similar color, predicting chemical components, classi-
fying complex objectives, and detecting invisible defects because it operates at 
visible wavelengths in the forms of monochromatic or color images.
Hyperspectral imaging is defined as a system that is able to simultane-
ously acquire spatial images in a very large number of spectrally discrete or 
contiguous bands measured from a remotely operated platform (Schaepman, 
2007). By integration of the main advantages of spectroscopy and imaging, 
hyperspectral imaging enables us to simultaneously provide external physi-
cal and geometrical features as well as the inside chemical properties of the 
product. In other words, if conventional spectroscopy answers the question 

22
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
of what and conventional imaging answers the question of where, hyper-
spectral imaging can provide the answer to the question of where is what.
2.2.2 Data Structure
A hyperspectral image is a three-dimensional (3D) hyperspectral cube (also 
called a hypercube, spectral cube, data cube, or spectral volume), which com-
prises two spatial dimensions (of x rows and y columns) and one spectral 
dimension (of λ wavelengths). A hypercube provides rich information about  
the objective food product, including physical and geometric observations of 
size, shape, color, and texture, together with chemical/molecular informa-
tion such as fat, water, protein and other hydrogen-bond constituents (Sun, 
2010). The 3D dataset contains a stack of images of the same object, where 
each one of them is measured at a different wavelength. Since pixels are 
digitalized intensities or gray values at a certain wavelength, they are inter-
preted as integers. The intensity value of each pixel might have 8-bit gray 
values meaning that 0 is the black and 255 is the white.
Figure 2.1 displays one example of the hypercube acquired from a piece of 
salmon fillet. The raw hyperspectral image comprises a series of continuous 
subimages and each of them presents the intensity and spatial distribution 
of the tested sample at a certain waveband. It should be noted that the collec-
tive images for all wavelengths are intrinsically the same as a conventional 
digital image: they both provide optical perception in a spatial domain. The 
only difference exists in the number of wavelengths involved and thereby the 
amount of characteristic information captured. Particularly, for a hypercube, 
the object of interest in a certain subimage may either be apparent or merged 
in the background and noise, based on the wavelength concerned. There-
fore, effective image analysis approaches should be carefully established and 
employed to sift through useful bands, which will be discussed later.
As shown in Figure 2.1, the hyperspectral image described as I(x, y, λ) can 
be viewed either as a separate spatial image I(x, y) at each individual wave-
length λ, or as a spectrum I(λ) at each individual pixel (x, y). Full spatial fea-
tures of the tested object could be viewed at a different single waveband 
(pseudocolor image) as depicted in Figure 2.1 to show how the sample gives 
different reflectance values at different wavelengths based on its chemical 
composition. Meanwhile, spectral features can be viewed in the form of a 
spectrum, which acts like a fingerprint to characterize the composition of 
that particular pixel. For a given tested object, when the reflectance value 
(also absorbance or transmittance) is plotted against wavelengths, the result-
ing curve is considered the spectral signature or spectral fingerprint for 
that object. In essence, the spectral signature can be utilized to uniquely 
identify, characterize, and discriminate between classes/types of any given 
material(s) in each pixel of the image (Elmasry et al., 2012b). For instance, 
salmon is a fat-rich fish with a large proportion of lipids congregated in 
white stripes of connective tissue, segmenting the red-colored muscle tissue 

23
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
in vertical blocks and presenting a zebra-like appearance. Figure 2.1 shows 
the difference in spectral signatures between white stripe pixel and red mus-
cle pixel of the tested salmon fillet. According to Xu et al. (2016), though these 
two spectra shared a similar spectral pattern, the white stripe demonstrated 
higher reflectance (lower absorbance) values over the whole wavelength 
range owing to different concentrations of major chemical compositions. 
Therefore, it is possible to identify either white stripes or red muscles from 
captured spectral signatures.
2.2.3 Image Sensing Modes
There are three common sensing modes for hyperspectral imaging, namely 
reflectance, transmittance and interactance, based on the relative arrange-
ment between the light source and the optical detector (spectrograph, cam-
era, and lens). In reflectance mode, the detector collects the reflected light 
from the illuminated sample in a specific conformation to avoid specular 
Hypercube (x, y, λ)
viewed as spatial image
at each wavelength
Hypercube (x, y, λ) viewed
as a spectrum at every pixel
White stripe
Wavelengths
(λ)
Red muscle
No. of pixels in x-direction
No. of pixels in
y-direction
Image at 1050 nm
Image at 1155 nm
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.4
0.3
Reflectance
0.2
0.1
1000
1100
1200
1300
Wavelengths
Spectral signatures of two different pixels.
1400
1500
nm
Image at 1355 nm
x
y
λ
FIGURE 2.1
The conceptual view of a hypercube for a salmon fillet.

24
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
reflection. External quality features such as shape, size, surface texture, 
color, and external defects are typically detected using reflectance mode. In 
transmittance mode, the detector is located in the opposite side of the light 
source and captures the transmitted light penetrated through the substance. 
The amount of light through the sample is normally very small but carries 
more valuable information. Transmittance mode is mostly used to determine 
internal ingredient concentration and detect internal defects of relatively 
transparent materials such as vegetables, fruit, and fish (Wu and Sun, 2013a). 
However, transmittance mode has a low signal level from light attenuation 
and is affected by the thickness of the sample. Therefore, a more powerful 
light source and a sensitive detector are required in this mode. Interactance 
mode is a combination of transmittance and reflectance where both the light 
source and the detector are located on the same side and parallel to each 
other (ElMasry and Wold, 2008). Compared to reflectance mode, the inter-
actance method can detect information deeper into the sample and has less 
surface effects. In addition, the interactance mode can reduce the influence 
of thickness, which is a practical advantage when compared to transmis-
sion mode. However, a special setup with a light seal is required in interac-
tance mode to avoid interference from the environment, which may affect 
the received light.
2.2.4 Acquisition of Hyperspectral Images
Technically, there are four approaches to acquire hyperspectral images, 
which are point scanning, line scanning, area scanning, and the single-shot 
method, as illustrated in Figure 2.2. The point scanning method, known as 
the whiskbroom approach, is completed by acquiring a complete spectrum 
of a single point (pixel) at a time and then moving either the detector or 
the sample along two spatial dimensions (x and y), after which and another 
spectrum is taken. The great advantage of point scanning is that the light for 
every spatial element passes through the same path of the optical system. 
However, it is very time consuming for positioning the sample and needs 
advanced repositioning hardware to ensure repeatability. The hypercube 
obtained from this configuration is stored in the band-interleaved-by-pixel 
(BIP) format. This format is optimal for accessing the spectral information of 
each pixel and is commonly used for microscopic imaging where the acquisi-
tion time is usually not a problem.
The line scanning method (also known as the pushbroom method) can 
be regarded as an extension of the whiskbroom method. It simultaneously 
records a whole line of an image rather than a single pixel, together with 
spectral information corresponding to each pixel in the line at a time. A slit 
of the object is imaged onto a row of pixels on one dimension of the sensor 
chip and the spectrograph yields a spectrum for each point on the second 
dimension of the chip. As illustrated in Figure 2.2, a special image (y, λ) with 
one spatial dimension (y) and one spectral dimension (λ) is acquired at a 

25
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
time and the complete hypercube I(x, y, λ) is obtained as the line is scanned 
along the direction of x dimension. This configuration stores a hypercube 
in the format of band-interleaved-by-line (BIL). Because of its characteristics 
of continuous scanning in one direction, line scanning is particularly well 
suited for conveyor belt systems that are commonly used in food process 
lines. Therefore, line scanning is the most popular method of acquiring 
hyperspectral images for food industry applications.
Both point scanning and line scanning are spatial scanning methods, 
while area scanning (also known as plane scanning) is a spectral scanning 
method. This method keeps the image field of view fixed and there is no 
movement at all either for the imaging unit or for the tested object itself. 
This configuration acquires a 2D grayscale image (x, y) with full spatial 
information at a single spectral band at a time and it repeats over the whole 
wavelength range, accounting for a stack of single-band images stored in 
the band sequential (BSQ) format. As the detector is exposed to only a 
single wavelength each time, a suitable exposure time can be set for each 
spectral band. Particularly, area scanning is suitable for applications where 
the object should be stationary for a while, such as excitation-emission in 
florescence imaging. However, the disadvantage is that it is not suitable for 
a moving sample or the inspection of real-time delivery. Finally, the single 
Point scanning
Single shot
x
Line scanning
x
y
y
λ
Area scanning
x
x
y
y
λ
λ
FIGURE 2.2
Four approaches to acquire hypercube I(x, y, λ).

26
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
shot method was developed to record both spatial and spectral informa-
tion using an area detector with one exposure, making it attractive when 
fast hyperspectral imaging is anticipated. Nevertheless, this method is not 
fully developed and has limited resolutions for the spatial dimension and 
narrow ranges for the spectral dimension. To conclude, each approach has 
its own advantages, and the choice among these methods depends on the 
specific application. Point scanning is useful if a small surface has to be 
analyzed to find out minor compounds (i.e., impurity detection), while 
area scanning is more appropriate in situations where an overview of the 
sample is required and a lot of samples must be analyzed. As for the line 
scanning approach, it is a typical choice for online applications where the 
sample is moving.
2.3 Hyperspectral Imaging Instruments
The instrumentation of hyperspectral imaging is basic and it is very desir-
able to acquire reliable hyperspectral images with high quality in the food 
industry. Therefore, the main components of a hyperspectral imaging system 
will be outlined in this section and more efforts will be focused on the sys-
tem employing the line scanning method due to the fact that line scanning 
is more consistent and useful for food online applications. The schematic 
representation of the main configuration of a line-scan hyperspectral imag-
ing system used for nondestructive meat quality assessment at University 
College Dublin (UCD), Ireland is illustrated in Figure 2.3. A typical pushb-
room hyperspectral imaging system consists of an illumination unit, a spec-
trograph coupled with C-mount lens, CCD, or complementary metal oxide 
semiconductor (CMOS) cameras, and a computer equipped with image 
acquisition software.
Camera
Spectrograph
Illumination unit
Sample
Translation stage
Computer
FIGURE 2.3
Schematic diagram of the main components of a pushbroom hyperspectral imaging system.

27
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
2.3.1 Illumination Unit
Light serves as an information carrier to excite or illuminate the target sam-
ple. The illumination unit is an essential part of optical inspection systems 
to generate light. Choice of light sources and development of the lighting 
setup are paramount to guarantee the excellent performance and reliability 
of any imaging system. Typical light sources used in hyperspectral imag-
ing systems include halogen lamps, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), lasers, and 
tunable sources.
Halogen lamps are usually used for illumination in the visible and NIR 
spectral regions. These broadband sources cover a wide spectral range, 
from 400 to 2500 nm, and are low cost (Gowen et al., 2015). Typically, a lamp 
filament made of tungsten wire is housed in a quartz glass bulb filled with 
halogen gas (Sun, 2010). The output light of quartz–tungsten–halogen (QTH) 
lamps is generated from incandescent emission when the filament has a 
high temperature. The QTH lamps are bright and work with low voltage, 
and thereby they are considered all-purpose illumination sources. However, 
the heat generated by a tungsten–halogen bulb is significant and may alter or 
even burn the sample. In order to overcome this issue, fiber optic line lights 
are usually applied to provide distance between the tungsten–halogen bulb 
and sample (Gaston et al., 2010).
LED technology has developed rapidly owning to its advantages of small 
size, low cost, long lifetime, fast response, low heat generation, low frequency 
of bulb replacement, low energy consumption, robustness, power, coolness to 
the touch without burning concerns, and insensitivity to vibration (Wu and 
Sun, 2013a). Instead of having a filament for incandescent emission, LEDs are 
solid-state sources that emit light when a semiconductor is electrified. LEDs 
can be assembled in different arrangements (e.g., spot, line, and ring lights) 
to meet different illumination requirements. With the different benefits men-
tioned above, LED lights have found application in hyperspectral imaging 
systems in food inspection (Park et al., 2011). The growth of LED technology 
is still ongoing with the development of new materials and electronics, and 
it has great potential to become a mainstream light source.
Unlike broadband illumination sources, lasers are directional monochro-
matic light sources. Lasers have three unique properties, namely monochro-
maticity, directionality, and coherence. Lasers are widely used as excitation 
sources in the application of fluorescence and Raman measurements. When 
some biological materials are excited by a monochromatic beam of light with a 
high energy, they will emit light of a lower energy in a broad wavelength range, 
accounting for fluorescence emission or Raman scattering. In recent years, 
lasers have been used as excitation sources in hyperspectral Raman imaging 
(Qin et al., 2011) and fluorescence imaging (Cho et al., 2009) applications.
Tunable light sources are mostly used for area scanning hyperspectral 
imaging systems. Tunable light sources put the wavelength dispersion 
device in the illumination light path instead of the imaging light path, allow-

28
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
ing the detector directly performing area scanning to obtain both spatial and 
spectral information from the sample. Tunable light sources are still in the 
early stage of development and different wavelengths dispersion methods 
are explored. Currently, hyperspectral imaging with tunable light sources 
have been used for identification of fraudulent documents (Klein et al., 2008).
2.3.2 Wavelength Dispersion Devices
Wavelength dispersion devices are recognized as the core component for any 
hyperspectral imaging system using broadband illuminating light sources. 
Different optical and electro-optical instruments can be used to disperse 
broadband light into different wavelengths so that detectors can record light 
changes in specific wavelengths with associated spatial information after 
light-matter interaction. Typical devices include imaging spectrographs, 
bandpass filter wheels, and tunable filters.
2.3.2.1 Imaging Spectrographs
The imaging spectrograph normally operates in a hyperspectral imaging 
system with line scanning mode. This optical device is capable of dispers-
ing incident broadband light into different wavelengths while preserving its 
spatial information and generating a spectrum for each point on the scanned 
line. The dispersed light is mapped onto the detector array and then a two-
dimensional (2D) image is constructed with one dimension representing the 
spectral axis and the other containing spatial information for the scanning 
line. A complete 3D hyperspectral image cube is generated after scanning 
the entire surface of the sample. Most contemporary imaging spectrographs 
are established based on diffraction grating, which is a collection of equally 
spaced reflecting or transmitting elements separated by a distance that is on 
the order of the wavelength of the light under investigation. The physical 
characteristic of the diffraction grating is based on the spatial modulation of 
the refractive index, by which the incident electromagnetic wave on a grat-
ing will have its electric field amplitude, or phase, or both, modified in a 
predictable manner (Palmer et al., 2005).
There are two main methods for building imaging spectrographs, namely 
reflection gratings (i.e., a grating laid on a reflective surface) and transmis-
sion gratings (i.e., a grating laid on a transparent surface). The imaging 
spectrograph utilizing a transmission grating is based on the prism-grating-
prism (PGP) principle and no moving mechanical components are included. 
Specifically, the light source, such as a halogen lamp, illuminates the object 
and entrance optics, for example, a lens, captures the radiation coming from 
the tested object. After passing through the entrance slit of the spectrograph, 
the incoming beam is then collimated and dispersed at the PGP component 
into different directions according to wavelength. At last, the dispersed light 
is projected onto an area detector resulting in a 2D image; one dimension 

29
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
represents the spectral axis (λ), and the other contains one spatial dimension 
(y) of the scanned line. The second spatial dimension (x) is generated by mov-
ing the sample perpendicularly to the scanning direction. As a result, hyper-
cube I(x, y, λ) is created after the surface of the sample is completely scanned. 
As another main form of imaging spectrographs, a typical reflection grating 
generally consists of an entrance slit, a pair of concentric spherical mirrors 
coupled with an aberration-corrected convex reflection grating, and a detec-
tor. After passing through the entrance slit, the incoming light is reflected 
by the lower mirror to the reflection grating, where the incident beam is dis-
persed into different wavelengths in a reflection manner. The upper mirror 
then reflects the dispersed light to the detector, resulting in a continuous 
spectrum at different pixels. Reflection grating is believed to have several 
advantages, such as lack of higher order aberrations, high image quality, low 
distortion, low f-number, and large field size (Bannon and Thomas, 2005). 
Additionally, the efficiency of the reflective optical components (e.g., mir-
ror) is usually higher than that of the transmission components (e.g., prism). 
Hence, reflection grating-based imaging spectrographs can provide high sig-
nal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and are more suitable for low-light measuring con-
ditions, such as fluorescence imaging and Raman imaging, which make the 
reflection grating approach increasingly accepted in line-scan hyperspectral 
imaging systems.
2.3.2.2 Filter Wheels
A rotatable disk called a filter wheel is the most basic implementation of 
spectral imaging for wavelength dispersion. A filter wheel carries a set of 
discrete bandpass filters that transmit the light at a particular wavelength 
while rejecting light at other wavelengths out of the passband. Filter wheels 
are relatively cheap and easy to use. Nevertheless, they have some disadvan-
tages for applications in hyperspectral imaging, such as mechanical vibra-
tion from moving parts, slow wavelength switching, low resolution, and 
image misregistration owing to the filter movement. There is a broad range 
of filters from UV and visible to NIR wavelength with different specifications 
commercially available to satisfy different requirements.
2.3.2.3 Tunable Filters
An acousto-optic tunable filter (AOTF) is a solid-state device that works 
based on acousto-optic interactions in a crystal. An AOTF can isolate a sin-
gle wavelength from a broadband source through an applied acoustic field. 
The wavelength of the dispersed light is a function of the frequency of the 
acoustic waves that are applied to the crystal (Sun, 2010). The AOTF only 
diffracts one particular spectral band at a time, which is quite similar to 
a bandpass filter with a narrow bandwidth. A liquid crystal tunable filter 
(LCTF) is another commonly used tunable filter and it is established from a 

30
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
series of optical stacks. A LCTF has electronically controlled liquid crystal 
cells inserted between two parallel polarizers to transmit light at a specific 
wavelength while eliminating light at other wavelengths. Each optical stack 
comprises a combination of a birefringent retarder and a liquid crystal layer 
inserted between two parallel polarizers. Both AOTFs and LCTFs are elec-
tronically tunable bandpass filters. Tunable filters have moderate spectral 
resolution (approximately 5–20 nm) and a broad wavelength range covering 
400 to 2500 nm. In addition, electronically tunable filters like AOTFs and 
LCTFs can be flexibly controlled for various wavelengths by differentiating 
the frequency of the radio frequencies using a computer, which is a major dif-
ference from fixed interference filters. Compared to the rotating filter wheels, 
tunable filters have no problem of speed limitation, mechanical vibration, 
and image misregistration because they have no moving parts.
2.3.3 Area Detectors
Area detectors are used to quantify the intensity of the acquired light by con-
verting radiation energy to electrical signals. The quality of hyperspectral 
images are directly based on the performance of the detector. Hyperspectral 
imaging systems operating in the spectral range of 400–1000 nm typically 
utilize two major types of solid-state area detectors, namely, CCD and CMOS 
cameras. Both types of detectors are sensitive in the wavelength region of 
300–1000 nm, but typically subject to a sharp decrease in quantum efficiency 
below 400 nm and above 900 nm (Gowen et al., 2015). Longer wavelength 
systems require more expensive detectors, for example, InGaAs, which is 
made of an alloy of indium arsenide (InAs) and gallium arsenide (GaAs). 
A standard InGaAs (53% InAs and 47% GaAs) sensor is generally used for 
detecting the spectra at 900–1700 nm (ElMasry et al., 2012c) and it has fairly 
flat and high quantum efficiency in the NIR region. Photodiodes made of 
light-sensitive materials are the basic unit of both CCD and CMOS sensors to 
convert incident photons into electrons.
2.3.4 Hyperspectral Imaging System Calibration
Proper calibrations for a hyperspectral imaging system are necessary to 
ensure the consistent performance of the instrument and reliability of the 
acquired data. Inconsistent spectral profiles of reference spectra may be 
recorded by some systems even if the environment of data measurement 
is under carefully controlled conditions. The variability suggests that it is 
essential to apply a standardized and objective calibration protocol. The 
aims of calibration process are to (1) standardize the spectral and spatial 
axes of the hyperspectral image, (2) evaluate the accuracy of the extracted 
spectral and spatial data and validate the acceptability and reliability, (3) 
determine whether the hyperspectral imaging system is in a stable running 
condition, and (4) diagnose instrumental errors if necessary. The commonly 

31
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
used calibration methods include spatial calibration, spectral calibration, 
and flat-field correction.
2.3.4.1 Spatial Calibration
Spatial calibration for hyperspectral imaging systems is intended to adjust 
the field of view and estimate the spatial detection limit. There are dif-
ferent spatial calibration methods that can be used according to different 
image acquisition modes for imaging systems. In area scanning mode, as 
mentioned before, each single-band image at different wavelengths is a 
regular 2D grayscale image with full spatial information. Therefore, spatial 
calibration is carried out on a selected image with high SNR using resolu-
tion test charts, for example, the NBS 1952 Resolution Test Chart, ISO 12233 
Test Chart, and 1951 USAF resolution test chart. When the same binning is 
employed for the horizontal and vertical axis of the camera, the area scan-
ning systems generally provide the same resolution for both spatial dimen-
sions. However, the resolution for two spatial dimensions might be different 
in line scanning systems. The y direction is parallel to the slit of the imaging 
spectrograph (see Figure 2.2), and the resolution has a relationship with the 
working distance, lens, imaging spectrograph, and camera. The pixels along 
the x direction are acquired by the stepwise movement of the sample, and 
the resolution is determined by the step size of the movement.
2.3.4.2 Spectral Calibration
The goal of spectral calibration (also called wavelength calibration) is to 
identify each pixel along the spectral dimension with a specific wavelength. 
Wavelength calibration will convert the form of hyperspectral data from 
pixel intensity versus pixel index to intensity versus wavelength. The cali-
bration results are useful to determine the range and resolution of spectra. 
Wavelength calibration is not necessary for area scanning systems because 
single-band images at a series of known wavelengths are generated in area 
scanning mode. However, imaging spectrograph-based line scanning sys-
tems disperse indecent light into different spectral bands, which are then 
charged at different locations on the detector. Thus, the wavelength of each 
pixel is usually unknown. Technically, standard emission lamps are used as 
light sources to determine the correlations between distance (in pixels) on 
the spectral axis and wavelength. These calibration lamps generate constant, 
narrow, intense, stable, and specific lines from the excitation of different rare 
gases and metal vapors. Different spectral calibration lamps are available 
for different wavelength ranges from UV to infrared for different systems. 
The most acceptable wavelength calibration lamps include battery-powered 
lamps, pencil style lamps, and high power lamps utilizing Argon (Ar), Mer-
cury (Hg), Krypton (Kr), Neon (Ne), Mercury/Argon (Hg/Ar), Xenon (Xe), 
and so forth. Once the calibration lamp is scanned by the hyperspectral 

32
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
imaging system, the spectral peaks with known wavelengths as well as their 
corresponding pixel indices along the spectral dimension can be identified. 
Then, the relationship between wavelength and the pixel indices can be 
established by a quantitative regression equation. The resulting regression 
equation can be used to identify the wavelengths of all pixels along the spec-
tral dimension.
2.3.4.3 Flat-Field Correction
Due to the imperfections of each component (e.g., source, lens, spectrograph, 
and camera) and different measurement environments, the acquired raw 
hyperspectral images generally contain noises and artifacts. Many factors, 
such as nonuniform illumination, pixel-to-pixel sensitivity variations of the 
detector, and dust on the lens, will contribute to different image artifacts, 
leading to the raw images not suitable for quantitative analysis. Flat-field 
correction (also known as reflectance calibration) can be performed to cali-
brate the raw intensity image into a relative (or percent) reflectance or absor-
bance image and remove the effects of the noise and artifacts. White diffuse 
reflectance panels, which have high, uniform, stable, and flat reflectance over 
a broad spectral range (about 99.9% reflectance), are generally employed as 
standards for the reflectance calibration. The dark current image (about 0% 
reflectance) is obtained with the light source completely off and the camera 
lens completely covered. These two reference images are then used to correct 
the original hyperspectral images using the following equation:
 
=
−
−
S
D
W
D
R
I
I
I
I
  
(2.1)
where R is the relative reflectance image, 
SI  the raw hyperspectral image, D
I  
the dark image, and 
W
I
 the white reference image. The original image can 
also be corrected into absorbance (A) by taking logarithms of Equation 2.1 as
 
= −
−
−
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
log10
S
D
W
D
R
I
I
I
I
  
(2.2)
Figure 2.4 shows an example of flat-field correction for a hyperspectral 
image of a salmon sample. The plot displayed in Figure 2.4a consists of origi-
nal spectra extracted from three hyperspectral images (i.e., salmon sample, 
white calibration tile made of Teflon [Gilden Photonics Ltd., Glasgow, UK], 
and dark current). The white panel is observed to have the highest inten-
sity values and the dark current is relatively low and flat over the whole 
wavelengths. A relative reflectance spectrum of the sample (Figure 2.4b) is 
achieved by performing Equation 2.1 and this spectrum is suitable for the 
subsequent spectral data analysis.

33
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
2.4  Hyperspectral Imaging Data Processing 
and Multivariate Analysis
2.4.1 Image Segmentation
Segmentation is the process that divides an image into disjoint objects or 
regions and locates the regions of interest (ROIs) in a form of mask for fur-
ther spectral and textural feature extraction. Technically, image segmenta-
tion can be obtained by attempting to detect either the discontinuity of object 
boundaries or the similarity of regions in an image. Discontinuity is defined 
as the abrupt changes of intensity, and the places where discontinuity occurs 
are named edges. On the other hand, the approach based on similarity is to 
identify the relatively homogeneous regions which are believed to be similar 
according to the predefined criteria. There are some classic techniques for 
image segmentation, such as thresholding, morphological processing (such 
as erosion, dilation, open, close, and watershed algorithms), and edge-based 
segmentation.
With a hyperspectral image, each pixel contains a vector of intensity values 
and this vector is well recognized as the spectral signature. Therefore, image 
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0.4
0.3
Reflectance
Intensity (CCD count)
0.2
0.1
0
1000
1100
Dark current
Salmon sample
Salmon sample
White panel
1200
1300
1400
1500
1000
1100
1200
1300
Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
(a)
(b)
1400
1500
FIGURE 2.4
Flat-field correction for hyperspectral image. (a) Raw reflectance spectra. (b) Relative reflec-
tance spectrum after flat-field correction.

34
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
segmentation can be achieved by classifying pixels into background and the 
tested object based on the spectral difference. Spectral image segmentation, 
which is regarded as a higher level analysis compared to traditional seg-
mentations, actually integrates segmentation and classification into a single 
process.
2.4.1.1 Thresholding and Morphological Processing
Thresholding is popularly used to separate samples from the background 
because it is easy to use and it can provide relatively good results. Better 
performance can be obtained for the image containing the object against a 
contrasting background. When ROIs present a high gray level on a low gray 
level background, the thresholding image ( , )
J x y  can be defined as
 
(
) =
≥
⎧
⎨⎪
⎩⎪
,
1,
if ( , )
0,
otherwise
J x y
I x y
T
  
(2.3)
where ( , )
I x y  represents the original image, and T  is the threshold value. 
Therefore, all pixels at or above the threshold are assigned value 1 corre-
sponding to the ROI, whereas pixels corresponding to the background are 
assigned value 0. Global thresholding, which is known as the simplest thresh-
olding technique, is accomplished by partitioning the image histogram with 
a single global threshold and it is widely acceptable in hyperspectral image 
processing. This approach is competent when the gray level histogram is 
bimodal and the threshold T  is appropriately selected. Morphological pro-
cessing is flexible and powerful for image segmentation and it can be uti-
lized if the initial segmentation by thresholding is not satisfactory. Binary 
morphological processing consists of typical neighborhood operations by 
sliding a structure element containing any complement of 0s and 1s with 
any size over the image. Erosion and dilation are two primitive operations 
of morphological processing techniques. Specifically, erosion is the process 
to eliminate all the pixels on object boundaries in an image, while dilation is 
the process of incorporating pixels to the boundaries of objects.
Figure 2.5 demonstrates examples of hyperspectral image segmentation 
by using the thresholding technique. The spectra of three pixels belong to 
the salmon sample and three pixels of background were randomly selected 
and presented in the form of a plot (Figure 2.5a). A grayscale image at a 
waveband of 1400 nm (B2) was obtained due to the high contrast between 
the sample and the background (Figure 2.5b). Simple histogram threshold-
ing (value of 0.3) was determined and it subsequently produced a segmented 
image for the whole sample. Then, morphological operations were imple-
mented to boost the segmentation performance. This method is simple and 
useful; however, as we can see from the final mask (Figure 2.5b), some pix-
els of the sample were wrongly classified into the background. Figure 2.5c 

35
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
shows another thresholding method that is widely used in hyperspectral 
imaging processing (Barbin et al., 2013c; Kamruzzaman et al., 2011). Two 
images were selected, one with high (B1 of 1077 nm) and the other with low 
reflectance values (B2 of 1400 nm), and subtracted from each other to obtain 
400
1600
800
0
–0.05 0
0.1
0.2
0.3
300
200
100
0
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Raw image at B2
Mask 1
Thresholding
Histogram
Histogram
Image obtained after B1-B2
Mask 1
Thresholding
Morphological
processing
Final mask
Thresholding
value = 0.3
Thresholding
value = 0.01
Morphological
processing
Final mask
(b)
(c)
0.4
0.5
0.3
Reflectance
0.2
0.1
0
Background
1000
1100
B1
B2
1200
1300
Wavelength (nm)
(a)
1400
1500
Salmon sample
FIGURE 2.5
Hyperspectral image segmentation by thresholding.

36
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
a grayscale image. This grayscale image has uniform gray level within the 
entire sample region and no extreme pixel can be observed. All the pixels in 
the background were set to approximately 0 because each spectrum of back-
ground remains constant along the whole wavelength region. As a result, a 
thresholding value of 0.01 was obtained and a final mask was generated. As 
shown, the segmentation result was greatly improved.
2.4.1.2 Spectral Image Segmentation
Classification-based techniques intend to partition pixels into several classes 
based on various classification methods. Generally, they can be categorized 
into two groups, supervised and unsupervised, where output target values 
of learning samples are involved in the former and missing in the latter. 
There are a great number of supervised techniques, such as support vector 
machines (SVMs), artificial neural networks (ANNs), and Bayesian classifi-
cation, among which Bayesian classification is considered as the most com-
monly used method (Kleynen et al., 2005). Unsupervised classification does 
not offer guidance in the learning process because of lack of target values 
and the widely used methods include K-means and principal component 
analysis (PCA). K-means is a classical dynamic clustering algorithm and is 
simple in theory and fast in computation. It intends to partition the image 
into K clusters so that intercluster similarity is low and intracluster simi-
larity is high. K-means has been successfully implemented in hyperspectral 
image segmentation (Piqueras et al., 2011).
Meanwhile, PCA is a mathematical approach used to segment a hyper-
spectral image by seeking the maximum variances from the original 
image. It decomposes the raw hyperspectral image into several score 
images described by a small amount of uncorrelated data (principal com-
ponents [PC]) and loadings (eigenvectors). The first and the second PC 
score images usually interpret the highest variance. Figure 2.6 shows an 
example of using PCA for identification of the loin eye, fat part, and mar-
bling pixels in a piece of pork meat (Barbin et al., 2012a). The first two PCs 
were used to compose the score plot for identifying the pixels with similar 
spectral signatures. This plot represents the most useful information of the 
original image due to the highest variance and the lowest correlation to 
avoid the colinearity of the spectral data. Since each material has a unique 
spectral signature based on different physicochemical properties, the loin 
eye reveals a distinctive spectral signature compared with fat portions and 
any other muscles adjoining the loin eye. Pixels with similar spectral sig-
natures were projected together as one cluster in the 2D scatter plot, which 
facilitates its identification in the PC score image and consequently in the 
original image. The correspondent pixels recognized in the score plot were 
highlighted in the PC score image simultaneously, which allowed for the 
identification of the corresponding clusters, namely loin eye, fat, and mus-
cles adjacent to the loin eye.

37
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
2.4.2 Spectral Preprocessing
After image segmentation, spectral data can be extracted from different ROIs, 
which present different quality features in the calibrated image. Spectral pre-
processing algorithms are mathematically used to improve the spectral data. 
They aim to correct undesired effects such as random noise, length variation 
of light path, and light scattering resulting from variable physical sample 
properties or instrumental effects, to produce a robust model with the best 
predicting ability. This step is generally performed prior to multivariate 
modeling so as to reduce, eliminate, or standardize the impact on the spec-
tra and to greatly enhance the robustness of the calibration model (Reich, 
2005). The most widely used preprocessing algorithms include smoothing, 
derivatives, standard normal variate (SNV), multiplicative scatter correction 
(MSC), Fourier transform (FT), and some new methods including orthogonal 
signal correction (OSC) and wavelet transforms (WTs) (Luypaert et al., 2004).
Smoothing, which includes moving smoothing and Savitzkye–Golay 
smoothing (Savitzky and Golay, 1964), can be applied to eliminate noises in 
the raw spectra without reducing the number of spectral variables. Generally, 
smoothing is combined with other preprocessing techniques to accomplish 
the denoising function. Derivatives (mainly first and second derivatives) are 
PCA
Hyperspectral image
with no background
PC score image
Scatter plot
PC2 (3.5%)
Segmentation
PC1 (95.1%)
Score plot
Segmented image
PC1 (95.1%)
PC2 (3.5%)
PC2 image
PC1 image
FIGURE 2.6
Principal component analysis (PCA) classification-based segmentation method for hyperspectral 
images. (Adapted from Barbin, D. et al., Meat Science, 90, 259–268, 2012a.)

38
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
performed to correct baseline effects in spectra, remove background, and 
increase spectral resolution. The second derivative also has the function of 
resolving nearby peaks and sharpening spectral features. Figure 2.7a and b 
shows original and processed spectra by the Savizkye–Golay second deriva-
tive with a window width of 15. It can be observed that the peaks and valleys 
not very obvious in raw spectra became clear after preprocessing.
SNV and MSC intend to remove the multiplicative interferences of scatter, 
particle size, and the change of light distance (Blanco et al., 1997). In order to 
remove slope variations on individual spectrum basis, each object is trans-
formed independently using the following calculation:
 
∑
=
−
−
−
=
(
)/
(
)
(
1)
,SNV
1
2
X
X
X
X
X
m
i
i
i
m
i
  
(2.4)
where 
,SNV
Xi
 is the ith variable in the transformed spectrum after SNV pre-
processing, Xi  is the ith variable, and X is the average of all variables in the 
raw spectrum, respectively, =
…
1,2,3,
,
,
i
m  where m is the number of wave-
length variables in the spectrum. Figure 2.7c shows spectra processed by the 
SNV algorithm, and it is observed that the baseline shift was successfully 
0.9
4
×10–3
2
0
2
1
0
–1
1000 1100 1200 1300
Wavelengths (nm)
1400 1500
–2
–4
0.7
0.5
0.3
Reflectance
0.1
1000 1100 1200 1300
Wavelengths (nm)
(a)
(b)
(c)
1400 1500
1000 1100 1200 1300
Wavelengths (nm)
1400 1500
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(d)
1000 1100 1200 1300
Wavelengths (nm)
1400 1500
FIGURE 2.7
Near-infrared (NIR) spectra of salmon samples obtained from (a) raw data, (b) Savizkye–
Golay second derivative, (c) standard normal variate, and (d) extended multiplicative signal 
correction.

39
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
removed. Extended multiplicative signal correction (EMSC) is considered an 
extension of MSC that can be used to eliminate additional unwanted inter-
ferences in the signal (Martens and Stark, 1991). This method cannot only 
correct the spectra for multiplicative effects but can also correct the baseline 
of the spectra and suppress the effect of known interfering compounds. This 
method outperforms MSC in many cases (Esquerre et al., 2012). The perfor-
mance of EMSC with the default setting in MATLAB® 8.6 R2015b software 
(The Mathworks Inc., MA, USA) is displayed in Figure 2.7d.
2.4.3 Multivariate Analysis
As mentioned previously, hyperspectral imaging contains huge amount of 
spectral and spatial data; therefore, a combination of multivariate chemo-
metrics and visualization tools to appropriately extract desired information 
in an efficient way is undoubtedly required. Chemometric techniques are 
mathematical and statistical methods which decompose a massive quantity 
of features into simple and easier interpretable structures, which enable the 
establishment of easier to understand relationship between hyperspectral 
data and the desired attributes of tested samples (Bro et al., 2002). Multi-
variate techniques commonly applied in spectral data can be classified into 
multivariate classification for qualitative analysis and multivariate regres-
sion for quantitative analysis.
2.4.3.1 Multivariate Classiﬁcation
Qualitative classification, also called pattern recognition, can be further 
divided into unsupervised and supervised classification. Unsupervised 
classification is accomplished based on the natural characteristics, which 
can be correlation, distance, or some combination of both, requiring no prior 
knowledge about the class information of the data. Generally, it is quite useful 
for preliminary evaluation of the information contents in the spectral dataset. 
Typical unsupervised classification algorithms for the analysis of hyperspec-
tral data include hierarchical clustering, K-means clustering, and PCA.
PCA is a dimension-reduction tool, which can reduce a large set of vari-
ables to a small set but retain most of the information in the original data-
set. It is a mathematical procedure that transforms a number of (possibly) 
correlated variables into a (smaller) number of uncorrelated variables called 
PCs. The first PC interprets as much of the variability in the data as possible, 
and each succeeding component accounts for as much of the remaining vari-
ability as possible. PCA decomposes the data matrix X (m samples and n 
variables) as the sum of the outer product of vectors ti and pi plus a residual 
variance (Penha and Hines, 2001):
 
=
+
+
+…+
+
=
+
1
1
T
2
2
T
3
3
T
T
T
X
t p
t p
t p
t p
E
T P
E
k
k
k
k
  
(2.5)

40
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
where ti vectors refer to principle component scores and provide informa-
tion on how the samples are correlated with each other, and pi vectors are 
the eigenvectors of the covariance of data matrix X. These eigenvectors are 
known as the PC loadings, which reveal how variables are related to each 
other. In other words, the PCA model aims to split the matrix X in two parts: 
one accounts for the system variation (the process model 
T
T P
k
k ) and the other 
captures the noise or unmodeled information (residual variance E). This 
division is able to reduce the dimensionality and eliminate the redundant 
information existent in highly correlated variables of the original dataset.
Figure 2.8 demonstrates an example of PCA model used to evaluate spec-
tral variations in chicken meat, lamb, and salmon. Each data point in the 
score plot represents a spectrum of the sample. This plot was established 
for exploration and identification of any special features (clusters or group-
ings) within the data set. As shown, all sample points were generally clus-
tered into three groups based on their first three PCs, which account for 
91.26% of the total variance. Loading plots in Figure 2.8 can be used to 
identify important variables that are responsible for the specific features 
appearing in the corresponding scores. Generally, several wavelengths 
with high (local maxima) and low (local minimum) values from the PC 
loadings should be selected as the dominant wavelengths which contribute 
most to the classification performance. As the most frequently used unsu-
pervised technique for qualitative classification, PCA has proved useful in 
initial investigation of many meat species to visualize the spectral data and 
0.04
Chicken
Lamb
Salmon
0.04
0.4
0.2
0
–0.2
0 –0.04
0.02
0
–0.02
–0.04
1000
1200
Wavelengths (nm)
Loadings for PC1
1400
1600
1000
1200
Wavelengths (nm)
Loadings for PC2
1400 1600
1000
1200
Wavelengths (nm)
Loadings for PC3
1400 1600
Scores on PC3
(0.68%)
Scores on PC2
(2.17%)
Scores on PC1
(88.41%)
0.15
0
–0.15
0.15
0
–0.15
0.2
0
–0.2
FIGURE 2.8
Example of PCA model performance to analyze chicken meat, lamb, and salmon using NIR 
hyperspectral imaging.

41
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
to examine any possible grouping of samples according to spectral features 
(Kamruzzaman et al., 2012a; Wu et al., 2012).
Supervised pattern recognition intends to establish a classification model 
to group new unknown samples into predefined known classes on the basis 
of their measured features. Linear discrimination analysis (LDA) and par-
tial least squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) are typical chemometric 
techniques for supervised classification of the spectra and they are increas-
ingly used in hyperspectral data analysis for classification and discrimina-
tion problems (Chevallier et al., 2006). LDA aims to find optimum boundaries 
among classes by maximizing the ratio of between-groups variance and min-
imizing the ratio of within-groups variance. PLS-DA is based on the partial 
least squares regression (PLSR) approach and seeks the optimum separation 
of classes by encoding each dependent variable of PLSR with dummy vari-
ables interpreting the classes. When performed using the PLS2 algorithm, the 
dependent Y matrix in the PLS-DA model has as many columns as classes, 
and as many rows as samples used for the calibration. This is known as the 
dummy matrix and it contains only 1’s and 0’s, indicating that the spectrum 
belongs or not belongs to a specific class, respectively. Technically, a thresh-
old must be set in the predictions because the results will not be either a 
1 or a 0 perfectly.
Machine learning methods, including SVM, artificial neural networks 
(ANN), and random forests (RF), have also been applied in the supervised 
multivariate analysis. Among them, RF is a powerful statistical classifier, 
which is well established in many disciplines but is relatively unknown in 
the food research area. It has been shown effective when applied for classi-
fication of hyperspectral data (Lawrence et al., 2006). As the name suggests, 
the RF classifier first generates many classification trees and then combines 
the predictions to provide a more accurate classification result (Cutler et al., 
2007). The trees are fully grown and each can be used to predict the out-of-
bag (OOB) observations. The predicted class is calculated by majority vote 
of the OOB predictions, with ties split randomly. Accuracies and error rates 
are calculated for each observation, and then averaged over all observations. 
Meanwhile, SVM has also been successfully used for NIR classification tasks, 
such as material identification (Langeron et al., 2007) and food discrimina-
tion (Chen et al., 2007). This method aims at finding the optimal separation 
surface between classes on the basis of the identification of support vectors 
which are the most representative training samples of the side of the class 
(Mercier and Lennon, 2003). If the training data are not linearly separable, a 
kernel method is applied to simulate a nonlinear projection of the data in a 
higher dimension space, where the classes are linearly separable.
2.4.3.2 Multivariate Regression
The goal of multivariate regression is to establish a quantitative rela-
tionship between the desired physical, chemical, or biological attributes 

42
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
of the tested sample and its spectrum response. The most widely used 
multivariate linear regression methods are multiple linear regression 
(MLR), principle component regression (PCR), and PLSR. MLR establishes 
a relationship between the spectrum and its target features with explana-
tory or predictive purposes in the form of a linear equation. It is simple 
and easy to interpret. The regression coefficients (RCs) of the equation are 
estimated by the process of minimizing the error between reference and 
predicted values in a least squares sense. MLR typically does not perform 
well when the number of variables is more than that of samples and is 
easily affected by high collinearity between the variables. PCR is a two-
step multivariate method that consists of PCA and MLR. The PCs are first 
computed by the PCA model and then used as independent variables in 
MLR to replace the original variables. Compared to MLR, the PC calcula-
tion in PCR makes the independent variables uncorrelated and less noisy. 
However, PC calculation does not take the reference values of depen-
dent variables into consideration; therefore, the achieved PCs may be not 
informative with respect to the response variables. On the other hand, 
PLSR decomposes both the spectra (independent variables) and proper-
ties of objects (dependent variables) simultaneously. During the decom-
position process, dependent variables are actively considered to extract 
a set of orthogonal factors called latent variables (LVs) to ensure that the 
first several LVs are the most related for predicting dependent variables. 
The number of LVs to be extracted relies on the prediction error, typically 
determined by cross-validation.
When the spectra of the tested sample and its quality are not linearly 
related, nonlinear methods, such as ANN and support vector regression 
(SVR), are very suitable for analysis. ANN is inspired by the behavior of 
biological neural networks and is used for learning and prediction purposes. 
The most widely used ANN technique is the multilayer feed forward neural 
network where the artificial neurons are arranged into three layers of input, 
hidden, and output layer. The intensity or reflectance value at each spectral 
wavelength is fed to the input layer, while the output layer exports the predic-
tion of the target attribute. A feed forward neural network usually involves 
more than one hidden layer, which makes the network capable of processing 
nonlinear and complex correlation. SVR employs a nonlinear map function 
and the input is first mapped to a high-dimensional feature space, then a lin-
ear regression is established in this space. There are two methods to build an 
SVR model, epsilon-SVR and nu-SVR, and the difference lies in the fact that 
nu-SVR introduces and uses parameter nu to control the number of support 
vectors while epsilon-SVR uses parameter epsilon. The radial basis function 
(RBF) kernel is normally used as the kernel function of epsilon-SVR to deal 
with the linear and nonlinear relationships between the spectral informa-
tion and target attributes. Both ANN and SVM are able to deliver promising 
solutions in different classification and regression tasks.

43
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
2.4.3.3 Model Evaluation
To perform either qualitative classification or quantitative regression using 
hyperspectral imaging, data must be trained or calibrated to develop a 
model to relate spectral data with the real properties of these samples. This 
is generally carried out by first selecting representative calibration samples 
(which span the values of attributes under investigation) and then building 
a multivariate model. The established model is subsequently validated by 
cross-validation or/and the prediction process with a new set of samples. 
Cross-validation is a method to measure generalization error by using hold-
out data. Leave-one-out cross-validation and venetian blinds cross-validation 
methods are widely used to validate hyperspectral data.
Within the processes of quantitative regression, the performance of a cali-
bration model is usually evaluated by the following criteria: standard error 
of calibration (SEC) and standard error of prediction (SEP), root mean square 
error of calibration (RMSEC), root mean square error of cross-validation 
(RMSECV) and root mean square error of prediction (RMSEP), coefficients 
of determination of calibration (
)
2
C
r
, coefficients of determination of cross-
validation (
)
2
CV
r
 and coefficients of determination of prediction (
)
2
P
r
, and 
residual predictive deviation (RPD). Generally, a good model would present 
higher values of 
2
C
r
, 
2
CV
r
,  
2
P
r
, and RPD, lower values of SEC, SEP, RMSEC, 
RMSECV, and RMSEP, with a small difference between SEC and SEP (Wu 
and Sun, 2013a).
When it comes to qualitative classification, the performance of each estab-
lished model can be evaluated by calculating the correct classification rate 
(CCR) in calibration, validation, and cross-validation, which is expressed 
according to the following equation:
 
=
×
CCR
100%
1
2
N
N
  
(2.6)
where 
1
N  is the number of correctly classified samples and 
2
N  is the total 
number of samples. Meanwhile, model performance can also be statistically 
evaluated by using the sensitivity, specificity, and class error:
 
=
+
Sensitivity
TP
TP
FN  
(2.7)
 
=
+
Specificity
TN
FP
TN  
(2.8)
 
=
−
+
Class error
1
Sensitivity
Specificity
2
  
(2.9)

44
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
In Equations 2.7 through 2.9, TP and TN refer to true positive and true nega-
tive, respectively, resulting in the samples that have been correctly assigned 
as belonging (TP), or not belonging (TN), to a specific class. FP and FN 
denote false positive and false negative, respectively, accounting for the 
samples that have been wrongly assigned as belonging (FP), or not belong-
ing (FN), to a specific class (Amigo et al., 2015). Another important statistic 
evaluation often used in classification is the receiver operator characteris-
tics (ROC) curves, which are graphical plots that present the performance of 
the classification as its discrimination threshold (relationship between the 
specificity and sensitivity) is varied. The closest point in the ROC curve to 
the top left corner of the chart usually results from an optimal threshold. 
The best prediction model would generate a point in the upper left corner 
or coordinate (0, 1) of the ROC space, representing 100% sensitivity (no false 
negatives) and 100% specificity (no false positives). The area under the ROC 
curve (AUC) can also be applied to compare general classification perfor-
mances due to its statistical property: the AUC of a classifier is equivalent 
to the probability that the classifier will rank a randomly chosen positive 
instance higher than a randomly chosen negative instance.
2.4.4 Selection of Important Wavelengths
It is very critical to select the most important wavelengths in hyperspec-
tral imaging in order to optimize data analysis and save computation time. 
Irrelevant wavelength elimination and spectral dimension reduction are 
necessary in spectral data analysis. According to Wold et al. (1996), effec-
tive wavelengths may be equally or more efficient than full wavelengths in 
many situations. The elimination of irrelevant wavelengths can predigest 
calibration modeling and enhance the results in terms of accuracy and 
robustness. Besides, contiguous wavelengths are likely to have a problem 
of multicollinearity, which refers to strong correlations among the indepen-
dent variables (wavelengths). The selection of spectral variables can mini-
mize the collinearity among contiguous wavelengths. Once a few optimal 
wavelengths with characteristic information are collected, a multispectral 
imaging system with the advantages of simple structure and low cost can be 
developed and it will be incomparable for process monitoring and real-time 
inspection.
There are numerous mathematical selection algorithms developed for 
choosing optimum wavelengths. Some classical methods include correlation 
coefficients, analysis of spectral differences (ASD), spectrum derivatives, 
and stepwise regression. Simulated annealing (SA) and genetic algorithms 
(GAs) are two elaborate search-based strategies. Interval-based algorithms 
usually include interval partial least squares (iPLS), windows PLS, and back-
ward interval partial least squares (biPLS). The choice of a particular method 
should be determined by the nature of the problem, ease of implementation, 
the size of the data set, and economic feasibility (ElMasry and Wold, 2008).

45
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
2.5  Online Applications for Meat 
Quality and Safety Assessment
From its manifestation as a means of remote sensing exploration, to its current 
success in several distinct applications, hyperspectral imaging has established 
itself as a key analytical tool for nondestructive quality and safety evaluation 
of meat and meat products. When implemented in processing lines, hyper-
spectral imaging systems enable further increasing throughput by providing 
precise inspection control over key steps in the production and packaging pro-
cess. Stimulated by rapid advances in instrumentation, software, and algorith-
mic developments as well as chemometrics, hyperspectral imaging has found 
use in many important applications in the meat industry such as classification 
or sorting of meat into different groups based on quality traits, such as color, 
fat, protein, and moisture, either to screen or eliminate lower quality products 
before processing or packaging or to sort a single meat source into a quality 
stack. Meanwhile, it is applied for uniformity control and inspection purposes 
to identify meat adulteration and exclude contaminated or substandard meat 
sources from the food chain with minimal additional cost. There are a number 
of areas for which hyperspectral imaging holds great potential in online quality 
and safety evaluation of meat and meat products, as summarized in Table 2.1.
TABLE 2.1
Applications of Hyperspectral Imaging for Quality and Safety Evaluation of Meat
Products
Imaging 
Mode
Spectral 
Range (nm)
Applications
Data 
Analysis
References
Poultry 
carcass
Reflectance
385–735
Differentiation of 
wholesome and 
unwholesome 
chicken
Fuzzy 
algorithm
Chao et al. 
(2007)
Reflectance
400–1000
Fecal detection 
and wholesome-
ness inspection
Image 
processing 
algorithm
Park et al. 
(2010)
Fluorescence
425–711
Skin tumor 
detection
SVM, PCA
Du et al. 
(2007)
Reflectance
447–733
Skin tumor 
detection
FS-MBB, 
KNN
Nakariyakul 
and Casasent 
(2007)
Reflectance/
transmittance
400–1000
Bone fragment 
detection
PCA
Yoon et al. 
(2008)
Reflectance
900–1700
TVC prediction
PLSR
Feng and Sun 
(2013a)
Reflectance
900–1700
Pseudomonas 
loads
PLSR
Feng and Sun 
(2013b)
Reflectance
900–1700
Enterobacteria-
ceae loads
PLSR
Feng and Sun 
(2013)
(Continued)

46
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 2.1 (Continued)
Applications of Hyperspectral Imaging for Quality and Safety Evaluation of Meat
Products
Imaging 
Mode
Spectral 
Range (nm)
Applications
Data 
Analysis
References
Reflectance
400–1000
Hydroxyproline 
content in 
chicken meat
PLSR
Xiong et al. 
(2015b)
Reflectance
400–1000
Springiness of fresh 
chicken meat
PLSR, 
ANN
Xiong et al. 
(2015a)
Fish
Interactance
400–1000
Freshness 
assessment of 
cod
PCA, 
PLSR, 
KNN
Sivertsen 
et al. (2011)
Reflectance
400–1000
Sensory QIS in 
grass carp fillet
LS-SVM
Cheng and 
Sun (2015a)
Interactance
760–1040
Distribution of fat 
and salt contents
PLSR
 Segtnan et al. 
(2009)
Reflectance
899–1694
Fat content in 
Atlantic salmon 
fillets
PLSR
Zhu et al. 
(2014)
Interactance
448–752
Nematodes 
detection in cod 
fillets
GML 
classifier
Sivertsen 
et al. (2012)
Reflectance
400–1700
TVC of salmon 
fillets
PLSR, 
LS-SVM
Wu and Sun 
(2013d)
Reflectance
400–1000
Enterobacteria-
ceae loads in 
grass carp
PLSR
Cheng and 
Sun (2015b)
Reflectance
380–1030
Discrimination of 
fresh and 
frozen-thawed 
halibut fillets
LS-SVM
Zhu et al. 
(2013)
Reflectance
400–1000
Categorization of 
salmon fillets 
stored under 
different 
atmospheres
PCA, 
KNN
Sone et al. 
(2012)
Reflectance
400–1000
Distinguish 
expired and 
nonexpired 
vacuum-packed 
salmon
PLS-DA
Ivorra et al. 
(2013)
Red meat
Reflectance
900–1700
Color, pH, and 
tenderness of 
fresh beef
PLSR
ElMasry et al. 
(2012c)
Reflectance
900–1700
Color, pH, and 
drip loss of pork
PLSR
Barbin et al. 
(2012b)
(Continued)

47
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
TABLE 2.1 (Continued)
Applications of Hyperspectral Imaging for Quality and Safety Evaluation of Meat
Products
Imaging 
Mode
Spectral 
Range (nm)
Applications
Data 
Analysis
References
Reflectance
400–1000
Beef marbling 
grade
MLR
Li et al. (2011)
Reflectance
400–1000
Pork tenderness
MLR
Tao et al. 
(2012)
Reflectance
900–1700
Lamb tenderness
PLSR
Kamruzza-
man et al. 
(2013)
Reflectance
400–1000
Beef tenderness
FLD, SVM, 
DT
Konda 
Naganathan 
et al. (2016)
Reflectance
380–1700
Moisture content 
in beef
MLR
Wu et al. 
(2013)
Reflectance
900–1700
Water, fat, and 
protein contents 
of beef
PLSR
ElMasry et al. 
(2013)
Reflectance
400–1000
Fat content in 
beef
SAM, 
EDM
Lohumi et al. 
(2016)
Reflectance
1000–2500
Moisture content 
of porcine meat
PLSR
Liu et al. 
(2014b)
Reflectance
400–1000
Moisture content 
in pork
PLSR
Ma et al. 
(2016)
Reflectance
900–1700
Moisture, protein, 
and fat of intact 
and minced 
pork
PLSR
Barbin et al. 
(2013a)
Reflectance
900–1700
Moisture, protein, 
and fat content 
in lamb
PLSR
Kamruzza-
man et al. 
(2012b)
Reflectance
400–1000
Moisture content 
in beef, lamb, 
and pork
MLR
Kamruzza-
man et al. 
(2016b)
Reflectance
900–1700
TVC and PPC in 
pork
PLSR
Barbin et al. 
(2013b)
Reflectance
472–1000
TVC in pork
SMLR
Tao and Peng 
(2015)
Reflectance
400–1000
pH of salted pork 
meat
PLSR
Liu et al. 
(2014a)
Reflectance
400–1000, 
900–2500
Drip loss of 
frozen pork
PLSR
Xie et al. 
(2015)
Reflectance
900–1700
Drip loss of lamb
PLSR
Kamruzza-
man et al. 
(2012c)
(Continued)

48
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
2.5.1 Poultry Carcass
The Poultry Products Inspection Act of 1957 requires the United States Depart-
ment of Agriculture’s Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) to inspect all 
domesticated birds when slaughtered and processed into products by a com-
mercial facility. Since then, on-site organoleptic inspection is carried out on 
each chicken carcass processed at U.S. poultry plants for indications of dis-
eases or defects and it is usually accomplished by sight and by touch for the 
body, the inner body cavity surfaces, and the internal organs during process-
ing operations. Each inspector employed in FSIS is limited to a maximum of 35 
birds per minute and an inspector working more than eight hours per day in 
these conditions tends to develop repetitive motion injuries and fatigue prob-
lems. As a result, fast and automatic methods for precise inspection are nec-
essary in the poultry industry for efficient management. In recent years, the 
hyperspectral imaging technique has been extensively implemented for safety 
and quality evaluation and monitoring of chicken and poultry carcasses in 
offline and online applications through many research endeavors (Feng and 
Sun, 2014; Park et al., 2007). The widely conducted research of hyperspectral 
imaging systems in poultry quality and safety evaluation is mostly focused on 
the differentiation between unwholesome and wholesome freshly slaughtered 
chickens or identification of different contaminants or tumors on the surface 
of the poultry carcasses. In fact, some online hyperspectral imaging detection 
systems for inspection of poultry carcasses have been successfully installed 
and implemented (Chao et al., 2008). Generally, the spectral image is first cap-
tured for each poultry carcass along the processing line, and then the image 
is processed by computer software and the result to determine whether or not 
the chicken has a contaminant, disease, or systemic defects will be obtained in 
seconds (Chao et al., 2014).
TABLE 2.1 (Continued)
Applications of Hyperspectral Imaging for Quality and Safety Evaluation of Meat
Products
Imaging 
Mode
Spectral 
Range (nm)
Applications
Data 
Analysis
References
Reflectance
900–1700
WHC in fresh 
beef
PCA 
,PLSR
ElMasry et al. 
(2011)
Reflectance
400–1000
WHC in beef, 
lamb, and pork
PLSR, 
LS-SVM
Kamruzza-
man et al. 
(2016a)
ANN, artificial neural network; DT, decision tree; EDM, Euclidian distance measure; FLD, 
Fisher’s linear discriminant; FS-MBB, forward selection-modified branch and bound; 
GML, Gaussian maximum likelihood; KNN, K-nearest neighbor; LS-SVM, least 
squares-support vector machine; MLR, multiple linear regression; PCA, principal 
component analysis; PLS-DA, partial least squares-discriminant analysis; PPC, 
psychrotrophic plate count; PLSR, partial least squares regression; QIS, quality index 
scores; SAM, spectral angle measure; SVM, support vector machines; TVC, total viable 
counts; WHC, water holding capability.

49
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
2.5.1.1 Contamination Detection
Undoubtedly, consumers require some assurance that the poultry product 
available for purchase is wholesome and without any food safety hazards. 
Contamination of poultry carcasses with bacterial food-borne pathogens 
potentially results from exposure of the animal carcass to fecal materials 
during or after slaughter. Microbial pathogens are likely to be transmitted 
to humans after consumption of contaminated undercooked or mishandled 
poultry meat. In the United States, about 9000 deaths and 6.5–33 million 
illnesses each year are food related (Park et al., 2002). As a result, fecal and 
ingesta contaminants on poultry carcasses are prohibited in order to reduce 
the risk of an adverse health effect. For safety purposes, the successful 
identification of poultry carcasses contaminated by feces and/or ingesta is 
critical to protect the public health from a potential source of food-borne ill-
nesses. Generally, the color of fecal material ranges from different shades of 
yellow to green, brown, and white and the consistency of feces is normally 
semisolid to paste. These guidelines are used by inspectors to prevent visibly 
fecal-contaminated carcasses from entering the chilling tanks. In addition to 
being very tedious, this manual inspection method is not only labor-intensive 
but also prone to both human error and inspector-to-inspector variation.
Hyperspectral imaging systems with different designs have been developed 
for the identification of fecal matter and ingesta on the surfaces of poultry 
carcasses. Intensive research has been conducted by the USDA Agricultural 
Research Service (ARS) for calibrating hyperspectral imaging systems, iden-
tifying spectral signatures of different contaminants, building models for 
fecal detection, and exploiting the system in online multispectral applica-
tions (Chao et al., 2008; Park et al., 2007). Park et al. (2006) attempted to find 
out the optimal supervised classification algorithms for the identification of 
fecal and ingesta contaminants on the surfaces of poultry carcasses. In this 
research, a pushbroom hyperspectral imaging system was used to acquire 
hyperspectral images, with 512 narrow bands ranging from 400–900 nm. 
Three different feces from digestive tracts (duodenum, ceca, and colon) and 
ingesta were regarded as contaminants. Figure 2.9 shows typical hyper-
spectral images of an uncontaminated carcass, surface contaminants with 
regions of interest (ROIs), and the corresponding spectra from each ROI. As 
shown, 25 pixels were recognized as duodenum, 27 pixels as ceca, 78 pixels 
as colon, 93 pixels as ingesta, and 195 pixels as skin of different locations of 
thigh, breast, and wing. The reflectance spectra of skin were observed to be 
much higher than those of the contaminants. After spectra were extracted 
from different ROIs, six different supervised classification methods were 
investigated and the performances were compared. Those supervised classi-
fication algorithms were parallelepiped, minimum distance, maximum like-
lihood, Mahalanobis distance, spectral angle mapper, and binary encoding 
classifier. The classification accuracies varied with the algorithms as well as 
with the type of feed used to grow the broilers. The highest classification 

50
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
accuracy for identifying contaminants from corn-fed carcasses was observed 
to be 92.3% with a spectral angle mapper classifier.
A multispectral imaging system to detect fecal and ingesta contaminants on 
the surface of poultry carcasses was developed for a real-time, online poultry 
inspection application (Park et al., 2004). Three optimum wavelengths of 515.4, 
566.4, and 631 nm was selected according to the results of previous research 
(Park et al., 2002; Windham et al., 2003) and these three-band spectral images 
were collected using a common aperture camera with three selected optical 
filters that were preinstalled into the camera assembly. The detailed process 
for the real-time image processing is described in Figure 2.10. It was found 
that the ratio of 566.4-nm image/515.4-nm image could identify feces (duo-
denum, ceca, and colon) and ingesta contaminants. Meanwhile, a masking 
process was implemented to remove the noisy background by using a 631-nm 
image. After a threshold process, three white spots of each row from the top 
Duodenum
(25 pixels)
Duodenum
Ceca
Colon
Ingesta
Skin (thigh)
Skin (breast)
Skin (wing)
Ceca (27 pixels)
Colon (78 pixels)
Ingesta (93 pixels)
Skin (195 pixels)
(b)
(a)
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
400
500
Wavelengths (nm)
Reflectance
(c)
600
700
800
900
FIGURE 2.9
Regions of interests (ROIs) of a corn-fed poultry carcass and the corresponding mean spectra. 
(a) Uncontaminated carcass. (b) Fecal contaminant ROIs. (c) Mean spectra of ROIs. (Repro-
duced from Park, B. et al., Transactions of the ASABE, 49, 2017–2024, 2006.)

51
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
Masking
Collect three-band
spectral images using
common aperture camera
Calculate image ratio 
(566.4-nm image/515.4-nm image)
to identify fecal and ingesta
contaminants
Threshold to segregate
contaminants
Mask spectral image to
eliminate noisy background
using 631-nm image
Determine coordinates of
contaminated spots
Find centroid of each
contaminant spot and
calculate size of contaminant
Calculate location and
area of contamination
(a)
(b)
Band ratio
515.4 nm
566.4 nm
631 nm
Centroid
Find coordinate
Masked image
Thresholding
FIGURE 2.10
(a) The process of a real-time multispectral imaging method for automated fecal and ingesta 
detection on poultry carcasses (b) and the corresponding flowchart. (Reproduced from Park, 
B. et al., Journal of Food Process Engineering, 27, 311–327, 2004.)

52
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
to the bottom were obtained to represent contaminants from duodenum, 
ceca, colon, and ingesta from the crop or gizzard, respectively. The crossline-
markers denoted the centroid of each contaminant spot. Finally, blob analysis 
was used to determine the location of each contaminant spot. The total pro-
cessing time to analyze one bird was 251 ms or 3.99 frames per second, which 
means processing capability would exceed 239 birds per minute. The overall 
accuracy to detect fecal and ingesta contaminants was 96.8% and the predic-
tion accuracy of identifying each contaminant was 92.4% for duodenum and 
98% for ceca, colon, and ingesta with moderate false positives. The algorithm 
developed in this research confirmed that a multispectral imaging system 
with batch image-processing algorithm can be effectively used for the real-
time, online poultry processing speed of at least 140 birds per minute.
In addition, Chao et al. (2007) have developed a multispectral imaging 
platform using a line-scan hyperspectral camera with a spectrograph for 
differentiation of wholesome and systemically diseased poultry carcasses 
at a commercial line speed. Using a threshold of 0.4 for fuzzy output deci-
sion values, multispectral classification was able to obtain 97.6% accuracy for 
wholesome birds and 96.0% accuracy for systemically diseased birds in the 
testing dataset. More recently, Park et al. (2010) attempted to merge the fecal 
detection and systemic disease detection systems onto a common platform 
using a line-scan hyperspectral imaging system in real-time mode during 
poultry processing. Figure 2.11 presents a line-scan hyperspectral imaging 
system setup developed in this research to collect image data for contami-
nate detection on poultry carcasses at a commercial line speed at the Belts-
ville imaging laboratory. The results testified to the feasibility of a line-scan 
hyperspectral imaging system in terms of processing speed and detection 
accuracy for real-time, online fecal detection and wholesomeness inspection 
in a commercial poultry plant.
2.5.1.2 Tumor and Bone Detection
The presence of tumors and bones in chicken carcasses poses serious 
problems to the producers because they are not acceptable for consumers. 
Chicken skin tumors refer to round ulcerous lesions that are surrounded by 
a rim of thickened skin and dermis. Skin cancer makes skin cells unable to 
divide and grow normally, and induces abnormal cells to grow out of control 
to form tumors. Tumors are not as visually obvious as other pathological dis-
eases because their spatial signature appears as shape distortion rather than 
a discoloration. Moreover, tumors vary in size and shape and sometimes 
they can be found in both sides of the chicken. Therefore, identification is a 
big challenge because some blemishes are rather difficult to discern by using 
traditional manual inspection and conventional vision-based inspection sys-
tems operating in the visual spectrum may also suffer limitations (Du et al., 
2007). Additionally, different tumors present different spectral responses 
and some parts of normal chicken skin even have similar spectral response 

53
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
as that of tumors, which makes detection a more difficult task. In this aspect, 
hyperspectral imaging shows potential for identification and classification 
of biomedical abnormalities due to its ability of simultaneously providing 
spatial and spectral features of the objects of interest in the image.
Currently, two methods, namely hyperspectral fluorescence imaging and 
hyperspectral reflectance imaging, are widely used to detect tumors on 
poultry carcasses. Prior work on detection of chicken skin tumors used PCA 
on hyperspectral reflectance images to select three effective wavelengths 
(465, 575, and 705 nm) and developed a multispectral imaging system 
(Chao et al., 2002). In this study, they achieved classification accuracy of 91% 
and 86% for normal and tumorous skin tissue regions, respectively. Kim 
et al. (2004) investigated the use of a hyperspectral fluorescence imaging 
system for identification of chicken skin tumors. A spectral classifier gener-
ated a spectral map that locates candidate regions for skin tumors. Then, 
a spatial classifier was employed to select the real tumor spots from the 
potential tumorous regions, which yielded final results showing the loca-
tion of tumors. This method was believed to be useful to detect chicken 
carcasses with tumors, but it failed to detect some tumors smaller than 
3 mm in diameter. The detection rate, false positive rate, and miss rate of 
this proposed method were 76%, 28%, and 24%, respectively. Nakariyakul 
FIGURE 2.11
Line scanning real-time hyperspectral imaging system setup. (Reproduced from Park, B. et al., 
Line-scan hyperspectral imaging for real-time poultry fecal detection. SPIE Defense, Security, 
and Sensing. International Society for Optics and Photonics, Orlando, Florida, 76760I, 2010.)

54
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
and Casasent (2007) developed a novel feature selection method to detect 
skin tumors on chicken carcasses using hyperspectral reflectance data. 
Figure 2.12 demonstrates the whole process to obtain the final classifica-
tion image (Figure 2.12d) by using a fusion system. As mentioned earlier, 
a chicken skin tumor consists of an ulcerous lesion region, which is sur-
rounded by a region of thickened skin; the spectral responses of the lesion 
and the thickened-skin regions of tumors are remarkably different. In this 
research, the feature selection algorithm was applied to choose different 
sets of spectral bands to separately detect the lesion and thickened-skin 
regions of the tumors. A pair of binary images were produced to locate a 
candidate lesion and thickened-skin pixels and then morphologically pro-
cessed and finally fused to reduce false alarms. As shown in Figure 2.12d, 
the initial test results were promising with 11 of 14 skin tumors detected 
without any false alarms. Two of the three missed tumors were very small 
and were expected to be missed. Meanwhile, the feature selection algorithm 
only included five bands, therefore making a fast and inexpensive multi-
spectral sensor system possible.
Fragments of bone in boneless poultry meat also pose significant hazards 
to consumers. Bone fragments may result from bones that are already bro-
ken before or during slaughter or a misaligned cutting blades shaving pieces 
from the skeleton. Bone fragments, including the clavicle (wishbone), which 
is a long, sharp, and completely calcified bone, have the potential to cause 
injury. Yoon et al. (2008) evaluated how reflectance spectra can be exploited 
for detection of bone fragments in chicken fillets. Specifically, a fusion of 
hyperspectral transmittance and reflectance imaging, which is a nonionized 
and nondestructive imaging modality, was developed in this study as an 
Spectral feature
selection
Thickened
skin-pixel classification
Spatial
 postprocessing
Spectral feature
selection
Final fused
classification image
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fusion
algorithm
Lesion pixel
classification
Spatial
postprocessing
1
14
4
7 8
6
9 10
111213
5
3
2
Hyperspectral
raw image
Spatial 
preprocessing
FIGURE 2.12
Chicken skin tumor detection by using hyperspectral imaging aided with a fusion algorithm.

55
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
alternative method to the conventional transmittance x-ray imaging tech-
nique. An enhancement method using an illumination-transmittance model 
was proposed to correct nonuniform illumination effects so that embedded 
bones were more easily identified by a simple segmentation method with a 
single threshold value. Predicted bones were classified by the nearest neigh-
bor classifier which was trained by the library of mean spectral reflectance of 
chicken tissues such as fat, meat, and embedded bones. Their study observed 
that bones embedded in compressed 1 cm thick samples can be successfully 
detected when both sides of the sample were examined. Their results were 
promising, indicating that a hyperspectral imaging system was effective for 
detecting bones on poultry carcasses when appropriate image processing 
algorithms were applied.
2.5.1.3 Microbiological Spoilage Detection
All chicken meat provided to the markets must undergo quality control in 
order to guarantee consumer safety. Without proper storage conditions, 
undesirable microorganisms may grow to cause sensory changes, dis-
coloration, and changes in taste. Therefore, fast and automatic methods 
for precise prediction of bacterial loads in chicken meat are required in 
the poultry industry for efficient management. A laboratory-based push-
broom hyperspectral imaging system in the NIR range was investigated 
to evaluate TVCs in raw chicken fillets (Feng and Sun, 2013a). To simplify 
the models, important wavelengths were selected by stepwise regres-
sion. Meanwhile, the resulting reflectance images were transformed 
into hypercubes in absorbance and Kubelka–Munck (K–M) units. Three 
PLSR models were built based on reflectance spectra, absorbance data, 
and K–M parameters, named RS-PLSR, AS-PLSR, and KMS-PLSR, respec-
tively. More robustness was found in the resulting simplified KMS-PLSR 
model with high correlation coefficients (R) of 0.96 and 0.94 as well as low 
root mean squared errors (RMSEs) of 0.40 and 0.50 log
CFU/g
10
, for cali-
bration and cross-validation, respectively. With respect to detecting spe-
cific bacteria, the hyperspectral imaging technique as a nondestructive 
tool has also been employed for quantitative and direct determination of 
Pseudomonas loads (Feng and Sun, 2013b) and Enterobacteriaceae loads 
(Feng et al., 2013) on chicken fillet. The best model for Pseudomonas loads 
prediction produced R and RMSEs of 0.91 and 0.55 log
CFU/g
10
, 0.87 and 
0.65 log
CFU/g
10
 as well as 0.88 and 0.64 log
CFU/g
10
 for calibration, cross-
validation, and prediction, respectively. Three optimal wavelengths (930, 
1121, and 1345 nm) were selected and competent for predicting Entero-
bacteriaceae loads with 
2
R  of 0.89, 0.86, and 0.87 and RMSEs of 0.33, 0.40, 
and 0.45 log
CFU/g
10
 for calibration, cross-validation, and prediction, 
respectively. All the mentioned studies had the advantage of building a 
prediction map to visualize the distribution of bacteria on chicken fillet, 
which is not available by conventional methods.

56
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
In addition to the abovementioned applications, there have been an 
increasing amount of research about predicting quality parameters of 
poultry meat using hyperspectral imaging systems. For instance, Xiong 
et al. (2015b) used a hyperspectral imaging system (400–1000 nm) to predict 
hydroxyproline content in chicken meat and good results were achieved 
from the simplified regression model with 
p
R  of 0.854 and low RMSEP of 
0.049. Springiness, as one of the most important quality characteristics of 
chicken meat, was also measured by a hyperspectral imaging technique 
with satisfying results presented (Xiong et al., 2015a). However, future 
work should be carried out to investigate the feasibility of multispectral 
imaging systems for online and at-site inspections in terms of predicting 
these parameters in chicken meat.
2.5.2 Fish
Fish and fish products play a significant part in our daily diet; in addi-
tion to an appetizing taste, they are regarded as the best sources of fats, 
proteins, and essential micronutrients to promote human health. Globally, 
fish and fish products are consumed by nearly two-thirds of the world’s 
population, providing roughly 40% of the protein intake (Cheng et al., 
2013). Nevertheless, there are some concerns and challenges related with 
the evaluation of fish quality and safety at an industrial level. Fish quality 
and safety is a scientific discipline referring to handling, preparation, pro-
cessing, transportation, and storage in ways that prevent food-borne ill-
ness and supply the consumer with premium quality products. However, 
fish is one of the most perishable and heterogeneous aquatic products, 
and it serves as a growth medium for microorganisms that may cause 
fish spoilage or even cause disease in the consumer. In addition, chemical 
composition and sensory attributes of fish are highly affected by prehar-
vest (species, sex, age, feeding, and environmental habits) and postharvest 
factors (storage methods, time, and temperature). Subtle changes in color, 
juiciness, texture, and biochemical properties of fish are likely to affect 
consumers’ sensory evaluation of fish quality as well as their decisions in 
making a second purchase. Therefore, appropriate tools for inspection are 
required to maintain good quality and safety in production and trade of 
fish and fish products.
During the past few decades, a great number of different techniques have 
been explored as possible instrumental methods for quality and safety evalu-
ation of fish, including sensory evaluation based on the quality index method 
(QIM) (Larsen et al., 1992), biochemical methods with HPLC (Mendes et al., 
2009), and microbial inspection based on TVCs (Song et al., 2012). These tech-
niques play a critical role in the current fish industry; some of them have 
always been used as gold standards and regulation methods serving scientific 
research because of their relative validity and accuracy. However, these meth-
ods are normally expensive, time consuming, laborious, and require highly 

57
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
skilled operators, and are not suitable for online and real-time monitoring. 
Applications of hyperspectral imaging for quality and safety assessment of 
fish are mainly concentrated on overall fish freshness, chemical composi-
tion determination, and microbial inspection. Compared with NIR spectros-
copy, applications of hyperspectral imaging in freshness grading and quality 
evaluation of fish in both research and industry have a limited number of 
publications, although there is a prevailing tendency of promising success. 
The reason probably lies in the fact that hyperspectral imaging is still a rela-
tively new technique, and its full potential has yet to be exploited so far. The 
hyperspectral imaging technique is able to optimize processing of the raw 
fish, determing the correct pricing, labeling, and documentation, and identify 
quality authentication when appropriately applied in production and packag-
ing plants.
2.5.2.1 Freshness
Fresh fish normally refers to the fish being caught/harvested and then 
chilled and stored for a short period before use. Freshness is an ambiguous 
term summing up many factors, mostly associated with a sensory impres-
sion or understanding. The freshness is reduced during storage time until 
spoilage occurs due to physical, chemical, biochemical, and microbiological 
processes, which are mainly affected by time and temperature. Traditionally, 
fish freshness has been measured by sensory inspection (Anastasio et al., 
1999), which is carried out through the sense of smell, sight, taste, and touch. 
Descriptive analysis like QIM for sensory analysis of marine products is cur-
rently increasingly used. These methods are relatively simple, but inefficient, 
time consuming, costly, and very subjective because the assessment is based 
on individual preferences, although the bias could be reduced if proper sen-
sory training is implemented. Instrumental methods are also developed, 
such as an electric nose that simulates the human sense of smell for ana-
lyzing the odor profile of fish samples. These methods enable objective and 
reliable results to a certain degree, but they are still not efficient when a large 
number of samples need to be measured.
In recent years, hyperspectral imaging has been employed as an advanced 
method for automatic freshness assessment of different kinds of fish dur-
ing production. Chau et al. (2009) employed the hyperspectral imaging 
system in the region of 892–2495 nm to determine overall freshness of fish. 
Their research revealed that hyperspectral imaging was able to evaluate the 
freshness in all spots (pixels) of the fish surface instead of evaluating the 
fish freshness at specific regions on the fish surface. It also showed that 
there were differences observed among the mean spectra of a whole fish, the 
fillet flesh, and belly flap regions of a fillet. These dissimilarities between 
the spectra are basically due to the significant differences between chemical 
compositions of these parts. Meanwhile, hyperspectral interactance imaging 
in the region 400–1000 nm was investigated for differentiating between fresh 

58
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
and frozen-thawed cod fillets and for measuring the freshness at industrial 
speed (40 cm/s or 1 fillet/s) (Sivertsen et al., 2011). In this study, PCA, 
K-nearest neighbor (KNN) classifier, and PLSR were applied as the multi-
variate analysis. Their results showed that the freshness, defined as storage 
days on ice, can be well predicted for each of the unfrozen samples with a 
RMSECV of 1.64 days for the simplified PLSR model calculated from only 
four wavelengths. This result was comparable, or better, than that obtained 
from sensory evaluation by the QIM with a group of trained panelists.
More recently, Cheng and Sun (2015a) explored the feasibility of using 
hyperspectral imaging (400–1000 nm) in tandem with a data fusion tech-
nique for rapid and nondestructive determination of sensory quality index 
scores (QIS) of grass carp fish fillet during cold storage. In the QIM scheme, 
QIS is assigned for each quality parameter in a numeric scale using a demerit 
score system, ranging from 0 to 3. Score 0 normally refers to the very fresh 
fish, with scores increasing with storage time. In their study (Cheng and Sun, 
2015a), a total of 135 fresh fish subsamples were involved and the reflectance 
hyperspectral images were acquired in a line scanning mode. Five important 
wavelengths (441, 560, 598, 639, and 684 nm) were collected by the successive 
projections algorithm (SPA) and 13 textural feature variables were extracted 
by the gray-level gradient co-occurrence matrix (GLGCM) method. In order 
to boost the robustness of models, these selected spectral variables and 
textural feature variables were fused by applying the feature level fusion 
method. Figure 2.13 shows the flowchart of data fusion for measurement of 
fish fillet QIS using hyperspectral imaging. The least squares-support vector 
machine (LS-SVM) model developed by data fusion of effective spectra and 
texture data presented the most excellent performance with RPD of 4.23, 
 
2
P
R
 
of 0.944, and RMSEP of 0.703. These results verified that hyperspectral imag-
ing is an admirable alternative to the conventional evaluation by trained 
panelists for assessment of fish freshness and it also indicated the potential 
and promise for making more efforts to facilitate this emerging technique 
for online applications in the fish industry.
2.5.2.2 Chemical Compositions
Another aspect related to fish quality and safety properties is intrinsic 
chemical attributes such as water, protein, fat, and salt. These key quality 
parameters vary greatly from one species or one individual fish to another 
and these variations can cause a severe deterioration of sensory quality, and 
loss of nutritional and commercial values. Water is the largest component  of 
fish composition and is closely associated with other attributes such as fat 
and lipid. Furthermore, moisture plays an essential part in affecting micro-
bial growth, leading to influencing the shelf life of fish and fish products. 
The first application of hyperspectral imaging for moisture content predic-
tion was conducted by Wold et al. (2006) using a multispectral imaging NIR 
transflectance system in the region of 760–1040 nm for online evaluation 

59
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
of dried salted coalfish (Bacalao). Fish was placed on the conveyor belt and 
moved at a speed of approximately 0.1 ms−1. It was scanned line by line to 
collect the entire spectral image, which was acquired with a spectral resolu-
tion of approximately 20 nm at the speed of 10,000 spectra per second. Their 
research achieved the best prediction model with 
2
R  and RMSECV equal 
to 0.92 and 0.70%, respectively. In addition, hyperspectral imaging was also 
explored to determine the spatial distribution of moisture content in farmed 
Atlantic salmon fillets (He et al., 2013). Three spectral regions of 400–1000 nm 
(Spectral Range I), 900–1700 nm (Spectral Range II), and 400–1700 nm (Spec-
tral Range III) were considered, and optimized PLSR models were built using 
only the important wavelengths selected from each spectral range, resulting 
in 
2
P
R
 of 0.893, 0.888 and 0.884, and RMSEP of 1.517%, 1.553%, and 1.578% for 
the three spectral regions, respectively.
Fat content is also one of the most significant quality criteria of fish, not only 
from a nutritional point of view, but also because of its sensory and functional 
properties. Nevertheless, conventional chemical analytical methods for fat con-
tent assessments are destructive and time consuming and require the use of 
hazardous chemicals that may be harmful to analysts and the environment (Xu 
et al., 2015). Therefore, online NIR hyperspectral interactance imaging (760–1040 
nm) was used as an advanced and noncontact technique to determine the fat 
distribution in raw and salted salmon (Salmo salar) fillets (Segtnan et al., 2009). 
0d
Spectra extraction
Hyperspectral image
Image texture extraction
Image texture variables
Data fusion
ROI
LS-SVM analysis
PC1
PCA
GLGCM
SPA
Full spectra data
Optimal spectra data
PC2
PC3
2d
4d
6d
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
R
0.20
0.10
0.00
400 500 600 700
Wavelength nm
800 9001000
FIGURE 2.13
Flowchart of data fusion for prediction of quality index scores in grass carp fish fillet by reflec-
tance hyperspectral imaging. GLGCM, gray-level gradient co-occurrence matrix; LS-SVM, 
least squares-support vector machine; PCA, principal component analysis; ROI, regions of 
interest; SPA, successive projections algorithm. (Reproduced from Cheng, J.-H. and Sun, D.-W., 
LWT—Food Science and Technology, 63, 892–898, 2015a.)

60
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Satisfactory results were obtained with correlation R and prediction error 
(RMSECV) for raw fillets of 0.947 and 1.96% and for salted fillets of 0.966 and 
1.95%, respectively. Likewise, Zhu et al. (2014) used a pushbroom NIR (899–1694 
nm) hyperspectral imaging system to determine the spatial distribution of fat 
in Atlantic salmon fillets. The quantitative relationship between spectral data 
and the reference fat contents was successfully established based on PLSR with 
RP of 0.93 and RMSEP of 1.24.
In another interesting endeavor for the application of compositional analy-
sis in fish, an NIR hyperspectral imaging technique was employed for non-
invasive distributional analysis of salt (NaCl) and fat in salmon fillets during 
salting, salt equilibration, and smoking, which are recognized as very criti-
cal for modern fish processing plants (Segtnan et al., 2009). In spite of the 
fact that NaCl molecules are not infrared active, several studies have been 
implemented on the use of NIR spectroscopy for prediction of NaCl con-
tents in foods. Segtnan et al. (2009) acquired hyperspectral images of salted 
and smoked salmon fillets and built models with the use of PLSR. It was 
found that NIR interactance imaging alone can predict NaCl contents locally 
in salted salmon fillets with RMSECV of 0.56% and R of 0.86. In addition, a 
large number of other studies have also stressed the potential of hyperspec-
tral imaging for automatic inspection and evaluation of physical properties 
in fish, such as the measurement of color distribution in salmon fillet (Wu 
et al., 2012), determination of water holding capacity (Wu and Sun, 2013c), 
and analysis of texture (Wu et al., 2014).
2.5.2.3 Parasites and Defects
As with other foods, safety is a key issue in the fish industry. Therefore, 
producers must deliver fish and fish products free from parasites and nema-
todes because these incidents about parasites in fish muscle to a great extent 
lead to an instant negative response from consumers toward the product. 
So far, the only reasonable solution is the manual inspection and trimming 
of each fillet on a candling table to avoid the occurrence of parasites in fish 
products and detect them online (Elmasry et al., 2012a). This is a very labor-
intensive and time-consuming method because the operator has to inspect 
the fillet first and then manually remove the defects from the fillet. As a 
consequence, the hyperspectral imaging technique has been used to detect 
parasite contamination in fish. In an early study, Wold et al. (2001) applied 
a multispectral imaging technique in the visible and NIR spectral region to 
detect parasites in cod (Gadus morhua) fillets. It was observed that parasites 
in fish flesh presented distinctive spectral fingerprints compared to the nor-
mal fish muscles. They further confirmed that this methodology was capable 
of detecting parasites at a depth of 6 mm below the fillet surface, which is 
2–3 mm deeper than what can be found by manual inspection of fish fillets.
Recently, interactance hyperspectral imaging was conducted under indus-
trial conditions to automatically detect nematodes in cod fillets (Sivertsen et al., 

61
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
2012). The test was performed at a fish processing plant in northern Norway 
and this system operated at a conveyor belt speed of 400 mm/s, which meets 
the industrial speed requirements. A detailed sketch of the main system com-
ponents are illustrated in Figure 2.14a, and a photograph of the inspection 
machine, with the front cover removed, is presented in Figure 2.14b. A Gauss-
ian maximum likelihood (GML) classifier was utilized to classify pixels as 
nematodes or not according to their corresponding spectra. Results indicated 
that the detection rate was 61.5% for all nematodes, and 70.8% and 60.3% for 
the dark and pale nematodes, respectively. To some degree, these studies 
reveal that the hyperspectral imaging technique has the potential to replace 
manual inspection in the fish processing industry.
2.5.2.4 Microbial Spoilage
A hyperspectral imaging system in the region of 400–1700 nm was devel-
oped to rapidly and noninvasively determine TVC of salmon fillets during 
the spoilage process (Wu and Sun, 2013d). The reference TVC values were 
measured using a standard plate count method and calibration models were 
established using PLSR and LS-SVM. The  competitive adaptive reweighted 
sampling (CARS)  algorithm was used to identify the effective wavelengths, 
which largely reflected the changes of microbial spoilage. A CARS-PLSR 
20
VNIR-640
Screen
Fiber-optic
light line
Cylindrical lens
Conveyer direction
20
50
100
1030
20
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2.14
(a) A sketch illustrating the dimensions and position of the spectrometer and fiber lines and 
(b) a photo of the hyperspectral imaging machine with the front cover removed.

62
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
model built with only eight spectral variables demonstrated the best per-
formance with 
2
P
R
 of 0.985 and RPD of 5.127. More recently, Cheng and Sun 
(2015b) used hyperspectral imaging in the spectral range of 400–1000 nm to 
measure the Escherichia coli loads in grass carp fish for evaluation and visu-
alization of microbial spoilage. A PLSR model built with full wavelengths 
showed good performance with RPD of 5.47 and 
2
P
R
 = 0.880. A simplified  
PLSR with six characteristic wavelengths also demonstrated good prediction 
capability (RPD = 5.22 and 
2
P
R
 = 0.870). The results presented in these stud-
ies confirmed that hyperspectral imaging systems are suitable for microbial 
spoilage control in view of the online requirements of fish industry.
2.5.2.5 Differentiation and Classification/Sorting
Fish product differentiation and classification is an emerging area of con-
cern in the fish processing industry. The feasibility of Vis/NIR hyperspectral 
imaging (380–1030 nm) in alliance with LS-SVM classifiers was investigated 
to discriminate the fresh and frozen-thawed halibut fillets (Zhu et al., 2013). In 
this work, a classification model was established based on the textural feature 
variables extracted by gray-level co-occurrence matrix analysis. Satisfactory 
results with a classification rate of 97.22% were obtained. In another work, 
categorization of fresh Atlantic salmon fillets stored under different atmo-
spheres using hyperspectral imaging was conducted by Sone et al. (2012). 
PCA was used to study changes occurring in the spectral characteristics of 
samples under different storage atmospheres and a KNN classifier was used 
for the classification of fillets by packaging type. Successful classification of 
over 88% was obtained, which was mainly associated with spectral char-
acteristics at the wavelengths of 606 and 636 nm. Meanwhile, Ivorra et al. 
(2013) also applied Vis/NIR hyperspectral imaging to distinguish expired 
and nonexpired vacuum-packed salmon based on PLS-DA method for 
classification purposes. The result obtained has a classification success rate 
of 82.7% in cross-validation from real commercial samples, which makes this 
technique promising for the nondestructive detection of expired packaged 
smoked salmon. On the basis of the results obtained from the earlier studies, 
it is necessary to develop suitable classification algorithms and enhance the 
hardware of the hyperspectral imaging system to boost and accelerate the 
industrial application of a hyperspectral imaging technique with a higher 
correct classification rate near 100%.
2.5.3 Red Meats
Red meats, such as pork, beef, and lamb, play a significant part in people’s 
daily diet as they are good sources of animal protein, vitamins, and miner-
als. For meat and meat products, it is very critical to keep them at a high qual-
ity for the modern meat industry because superior quality of these products 
is always demanded by consumers. Red meat is a nutritious, expensive, 

63
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
and perishable food commodity, and its quality is always associated with 
individual experience and preference. Generally, meat quality is defined 
as a measurement of attributes or properties which determine the suitabil-
ity of meat as fresh or stored for a reasonable period without deterioration 
(Elmasry et al., 2012b). Particularly, quality attributes of red meats usually 
comprise sensory, chemical, microbiological, and technological attributes 
(Xiong et al., 2014), as demonstrated in Figure 2.15. Regrettably, there is a 
great variability in these attributes of raw meat, accounting for highly vari-
able meat products being marketed without a controlled level of quality. This 
issue will be aggravated when the industry cannot satisfactorily characterize 
this level of quality and thus is unable to market products with a certified 
quality level (Damez and Clerjon, 2008).
Traditionally, sensory attributes (color, juiciness, firmness, marbling, 
tenderness, etc.) of many foods, including red meats, are evaluated by 
well-trained assessors. For meat color and marbling, the inspection 
methods are similar and usually conducted by comparing the color of 
the rib eye muscle (Musculus longissimus dorsi) or the proportion of intra-
muscular fat within the Musculus longissimus dorsi and scoring against 
the reference standards specific for each of the meat species (Xiong et al., 
2014). Today, other methods like chemical methods and instrumental 
techniques have also been used in evaluation of quality attributes, which 
are more convenient and effective than manual inspection. For chemical 
methods, the universal standard for crude protein analysis in food is the 
Kjeldahl method (Kirk, 1950) while for moisture content the oven-drying 
method is the standard (Willits, 1951). However, most of the chemical 
and instrumental techniques are destructive and require lengthy sample 
preparation. Hence, these methods are not feasible for rapid analysis of 
quality attributes in industrial and commercial processing. In addition, 
from the viewpoint of quality assurance, it is desirable to inspect all meat 
and meat products and thereby an ideal sensing technique for the meat 
industry should be online and nondestructive.
In recent years, many studies have been reported on developing nonde-
structive techniques for detecting internal and/or external red meat quality 
attributes (Kamruzzaman et al., 2012b). Different methodologies based on 
Quality attributes of red meats
Sensory
(color, marbling,
tenderness)
Chemical
(moisture, protein,
fat)
Microbiological
(freshness, spoilage)
Technological
(pH, water holding
capacity, drip loss)
FIGURE 2.15
Common quality attributes of red meats analyzed in the meat industry.

64
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
different principles, procedures, and instruments, such as ultrasound tech-
nology and computed tomography (CT) scanning, are currently available for 
measuring different meat quality attributes. Among them,the hyperspectral 
imaging technique is widely accepted as a new inspiring and versatile tech-
nique for rapid, reagentless, and noninvasive quantitative applications in the 
red meat industry. As a matter of fact, a large amount of research has been 
done in the application of hyperspectral imaging in red meats analysis, high-
lighting its capability of measuring many different quality attributes such as 
pH, color, tenderness, and fat content in beef, pork, and lamb (Barbin et al., 
2013a; Kamruzzaman et al., 2012c).
2.5.3.1 Sensory Attributes
Today, the application of hyperspectral imaging systems to measure sensory 
attributes of red meats are largely focused on prediction of color, marbling, 
and tenderness. Sensory attributes are the main quality attributes that have a 
huge influence on consumers’ overall evaluation of red meats. As consumers 
usually use color as an indicator of freshness and wholesomeness of meat, 
an attractive and stable color in the meat has a major influence on the buy-
ing decision made by the consumer. Marbling refers to the white flecks of 
fat present within the lean in the muscle, and the marbling score normally 
evaluates the distribution density of fat in the carcass rib eye region. As mar-
bling enhances juiciness, retail cuts with little marbling tend to account for 
cooked products that lack flavor and juiciness. Ideally, it should be uniformly 
and finely distributed throughout the lean, as this is preferred by consumers 
to enhance eating satisfaction. With respect to tenderness, it is an expression 
of meat texture, which is regarded as the most important sensory quality 
attribute related to consumer satisfaction. Meat tenderness is also positively 
associated with juiciness and flavor, and therefore consumers accept pay-
ing more for tender meat. Sources of tenderness variation in meat may be 
ascribed to the animal’s sex, age, breed, and antemortem stress, as well as 
postmortem treatments. Indeed, meat tenderness is a complex phenomenon 
that encompasses many characteristics such as chewiness, springiness, cohe-
siveness, hardness, and even juiciness (Elmasry et al., 2012a).
Color is an important feature that is used in conjunction with other char-
acteristics to determine the grade or suitability of red meat for a particular 
market. Beef and lamb meat in bright red and pork in pink are desirable 
to consumers. Retailers have to cut prices for meat with undesired surface 
color, which leads to revenue losses. ElMasry et al. (2012c) developed a hyper-
spectral imaging system in the NIR region for noncontact measurements of 
surface color, pH, and tenderness of fresh beef. Hyperspectral images were 
acquired in a pushbroom mode and reference color values were measured in 
a * * *
L a b  color system with a chromometer (CR-400, Konica Minolta Corp., 
Japan). It was found that PLSR models for prediction of color components *
L  
and *
b  were reasonably good; yet prediction of color component *
a  was not 

65
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
satisfactory. The resulting PLSR models generated 
2
CV
R
 of 0.88 and 0.81 and 
RMSECV of 1.21 and 0.57 for lightness ( *)
L  and yellowness ( *)
b , respectively. 
In addition, an image processing algorithm was developed to transfer the 
simplified model to every pixel in the image for visualizing color distribution 
in all portions of the beef sample. ElMasry et al. (2012c) thereby concluded 
that a hyperspectral imaging technique could be effectively implemented 
in commercial meat processing plants for rapid and nondestructive qual-
ity analysis when more improvements in terms of speed and processing are 
achieved. In addition to beef, the objective determination of the pork color 
attribute has also been investigated using a hyperspectral imaging technique 
(Barbin et al., 2012b). In this research, hyperspectral images in the NIR region 
were acquired for pork samples from the longissimus dorsi muscle by a push-
broom hyperspectral imaging system. Reference color (L, a, and b values) 
was measured using a Minolta Chromameter (CR-400, Konica Minolta Corp., 
Japan) calibrated against white ceramic tile. Meanwhile, chroma 
+
((
)
)
2
2 1/2
a
b
 
and hue angle (arctan /
b a) were also calculated, as it is believed that these 
parameters can change due to differences in meat quality. The optimized 
PLSR models were developed to predict color features (L, a, b, chroma, and 
hue angle) and good performance was achieved in the prediction of light-
ness (L) with 
2
CV
R
 of 0.93, 
2
P
R
 of 0.90, RMSECV of 1.36 < and RMSEP of 1.63. 
Distribution maps for lightness (L) prediction in pork meats were generated 
by applying this reduced PLS-R model (Figure 2.16b).
As for marbling, some researchers have used hyperspectral imaging tech-
nique in marbling evaluation of red meat and obtained good results. For 
instance, Li et al. (2011) investigated assessment of beef-marbling grade using 
a hyperspectral imaging system in the spectral region of 400–1100 nm. A 
charactersitic band was collected at the point where the maximal ratio of gray 
value of fat and lean occurs and therefore the images at 530 nm were used 
to differentiate beef-marbling. In addition, three characteristic parameters of 
samples, namely the density of large-particle fat, that of medium-particle fat, 
and that of small-particle fat, were applied to establish a prediction model by 
the MLR method and the beef samples were successfully graded with 
2
R  of 
0.92 for full cross-validation.
With respect to meat tenderness, the most common method is to mea-
sure the mechanical properties of a meat sample using the Warner–Bratzler 
shear force (WBSF) or slice shear force (SSF), yet both of them are not suit-
able for the commercial and fast-paced production environment. Recently, 
interest in exploiting hyperspectral imaging for the assessment of red meat 
tenderness is growing (ElMasry et al., 2012c). In an early study, Nagana-
than et al. (2008) developed and tested a Vis/NIR hyperspectral imaging 
system to predict meat tenderness of 14-day aged beef. On the basis of the 
extracted features, discriminant models were established to predict three 
beef tenderness categories, namely tender (SSF ≤ 205.80 N), intermediate 
(205.80 N < SSF < 254.80 N), and tough (SSF ≥ 254.80 N). The prediction 

66
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
model achieved an overall accuracy of 96.4% in leave-one-out cross-vali-
dation and all of the tough samples were correctly classified. Apart from 
that, Tao et al. (2012) implemented hyperspectral imaging in 400–1000 nm 
to nondestructively determine pork tenderness. The overall results showed 
that the spatially resolved hyperspectral imaging technique coupled with 
MLR was capable of predicting tenderness in pork. More recently, a hyper-
Average drip loss = 6.35%
Average drip loss = 2.73%
Average pH = 5.41
Average pH = 5.85
Average l = 49.12
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
6.5
6
5.5
5
4.5
15
10
5
0
–5
15
10
5
0
–5
6.5
6
5.5
5
4.5
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
Average l = 41.3
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 2.16
Distribution maps for some quality attributes in pork samples.

67
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
spectral imaging system (900–1700 nm) was utilized to predict instrumental 
and sensory tenderness of lamb meat (Kamruzzaman et al., 2013). WBSF val-
ues and sensory scores by trained panelists were recorded as the indicators 
of instrumental and sensory tenderness, respectively. Reasonable accuracy 
was obtained from PLSR models with 
CV
R
 of 0.84 for WBSF values and 0.69 
for sensory tenderness scores. Further results demonstrated that hyper-
spectral imaging can quickly categorize lamb steaks into good (i.e., tender) 
and bad (i.e., tough) based on WBSF values and sensory scores with overall 
accuracy of 94.51% and 91%, respectively. More recently, a prototype online 
hyperspectral imaging system (400–1000 nm) was built to acquire images of 
exposed rib eye muscle on hanging beef carcasses at two-day postmortem 
in a commercial beef packing plant (Konda Naganathan et al., 2016). In this 
research, 3D chemometric analyses coupled with discriminant models were 
applied to forecast beef tenderness by predicting WBSF values. Four differ-
ent dimensionality reduction approaches including sample principal com-
ponent analysis (SPCA), chemometric principal component analysis (CPCA), 
mosaic principal component analysis (MPCA), and partial least squares 
analysis (PLSA), as well as three different discriminant analysis algorithms, 
Fisher’s linear discriminant (FLD), SVM, and the decision tree (DT) model, 
were involved. The best prediction model was achieved by the CPCA and 
FLD combination with a tender certification accuracy of 86.7% and accuracy 
index value of 66.8%, in a true validation set (101 samples).
2.5.3.2 Chemical Compositions
Chemical constituents are intrinsic factors that affect red meat quality. It 
is believed that color, flavor, as well as tenderness of red meats might be 
changed by a series of reactions among different chemical constituents. For 
instance, moisture, as the major chemical constituent in red meats, plays a 
key part in affecting microbial growth, leading to influencing the shelf life of 
meat products. In addition to moisture, protein and fat are also main compo-
nents in red meats. There are abundant different kinds of proteins contained 
in red meats and these proteins can be easily digested and absorbed by the 
human body for essential good health. As another major component of red 
meats, fat contributes greatly to the flavor when they are cooked and has a 
positive effect on eating satisfaction.
Attempts on using hyperspectral imaging as a nondestructive method 
for assessing beef chemical constituents have been fully investigated by 
many researchers (Elmasry et al., 2012a). The feasibility of determination 
of water distribution within beef during dehydration was investigated 
by using a time series hyperspectral imaging system (380–1700 nm) (Wu 
et al., 2013). Hyperspectral images of beef slices were first acquired at 
different periods of the dehydration process and the reference value of 
water content was determined based on the oven-drying method. Then, 

68
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
the selection of effective wavelengths was carried out using SPA to reduce 
the computational and predigest calibration modeling. Good results 
were achieved from the SPA-MLR model with 
2
CV
R
 equal to 0.953 and an 
RMSECV of 1.280%. Finally, the visualization of water distribution within 
beef slice along with dehydration was also created. Moreover, a labora-
tory-based pushbroom hyperspectral imaging system (900–1700 nm) in 
reflectance mode was tested to simultaneously predict water, fat, and pro-
tein contents of beef (ElMasry et al., 2013). PLSR models for predicting 
water, fat, and protein contents yielded a reasonable accuracy with 
2
P
R
 of 
0.89, 0.84, and 0.86 concomitant with standard error of prediction (SEP) of 
0.46%, 0.65%, and 0.29%, respectively. More recently, Lohumi et al. (2016) 
used a hyperspectral imaging system (400–1000 nm) for determination 
and visualization of intramuscular fat concentration in beef samples. An 
analysis of variance (ANOVA) test revealed that the ratio image based 
on wavelengths of 650.4 and 736.4 nm was found to be effective for the 
visualization of the intramuscular fat distribution, since a notable differ-
ence in the contrast between the intramuscular fat and the lean area was 
observed. Furthermore, spectral similarity analysis methods, which are 
based on the quantification of spectral similarities using a predetermined 
end-member spectrum vector, yielded comparable results for character-
ization of intramuscular fat in beef.
Besides beef, intensive research using hyperspectral imaging for predic-
tion of chemical compositions has also been reported on pork. The suitabil-
ity of using a hyperspectral imaging system (1000–2500 nm) for predicting 
moisture content during the salting process of porcine meat was assessed 
(Liu et al., 2014b). In this research, three different spectral profiles including 
reflectance spectra (RS), absorbance spectra (AS), and Kubelka–Munk spec-
tra (KMS) were applied to build PLSR models and their results were com-
pared. It was shown that the best full-wavelength PLSR model was obtained 
based on reflectance spectra (
2
P
R
 = 0.941, RMSEP = 1.23%). Based on the 
important wavelengths selected using the RC, the optimal RS-MLR model 
also demonstrated good performance to predict moisture content of salted 
pork with 
2
P
R
 of 0.917 and RMSEP of 1.48%. More recently, Ma et al. (2016) 
proved that the spectral absorption index (SAI) was promising in spectral 
analysis to predict moisture content in pork samples using a hyperspectral 
imaging technique. Based on SAI features, PLSR models presented satisfac-
tory performance with 
2
R P of 0.952 and RMSEP of 1.396. An extended experi-
ment was conducted by predicting moisture, protein, and fat of intact and 
minced pork (Barbin et al., 2013a). The results obtained by cross-validated 
PLSR models indicated that the NIR spectral range (900–1700 nm) had an 
extraordinary ability to determine the content of moisture (
2
CV
R
 = 0.87), pro-
tein (
2
CV
R
 = 0.88), and fat (
2
CV
R
 = 0.95) in pork samples.
When it comes to lamb, relatively few studies have been carried out 
using hyperspectral imaging for chemical composition prediction. 

69
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
Kamruzzaman et al. (2012b) were the first to use hyperspectral imaging 
(900–1700 nm) for simultaneous prediction of the moisture, protein, and 
fat content in lamb meat. Multivariate calibration models were constructed 
by using PLSR in full spectral range and reasonable prediction abilities 
for these chemical constituents were presented with 
2
P
R
 of 0.88, 0.88, and 
0.63 and SEP of 0.51%, 0.40%, and 0.34% for moisture, protein, and fat 
content, respectively. Six spectral variables were selected as the most rel-
evant wavelengths in the spectrum for water and fat prediction and six 
wavelengths were identified as the effective wavelengths for protein pre-
diction. The new PLSR models based on feature wavelengths generated 
2
P
R
 of 0.84, 0.87 and 0.82 and SEP of 0.57%, 0.35% and 0.47% for water, fat, 
and protein contents, respectively. Meanwhile, the resulting distribution 
maps have provided detailed information on the compositional gradient 
in the tested lamb samples. Interestingly, a hyperspectral imaging sys-
tem (400–1000 nm) was investigated to develop a multispectral real-time 
imaging system allowing the meat industry to predict moisture content 
in red meat including beef, lamb, and pork (Kamruzzaman et al., 2016b). 
In their study, instead of respectively selecting different sets of effective 
wavelengths for beef, lamb, and pork, a set of 10 optimal wavelengths was 
selected for convenient industrial application for the prediction of mois-
ture content in red meat. The best optimized MLR model yielded 
2
P
R
 of 
0.97 and RMSEP of 2.19%, which confirmed that a fast, reliable, and accu-
rate multispectral system for real-time monitoring of moisture content in 
red meat is available.
2.5.3.3 Microbiological Properties
Spoilage in red meats usually results from the growth and enzymatic activ-
ity of microorganisms; this will lead to the decomposition of nutrition com-
positions and the formation of metabolites. Red meats are described as 
spoiled if organoleptic changes make them unacceptable to the consumer. 
These organoleptic characteristics normally include changes in appear-
ance (discoloration), changes in taste, the development of off odors, or any 
other characteristic that makes the food undesirable for consumption (Doyle 
and Buchanan, 2012). Excessive bacterial spoilage in red meats would cause 
harm to human health, thus it is crucial to guarantee the safety of red meats 
supplied to the markets. However, present methods of detecting bacterial 
spoilage in meats, such as enumeration methods based on microscopy, the 
plate count method, ATP bioluminescene, and the measurement of electrical 
phenomena, are not able to rapidly and nondestructively detect bacterially 
contaminated meat.
The hyperspectral imaging technique has unique advantages over the 
aforementioned methods and its potential for predicting microbiological 
properties of red meats has been intensively exploited through many research 

70
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
endeavors (Tao et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2011). For example, a NIR pushbroom 
hyperspectral imaging system (900–1700 nm) was explored to determine 
the TVC and psychrotrophic plate count (PPC) in chilled pork during storage 
(Barbin et al., 2013b). First, hyperspectral images were utilized to classify the 
tested samples into fresh or spoiled pork and good results were obtained with 
over 95% accuracy for spoilage detection. In the second stage, TVC and PPC 
were predicted simultaneously by correlating classical microbiological plat-
ing methods with the spectral information extracted from the pork samples. 
PLSR was applied and the best models demonstrated promising performance 
with an 
2
R  of 0.86 and 0.89 for log (TVC) and log (PPC), respectively. Finally, 
effective wavelengths were selected for regression and spatial visualization of 
microbial contamination. Similarly, Tao and Peng (2015) also applied hyper-
spectral scattering imaging in the spectral range of 472–1000 nm to predict 
TVC in pork meat. A stepwise multiple linear regression (SMLR) method was 
applied to build prediction models and models constructed by the Lorentzian 
parameter b and the Gompertz parameter β performed best for determining 
TVC of pork meat, with 
P
R  of 0.94 and 0.93, respectively.
As for beef, Peng et al. (2011) investigated the feasibility of hyperspectral 
imaging technique for prediction of the beef spoilage. In this research, PLSR 
was carried out between the log (TVC)
10
 value and three combinations of 
scattering parameters. The best predictions were obtained with 2r  = 0.95 and 
SEP = 0.30. Likewise, the application of a multispectral imaging system has 
been evaluated to monitor aerobically packaged beef filet spoilage at differ-
ent storage temperatures (Panagou et al., 2014). Spectral data in the spectral 
range of 405–970 nm were extracted and correlated with microbiological data 
(log counts), for TVC, Pseudomonas spp., and Brochothrix thermosphacta, respec-
tively. Qualitative analysis (PLS-DA) was first applied for the classification of 
meat samples in three microbiological quality classes based on the values of 
TVC, namely Class 1 (TVC < 5.5 log
CFU/g
10
), Class 2 (5.5 log
CFU/g
10
 < 
TVC < 7.0 log
CFU/g
10
), and Class 3 (TVC > 7.0 log
CFU/g
10
). Meanwhile, 
PLSR models were also built to provide quantitative estimations of micro-
bial counts during storage. Encouraging results were obtained in discrimi-
nation of meat samples with the overall CCR for cross-validation amounting  
to 85.9% and respective sensitivities of 73.1%, 75.0%, and 95.7% for classes 
1, 2, and 3, respectively. The developed PLSR models yielded CV
r
 of 0.918, 
0.898, and 0.903 for TVC, Pseudomonas spp., and Brochothrix thermosphacta, 
respectively. The overall results confirmed that multispectral imaging has 
significant potential as a rapid and nondestructive technique in assessing 
the microbiological quality of beef fillets.
2.5.3.4 Technological Attributes
Besides sensory attributes, chemical constituents attributes, and microbial 
spoilage determination, in recent years, research on red meat quality and safety 

71
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
inspection using hyperspectral imaging has been extended to predict impor-
tant technological attributes such as pH, drip loss, and water holding capability 
(WHC), generally with satisfactory results. pH is defined as the concentration 
of the hydrogen ion in aqueous solution. It has significant influence on the stor-
age and quality of red meat by affecting its WHC and color. Traditionally, pH is 
determined by inserting a pH meter into the muscle, but nowadays, there is the 
potential to predict pH using a hyperspectral imaging technique (Xiong et al., 
2014). In more detail, Liu et al. (2014a) carried out the an experiment to investi-
gate the utility of hyperspectral imaging (400–1000 nm) for predicting the pH 
of salted pork meat. The results from the PLSR model with a reduced number 
of wavelengths yielded 
2
CV
R
 of 0.86 and RMSECV of 0.073. Additionally, NIR 
hyperspectral imaging was employed to predict pH values of pork samples 
from the longissimus dorsi muscle and promising results were achieved with 
2
CV
R
 of 0.87 (Barbin et al., 2012b). The distribution maps of pH values were 
generated by applying the PLSR model to each pixel in the spectral image as 
shown in Figure 2.16c. The distribution maps illustrated how pH values varied 
drastically between different parts of the same sample.
Drip loss is of great importance in red meat production due to its financial 
implications. Generally speaking, meat with a high drip loss has an unat-
tractive appearance and thus has low consumer preference, accounting for 
loss of sales. In addition to pH, Barbin et al. (2012b) used the same hyper-
spectral imaging system to predict drip loss of pork meat. The results from 
the PLSR model revealed that drip loss of pork meat could be well predicted 
with 
2
CV
R
 of 0.83 and the corresponding distribution maps are shown in 
Figure 2.16d. More recently, a hyperspectral imaging system was utilized to 
test frozen pork quality with drip loss as one of the quality indicators (Xie 
et al., 2015). In this study, hyperspectral images were acquired at the frozen 
state and PLSR was used to establish calibration models. The performance 
for drip loss prediction was acceptable with 
2
P
R
 of 0.762. Additionally, NIR 
hyperspectral imaging was explored for the prediction of some quality 
attributes of lamb meat including drip loss (Kamruzzaman et al., 2012c). As 
usual, PLSR models were developed and good performance was obtained 
for drip loss prediction with 
2
R  of 0.77 and RDP of 2.11.
Like drip loss, WHC also has a huge influence on the appearance of fresh 
red meat during retail and might affect the sensory attributes of cooked 
meat. From an economic point of view, high WHC is extremely desirable 
as red meat is normally sold by weight and any water loss accounts for 
a reduction in yield due to loss in the total weight of the meat (Hoving-
Bolink et al., 2005). Past years have seen the potential of a hyperspectral 
imaging system for nondestructive and rapid evaluation of WHC of red 
meats (ElMasry et al., 2011; Kamruzzaman et al., 2012b). For instance, 
ElMasry et al. (2011) conducted an experiment for postmortem prediction 
of WHC in fresh beef using NIR hyperspectral imaging. Both PCA and 
PLSR models were developed to correlate spectral data with the reference 

72
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
WHC  estimated by the drip loss method. The PLSR model resulted in an 
2
CV
R
 of 0.89 and standard error estimated by cross-validation (SECV) of 
0.26%. Six spectral variables (940, 997, 1144, 1214, 1342, and 1443 nm) were 
selected as optimal wavelengths to establish a new PLSR prediction model 
with 
2
CV
R
 of 0.87 and SECV of 0.28%. More recently, a hyperspectral imag-
ing system was tested for determination of effective wavelengths to be 
used in the design of a multispectral system for online monitoring of WHC 
in red meats including beef, lamb, and pork samples (Kamruzzaman et al., 
2016a). Hyperspectral images of different red meat samples were acquired 
in the spectral range of 400–1000 nm and subsequently PLSR and LS-SVM 
models were constructed. Optimal wavelengths were collected using RC 
and CARS methods. Instead of selecting different sets of important wave-
lengths for different red meats, only eight spectral variables (545, 610, 705, 
765, 805, 900, 940, and 970 nm) were selected to design a multispectral sys-
tem for convenient industrial application of red meats. The RC-LS-SVM 
model demonstrated the best performance with an 
2
P
R
 of 0.93 and RPD of 
4.09, confirming that this model is adequate for analytical purposes.
2.6 Conclusions
Hyperspectral imaging is a powerful and versatile technique and it is now 
under dynamic evaluation by researchers in many different fields. Among 
dozens of techniques that have been proposed for meat quality evaluation on 
the fresh intact form, the hyperspectral imaging technique has great potential 
advantages, including elimination of human error during subjective judg-
ment, reduced labor costs, and the generation of product data in visualized 
forms in real time for documentation, labeling, and traceability. With the pri-
mary advantage of providing both spatial and spectral details, hyperspec-
tral imaging not only provides a means of accurate quantification but also 
describes constituent variation within the tested meat sample, which con-
sequently enables better characterization of the meat sample and improved 
description of meat quality and safety status. Additionally, hyperspectral 
imaging is able to measure multiple quality and/or safety attributes simulta-
neously without monotonous sample preparation. Therefore, the hyperspec-
tral imaging technique has many applications in the meat industry, such as 
simple product inspection, full sample quantification, or the segregation of a 
subset of the measured batch for further manual inspection (Elmasry et al., 
2012a). The results of the previous research works presented in this chapter 
confirm that hyperspectral imaging is a promising technology for rapid and 
noncontact evaluation of essential meat quality and safety attributes.

73
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
However, there are two major challenges that may hamper widespread 
adoption in the meat industry. The first is the high purchase cost of hyper-
spectral imaging systems. There are few commercial suppliers as this 
technology is an emerging tool for meat quality evaluation. Future tech-
nological developments in hyperspectral imaging equipment manufacture 
are expected to promote the manufacture of low-cost systems. The second 
limitation arises from the relatively lengthy times necessary for hyperspec-
tral image acquisition, processing, and modeling. Based on target size and 
image resolution, acquisition time can range from two to four minutes. 
Although a multispectral imaging system with a limited number of wave-
bands can largely reduce the prolonged time, it is normally very tricky 
to judge which subsets of selected wavelengths will provide the best per-
formance, because applying different variable selection methods always 
leads to different optimal wavelengths combinations. It is of great impor-
tance for researchers to overcome technological challenges for performing 
hyperspectral imaging technology in the food industry for meat quality 
and safety assessment, so that the meat industry can realistically benefit 
from implementing this rapid and nondestructive technique at an early 
stage of processing without additional time-consuming, tedious, and labo-
rious chemical analyses, enabling early sorting and grading of produce 
and thereby enhanced quality management.
Although it suffers from several disadvantages, considering the continu-
ing improvements in hardware and software design, it is anticipated that 
hyperspectral imaging may progressively become a substantial and routine 
method for real-time meat safety and quality control.
References
Adam, E., Mutanga, O. and Rugege, D. (2010). Multispectral and hyperspectral 
remote sensing for identification and mapping of wetland vegetation: A review. 
Wetlands Ecology and Management, 18(3), 281–296.
Amigo, J. M., Babamoradi, H. and Elcoroaristizabal, S. (2015). Hyperspectral image 
analysis. A tutorial. Analytica Chimica Acta, 896, 34–51.
Anastasio, A., Vollano, L., Visciano, P., Miranda, E. and Cortesi, M. (1999). Corre-
lations between pH, total volatile basic nitrogen, trimethylamine and sensory 
evaluation in fresh fish slices. Archiv für Lebensmittelhygiene, 50(3), 63–66.
Bannon, D. and Thomas, R. (2005). Harsh environments dictate design of imaging 
spectrometer. Laser Focus World, 41(8), 93–97.
Barbin, D., Elmasry, G., Sun, D.-W. and Allen, P. (2012a). Near-infrared hyperspectral 
imaging for grading and classification of pork. Meat Science, 90(1), 259–268.
Barbin, D. F., ElMasry, G., Sun, D.-W. and Allen, P. (2012b). Predicting quality and 
sensory attributes of pork using near-infrared hyperspectral imaging. Analytica 
Chimica Acta, 719, 30–42.

74
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Barbin, D. F., ElMasry, G., Sun, D.-W. and Allen, P. (2013a). Non-destructive determi-
nation of chemical composition in intact and minced pork using near-infrared 
hyperspectral imaging. Food Chemistry, 138(2), 1162–1171.
Barbin, D. F., ElMasry, G., Sun, D.-W., Allen, P. and Morsy, N. (2013b). Non-destructive 
assessment of microbial contamination in porcine meat using NIR hyperspec-
tral imaging. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 17, 180–191.
Barbin, D. F., Sun, D.-W. and Su, C. (2013c). NIR hyperspectral imaging as non-
destructive evaluation tool for the recognition of fresh and frozen-thawed 
porcine longissimus dorsi muscles. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Tech-
nologies, 18, 226–236.
Blanco, M., Coello, J., Iturriaga, H., Maspoch, S. and Pezuela, C. (1997). Effect of data 
preprocessing methods in near-infrared diffuse reflectance spectroscopy for the 
determination of the active compound in a pharmaceutical preparation. Applied 
Spectroscopy, 51(2), 240–246.
Bro, R., Van den Berg, F., Thybo, A., Andersen, C. M., Jorgensen, B. M. and Andersen, 
H. (2002). Multivariate data analysis as a tool in advanced quality monitoring in 
the food production chain. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 13(6), 235–244.
Brosnan, T. and Sun, D.-W. (2004). Improving quality inspection of food products by 
computer vision––A review. Journal of Food Engineering, 61(1), 3–16.
Chao, K., Kim, M. S. and Chan, D. E. (2014). Control interface and tracking control 
system for automated poultry inspection. Computer Standards and Interfaces, 
36(2), 271–277.
Chao, K., Mehl, P. and Chen, Y. (2002). Use of hyper-and multi-spectral imaging for 
detection of chicken skin tumors. Applied Engineering in Agriculture, 18(1), 113–120.
Chao, K., Yang, C., Chen, Y., Kim, M. and Chan, D. (2007). Hyperspectral-multispectral 
line-scan imaging system for automated poultry carcass inspection applications 
for food safety. Poultry Science, 86(11), 2450–2460.
Chao, K., Yang, C., Kim, M. and Chan, D. (2008). High throughput spectral imaging 
system for wholesomeness inspection of chicken. Applied Engineering in Agricul-
ture, 24(4), 475–485.
Chau, A., Whitworth, M., Leadley, C. and Millar, S. (2009). Innovative sensors to rap-
idly and non-destructively determine fish freshness. Seafish Industrial Authority. 
Report No. CMS/REP/110284/1. References 233.
Chen, Q., Zhao, J., Fang, C. and Wang, D. (2007). Feasibility study on identification 
of green, black and Oolong teas using near-infrared reflectance spectroscopy 
based on support vector machine (SVM). Spectrochimica Acta Part A: Molecular 
and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 66(3), 568–574.
Cheng, J.-H., Dai, Q., Sun, D.-W. et al. (2013). Applications of non-destructive spectro-
scopic techniques for fish quality and safety evaluation and inspection. Trends in 
Food Science and Technology, 34(1), 18–31.
Cheng, J.-H. and Sun, D.-W. (2015a). Data fusion and hyperspectral imaging in tan-
dem with least squares-support vector machine for prediction of sensory qual-
ity index scores of fish fillet. LWT—Food Science and Technology, 63(2), 892–898.
Cheng, J.-H. and Sun, D.-W. (2015b). Rapid quantification analysis and visualiza-
tion of Escherichia coli loads in grass carp fish flesh by hyperspectral imaging 
method. Food and Bioprocess Technology, 8(5), 951–959.
Chevallier, S., Bertrand, D., Kohler, A. and Courcoux, P. (2006). Application of PLS-
DA in multivariate image analysis. Journal of Chemometrics, 20(5), 221.

75
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
Cho, B., Kim, M. S., Chao, K., Lawrence, K., Park, B. and Kim K. (2009). Detection of 
fecal residue on poultry carcasses by laser-induced fluorescence imaging. Jour-
nal of Food Science, 74(3), E154–E159.
Cutler, D. R., Edwards, T. C., Beard, K. H. et al. (2007). Random forests for classifica-
tion in ecology. Ecology, 88(11), 2783–2792.
Damez, J.-L. and Clerjon, S. (2008). Meat quality assessment using biophysical meth-
ods related to meat structure. Meat Science, 80(1), 132–149.
Doyle, M. P. and Buchanan, R. L. (2012). Food Microbiology: Fundamentals and Frontiers. 
Washington, D.C: American Society for Microbiology Press.
Du, Z., Jeong, M. K. and Kong, S. G. (2007). Band selection of hyperspectral images 
for automatic detection of poultry skin tumors. IEEE Transactions on Automation 
Science and Engineering, 4(3), 332–339.
Elmasry, G., Barbin, D. F., Sun, D.-W. and Allen, P. (2012a). Meat quality evaluation by 
hyperspectral imaging technique: An overview. Critical Reviews in Food Science 
and Nutrition, 52(8), 689–711.
Elmasry, G., Kamruzzaman, M., Sun, D.-W. and Allen, P. (2012b). Principles and 
applications of hyperspectral imaging in quality evaluation of agro-food prod-
ucts: A review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 52(11), 999–1023.
ElMasry, G. and Sun, D.-W. (2010). Meat quality assessment using a hyperspectral 
imaging system. In: Hyperspectral Imaging for Food Quality Analysis and Control, 
Da-Wen Sun (Ed.),  Amsterdam : Academic Press, 273–294.
ElMasry, G., Sun, D.-W. and Allen, P. (2011). Non-destructive determination of 
water-holding capacity in fresh beef by using NIR hyperspectral imaging. Food 
Research International, 44(9), 2624–2633.
ElMasry, G., Sun, D.-W. and Allen, P. (2012c). Near-infrared hyperspectral imaging for 
predicting colour, pH and tenderness of fresh beef. Journal of Food Engineering, 
110(1), 127–140.
ElMasry, G., Sun, D.-W. and Allen, P. (2013). Chemical-free assessment and mapping 
of major constituents in beef using hyperspectral imaging. Journal of Food Engi-
neering, 117(2), 235–246.
ElMasry, G. and Wold, J. P. (2008). High-speed assessment of fat and water content 
distribution in fish fillets using online imaging spectroscopy. Journal of Agricul-
tural and Food Chemistry, 56(17), 7672–7677.
Esquerre, C., Gowen, A. A., Burger, J., Downey, G. and O’Donnell, C. P. (2012). Sup-
pressing sample morphology effects in near infrared spectral imaging using 
chemometric data pre-treatments. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Sys-
tems, 117, 129–137.
Feng, Y.-Z., Elmasry, G., Sun, D.-W., Scannell, A. G., Walsh, D. and Morcy, N. (2013). 
Near-infrared hyperspectral imaging and partial least squares regression for 
rapid and reagentless determination of Enterobacteriaceae on chicken fillets. 
Food Chemistry, 138(2), 1829–1836.
Feng, Y.-Z. and Sun, D.-W. (2013a). Determination of total viable count (TVC) in 
chicken breast fillets by near-infrared hyperspectral imaging and spectroscopic 
transforms. Talanta, 105, 244–249.
Feng, Y.-Z. and Sun, D.-W. (2013b). Near-infrared hyperspectral imaging in tandem 
with partial least squares regression and genetic algorithm for non-destruc-
tive determination and visualization of Pseudomonas loads in chicken fillets. 
Talanta, 109, 74–83.

76
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Feng, Y.-Z. and Sun, D.-W. (2014). Seeing the bacteria: Hyperspectral imaging for bac-
terial prediction and visualisation on chicken meat. NIR news, 25(7), 4–6.
Gaston, E., Fras, J., Cullen, P., O’Donnell, C. and Gowen, A. (2010). Visible-near infra-
red hyperspectral imaging for the identification and discrimination of brown 
blotch disease on mushroom (Agaricus bisporus) caps. Journal of Near Infrared 
Spectroscopy, 18(5), 341.
Gowen, A. A., Feng, Y., Gaston, E. and Valdramidis, V. (2015). Recent applications of 
hyperspectral imaging in microbiology. Talanta, 137, 43–54.
He, H.-J., Wu, D. and Sun, D.-W. (2013). Non-destructive and rapid analysis of mois-
ture distribution in farmed Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) fillets using visible 
and near-infrared hyperspectral imaging. Innovative Food Science and Emerging 
Technologies, 18, 237–245.
Hoving-Bolink, A., Vedder, H. W., Merks, J. W. et al. (2005). Perspective of NIRS mea-
surements early post mortem for prediction of pork quality. Meat Science, 69(3), 
417–423.
Huang, H., Liu, L. and Ngadi, M. O. (2014). Recent developments in hyperspectral 
imaging for assessment of food quality and safety. Sensors, 14(4), 7248–7276.
Ivorra, E., Girón, J., Sánchez, A. J. et al. (2013). Detection of expired vacuum-packed 
smoked salmon based on PLS-DA method using hyperspectral images. Journal 
of Food Engineering, 117(3), 342–349.
Kamruzzaman, M., Barbin, D., ElMasry, G., Sun, D.-W. and Allen, P. (2012a). Poten-
tial of hyperspectral imaging and pattern recognition for categorization and 
authentication of red meat. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 16, 
316–325.
Kamruzzaman, M., ElMasry, G., Sun, D.-W. and Allen, P. (2011). Application of NIR 
hyperspectral imaging for discrimination of lamb muscles. Journal of Food Engi-
neering, 104(3), 332–340.
Kamruzzaman, M., ElMasry, G., Sun, D.-W. and Allen, P. (2012b). Non-destructive 
prediction and visualization of chemical composition in lamb meat using NIR 
hyperspectral imaging and multivariate regression. Innovative Food Science and 
Emerging Technologies, 16, 218–226.
Kamruzzaman, M., ElMasry, G., Sun, D.-W. and Allen, P. (2012c). Prediction of some 
quality attributes of lamb meat using near-infrared hyperspectral imaging and 
multivariate analysis. Analytica Chimica Acta, 714, 57–67.
Kamruzzaman, M., ElMasry, G., Sun, D.-W. and Allen, P. (2013). Non-destructive 
assessment of instrumental and sensory tenderness of lamb meat using NIR 
hyperspectral imaging. Food Chemistry, 141(1), 389–396.
Kamruzzaman, M., Makino, Y. and Oshita, S., (2016a). Hyperspectral imaging for 
real-time monitoring of water holding capacity in red meat. LWT—Food Science 
and Technology, 66, 685–691.
Kamruzzaman, M., Makino, Y. and Oshita, S. (2016b). Parsimonious model devel-
opment for real-time monitoring of moisture in red meat using hyperspectral 
imaging. Food Chemistry, 196, 1084–1091.
Kim, I., Kim, M., Chen, Y. and Kong, S. (2004). Detection of skin tumors on chicken 
carcasses using hyperspectral fluorescence imaging. Transactions-American Soci-
ety of Agricultural Engineers, 47(5), 1785–1792.
Kirk, P. L. (1950). Kjeldahl method for total nitrogen. Analytical Chemistry, 22(2), 
354–358.

77
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
Klein, M. E., Aalderink, B. J., Padoan, R., De Bruin, G. and Steemers, T. A. (2008). 
Quantitative hyperspectral reflectance imaging. Sensors, 8(9), 5576–5618.
Kleynen, O., Leemans, V. and Destain, M.-F. (2005). Development of a multi-spectral 
vision system for the detection of defects on apples. Journal of Food Engineering, 
69(1), 41–49.
Konda Naganathan, G., Cluff, K., Samal, A. et al. (2016). Three dimensional chemo-
metric analyses of hyperspectral images for beef tenderness forecasting. Journal 
of Food Engineering, 169, 309–320.
Langeron, Y., Doussot, M., Hewson, D. J. and Duchêne, J. (2007). Classifying NIR 
spectra of textile products with kernel methods. Engineering Applications of Arti-
ficial Intelligence, 20(3), 415–427.
Larsen, E., Heldbo, J., Jespersen, C., and Nielsen, J. (1992). Development of a method 
for quality assessment of fish for human consumption based on sensory evalu-
ation. In: Huss, H H., Jakobsen, M., Liston, J., (eds.) Quality Assurance in the Fish 
Industry. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishing,  351--358.
Lawrence, R. L., Wood, S. D. and Sheley, R. L. (2006). Mapping invasive plants using 
hyperspectral imagery and Breiman Cutler classifications (RandomForest). 
Remote Sensing of Environment, 100(3), 356–362.
Li, Y., Shan, J., Peng, Y. and Gao, X. (2011). Nondestructive assessment of beef-
marbling grade using hyperspectral imaging technology. In Procs 2011 Inter-
national Conference on New Technology of Agricultural Engineering (ICAE), Zibo, 
China. IEEE, 779–783.
Liu, D. Ma, J., Sun, D.-W. et al. (2014a). Prediction of color and pH of salted porcine 
meats using visible and near-infrared hyperspectral imaging. Food and Biopro-
cess Technology, 7(11), 3100–3108.
Liu, D., Sun, D.-W., Qu, J., Zeng, X. A., Pu, H. and Ma, J. (2014b). Feasibility of using 
hyperspectral imaging to predict moisture content of porcine meat during salt-
ing process. Food Chemistry, 152, 197–204.
Lohumi, S., Lee, S., Lee, H., Kim, M. S., Lee, W. H. and Cho, B.-K. (2016). Application 
of hyperspectral imaging for characterization of intramuscular fat distribution 
in beef. Infrared Physics and Technology, 74, 1–10.
Luypaert, J., Heuerding, S., Vander Heyden, Y. and Massart, D. (2004). The effect of 
preprocessing methods in reducing interfering variability from near-infrared 
measurements of creams. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis, 36(3), 
495–503.
Ma, J., Sun, D.-W. and Pu, H. (2016). Spectral absorption index in hyperspectral image 
analysis for predicting moisture contents in pork longissimus dorsi muscles. 
Food Chemistry, 197, Part A, 848–854.
Martens, H. and Stark, E. (1991). Extended multiplicative signal correction and 
spectral interference subtraction: New preprocessing methods for near 
infrared spectroscopy. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis, 9(8), 
625–635.
Mendes, R., Cardoso, C. and Pestana, C. (2009). Measurement of malondialdehyde in 
fish: A comparison study between HPLC methods and the traditional spectro-
photometric test. Food Chemistry, 112(4), 1038–1045.
Mercier, G. and Lennon, M. (2003). Support vector machines for hyperspectral image 
classification with spectral-based kernels. In Proc Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Symposium, 2003 (IGARSS’03), Toulouse, France. IEEE International, 288–290.

78
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Naganathan, G. K., Grimes, L. M., Subbiah, J., Calkins, C. R., Samal, A. and Meyer 
G. E. (2008). Visible/near-infrared hyperspectral imaging for beef tenderness 
prediction. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 64(2), 225–233.
Nakariyakul, S. and Casasent, D. (2007). Fusion algorithm for poultry skin tumor 
detection using hyperspectral data. Applied Optics, 46(3), 357–364.
Palmer, C.A., Loewen, E. G. and Thermo, R. (2005). Diffraction Grating Handbook. 
Springfield, OH: Newport Corporation.
Panagou, E. Z., Papadopoulou, O., Carstensen, J. M. and Nychas, G.-J. E. (2014). 
Potential of multispectral imaging technology for rapid and non-destructive 
determination of the microbiological quality of beef filets during aerobic stor-
age. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 174, 1–11.
Park, B., Lawrence, K., Windham, W. and Buhr, R. J. (2002). Hyperspectral imaging 
for detecting fecal and ingesta contaminants on poultry carcasses. Transactions 
of the ASAE, 45(6), 2017–2026.
Park, B., Lawrence, K., Windham, W. and Smith, D. (2006). Performance of super-
vised classification algorithms of hyperspectral imagery for identifying fecal 
and ingesta contaminants. Transactions of the ASABE, 49(6), 2017–2024.
Park, B., Lawrence, K. C., Windham, W. R. and Smith, D. P. (2004). Multispectral 
imaging system for fecal and ingesta detection on poultry carcasses. Journal of 
Food Process Engineering, 27(5), 311–327.
Park, B., Lee, S., Yoon, S.-C. et al. (2011). AOTF hyperspectral microscopic imaging for 
foodborne pathogenic bacteria detection. In SPIE Defense, Security, and Sensing, 
April 2011, Orlando, Florida. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 
802707-802707-11.
Park, B., Yoon, S.-C., Lawrence, K. and Windham, W. (2007). Fisher linear discrimi-
nant analysis for improving fecal detection accuracy with hyperspectral images. 
Transactions of the ASABE, 50(6), 2275–2283.
Park, B., Yoon, S.-C., Windham, W. R. et al. (2010). Line-scan hyperspectral imag-
ing for real-time poultry fecal detection. In SPIE Defense, Security, and Sensing, 
April 2010, Orlando, Florida. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 
76760I-76760I-10.
Peng, Y., Zhang, J., Wang, W. et al. (2011). Potential prediction of the microbial spoil-
age of beef using spatially resolved hyperspectral scattering profiles. Journal of 
Food Engineering, 102(2), 163–169.
Penha, R. and Hines, J. W. (2001). Using principal component analysis modeling to 
monitor temperature sensors in a nuclear research reactor. In Proc 2001 Mainte-
nance and Reliability Conference (MARCON 2001), Knoxville, Tennessee. Citeseer.
Piqueras, S., Duponchel, L., Tauler, R. and de Juan, A. (2011). Resolution and segmen-
tation of hyperspectral biomedical images by Multivariate Curve Resolution-
Alternating Least Squares. Analytica Chimica Acta, 705(1–2), 182–192.
Qin, J., Chao, K. and Kim, M.S. (2011). Investigation of Raman chemical imaging for 
detection of lycopene changes in tomatoes during postharvest ripening. Journal 
of Food Engineering, 107(3), 277–288.
Reich, G. (2005). Near-infrared spectroscopy and imaging: Basic principles and phar-
maceutical applications. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 57(8), 1109–1143.
Savitzky, A. and Golay, M. J. (1964). Smoothing and differentiation of data by simpli-
fied least squares procedures. Analytical Chemistry, 36(8), 1627–1639.

79
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
Schaepman, M. E. (2007). Spectrodirectional remote sensing: From pixels to pro-
cesses. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinformation, 9(2), 
204–223.
Segtnan, V. H., Høy, M., Sørheim, O. et al. (2009). Noncontact salt and fat distributional 
analysis in salted and smoked salmon fillets using X-ray computed tomography 
and NIR interactance imaging. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 57(5), 
1705–1710.
Sivertsen, A. H., Heia, K., Hindberg, K. and Godtliebsen, F. (2012). Automatic nema-
tode detection in cod fillets (Gadus morhua L.) by hyperspectral imaging. Journal 
of Food Engineering, 111(4), 675–681.
Sivertsen, A. H., Kimiya, T. and Heia, K. (2011). Automatic freshness assessment of 
cod (Gadus morhua) fillets by Vis/Nir spectroscopy. Journal of Food Engineering, 
103(3), 317–323.
Sone, I., Olsen, R. L., Sivertsen, A. H., Eilertsen, G. and Heia, K. (2012). Classifica-
tion of fresh Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.) fillets stored under different atmo-
spheres by hyperspectral imaging. Journal of Food Engineering, 109(3), 482–489.
Song, Y., Luo, Y., You, J., Shen, H. and Hu, S. (2012). Biochemical, sensory and 
microbiological attributes of bream (Megalobrama amblycephala) during partial 
freezing and chilled storage. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 92(1), 
197–202.
Sun, D.-W. (2010). Hyperspectral Imaging for Food Quality Analysis and Control. Elsevier.
Sun, D. -W. (2007). Computer Vision Technology for Food Quality Evaluation. San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press, Amsterdam: Academic Press.
Tao, F. and Peng, Y. (2015). A nondestructive method for prediction of total viable 
count in pork meat by hyperspectral scattering imaging. Food and Bioprocess 
Technology, 8(1), 17–30.
Tao, F., Peng, Y., Li, Y., Chao, K. and Dhakal, S. (2012). Simultaneous determination of 
tenderness and Escherichia coli contamination of pork using hyperspectral scat-
tering technique. Meat Science, 90(3), 851–857.
Timmermans, A. (1995). Computer vision system for on-line sorting of pot plants 
based on learning techniques. In: van Meurs, W. T. H. M., Gieling, T. H. and 
Bennedsen, B. S. (eds.) II International Symposium on Sensors in Horticulture 421, 
March 1998, Tune Landboskole, Greve, Denmark, 91–98.
Wang, H.-H. and Sun, D.-W. (2001). Evaluation of the functional properties of ched-
dar cheese using a computer vision method. Journal of Food Engineering, 49(1), 
49–53.
Wang, W., Peng, Y., Huang, H. and Wu, J. (2011). Application of hyper-spectral imag-
ing technique for the detection of total viable bacteria count in pork. Sensor Let-
ters, 9(3), 1024–1030.
Willits, C. (1951). Methods for determination of moisture-oven drying. Analytical 
Chemistry, 23(8), 1058–1062.
Windham, W., Lawrence, K., Park, B. and Buhr, R. (2003). Visible/NIR spectroscopy 
for characterizing fecal contamination of chicken carcasses. Transactions-Ameri-
can Society of Agricultural Engineers, 46(3), 747–754.
Wold, J. P., Jakobsen, T. and Krane, L. (1996). Atlantic salmon average fat content 
estimated by near-infrared transmittance spectroscopy. Journal of Food Science, 
61(1), 74–77.

80
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Wold, J. P., Johansen, I.-R., Haugholt, K. H. et al. (2006). Non-contact transflectance 
near infrared imaging for representative on-line sampling of dried salted coal-
fish (bacalao). Journal of Near Infrared Spectroscopy, 14(1), 59.
Wold, J. P., Westad, F. and Heia, K. (2001). Detection of parasites in cod fillets by using 
SIMCA classification in multispectral images in the visible and NIR region. 
Applied Spectroscopy, 55(8), 1025–1034.
Wu, D. and Sun, D.-W. (2013a). Advanced applications of hyperspectral imaging tech-
nology for food quality and safety analysis and assessment: A review—Part I: 
Fundamentals. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 19, 1–14.
Wu, D. and Sun, D.-W. (2013b). Advanced applications of hyperspectral imaging 
technology for food quality and safety analysis and assessment: A review—Part 
II: Applications. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 19, 15–28.
Wu, D. and Sun, D.-W. (2013c). Application of visible and near infrared hyperspectral 
imaging for non-invasively measuring distribution of water-holding capacity in 
salmon flesh. Talanta, 116, 266–276.
Wu, D. and Sun, D.-W. (2013d). Potential of time series-hyperspectral imaging (TS-
HSI) for non-invasive determination of microbial spoilage of salmon flesh. 
Talanta, 111, 39–46.
Wu, D., Sun, D.-W. and He, Y. (2012). Application of long-wave near infrared hyper-
spectral imaging for measurement of color distribution in salmon fillet. Innova-
tive Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 16, 361–372.
Wu, D., Sun, D.-W. and He, Y. (2014). Novel non-invasive distribution measurement 
of texture profile analysis (TPA) in salmon fillet by using visible and near infra-
red hyperspectral imaging. Food Chemistry, 145, 417–426.
Wu, D., Wang S., Wang, N. et al. (2013). Application of time series hyperspectral imag-
ing (TS-HSI) for determining water distribution within beef and spectral kinetic 
analysis during dehydration. Food and Bioprocess Technology, 6(11), 2943–2958.
Xie, A., Sun, D.-W., Xu, Z. and Zhu, Z. (2015). Rapid detection of frozen pork qual-
ity without thawing by Vis–NIR hyperspectral imaging technique. Talanta, 139, 
208–215.
Xiong, Z., Sun, D.-W., Dai, Q. et al. (2015a). Application of visible hyperspectral imag-
ing for prediction of springiness of fresh chicken meat. Food Analytical Methods, 
8(2), 380–391.
Xiong, Z., Sun, D.-W., Xie, A., Han, Z. and Wang, L. (2015b). Potential of hyperspectral 
imaging for rapid prediction of hydroxyproline content in chicken meat. Food 
Chemistry, 175, 417–422.
Xiong, Z., Sun, D.-W., Zeng, X.-A. and Xie, A. (2014). Recent developments of hyper-
spectral imaging systems and their applications in detecting quality attributes 
of red meats: A review. Journal of Food Engineering, 132, 1–13.
Xu, J. L., Riccioli, C. and Sun, D.-W. (2015). An overview on nondestructive spectro-
scopic techniques for lipid and lipid oxidation analysis in fish and fish products. 
Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 14(4), 466–477.
Xu, J.-L., Riccioli, C. and Sun, D.-W. (2016). Efficient integration of particle analysis in 
hyperspectral imaging for rapid assessment of oxidative degradation in salmon 
fillet. Journal of Food Engineering, 169, 259–271.
Yoon, S., Lawrence, K., Smith, D., Park, B. and Windham, W. (2008). Embedded bone 
fragment detection in chicken fillets using transmittance image enhancement 
and hyperspectral reflectance imaging. Sensing and Instrumentation for Food 
Quality and Safety, 2(3), 197–207.

81
Hyperspectral Imaging Technique
Zhu, F., Zhang, D., He, Y., Liu, F. and Sun, D.-W. (2013). Application of visible and 
near infrared hyperspectral imaging to differentiate between fresh and frozen–
thawed fish fillets. Food and Bioprocess Technology, 6(10), 2931–2937.
Zhu, F., Zhang, H., Shao, Y., He, Y. and Ngadi, M. (2014). Mapping of fat and moisture 
distribution in Atlantic salmon using near-infrared hyperspectral imaging. Food 
and Bioprocess Technology, 7(4), 1208–1214.


83
3
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting 
Meat Quality Traits
Stephanie M. Fowler, Heinar Schmidt, Rico Scheier, 
and David L. Hopkins
3.1 Introduction
Raman spectroscopy is a method of vibrational spectroscopy that was first dis-
covered by Indian physicist Sir C. V. Raman in 1928. Initially used to provide the 
first catalog of molecular vibrational frequencies, the low sensitivity of the tech-
nique hindered its use as extensive methods were needed to measure relatively 
large volumes of highly concentrated samples in order to obtain quality Raman 
spectra. Consequently, the use of Raman spectroscopy for chemical analysis 
declined as infrared (IR) spectrophotometers became available. Since these 
early days, the advent of lasers in the 1960s facilitated the development of more 
CONTENTS
3.1 
Introduction ..................................................................................................83
3.2 
Theory of Raman Spectroscopy .................................................................84
3.3 
Raman Spectroscopic Devices ...................................................................86
3.4 
Applications in Meat Science .....................................................................87
3.4.1 Pork ....................................................................................................88
3.4.1.1 Prerigor Pork ......................................................................88
3.4.1.2 Postrigor Pork ....................................................................92
3.4.1.3 Heat-Treated Pork ..............................................................93
3.4.1.4 Fatty Acid Composition of Pork Adipose Tissue..........94
3.4.2 Lamb ..................................................................................................96
3.4.3 Beef ...................................................................................................100
3.4.4 Spoilage ........................................................................................... 102
3.4.5 Differentiation of Animal Species and Detection of 
Adulteration in Muscle Foods ...................................................... 103
3.5 
Limitations .................................................................................................. 104
3.6 
Conclusion .................................................................................................. 106
References ............................................................................................................. 107

84
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
simplified Raman spectroscopy equipment and increased the sensitivity of the 
technique. Further development of technologies in recent decades has continued 
to increase the efficiency of the equipment, which has enabled the construction 
of smaller and more robust devices (McCreery, 2000). As a result, Raman spec-
troscopy is now a widely used method of chemical analysis used in a number 
of applications including archaeology, forensics, biomedical, and food sciences.
3.2 Theory of Raman Spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy is based on the principle that when light is directed 
at matter, there is an interaction and an exchange of energy occurs, which 
is referred to as inelastic scattering (Das and Agrawal, 2011). If the photons 
interact with the molecules and the net exchange of energy causes the pho-
ton to gain vibrational energy from the molecules and the backscattered 
frequency is greater than the incident frequency, this is called anti-Stokes 
Raman scattering. However, the reverse is more likely, where matter gains 
energy from the photons resulting in a backscattered frequency which is 
lower than the incident beam, which is referred to as Stokes Raman scatter-
ing (Ozaki, 1999). These interactions with the excitation photons are graphed 
for relative wave number (Raman shift) and intensity of the frequencies mea-
sured as a spectrum where the peaks indicate Raman scattering and the cen-
tral peak indicates the Rayleigh scattered light (Figure 3.1).
Vibrations for different chemical bonds are distinct due to energy that 
excites them and the movement of atoms which are generated by the 
Intensity
Relative wave number (cm–1)
Stokes Raman
Anti-Stokes Raman
Laser
×50
×10–6
–1800
–1400
–1000
–600
–200
200
600
1000
1400
1800
FIGURE 3.1
Representation of anti-Stokes and Stokes Raman spectra of polystyrene. Raman shifts are 
given in wave numbers relative to the laser line, which has been supressed by a notch filter.

85
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
exchange as well as the frequency at which the atoms oscillate, which cor-
responds to the wave number. Consequently, vibrations are characterized 
by their type of motion including the stretch of bonds (symmetric and 
asymmetric) and deformation of bond angles including in-plane deforma-
tions (scissor and rock deformations) and out-of-plane deformations (twist 
and wagging), as illustrated in Figure 3.2 for the three-atom methylene 
group.
Although the structure of large molecules cannot be directly obtained 
from the spectrum, approximations have been determined using the atomic 
vibrations of small molecules (Krimm and Bandekar, 1986). Early Raman 
studies ascertained the character of the vibrations (intensity, wave number, 
and symmetry) and the determination of their relation to the structure of the 
molecule using various pure and denatured samples, isotopic substitution 
and excitation at various wavelengths (Frushour and Koenig, 1975; Carey, 
1982; Hudson and Mayne, 1986; Krimm and Bandekar, 1986; Krimm, 1987).
Historically, Raman spectroscopy has many applications including chemi-
cal identification of materials in artworks (Breitman et al., 2007), quantitative 
analysis of fungicides, three-dimensional imaging of chemical composition, 
rapid identification of biological samples, pharmacology, dermatology, cos-
metic development, and characterizing pigments as well as atomic and ele-
ment composition (Hudson and Mayne, 1986; Das and Agrawal, 2011). With 
recent advances in charge-coupled devices (CCDs) and laser technologies, 
the use of Raman spectroscopy is expanding and its uses within commercial 
food systems are being explored.
Raman spectroscopy is suitable for use in food systems as it can provide infor-
mation about the structure, function, and kinetics of biomolecules including 
proteins and lipids by identification of the vibrational bands (Das and Agrawal, 
Scissor
Twist
Rock
Wag
Stretches
Deformations
Symmetric
Asymmetric
–
+
+
+
FIGURE 3.2
Examples of the chemical bond vibrations of the methylene group as characterized by Raman 
spectroscopy.

86
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
2011). The advantages of using Raman spectroscopy, in lieu of other technolo-
gies, include no sample preparation so measurements can be taken in any phys-
ical state including gases, liquids, gels, amorphous solids, or crystals. Raman is 
less affected by varying water content compared to IR or near infrared (NIR); 
it is nondestructive, noninvasive, and can detect substances even if only small 
amounts are present. Furthermore, it is sensitive to structural changes that are 
induced by freezing, heating, mixing, aeration, fiber formation, denaturation, 
and gelatination (Li-Chan et al., 1994; Li-Chan, 1996; Ozaki, 1999; Beattie et al., 
2004b; Afseth et al., 2006; Chen and Han, 2011). Consequently, Raman spectros-
copy is ideal for application in the research and assessment of muscle foods.
3.3 Raman Spectroscopic Devices
Benchtop Raman devices are the most common Raman spectroscopic equip-
ment currently in use. A schematic diagram (Figure 3.3) illustrates the 
arrangement, where a laser passes through the sample, and the scattered 
light is collected through a CCD detector, after it has passed through a notch 
filter, and focused onto the CCD detector. While the benchtop devices can be 
useful in suppressing fluorescence, which can be a limitation when measur-
ing biological samples (Hudson and Mayne, 1986), they are limited for in situ 
measurement by the sampling required as well as the size and weight of the 
devices, and the power consumption of the lasers (Schmidt et al., 2009).
CCD
Laser
Sample
Grating
Single-stage
spectrometer
Launch optics
Rayleigh filter
Collection optics
FIGURE 3.3
Schematic diagram of a benchtop single grating Raman spectrometer with a multichannel 
charge-coupled device (CCD) detector.

87
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
Miniaturization of the laser and implementation of fiber optics into Raman 
devices has enabled the development of ball probes which can be connected 
to Raman spectroscopy instruments via a fiber-optic cable (Olsen et al., 
2007). The CCD and spectrograph technologies used with this probe are 
bulky and collected light needs to be filtered before it can be focused and 
collected with the CCD, while others have developed a handheld Raman 
sensor head for in situ characterization of meat quality (Schmidt et al., 2009). 
This technology uses the principles of backscattering geometry, lens optics, 
integration of laser, and Raman filter stage in one optical bench device. Min-
iaturization of the benchtop device required the laser, band pass, and the 
Raman edge filters to be combined into a single module (or optical bench), 
along with mirrors and lens optics as illustrated in Figure 3.4 (Schmidt et al., 
2009). The Rayleigh scattered radiation is removed by the Raman filters and 
the Stokes-shifted signals is launched into an optical fiber within the same 
device (Schmidt et al., 2009).
Laboratory assessment of this technology suggested that a wavelength 
of 671 nm is optimal for pork meat, as it is a trade-off between the shorter 
wavelengths which allow for faster measuring times due to higher scatter-
ing intensities and the long wavelengths required to reduce fluorescence of 
the biological molecules (Schmidt et al., 2010). However, other Raman spec-
troscopic measurement parameters including laser power, integration time 
(the length of time used to collect photons on the detector), and the number 
of integrations (accumulations) acquired can be altered between samples to 
improve spectra, dependent on factors such as the rigor status of the meat.
3.4 Applications in Meat Science
The advantages of using Raman spectroscopy in food systems has not been 
overlooked in recent meat science research. Consequently, numerous studies 
Laser
Filters
Mirrors
Lens
Window
Fiber-optic cable
To spectrometer
Sample
FIGURE 3.4
Schematic diagram of a Raman handheld probe head. (Adapted from Schmidt et al., Proceedings 
of the Advanced Environment, Chemical and Biological Sensing Technology VI, International Society 
for Optics and Photonics, Orlando, Florida, 2009.)

88
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
have been conducted using both benchtop and handheld devices to deter-
mine whether Raman spectroscopy has the ability to predict a number of 
meat quality traits of beef, lamb, and pork.
3.4.1 Pork
Among the Raman publications in meat science, pork has the largest share 
(>40% between 2000 and 2015), reflecting that pork is a highly consumed 
meat in the world and especially preferred in Europe, large parts of Asia, and 
North America (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
[FAO], 2014). Apart from the pioneering work in the 1970s (Carew et al., 1975; 
Pezolet et al., 1978), Raman spectroscopy was rarely used in the meat science 
field before 2000.
The first Raman papers on pork addressed sensory and technological 
parameters associated with warmed-over flavor due to preslaughter stress 
(Brøndum et al., 2000a) indicating high expectations for the fingerprint-
ing capabilities of Raman spectroscopy, while the second tackled the pre-
diction of the water holding capacity (WHC) of pork in the abattoir before 
rigor (Pedersen et al., 2003). However, this early work was carried out with 
benchtop laboratory instruments which were not suited to the measure-
ment of meat or for fieldwork. Furthermore, these results were reported to be 
inferior due to lack of practicability and lack of sensitivity when compared 
to low-field nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) (Brøndum et al., 2000a) or 
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) predictions (Pedersen et al., 2003), which 
were conducted in parallel. It took nearly 10 years until the development of 
compact and sensitive Raman instrumentation allowed for a more practical 
and general use of Raman spectroscopy in meat science. Since then, pre-
dominantly technological and sensory quality parameters of pork have been 
investigated with Raman spectroscopy while the investigation of processed 
products is still an emerging field.
3.4.1.1 Prerigor Pork
The initial work of Pedersen et al. (2003) conducted Raman spectra of meat 
samples which were excised from freshly slaughtered pigs (n = 14) in an abat-
toir between 10 and 30 minutes postmortem (PM). While the authors found a 
correlation (R2 = 0.95) between the spectra and the measured drip loss (DL), 
the number of samples was low and no understanding of the Raman spectra 
in the prerigor phase was reported, limiting further applications of the find-
ings. However, Pedersen et al. (2003) did collect reference spectra of metab-
olites relevant to the development of meat quality traits during anaerobic 
glycolysis.
Although these early studies were limited, they highlighted the potential 
for Raman spectroscopy to monitor PM metabolism, particularly for pork 

89
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
which is susceptible to metabolic-related meat quality defects, such as dry 
firm and dark (DFD) and pale soft and exudative (PSE) meat (England et al., 
2013). Indeed, further research conducted by Scheier and Schmidt (2013) used 
a prototype handheld Raman device over a period of 0.5–10 h PM to measure 
the musculus semimembranosus (SM) from 10 animals, while measuring pH 
and lactate concentration as reference. In this research, pH was shown to 
correlate with two phosphate signals which act as pH indicators (Scheier and 
Schmidt, 2013). The pH values were calculated from the net signal intensities 
at 980 
−
[A ] and 1080 cm–1 [HA] with a standard error of 0.3 pH units using 
the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation (Equation 3.1):
 
=
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
−
pH
p
log
[A ]
[HA]
a
10
K
 
(3.1)
The observed pH values in this study gave a mean value of 5.8 and a stan-
dard deviation (SD) of 0.32, while the root-mean-squared error of calibra-
tion (RMSEC) was 0.14 pH units calculated with a multiple linear regression 
model based on the net intensities of 11 selected peaks. However, this error 
was reduced to 0.07 pH units with a partial least squares regression (PLSR) 
model (Scheier and Schmidt, 2013) demonstrating that different analyses can 
reduce the predictive error.
Using advanced spectral preprocessing and multivariate calibration tech-
niques, such as multiplicative scattering correction and locally weighted 
regression, further studies have shown that the lactate concentration and 
pH values can be determined from the Raman spectra with an error of root 
mean square error of cross-validation (RMSECV) = 4.5 mmol/kg (mean 
62.2 mmol/kg and SD 22.2 mmol/kg) and RMSECV = 0.06, respectively, 
highlighting the lactate concentration and pH predictions can be further 
improved (Nache et al., 2015).
The other observed changes in the spectra associated with pH decline 
in pork, however, were too complex for a direct assignment of the signals 
to metabolites (Scheier and Schmidt, 2013). The key to an understanding 
of the spectra was the calculation of difference spectra which reduced the 
complexity of the spectral changes in two defined phases: prerigor (spectra 
collected at <1 h PM minus the spectra collected at 2 h PM) and when the 
muscle enters into the rigor (spectra collected at 8.5 h PM minus spectra 
collected at 2 h PM). The subsequent measured difference spectra from 
both phases could then be well explained by calculating difference spectra 
using the scaled reference spectra of the involved metabolites (Figure 3.5) 
(Scheier et al., 2014b). To this end, the reference spectra were measured 
in aqueous solution under the same pH conditions which were observed 
in the meat samples and these spectra were scaled according to the mea-
sured or expected concentrations in normal meat (reddish, firm, nonexu-
dative—RFN) (Scheier et al., 2014b).

90
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
The key metabolites of anaerobic glycolysis are summarized in Figure 3.6, 
where metabolites which were observed in the Raman spectra with decreas-
ing concentration are marked with dashed lines, and compounds with 
increasing concentrations are marked with solid lines. Central to this pro-
cess is the regeneration of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) by depleting 
stored creatine phosphate (CrP), reaction (a), or glycolysis and formation of 
lactate, reaction (b). Preslaughter stress can accelerate or inhibit these reac-
tions causing deviations from normal meat quality (Scheffler and Gerrard, 
2007; Adzitey and Nurul, 2011). If the muscle glycogen reserves were already 
exhausted before the death of the animal, glycolysis and formation of lactate 
are inhibited. If the metabolism is upregulated perimortem, regeneration 
from adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and subsequent deamination to ino-
sine monophosphate (IMP), reaction (c), is significant and was shown to be 
an indicator of PSE and DFD (Honikel and Fischer, 1977). This information 
can be extracted from prerigor Raman spectra of pork. Finally, when ATP 
is hydrolyzed, reaction (d), protons are released which causes a fall in the 
muscle’s pH. It is interesting to note that the proton is not released during 
glycolysis or upon reduction of pyruvate to lactate (this step is consuming 
a proton), but that the proton is virtually stored in polyphosphates (as acid 
anhydrides) until the hydrolysis of ATP (Robergs et al., 2004). These key 
metabolites and components with their most significant Raman peaks are 
summarized in Table 3.1.
ADP
ADP
AMP
IMP
ATP
Cr
NH3
Glycogen
Lactate
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Pi
ADP
H+ +
H+
+
CrP
FIGURE 3.5
Scheme of postmortem energy metabolism in muscle cells showing (a) degradation of creatine 
phosphate (CrP) to creatine (Cr), (b) glycolysis and formation of lactate, (c) consumption of 
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and subsequent deamination of adenosine monophosphate 
(AMP) to inosine monophosphate (IMP), and (d) hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
with formation of inorganic phosphate (Pi) and H+ ions. Metabolites identified in the Raman 
spectra are framed: dashed and solid lines denote decreasing and increasing concentrations, 
respectively. (Modified from Scheier et al., Vibrational Spectroscopy, 70, 12–17, 2014b.)

91
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
1040
1417
1075
976
855
1380
537
1576
1335
1303
732
1551
1466
1645
1448
1309
935
875
901
1338
937
827
1081
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
500
700
900
1100
1300
1500
1700
Raman difference intensity (counts/mWs)
Wave number (cm–1)
(b)
(d)
(a)
(c)
(e)
(f)
(S)
1115
1119
FIGURE 3.6
Raman difference spectra of (a) porcine m. semimembranosus from seven pigs measured 8.5 h 
and 2 h postmortem and (S) simulated sum spectrum comprising Raman spectra of (b) inosine 
monophosphate at pH 5.6 minus adenosine triphosphate (ATP) at pH 6.0, (c) lactate minus 
glycogen, (d) phosphate at pH 5.6 minus phosphate at pH 6.0, (e) glucose 6-phosphate (G6P) at 
pH 5.6 minus G6P at pH 6.0, and (f) α -helical proteins. (Modified from Scheier et al., Vibrational 
Spectroscopy, 70, 12–17, 2014b.)

92
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
To transfer this approach from the laboratory to field tests, two experi-
ments were performed using the portable Raman device to demonstrate the 
feasibility of using Raman spectra for the prerigor assessment of meat quality 
in a production environment (Scheier et al., 2014a, 2015b). In the first study, 
the Raman spectra of the SM from 96 pigs were recorded where the car-
casses had been split, in the chilling room of an abattoir 1–2 h after slaugh-
ter. Ten Raman spectra with only 2.5 s integration times were averaged and 
correlated with pH45, pH24, DL, L*, a*, b*, and shear force (SF) measured after 
24 (SF24) and 72 h (SF72) using PLSR. The animals were selected to cover all 
typical slaughter weights and grades and the sample contained PSE and 
DFD type animals. Coefficients of correlation of between 0.64 and 0.73 were 
obtained for pH45, pH24, DL, L*, b*, and SF72 (Scheier et al., 2014a). While the 
measurement in the chiller allowed for a good differentiation of the meta-
bolic state of the carcasses, this point in time did not meet the requirements 
of the regular operation of the abattoir. Therefore, in the second study, the 
Raman spectra of the SM from 151 pigs were recorded at 25–40 min after 
slaughter before weighing and classification of the carcasses. The averaged 
Raman spectra with 2.5 s integration time, six accumulations and seven rep-
licates were correlated with pH45, pH24, L*, and DL yielding good results for 
pH5 (R2 = 0.75), pH24 (R2 = 0.58), and DL (R2 = 0.83) (Scheier et al., 2015b).
In summary, the field studies demonstrated that Raman spectra recorded 
from porcine muscles before rigor (0.5–2 h PM) can be utilized to measure 
and predict technological quality traits such pH1 (pH value at 1 h PM), ulti-
mate pH (pHu), and DL (which will occur three days later) with one mea-
surement. This is possible because the predictions are based on (known) 
differences of the early PM energy metabolism which is captured by the 
Raman spectra and which is related to deviating qualities such as dry (DFD) 
or exudative (PSE).
TABLE 3.1
Assignment of Most Significant Peaks to Metabolites Found in 
Different Raman Spectra of Early Postmortem Porcine Muscle
Peak Position/cm–1
Assignment
732, 1119, 1303, 1335, 1576
Adenosine triphosphate
901, 935, 1309, 1448, 1645
α -helical proteins
826, 1045
Creatine
849, 978
Creatine phosphate
937, 1115
Glycogen
1466, 1551
Inosine monophosphate
537, 855, 1040, 1417
Lactate
875, 1075 (980)
Phosphate, monobasic (dibasic)
827, 1081 (976)
Sugar phosphates, monobasic (dibasic) 
Source: Scheier, R. et al., Vibrational Spectroscopy, 70, 12–17, 2014b.

93
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
3.4.1.2 Postrigor Pork
While anaerobic glycolysis is ending and the muscle is passing into rigor 
mortis, a large part of this information is lost, e.g., normal pork cannot be 
discriminated from PSE meat based on the pHu. Similarly, postrigor Raman 
spectra contain less spectral information which can be used for the predic-
tion of DFD and PSE affected pork. For example, the Raman spectra of exu-
dative (PSE) pork exhibits significantly lower signals of α -helical proteins 
(Table 3.1) in the rigor phase, but these pH-related signals cannot be distin-
guished from normal pork (Scheier and Schmidt, 2013).
Subsequently, a very weak relationship between Raman spectra and the 
meat quality defect warmed-over flavor was reported when the impact of pre-
slaughter stress on the development of warmed-over flavor was studied by 
Brøndum et al. (2000b). However, we cannot exclude that this poor relation-
ship could also be due to the instrumentation used in this study, as a 1064 nm 
laser was used which is less suited to applications in meat science. Alterna-
tively, postrigor spectra from 95 pigs recorded with the 671 nm Raman device 
yielded correlations with pH and DL of R2 = 0.85 and 0.7, respectively, showing 
that the spectra allowed for the identification of DFD meat, but not for a clear 
differentiation of PSE meat (Schmidt et al., 2012). Subsequent work with 137 
m. longissimus thoracis yielded improved prediction errors for pH24 (RMSECV 
= 0.03 pH units), but not for DL (0.9%). In addition, L* (RMSECV = 1.2) and, to 
some extent, cooking loss (1.6%) could be correlated with the postrigor Raman 
spectra (Scheier et al., 2015a). However, the samples in this study were homog-
enous and contained neither PSE nor DFD animals so no conclusions can be 
drawn with respect to the postrigor detection of these qualities.
The ability to predict other meat quality traits of pork using Raman spectros-
copy has also been investigated as further studies have measured pork to deter-
mine SF values (Beattie et al., 2008) and sensory attributes (Wang et al., 2012). 
In a study conducted by Beattie et al. (2008), aged and cooked pork was tested 
with a 785 nm Raman benchtop device to determine whether SF values could 
be predicted. Prediction models for this study yielded a prediction error of 
RMSEP = 4.4 N for animals with an average SF of 36.9 N. However, the number 
of samples measured in this study was low, as meat from only three pigs was 
measured. Therefore, the application of this study is limited. Further work to 
predict sensory attributes of pork using a Raman microscope equipped with a 
780 nm excitation laser yielded poor accuracies in PLSR predictions of 23.2%, 
9.6%, and 17.3% (with 5% error tolerance) for tenderness, chewiness, and juici-
ness which were assessed by a sensory panel, but showed >83% correct pre-
dictions with tenderness and chewiness when employing PLS discriminant 
analysis (PLSDA) (Wang et al., 2012) suggesting that Raman spectral data may 
be better suited to differentiating and classifying meat on tenderness.
Overall, these studies conducted on pork highlight the potential of postrigor 
Raman spectra to determine technological relevant pork quality traits SF, 
pH24, and L* as well as sensory attributes.

94
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
3.4.1.3 Heat-Treated Pork
Cooking meat leads to changes in protein structures including denaturation 
of myosin at 53°C, sarcoplasmic proteins and connective tissue at 62°C, as well 
as actin at 76°C (Xiong et al., 1987; Tornberg, 2005). Subsequently, the changes 
associated with cooking can be monitored using Raman spectroscopy as they 
alter the spectra of cooked meat (Beattie et al., 2008; Berhe et al., 2014, 2015). 
The signals indicating denaturation of the proteins predominantly originate 
from the protein backbone signals at 1640–1660 (amide I, α -helix), 1660–1670 
(amide I, random coil and β -pleated sheet), 1330–1350 (CH-bending), 1230–1260 
(amide III, random coil and β -pleated sheet), 1000 (C-C stretching β -pleated 
sheet) (Beattie et al., 2008), and 920–960 cm–1 (C-C stretching α -helix) (Berhe 
et al., 2014, 2015). Although broad signals in the regions 510–550 cm–1 have 
been assigned to disulfide bonds (Berhe et al., 2014), the observed intensities 
are too high in this study to account for the low cysteine content of the meat. 
Furthermore, loss of fat, which also occurs during cooking, has been identi-
fied by peaks at 1060, 1080, and 1128 cm–1 (Beattie et al., 2008).
It has been long established that protein conformation and denaturation are 
reflected by the Raman spectra (Frushour and Koenig, 1975). Consequently, 
several studies were completed to determine if Raman spectroscopy could 
predict end point temperature by using principal component analysis (PCA) 
to cluster spectra according to the end point cooking temperature (Berhe et al., 
2014, 2015). These studies found that the temperature could be calculated 
using PLSR with a prediction error of RMSECV = 1.3°C (Berhe et al., 2014) 
and 1.3–1.6°C for freshly cooked meat (Berhe et al., 2015), and with 1.6–2.0°C 
for cooked meat stored for four or eight days (Berhe et al., 2014). Furthermore, 
classification of samples cooked below and above 65°C was achieved with 
<5% misclassification (Berhe et al., 2015) indicating that Raman spectroscopy 
could be useful to check the core temperature of cooked meat in a final prod-
uct. However, the application of these studies is limited given that noninva-
sive methods of temperature determination are already available.
The spectral changes associated with cooking have also been studied to 
determine the potential for Raman spectra to predict the amount of intracel-
lular fluid lost during cooking (cooking loss) and postcooking SF values of 
pork. Indeed, several studies have agreed that cooking loss of pork could be 
determined from Raman spectra with an RMSECV of 2.5% (Beattie et al., 
2008) and 2.8% (Berhe et al., 2014). Interestingly, these studies were also able 
to predict cooking time with an RMSECV = 4.1 min (Beattie et al., 2008) and 
1.4 h (Berhe et al., 2014). The correlation of SF with spectra of cooked pork 
samples was also promising, as models yielded a root-mean-squared error of 
prediction of RMSEP = 4.4 N using 54 samples for calibration and for valida-
tion with an averaged SF for all samples of 36.9 N (Beattie, 2015, pers. comm.).
Overall, these studies have shown that Raman spectra of cooked pork were 
able to provide information about conformational changes in the secondary 
structure of meat proteins and the hydrophobic environment at the molecu-
lar level. This spectral information can be used to predict the end point tem-

95
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
perature, cooking loss, and cooking time with high accuracy. In addition, 
there is potential to assess tenderness with Raman spectra of cooked pork.
3.4.1.4 Fatty Acid Composition of Pork Adipose Tissue
Raman work on pork adipose tissue has focused on the fatty acid (FA) com-
position (Olsen et al., 2007, 2008, 2010) and the prediction of FA bulk param-
eters for adipose tissue to differentiate it from the fat of other meat species 
(Beattie et al., 2006). These studies demonstrated consistently good correla-
tions between the Raman spectra and bulk unsaturation parameters of pork 
subcutaneous fat, including total unsaturated cis FAs (R2 = 0.97) and poly-
unsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) (R2 = 0.97) (Beattie et al., 2006), iodine value 
(IV) (R2 = 0.89 and 0.97), monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) (R2 = 0.96), 
and PUFAs (R2 = 0.98) (Olsen et al., 2007, 2010).
The predictions of trans-FAs were not as promising (R2 = 0.52), which was 
ascribed to the inherently low content of trans-FAs present in pork meat (Beat-
tie et al., 2006). Similarly, the prediction of individual FAs with Raman spec-
troscopy was shown to be feasible for subcutaneous fat in general, but with 
different levels of accuracy for individual FAs (Beattie et al., 2006). As this is 
of considerable interest due to the importance of determining the nutritional 
value of meats, further work has addressed the determination of omega-3 und 
omega-6 FAs in adipose tissue from the neck of 73 pork carcasses (Olsen et al., 
2008). This study found a high correlation between omega-6 and Raman spec-
tra (R2 = 0.93) yet the correlation was slightly lower between omega-3 FAs and 
Raman spectra (R2 = 0.91). Further work on the prediction of individual FAs has 
revealed that prediction of individual FAs is likely to be indirectly but strongly 
correlated to other FAs, such as PUFA and IV, when predicted using Raman 
spectra (Berhe et al., 2016). The authors describe this as a “cage of covariance,” 
which is also affected by the animal’s diet and potentially breed. Consequently, 
the authors suggested that further analysis is required when assessing models 
to predict individual FAs to prevent model instability due to this covariance.
Further Raman spectroscopy research has also been conducted to dis-
criminate between the inner and the outer layers of porcine subcutaneous 
adipose tissue, which is important due to the impact of chemical composi-
tion of fat on the cohesiveness and firmness of fat, visual appearance, oxida-
tive stability, and nutritive value of value-added pork products (Lyndgaard 
et al., 2012). Discrimination between the layers is possible as there is a higher 
degree of unsaturation (higher IV) of the outer layer compared to the inner 
layer (Lyndgaard et al., 2012).
The ability of Raman spectra to reflect the bulk FA profile was also 
exploited when discriminating animal fats from different species (Beattie 
et al., 2007; Sowoidnich and Kronfeldt, 2012; Boyaci et al., 2014b) or animal fats 
from plant oils (Abbas et al., 2009). The differentiation of animal fats from dif-
ferent origins is possible using polymorphic features in the Raman spectra. 
Polymorphism is the ability of a compound to solidify in different crystalline 
structures. As an example, the polymorphs of tristearin can be discriminated 

96
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
by their Raman spectra (Da Silva et al., 2009). Thus, the 1417 cm–1 methylene 
scissoring vibration which is an indicator for the β ′ polymorph can be used to 
discriminate porcine adipose tissue from bovine adipose tissue (Motoyama 
et al., 2010). Furthermore, Raman spectroscopy has been used to monitor 
physical changes of adipose tissue during the refrigeration process of a car-
cass. The degree of crystallinity and the fraction of β′ polymorph of porcine 
adipose tissue were shown to increase with refrigeration time and with low-
ering temperature (Motoyama et al., 2013). In this study, the degree of crys-
tallinity was calculated from the methylene twisting vibrations attributed to 
crystalline and melted fat at 1297 cm−1 and 1305 cm–1, respectively. Raman 
imaging was then applied to visualize and characterize the spatial distribu-
tion of the crystalline states of fats (Motoyama et al., 2016).
The ban on surgical castration of piglets in Europe has resulted in research into 
the detection of boar taint (EU, 2010). Boar taint is characterized as an off-flavor 
that is perceivable when fat of entire males is heated and is mainly ascribed 
to the compounds skatole (3-methyl-indole) and androstenone (5α -androst-
16-en-3-one), which are enriched in adipose tissue. Three approaches have 
been reported to investigate the feasibility of using Raman spectroscopy for 
boar taint detection (Wang, 2013; Sorensen et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2016). The first 
method used a methanolic extract from subcutaneous fat and direct measure-
ment of the extract (Wang, 2013). However, both skatole and androstenone occur 
at concentrations that are so low that they are not directly assessed with sponta-
neous Raman scattering. Therefore, this approach is not practical for a produc-
tion environment due to the extraction process. The second approach also used 
a methanolic extract, but assessed the malodorous compounds directly with 
surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) (Sorensen et al., 2015). SERS is 
the amplification of Raman scattering by orders of magnitude when the com-
pounds are adsorbed to gold or silver nanoparticles (Lee and Meisel, 1982). With 
SERS, quantification of skatole and androstenone was shown to be feasible with 
prediction errors (RMSECV) of 0.17 μg/g for skatole and 1.5 μg/g for androste-
none in the fat (Sorensen et al., 2015). The third approach tested the indirect 
detection of boar taint based on variations in the FA profile of boars. The ratio-
nale behind this approach was that such a measurement can be recorded dur-
ing the production process. Liu et al. (2016) showed that detection of extreme 
boar taint based on differences in the FA composition of subcutaneous fat was 
feasible with Raman spectroscopy and that the highest classification accuracy 
was achieved using only spectra from the inner layer (81% samples correctly 
classified). However, this approach had limitations as only extremely divergent 
fat samples were detectable and the classification may be affected by the diet of 
the animals as it influences the FA composition.
3.4.2 Lamb
The initial Raman spectroscopic research on lamb carcass quality conducted 
by Schmidt et al. (2013) used a Raman spectroscopic handheld device to pre-

97
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
dict SF values, due to the importance of tenderness to the consumer acceptance 
of meat products (Thompson, 2002). Consequently, the m. longissimus thoracis 
et lumborum (LTL) was sampled from 140 mixed sex lambs that were bred and 
reared at two different research sites, and this muscle was measured using a 
Raman handheld device equipped with a 671 nm laser (Schmidt et al., 2009). 
Prediction models developed using PLSR yielded promising correlations of 
R2 = 0.79 and 0.86, respectively, for the samples measured from the two sites. 
However, the methodology of this study limits the application of the findings 
to commercial meat processors, as the measurements were conducted on 3 
cm sections of LTL that were aged, frozen at −20°C, and thawed. Further-
more, this study did not conduct the Raman spectroscopic measurements and 
determine the SF values from the same piece of meat. Subsequently, further 
research was conducted to investigate whether the same Raman handheld 
device could be used to predict SF values of fresh intact lamb measured on 
the same piece of meat (Fowler et al., 2014a,b).
The complementary studies conducted by Fowler et al. (Fowler et al., 
2014a,b) reported for the first time the potential of Raman spectroscopy to 
predict the SF of fresh intact lamb, while also comparing the prediction 
using Raman spectroscopy against commonly used indicators of SF includ-
ing particle size, sarcomere length, pH measured at 24 h PM (pH24), and pHu. 
Given the promising correlations of the initial research predicting SF using 
a Raman handheld device (Schmidt et al., 2013), these studies moved toward 
developing Raman spectroscopy as a predictor of SF which could be used in 
industrial applications.
For the first time, these studies measured unrelated carcasses, collecting 
cuts from 80 carcasses selected from the same abattoir from different con-
signments over a four-day period to represent the animals typically pro-
cessed in order to obtain a spread in SF values which would be expected 
by commercial processors. Furthermore, the Raman spectroscopy measure-
ments were conducted on each intact sample at 24 h and five days PM in 12 
positions parallel to the muscle fibers of the cuts after they were removed 
from the carcass using an integration time of 3.75 (topside) and 3 s (loin). 
Therefore, the area sampled and the measurement times of each muscle were 
shorter and more feasible for measurement in industrial applications com-
pared to previous Raman spectroscopic research in lamb where the 3 cm 
thick samples were cut into quarters and the freshly cut surfaces of three 
of the quarters were measured in five different positions using integration 
times of 5 and 4 s for the two sample groups (Schmidt et al., 2013).
Despite the initial research suggesting there was an excellent correlation 
between SF of lamb and the Raman spectra, these subsequent studies (Fowler 
et al., 2014a,b) indicated otherwise, as the most fruitful model yielded a cross-
validated coefficient of determination between the predicted and observed 
values (
cv
2
R ) equal to 0.22 (Fowler et al., 2014a). This model was obtained for 
the prediction of SF values measured on the SM at five days PM using Raman 
spectra collected at one-day PM. Although these studies yielded lower accu-

98
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
racies for the prediction of SF values using Raman spectra, Fowler et al. 
(2014a) did demonstrate that compared to the laboratory- based indicators 
of SF, Raman spectroscopy had greater potential to predict SF values as the 
predictions using Raman spectra yielded lower prediction errors compared 
to using the indicators alone.
Comparing these Raman spectroscopic studies focused on predicting 
SF values highlights that there are numerous experimental design factors 
which vary between studies, including the spectral acquisition parameters, 
muscle and face measured, sample handling, number of independent sam-
ples, positioning of the sample under the laser, and the Raman spectroscopic 
device and wavelengths used for measurement as well as the methods of 
chemometric analysis. For example, multiple studies have been conducted 
all aimed to predict the SF values of meat determined by a Warner–Bratzler 
SF texture analyzer using Raman spectra (Beattie et al., 2008; Schmidt et al., 
2013; Fowler et al., 2014a,b). Yet models from these studies have yielded a 
range of results from no correlation (
cv
2
R  = 0.00) (Fowler et al., 2014b) to strong 
correlations (R2 = 0.86) (Schmidt et al., 2013) between predicted and observed 
values. However, as the experimental design varies between the cited stud-
ies, it is difficult to determine the reasons for the variation. Consequently, as 
the experimental design of studies have been altered to move toward devel-
opment of Raman spectroscopy as a tool for processors to predict SF values, 
the impact of changes to the design of the experiments on the quality of spec-
tral information and the robustness of the prediction is currently unknown.
As sample handling has varied greatly between earlier studies, Fowler 
et al. (2014a) hypothesized that freezing the meat may have improved the 
prediction of SF values found by Schmidt et al. (2013) as Raman spectros-
copy is sensitive to the effects of freezing and thawing (Li-Chan et al., 1994). 
Subsequently, further research was conducted to test this hypothesis and 
determine the effects of freezing and thawing on the prediction of SF of 
intact lamb (Fowler et al., 2015b). However, this research also aimed to test 
whether Raman spectroscopy could predict several other meat quality traits 
given that other research in pork has demonstrated the ability to predict pHu 
(R2 = 0.85) (Scheier et al., 2014a) and WHC (r = 0.98) (Pedersen et al., 2003) yet 
studies conducted on lamb had focused solely on the prediction of SF values.
The two complementary studies conducted by Fowler et al. (2015b) used 
similar experimental designs to previous research on fresh intact lamb 
(Fowler et al., 2014a); however, in these studies carcasses were subjected to 
electrical stimulation, Raman spectra were collected at 25-min PM and the 
80 SM collected over two consecutive days for experiment two were frozen 
after the five-day PM measurements, held frozen for 24 h, and thawed prior 
to measurement. Furthermore, the data analysis for both of these studies also 
included models to determine the potential to predict other meat quality 
traits of lamb including sarcomere length, particle size, color (L*, a*, b* values), 
collagen content, purge loss, and pH values at 24 h PM (pH24) as well as pHu.

99
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
The results of these experiments indicated that there was no ability to pre-
dict SF values using spectra collected at 24 h, five days PM, or after freezing 
and thawing (Fowler et al., 2015b). Given the inconsistent results from experi-
ments over multiple years (Schmidt et al., 2013; Fowler et al., 2014a,b, 2015b), it 
is likely that the measurement of intact lamb using the Raman spectroscopic 
handheld device is unable to provide a repeatable prediction of SF values as 
currently tested. Yet, the findings of Fowler et al. (2015b) indicated that there 
is a potential to predict pH24 and pHu using Raman spectra measured at 
24 h (
cv
2
R  = 0.59 and 
cv
2
R  = 0.48, respectively) as well as purge (
cv
2
R  = 0.42) and 
L* values measured at both 24 h PM (
cv
2
R  = 0.32) and five days PM (
cv
2
R  = 0.33).
Given that relationships between pH and purge were found and it has been 
well established that pH, purge, and color are interrelated (Hughes et al., 2014), 
it is plausible that the predictions of these meat quality traits using Raman 
spectroscopy are related to the biochemical changes which occur during the 
conversion of muscle to meat during the early PM period. Although there is 
a scarcity in literature which has reported on the prediction of lamb meat 
quality characteristics, spectral assignments to determine the biochemical 
characteristics that underlie the predictions for pH, purge, and color based 
on a comparison with existing literature on the determination of meat qual-
ity traits in pork (Scheier and Schmidt, 2013; Scheier et al., 2014b) agrees with 
this hypothesis. Although it was acknowledged that there are limitations 
in the transference of findings between the measurement of pH early PM 
in pork and the measurement of pHu at 24 h in lamb, some of the spectral 
changes were identified as metabolites involved in anaerobic glycolysis. These 
included spectral changes associated with inorganic phosphate (875, 970, and 
1080 cm–1), adenosine (1334 cm–1), α -helical proteins (937 cm–1), and the amino 
Wave number (cm–1)
Intensity (counts/second)
0
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
500
250
950
1100
1250
1400
1550
1700
1850
800
650
500
FIGURE 3.7
The averaged background corrected Raman spectra collected 24 h postmortem (PM) from the 
ovine m. semimembranosus with the five highest and five lowest pH values, highlighting the 
spectral changes associated with pH value.

100
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
acid side chains (563–720 cm–1) (Figure 3.7). Overall, it was concluded that 
the spectral changes noted suggested that lamb with lower pHu values may 
have undergone a more accelerated pH decline PM which could have been 
driven by glycogen concentrations at slaughter (Ferguson et al., 2008). How-
ever, the exact biochemical pathways which resulted in the spectral differ-
ences remained unclear due to the complexity of the spectra collected and a 
lack of reference spectra for comparison (Fowler et al., 2015b). Furthermore, it 
is yet to be determined whether these findings are repeatable over time and 
for independent data sets and subsequent research will need to address this.
As Raman spectroscopy has been used to classify adipose tissue by species 
(Beattie et al., 2007), and predict the FA composition of pork subcutaneous adi-
pose tissue (Olsen et al., 2007, 2010; Lyndgaard et al., 2011) and intact salmon 
(Afseth et al., 2006), further research conducted by Fowler et al. (2015a) has also 
investigated its potential as a tool to predict the fat content and FA group com-
position of lamb loin including PUFA, MUFA, and saturated fatty acids (SFA). 
Despite finding strong correlations between the observed and predicted values 
for the prediction of PUFA (R2 = 0.93) and MUFA (R2 = 0.54), this study found 
that the models became less accurate when cross-validation procedures were 
used as the cross-validated correlations between the predicted and observed 
values dropped to 
cv
2
R  = 0.21 and 
cv
2
R  = 0.16 for PUFA and MUFA, respectively.
Being the first study to focus on the prediction of major FA group compo-
sition of intact meat, several challenges were identified with the approach 
undertaken to measure FA composition in intact meat which could be con-
tributing to the reduction in the predictions when the models were cross 
validated. Fowler et al. (2015a) hypothesized that the discrimination between 
spectra containing lipid and protein signals and overlapping spectral signals 
from contributions of the phospholipid head groups present in intact muscle 
may be causing the models to under- or overestimate the major FA group 
concentrations when the models are cross validated. The optimal thresholds 
for discriminating between spectra containing mixed lipid and protein sig-
nals and the impact of contributions of phospholipid signals in spectra for 
meat with varying intramuscular fat content on the prediction models is cur-
rently unknown. Therefore, the current models do not have general applica-
bility; however, the value of measuring FA group composition due to human 
health targets warrants further investigation.
3.4.3 Beef
To date, there has been very little research conducted on the potential of 
Raman spectroscopy to predict meat quality traits of beef, although a prelim-
inary investigation on the application of Raman spectroscopy to predict sen-
sory quality traits (Beattie et al., 2004a) and tenderness (Bauer et al., 2016) of 
beef have been completed. The study by Beattie et al. (2004a) was an explor-
atory study to determine if Raman spectroscopy could predict meat quality 
given that other technology-based methods including elastograms, fluores-

101
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
cence emission spectroscopy, or NIR spectroscopy had not been adopted 
by industry for widespread use and high-performance push-button Raman 
spectroscopy equipment was becoming available at a reasonable cost. To this 
end, 52 samples of beef silverside were collected, cooked, and subsampled 
for Raman spectroscopic measurement on a rotating stage using a benchtop 
Raman device equipped with a 785 nm excitation laser, for determination 
of SF and sensory analysis. Despite achieving good correlation coefficients 
using Raman spectra to measure SF (R2 = 0.75) and sensory traits including 
texture (R2 = 0.71), juiciness (R2 = 0.62), as well as overall liking (R2 = 0.67), the 
application of these results to industry is limited as the samples were cooked 
prior to measurement and a benchtop Raman device was used which still 
requires a biopsy of the sample to be taken for measurement. Nonetheless, 
this experiment does highlight the potential for Raman spectroscopy to be 
applied to predict a broader range of eating quality traits.
A longer term study to determine the potential for Raman spectroscopy 
to predict the tenderness of beef m. gluteus medius (Bauer et al., 2016) demon-
strated that there was an ability to predict beef tenderness with good accu-
racy (
cal
2
R  = 0.94) with the initial modeling. However, when this model was 
further validated on independent samples, this accuracy is reduced (
val
2
R
 = 
0.23) suggesting the initial model was overfitted or the biological variance 
of the samples included in the calibration model did not represent the sam-
ples collected in the validation model. Yet, the correlation between Raman 
spectra and tenderness was improved when a model was created using the 
validation data to create a new model (
cv
2
R  = 0.65). Further analysis for this 
data showed that reducing the number of spectral channels included and 
limiting the latent variables in the analysis resulted in more robust models 
but reduced the precision of the predictions (
cv
2
R  = 0.33) (Bauer et al., 2016) 
highlighting the need to determine the optimal processing and analysis 
techniques to obtain repeatable predictions of meat quality parameters to 
determine whether there is a potential for industry to apply this research.
Bauer et al. (2016) also suggested an alternative approach to predicting SF 
values as they demonstrated that Raman spectroscopy has potential to dis-
criminate between tough and tender samples based on a given threshold, 
thereby eliminating the need for an exact prediction of the SF values. Thresh-
olds of 30, 34, 40, 43, and 49 N were trialled as consumer studies in the United 
States have demonstrated SF values below these values met the 100%, 99%, 
94%, 86%, and 25% consumer satisfaction scores for tenderness. Using partial 
least squares discriminate analysis (PLS-DA), Bauer et al. (2016) concluded that 
it was possible to classify samples with accuracies of between 59% and 80%. 
However, the precision increased with the threshold suggesting that Raman 
spectroscopy can be used as a screening tool to accurately identify tough beef.
While this study overcomes some of the limitations of earlier meat science 
research using Raman spectroscopy by using a handheld Raman device 
and measuring SF on the same areas of muscle which were scanned using 

102
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
the Raman device, more work is required to determine whether the accu-
racy and precision of predictive models are achievable using measurement 
protocols which more closely reflect commercial operations. Consequently, 
research is needed to determine whether an early PM Raman measurement 
in a commercial situation is able to predict the tenderness of the product 
when it reaches the consumer after aging and transport.
Tentative band assignment of the spectra collected from tough and ten-
der beef indicates that while there are clear signals associated with α -helical 
proteins (1650, 1447, 1312, 935, and 906 cm–1), amino acid side chains such as 
tryptophan (1550, 1353, 1336, 1009, and 759 cm–1), and connective tissue (1665, 
1453, 1270, 1248, and 855 cm–1), overall intensity of the spectra were the main 
difference between tough and tender samples (Bauer et al., 2016; Figure 3.8). 
This disagrees with the research conducted in lamb, which found that spec-
tra from tender samples had a higher overall intensity (Fowler et al., 2014a); 
however, reasons for these differences have not been well defined.
3.4.4 Spoilage
Meat is a very perishable food whose shelf life is dependent on the microbial 
flora, the packaging, and the storage conditions (Borch et al., 1996; Saucier, 
2016). Food safety regulations require routine control of microbial status, 
but as the traditional microbiological methods are time-consuming and 
expensive, rapid methods are sought for more efficient monitoring (Ellis 
–10
–6
–2
2
6
0
4
8
12
16
500
700
900
1100
1300
1500
1700
Difference intensity (counts/mWs)
Raman intensity (counts/mWs)
Wave number (cm–1)
FIGURE 3.8
Averaged and preprocessed Raman spectra of the 10 most tender (black line) and the 10 tough-
est (gray line) bovine gluteus medius samples with shear force values <29 N and >48 N, respec-
tively. The upper curve (thin line) represents the difference spectrum “tough minus tender.” 
Selected signals of α -helical proteins (star), myoglobin (circle), tryptophan (diamond), tyrosine 
doublet (gray triangle), and connective tissue (triangle) are highlighted. (From Bauer et al., 
Meat Science, 115, 27–33, 2016.)

103
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
and Goodacre, 2001). Spectroscopic methods are among those being trialled 
as they are rapid, noninvasive, and nondestructive (Damez and Clerjon, 
2008). The first detection of spoilage of pork using Raman spectroscopy was 
reported with a 785 nm laboratory set up (Schmidt et al., 2008). In this work, 
principal components analysis (PCA) was applied for a qualitative discrimi-
nation between samples at a threshold of 106 colony forming units (cfu)/cm2 
total viable mesophilic aerobic plate counts. This discrimination of spoiled 
pork was confirmed with a handheld Raman sensor head operating at 671 nm 
which was developed for the characterization of meat quality (Schmidt et al., 
2009). Subsequent research revealed that this detection was largely based 
on a laser-induced fluorescence which started beyond the threshold of 
106 cfu/cm2 (Sowoidnich et al., 2010) and that this detection could be per-
formed through packaging (Schmidt et al., 2009). In these studies, however, 
the growth of the spoilage flora was intrinsically tied to the storage time. To 
separate both effects, the storage experiment was repeated by comparing the 
Raman spectra of pork chops (LTL) which were sterilized and which did not 
spoil over a period of 14 days and untreated pork chops (SM and LTL), which 
perished over a period of 21 days (Sowoidnich et al., 2012). In this instance, 
the PCA revealed that spoilage was detected by means of the first princi-
pal component as observed before and that the aging of the sterilized meat 
was monitored by the second principal component. Raman signals indicat-
ing storage, time, and aging were observed at 1650 cm–1 (amide I), 1446 and 
1340 cm–1 (C–H deformation), and 902 and 935 cm–1 (C–C stretching α -helix), 
respectively (Sowoidnich, 2012; Sowoidnich et al., 2012).
Raman measurements using the polarization dependency of the spectra 
during a storage experiment with sterilized and untreated meat revealed 
that Raman spectra are anisotropic (with the muscle fiber direction). Dur-
ing storage changes in signals attributed to α -helical proteins indicated a 
loss of anisotropy as the surface spoiled; however, this did not occur with 
the sterilized samples. Hence, it was concluded that the bacteria on the sur-
face obscure to some extent the spectra of the underlying meat (Al Ebrahim 
et al., 2013b). Quantification of the microbial surface contamination of pork 
has also been successfully completed using a portable Raman device, which 
resulted in a model with a reported prediction error of RMSEV = 1.6 log 
total viable counts (TVC)/cm2 (Grimmler and Schmidt, 2015). Overall, this 
research demonstrates that Raman spectroscopy can be used below the criti-
cal threshold of 5 log TVC/cm2 (Grimmler and Schmidt, 2015).
3.4.5  Differentiation of Animal Species and Detection of 
Adulteration in Muscle Foods
Given the species differences evident in Raman spectra, it is unsurprising 
that Raman spectroscopy has been used to distinguish between different 
species such as pork, chicken, turkey, mutton, goat, beef, and horse (Ellis 
et al., 2005; Sowoidnich, 2012; Sowoidnich and Kronfeldt, 2012; Boyaci et al., 

104
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
2014a,b). This is achieved as the Raman spectra reflect differences in the 
protein and lipid composition, although heme signals from myoglobin can 
also be used as a marker for distinguishing between red and white muscles 
(Sowoidnich and Kronfeldt, 2012). Differences in muscle structure and minor 
components will also contribute to the classification of species using Raman 
spectroscopy, but current knowledge about the spectra and the identification 
of marker substances is inconsistent and incomplete.
Increasing attention is being paid to the detection of fraudulent addition 
of undesired meat, especially to minced meat products. Consequently, the 
addition of pork to minced lamb products has been investigated using a 
Raman microscope (Hassing et al., 2012; Hassing and Jernshøj, 2014). This 
work demonstrated classification of fat and meat from minced pork and 
lamb was possible, although it was stated that for a practical implemen-
tation, the 785 nm system which was used will require improvements in 
order to automatically detect areas of fat, to focus the laser, and to measure 
Raman spectra.
After the large-scale adulteration of beef mince by the addition of minced 
horse meat in Europe during 2013, the discrimination of horse meat and beef 
was investigated with Raman spectroscopy. Principal components analysis 
was shown to successfully discriminate Raman spectra of beef and horse 
which were measured with 671 nm excitation (Al Ebrahim et al., 2013a). 
FT-Raman measurements using 1064 nm excitation with ground beef mix-
tures with 0%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% admixture of horse meat indicated 
a correlation with selected signals (937, 879, 856, and 829 cm–1) which were 
normalized to the phenylalanine signal at 1003 cm–1 with the percentage of 
added horse meat (Zając et al., 2014). Similarly, the detection of horse meat in 
beef was also reported based on the 785 nm Raman spectra of the extracted 
fat using PCA (Boyaci et al., 2014b).
Dispersive Raman spectroscopy was used to detect beef offal adulterations 
(kidney, liver, heart, and lung) in beef burgers (Zhao et al., 2015). PLS-DA 
classifications with >89% correctly classified samples were reported and the 
authors stated a prediction accuracy acceptable for screening purposes when 
assessing total offal and added fat in the samples (Zhao et al., 2015).
3.5 Limitations
From the literature it is clear that Raman spectroscopy has the potential to 
be an online tool to predict meat quality traits of intact muscle in a nonde-
structive and rapid way. However, gaps in the understanding of existing lit-
erature including the reasons for inconsistencies between results of current 
studies predicting meat quality traits, the biochemical characteristics of the 
meat which underlie predictions, and the optimal muscle and measurement 

105
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
parameters for each species will need to be addressed before Raman spectro-
scopic technologies can be widely adopted within industry.
Lack of understanding of the causes of variation in predictability between 
studies is an ongoing challenge for adoption of Raman spectroscopy in 
industry as it is sensitive to variation in measurement parameters (Beattie 
et al., 2004a) yet there is little consistency in existing literature. For example, 
the research by Fowler et al. (2014a) was conducted by collecting 10 Raman 
spectra measured perpendicular to the muscle fiber over the largest face 
of the SM, where the m. adductor was removed, from 80 randomly selected 
lambs. However, Schmidt et al. (2013) measured 3 cm blocks of loin from 140 
lambs that had been quartered before five different positions were measured 
on the freshly cut surfaces with integration times of 5 and 4 s for the two 
sample groups. Thus, Schmidt et al. (2013) collected 15 spectra per sample 
over a much smaller portion of muscle. Furthermore, other Raman spectro-
scopic studies predicting meat quality traits of pork (Beattie et al., 2008) and 
beef (Beattie et al., 2004a) have measured different faces of other muscles 
using integration times of six and three minutes which produced relatively 
high 
cv
2
R  values of 0.75 and 0.77 (Beattie et al., 2004a, 2008). Consequently, the 
most appropriate measurement parameters, muscle, and face of the muscle 
for measurement for pork, beef, and lamb are yet to be determined.
The number of positions and locations measured on each independent 
sample needed to develop robust calibration models is also required as it 
determines the way in which the scattered light can be detected and the che-
mometric data can be analyzed. Despite the widespread use of PCA as a tool 
for spectral data analysis, when PCA is used in the analysis of data from a 
small number of samples the average spectra representing each sample may 
underrepresent subtle differences between spectral regions of the samples 
(Bonnier and Byrne, 2012). This occurs because PCA clusters data based on 
spectral similarity and variance. Consequently, it is expected that Raman 
spectra obtained from numerous subsections removed from a small number 
of independent samples would substantially impact the variance and load-
ings that differentiate groups in further data analysis. This is because the 
strength of this analysis technique is in the loadings, given that they repre-
sent the spectral origin of the variations (Bonnier and Byrne, 2012). As such, 
data sets with few truly independent samples, for example, Beattie et al. 
(2004a), who measured 168 pork m. longissimus lumborum (LL) sections from 
only 18 pigs, are at risk of artificially biasing the results from chemomet-
ric analysis and consequently underrepresenting subtle differences within 
more complex data sets. Consequently, the models generated from data sets 
with small numbers of independent samples or from more positions mea-
sured on fewer samples may then have a better accuracy of prediction than 
if the true spectral differences were represented.
Despite the strong advantages in using Raman within food systems, the 
presence of fluorescence is also a continuing challenge when measuring bio-
logical samples, particularly meat. Fluorescence occurs when light absorbed 

106
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
and emitted at a longer wavelength and therefore at lower energy (Austin 
et al., 1993). As the level of light scattered by the Raman process is gener-
ally weak in comparison to other optical processes, the vibrational spectrum 
can be completely obscured by other contributions including broad feature-
less fluorescence emission (Hudson and Mayne, 1986). Although the use of 
highly effective filters and measuring at a wavelength >800 nm can, to some 
extent, overcome these challenges (Hudson and Mayne, 1986), current Raman 
spectroscopic research on meat quality has focused on using shorter wave-
lengths (785 and 671 nm) to facilitate shorter measurement times (Schmidt 
et al., 2013). Although 785 nm excitation is considerably less impaired by fluo-
rescence, measurements are slower compared to 671 nm excitation and vice 
versa. Consequently, losses of Raman spectral information due to fluores-
cence continues to be an ongoing challenge for the prediction of meat quality 
traits using Raman spectroscopy in red meat where higher levels of iron and 
heme are likely to generate higher amounts of fluorescence when meat is 
excited with a 671 nm laser.
Like fluorescence, the presence of non-Raman background signals can com-
pletely obscure the Raman vibration modes (Beattie, 2011). Any photons that 
aren’t generated by the sample at the frequency of interest are considered back-
ground noise (McCreery, 2005). Background noise may arise from a range of 
optical phenomena (Beattie, 2011) including optic equipment, stray light from 
Rayleigh scattering, and reflections from optics or dust (McCreery, 2005). How-
ever, it also may arise from the samples due to differences in the myofibrils 
associated with background and age. After completing the chemometric analy-
sis jointly and separately for the samples reared at two sites, Schmidt et al. (2013) 
noted that coefficients of determination for prediction models were increased 
when two models were created based on site of origin due to the differences 
in background noise and fluorescence in the spectra. Therefore, the impact of 
differences in background noise and fluorescence generated from samples ran-
domly collected to generate calibration models needs to be determined.
3.6 Conclusion
Although there has been relatively limited research into the use of Raman 
spectroscopy for meat quality and eating quality assessment, the studies 
which have been completed demonstrate that there is potential to develop 
Raman spectroscopy into a carcass assessment tool which can be used in 
commercial situations. Predictions of meat quality traits including pHu, 
purge, SF, cooking loss, FA composition, and sensory traits including tender-
ness, juiciness, and flavor have been successfully completed in a number of 
species including pork, beef, and lamb. Furthermore, additional research has 
been able to determine microbiological loads and differentiate between spe-
cies to identify muscle food adulteration.

107
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
Before Raman spectroscopy can be adopted for widespread industry use, 
further research is required to determine the optimal measurement and 
analysis parameters methods, the factors which are contributing to differ-
ences between predictive models of species and traits and further identify 
the biochemical and biophysical characteristics of meat which are contribut-
ing to these predictions. However, as technological advancements continue, 
Raman spectroscopy equipment will continue to become more robust, pro-
viding repeatable measurements, and limitations associated with high fluo-
rescence will be overcome making Raman spectroscopy as an ideal tool for 
carcass quality assessment.
References
Abbas, O., Fernández Pierna, J. A., Codony, R., Von Holst, C. and Baeten, V. (2009). 
Assessment of the discrimination of animal fat by FT-Raman spectroscopy. Jour-
nal of Molecular Structure, 924–962, 294–300.
Adzitey, F. and Nurul, H. (2011). Pale soft exudative (PSE) and dark firm dry (DFD) 
meats: Causes and measures to reduce these incidences—A mini review. Inter-
national Food Research, 18, 11–20.
Afseth, N. K., Wold, J. P. and Segtnan, V. (2006). The potential of Raman spectroscopy 
for characterisation of the fatty acid unsaturation of salmon. Analytica Chimica 
Acta, 572, 85–92.
Al Ebrahim, H., Sowoidnich, K. and Kronfeldt., H.-D. (2013a). Raman spectroscopic 
differentiation of beef and horse meat using a 671 nm microsystem diode laser. 
Applied Physics B, 113, 159–163.
Al Ebrahim, H., Sowoidnich, K., Schmidt, H. and Kronfeldt, H.-D. (2013b). Polar-
ization dependence of the Raman scattering of oriented porcine muscle fibers 
affected by storage time and spoilage. Focusing on Modern Food Industry, 2, 1–9.
Austin, J. C., Jordan, T. and Spiro, T. G. (1993). Ultra violet reasonance Raman stud-
ies of proteins and related molecules. In: Clark, R. J. H. and Hester, R. E. (eds.) 
Biomolecular Spectroscopy-Part A. West Sussex: John Wiley and Sons.
Bauer, A., Scheier, R., Eberle, T. and Schmidt, H. (2016). Assessment of tenderness of 
aged bovine gluteus medius muscles using Raman spectroscopy. Meat Science, 
115, 27–33.
Beattie, J. R. (2011). Optimising reproducibility in low quality signals without smooth-
ing: An alternative paradigm for signal processing. Journal of Raman Spectros-
copy, 42, 1419–1427.
Beattie, J. R., Bell, S. E. J., Borgaard, C., Fearon, A. M. and Moss, B. W. (2006). Predic-
tion of adipose tissue composition using Raman spectroscopy: Average proper-
ties and individual fatty acids. Lipids, 41, 287–294.
Beattie, J. R., Bell, S. E. J., Borggaard, C., Fearon, A. M. and Moss, B. W. (2007). Classi-
fication of adipose tissue species using Raman spectroscopy. Lipids, 42, 679–685.
Beattie, J. R., Bell, S. E. J., Borggaard, C. and Moss, B. W. (2008). Preliminary investi-
gations on the effects of ageing and cooking on the Raman spectra of porcine 
longissimus dorsi. Meat Science, 80, 1205–1211.

108
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Beattie, J. R., Bell, S. E. J., Farmer, L. J., Moss, B. W. and Patterson, D. (2004a). Prelimi-
nary investigation of the application of Raman spectroscopy to the prediction of 
the sensory quality of beef silverside. Meat Science, 66, 903–913.
Beattie, J. R., Bell, S. E. J. and Moss, B. W. (2004b). A critical evaluation of Raman spec-
troscopy for the analysis of lipids: Fatty acid methyl esters. Lipids, 39, 407–419.
Berhe, D. T., Engelsen, S. B., Hviid, M. S. and Lametsch, R. (2014). Raman spectro-
scopic study of effect of the cooking temperature and time on meat proteins. 
Food Research International, 66, 123–131.
Berhe, D. T., Eskildsen, C. E., Lametsch, R., Hviid, M. S., Van Den Berg, F. and Engelsen, 
S. B. (2016). Prediction of total fatty acid parameters and individual fatty acids 
in pork backfat using Raman spectroscopy and chemometrics: Understanding 
the cage of covariance between highly correlated fat parameters. Meat Science, 
111, 18–26.
Berhe, D. T., Lawaetz, A. J., Engelsen, S. B., Hviid, M. S. and Lametsch, R. (2015). 
Accurate determination of endpoint temperature of cooked meat after storage 
by Raman spectroscopy and chemometrics. Food Control, 52, 119–125.
Bonnier, F. and Byrne, H. J. (2012). Understanding the molecular information con-
tained in principal component analysis of vibrational spectra of biological sys-
tems. Analyst, 137, 322–332.
Borch, E., Kant-Muermans, M. and Blixt, Y. (1996). Specific spoilage organisms bac-
terial spoilage of meat and cured meat products. International Journal of Food 
Microbiology, 33, 103–120.
Boyaci, I. H., Temiz, H. T., Uysal, R. S., Velioglu, H. M., Yadegari, R. J. and Rishkan, 
M. M. (2014a). A novel method for discrimination of beef and horsemeat using 
Raman spectroscopy. Food Chemistry, 148, 37–41.
Boyaci, İ. H., Uysal, R. S., Temiz, T. et al. (2014b). A rapid method for determination 
of the origin of meat and meat products based on the extracted fat spectra by 
using of Raman spectroscopy and chemometric method. European Food Research 
and Technology, 238, 845–852.
Breitman, M., Ruiz-Moreno, S. and Gil, A. L. (2007). Experimental problems in Raman 
spectroscopy applied to pigment identification in mixtures. Spectrochimica Acta 
Part A: Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 68, 1114–1119.
Brøndum, J., Byrne, D. V., Bak, L. S., Bertelsen, G. and Engelsen, S. B. (2000a). Warmed-
over flavour in porcine meat—A combined spectroscopic, sensory and chemo-
metric study. Meat Science, 54, 83–95.
Brøndum, J., Munck, L., Henckel, P., Karlsson, A., Tornberg, E. and Engelsen, S. B. 
(2000b). Prediction of water-holding capacity and composition of porcine meat 
by comparative spectroscopy. Meat Science, 55, 177–185.
Carew, E. B., Asher, I. M. and Stanley, H. E. (1975). Laser raman spectroscopy—New 
probe of myosin substructure. Science, 188, 933–936.
Carey, P. R. (1982). Biochemical Applications of Raman and Reasonance Raman Spectrosco-
pies. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Chen, H. and Han, M. (2011). Raman spectroscopic study of the effects of microbial 
transglutaminase on heat-induced gelation of pork myofibrillar proteins and its 
relationship with textural characteristics. Food Research International, 44, 1514–1520.
Da Silva, E., Bresson, S. and Rousseau, D. (2009). Characterization of the three major 
polymorphic forms and liquid state of tristearin by Raman spectroscopy. Chem-
istry and Physics of Lipids, 157, 113–119.

109
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
Damez, J.-L. and Clerjon, S. (2008). Meat quality assessment using biophysical meth-
ods related to meat structure. Meat Science, 80, 132–149.
Das, R. S. and Agrawal, Y. K. (2011). Raman spectroscopy: Recent advancements, 
techniques and applications. Vibrational Spectroscopy, 57, 163–176.
Ellis, D. I., Broadhurst, D., Clarke, S. J. and Goodacre, R. (2005). Rapid identification of 
closely related muscle foods by vibrational spectroscopy and machine learning. 
Analyst, 130, 1648–1654.
Ellis, D. I. and Goodacre, R. (2001). Rapid and quantitative detection of the microbial 
spoilage of muscle foods: Current status and future trends. Trends in Food Sci-
ence and Technology, 12, 414–424.EU. (2010). European Declaration on alternatives 
to surgical castration of pigs. Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/food/animals/
welfare/practice/farm/pigs/castration_alternatives_en
England, E. M., Scheffler, T. L., Kasten, S. C., Matarneh, S. K. and Gerrard, D. E. (2013). 
Exploring the unknowns involved in the transformation of muscle to meat. 
Meat Science, 95, 837–843.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). (2014). Sources 
of meat. Available at http://www.fao.org/ag/againfo/themes/en/meat/
backgr_sources.html (accessed 8 June 2016).
Ferguson, D. M., Daly, B. L., Gardner, G. E. and Tume, R. K. (2008). Effect of glyco-
gen concentration and form on the response to electrical stimulation and rate of 
post-mortem glycolysis in ovine muscle. Meat Science, 78, 202–210.
Fowler, S. M., Ponnampalam, E. N., Schmidt, H., Wynn, P. and Hopkins, D. L. 
(2015a). Prediction of intramuscular fat content and major fatty acid groups 
of lamb M. longissimus lumborum using Raman spectroscopy. Meat Science, 
110, 70–75.
Fowler, S. M., Schmidt, H., Van De Ven, R., Wynn, P. and Hopkins, D. L. (2014a). Pre-
dicting tenderness of fresh ovine semimembranosus using Raman spectroscopy. 
Meat Science, 97, 597–601.
Fowler, S. M., Schmidt, H., Van De Ven, R., Wynn, P. and Hopkins, D. L. (2014b). 
Raman spectroscopy compared against traditional predictors of shear force in 
lamb m. longissimus lumborum. Meat Science, 98, 652–656.
Fowler, S. M., Schmidt, H., Van De Ven, R., Wynn, P. and Hopkins, D. L. (2015b). 
Predicting meat quality traits of ovine m. semimembranosus, both fresh and 
following freezing and thawing, using a hand held Raman spectroscopic device. 
Meat Science, 108, 138–144.
Frushour, B. G. and Koenig, J. L. (1975). Raman spectroscopy of proteins. In: Clark, 
R. J. H. and Hester, R. E. (eds.) Advances in Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy. Lon-
don: Wiley & Sons.
Grimmler, C. and Schmidt, H. (2015). Quantifying bacteria on pork using a portable 
Raman scanner. 61st International Congress of Meat Science and Technology 
(ICoMST). Clermont-Ferrand, France.
Hassing, S. and Jernshøj, K. D. (2014). Benefits and challenges in applying Raman 
spectroscopy as a non-destructive tool in the analysis of food quality. Agro Food 
Industry Hi Tech, 25, 63–69.
Hassing, S., Jernshøj, K. D. and Christensen, L. S. (2012). Raman spectroscopy: A non-
destructive and on-site tool for control of food quality? InTech.
Honikel, K. O. and Fischer, C. (1977). A rapid method for the dectection of PSE and 
DFD porcine muscles. Journal of Food Science, 42, 1633–1636.

110
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Hudson, B. and Mayne, L. (1986). Ultraviolet resonance Raman spectroscopy of bio-
polymers. In: Hirs, C. H. W. (ed.) Methods in Enzymology. New York, NY: Aca-
demic Press.
Hughes, J. M., Oiseth, S. K., Purslow, P. P. and Warner, R. D. (2014). A structural 
approach to understanding the interactions between colour, water-holding 
capacity and tenderness. Meat Science, 98, 520–532.
Krimm, S. (1987). Peptides and proteins. In: Spiro, T. G. (ed.) Biological Applications 
Raman Spectroscopy. New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons.
Krimm, S. and Bandekar, J. (1986). Vibrational spectroscopy and conformation of pep-
tides, polypeptides, and proteins. In: Anfinsen, C. B., Edsall, J. T. and Richards, 
F. M. (eds.) Advances in Protein Chemistry. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Lee, P. C. and Meisel, D. (1982). Adsorption and surface-enhanced Raman of dyes on 
silver and gold sols. Journal of Physical Chemistry, 86, 3391–3395.
Li-Chan, E. C. Y. (1996). The applications of Raman spectroscopy in food science. 
Trends in Food Science and Technology, 7, 361–370.
Li-Chan, E. C. Y., Nakai, S. and Hirotsuka, M. (1994). Raman spectroscopy as a probe of 
protein structure in food systems. In: Yada, R. Y., Jackman, R. L. and Smith, J. L. 
(eds.) Protein Structure-Function Relationships in Food. Glasgow: Blackie Aca-
demic and Professional.
Liu, X., Schmidt, H. and Mörlein, D. (2016). Feasibility of boar taint classification 
using a portable Raman device. Meat Science, 116, 133–139.
Lyndgaard, L. B., Sorensen, K. M., Van Den Berg, F. and Engelsen, S. B. (2011). Depth 
profiling of porcine adipose tissue by Raman spectroscopy. Journal of Raman 
Spectroscopy, 43, 482–489.
Lyndgaard, L. B., Sorensen, K. M., Van Den Berg, F. and Engelsen, S. B. (2012). Depth 
profiling of porcine adipose tissue by Raman spectroscopy. Journal of Raman 
Spectroscopy, 43, 482–489.
McCreery, R. L. (2000). Raman spectroscopy for chemical analysis. In: Winefordner, 
J. D. (ed.) A Series of Monographs of Analytical Chemistry and It’s Applications. New 
York, NY: Wiley-Interscience John Wiley & Sons.
McCreery, R. L. (2005). Raman Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis. 1st ed. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley-Interscience.
Motoyama, M., Ando, M., Sasaki, K. and Hamaguchi, H.-O. (2010). Differentiation 
of animal fats from different origins: Use of polymorphic features detected by 
Raman spectroscopy. Applied Spectroscopy, 64, 1244–1250.
Motoyama, M., Ando, M., Sasaki, K. et al. (2016). Simultaneous imaging of fat crystal-
linity and crystal polymorphic types by Raman microspectroscopy. Food Chem-
istry, 196, 411–417.
Motoyama, M., Chikuni, K., Narita, T., Aikawa, K. and Sasaki, K. (2013). In situ 
Raman spectrometric analysis of crystallinity and crystal polymorphism of fat 
in porcine adipose tissue. Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry, 61, 69–75.
Nache, M., Scheier, R., Schmidt, H. and Hitzmann, B. (2015). Non-invasive lactate- 
and pH-monitoring in porcine meat using Raman spectroscopy and chemomet-
rics. Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems, 142, 197–205.
Olsen, E. F., Baustad, C., Egelandsdal, B., Rukke, E.-O. and Isaksson, T. (2010). Long-
term stability of a Raman instrument determining iodine value in pork adipose 
tissue. Meat Science, 85, 1–6.

111
Raman Spectroscopy for Predicting Meat Quality Traits
Olsen, E. F., Rukke, E.-O., Egelandsdal, B. and Isaksson, T. (2008). Determination of 
omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids in pork adipose tissue with nondestructive 
Raman and fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. Applied Spectroscopy, 62, 
968–974.
Olsen, E. F., Rukke, E.-O., Flåtten, A. and Isaksson, T. (2007). Quantitative determina-
tion of saturated-, monounsaturated- and polyunsaturated fatty acids in pork 
adipose tissue with non-destructive Raman spectroscopy. Meat Science, 76, 628–
634.
Ozaki, Y. (1999). Raman spectroscopy. In: Mossoba, M. M. (ed.) Spectral Methods in 
Food Analysis—Instrumentation and Applications. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker.
Pedersen, D. K., Morel, S., Andersen, H. J. and Balling Engelsen, S. (2003). Early pre-
diction of water-holding capacity in meat by multivariate vibrational spectros-
copy. Meat Science, 65, 581–592.
Pezolet, M., Pigeon-Gosselin, M. and Caille, J.-P. (1978). Laser Raman investigation of 
intact single muscle fibers: Protein conformations. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 
(BBA)—Protein Structure, 533, 263–269.
Robergs, R. A., Ghiasvand, F. and Parker, D. (2004). Biochemistry of exercise-induced 
metabolic acidosis. American Journal of Physiology-Regulatory, Integrative and 
Comparative Physiology, 287, R502–R516.
Saucier, L. (2016). Microbial spoilage, quality and safety within the context of meat 
sustainability. Meat Science, 120, 78–84.
Scheffler, T. L. and Gerrard, D. E. (2007). Mechanisms controlling pork quality devel-
opment: The biochemistry controlling postmortem energy metabolism. Meat 
Science, 77, 7–16.
Scheier, R., Bauer, A. and Schmidt, H. (2014a). Early postmortem prediction of meat 
quality traits of porcine semimembranosus muscles using a portable Raman 
system. Food and Bioprocess Technology, 7, 2732–2741.
Scheier, R., Köhler, J. and Schmidt, H. (2014b). Identification of the early post mortem 
metabolic state of porcine m. semimembranosus using Raman spectroscopy. 
Vibrational Spectroscopy, 70, 12–17.
Scheier, R., Scheeder, M. and Schmidt, H. (2015a). Post-rigor assessment of porcine 
meat quality applying a portable Raman system. In 61st International Congress 
of Meat Science and Technology (ICoMST). Clermont-Ferrand, France.
Scheier, R., Scheeder, M. and Schmidt, H. (2015b). Prediction of pork quality at the 
slaughter line using a portable Raman device. Meat Science, 103, 96–103.
Scheier, R. and Schmidt, H. (2013). Measurement of the pH value in pork meat early 
postmortem by Raman spectroscopy. Applied Physics B, 111, 289–297.
Schmidt, H., Blum, J., Sowoidnich, K. and Kronfeldt, H. D. (2008). Raman spectro-
scopic examinations of meat ripening: An approach to product-flanking meat 
monitoring using non-invasive optical measuring methods. Fleischwirtschaft, 88, 
111–113.
Schmidt, H., Scheier, R. and Hopkins, D. L. (2013). Preliminary investigation on the 
relationship of Raman spectra of sheep meat with shear force and cooking loss. 
Meat Science, 93, 138–143.
Schmidt, H., Scheier, R., Octoviani, A., Agarkov, N. and Petzet, A. (2012). Recent 
results of measuring quality traits of pork meat using Raman spectroscopy. Mit-
teilungsblatt der Fleischforschung Kulmbach, 51, 219–225.

112
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Schmidt, H., Sowoidnich, K. and Kronfeldt, H. D. (2010). A prototype hand-held 
Raman sensor for the in situ characterization of meat quality. Applied Spectros-
copy, 64, 888–894.
Schmidt, H., Sowoidnich, K., Maiwald, M., Sumpf, B. and Kronfeldt, H. D. (2009). 
Hand-held Raman sensor head for in-situ characterization of meat quality 
applying a mircosystem 671 nm diode laser. In: Vo-dinh, T., Lieberman, R. A. 
and Gauglitz, G. (eds.) Proceedings of the Advanved Environment, Chemical and 
Biological Sensing Technology VI. Orlando, FL: International Society for Optics 
and Photonics, 1–8.
Sorensen, K. M., Westley, C., Goodacre, R. and Engelsen, S. B. (2015). Simultaneous 
quantification of the boar-taint compounds skatole and androstenone by sur-
face-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and multivariate data analysis. Analyti-
cal and Bioanalytical Chemistry, 407, 7787–7795.
Sowoidnich, K. (2012). Multispektrale, Diodenlaser-basierte Raman-Untersuchungen 
zur In-situ-Analytik ausgewählter Fleischsorten. PhD dissertation, Technische 
Universität, Berlin.
Sowoidnich, K. and Kronfeldt, H.-D. (2012). Shifted excitation Raman difference 
spectroscopy at multiple wavelengths for in-situ meat species differentiation. 
Applied Physics B, 108, 975–982.
Sowoidnich, K., Schmidt, H., Kronfeldt, H.-D. and Schwägele, F. (2012). A portable 
671 nm Raman sensor system for rapid meat spoilage identification. Vibrational 
Spectroscopy, 62, 70–76.
Sowoidnich, K., Schmidt, H., Maiwald, M., Sumpf, B. and Kronfeldt, H.-D. (2010). 
Application of diode-laser Raman spectroscopy for in situ investigation of meat 
spoilage. Food and Bioprocess Technology, 3, 878–882.
Thompson, J. M. (2002). Managing meat tenderness. Meat Science, 62, 295–308.
Tornberg, E. (2005). Effects of heat on meat proteins—Implications on structure and 
quality of meat products. Meat Science, 70, 493–508.
Wang, Q. 2013. Raman spectroscopic characterization and analysis of agricultural and 
biological systems. PhD dissertation, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa.
Wang, Q., Lonergan, S. M. and Yu, C. (2012). Rapid determination of pork sensory 
quality using Raman spectroscopy. Meat Science, 5, 4069–4085.
Xiong, Y. L., Brekke, C. J. and Leung, H. K. (1987). Thermal denaturation of muscle 
proteins from different species and muscle types as studied by differential scan-
ning calorimetry. Canadian Institute of Food Science and Technology Journal, 20, 
357–362.
Zając, A., Hanuza, J. and Dymińska, L. (2014). Raman spectroscopy in determina-
tion of horse meat content in the mixture with other meats. Food Chemistry, 156, 
333–338.
Zhao, M., Downey, G. and O’Donnell, C. P. (2015). Dispersive Raman spectroscopy 
and multivariate data analysis to detect offal adulteration of thawed beefburg-
ers. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 63, 1433–1441.

113
4
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of 
Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
Alicia Rodríguez, María J. Andrade, Mar Rodríguez, and Juan J. Córdoba 
CONTENTS
4.1 
Principles and Characteristics of Real-Time Polymerase Chain 
Reaction for Detecting and Quantifying Pathogens in Meat and 
Meat Products ............................................................................................. 114
4.1.1 Sample Preparation ....................................................................... 114
4.1.2 Main Considerations for qPCR .................................................... 116
4.1.3 Targets ............................................................................................. 117
4.1.4 Controls of the qPCR ..................................................................... 118
4.1.5 Validation ........................................................................................ 118
4.2 
qPCR for Detecting Bacterial Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products .... 119
4.2.1 qPCR for Detecting Bacteria Foodborne Infection ................... 119
4.2.1.1 Salmonella .......................................................................... 119
4.2.1.2 Listeria monocytogenes ......................................................122
4.2.1.3 Verotoxigenic E. coli ........................................................124
4.2.1.4 Campylobacter ...................................................................127
4.2.1.5 Yersinia ..............................................................................127
4.2.2 qPCR for Detecting Bacteria Foodborne Intoxications .............129
4.2.2.1 Staphylococcus aureus .......................................................129
4.2.2.2 Clostridium botulinum ...................................................... 131
4.3 
qPCR for Detecting Toxigenic Molds ...................................................... 132
4.4 
Reverse Transcription Quantitative PCR as a Tool for Evaluating Gene
 
Expression of Foodborne Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products ...........134
4.4.1 Salmonella .........................................................................................135
4.4.2 Listeria monocytogenes .....................................................................139
4.4.3 Shiga Toxin-Producing E. coli .......................................................140
4.4.4 Campylobacter jejuni ........................................................................140
4.4.5 Staphylococcus aureus ......................................................................141
4.4.6 Viruses ............................................................................................. 141
4.4.7 Ochratoxin A-Producing Penicillia ............................................. 142
4.5 
Conclusions ................................................................................................. 142
Acknowledgments .............................................................................................. 143
References ............................................................................................................. 143

114
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
4.1  Principles and Characteristics of Real-Time 
Polymerase Chain Reaction for Detecting and 
Quantifying Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
In the meat industry, there is a necessity of having available rapid microbio-
logical methods to ensure the safety of products. For such purposes, a wide 
range of protocols for detecting and/or quantifying pathogenic microorgan-
isms has been developed. Despite the fact that the results yielded by classical 
microbiological techniques based on the enrichment, isolation, and/or enu-
meration using selective culture media and the subsequent confirmation by 
biochemical and/or serological tests are generally adequate, they are laborious 
and time consuming. In recent years, many molecular techniques have been 
optimized for the detection of pathogens in meat and meat products. The most 
valuable molecular methods rely on the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 
They have demonstrated to be faster than the traditional techniques and allow 
a more specific and sensitive detection of pathogenic microorganisms. Within 
such methods, the real-time PCR (quantitative PCR [qPCR]) ones are the most 
valuable since they allow quantifying the level of pathogens apart from being 
more sensitive and less prone to cross-contamination risks than conventional 
PCR and have potential for automation (Hernández et al., 2009). Besides, qPCR 
procedures developed for detecting and quantifying pathogenic microor-
ganisms in meat and meat products requires less time for the analyses, less 
than 24 h in some cases, while this time is much higher (to seven days or even 
more depending on the pathogen) when using traditional methods. In addi-
tion, qPCR methods are able to detect and quantify different pathogens in the 
same reaction. Thus, the current trend is to develop multiplex qPCR methods 
to detect several pathogenic microorganisms. They are also very useful for 
detecting closely related species that display genetic variations requiring the 
use of different sets of primers for reliable detection (Postollec et al., 2011).
This chapter focuses on current qPCR methods that are available for detect-
ing and quantifying microbial pathogens of interest in meat and meat products.
4.1.1 Sample Preparation
DNA isolation is the first critical step of qPCR procedures to detect and/or quan-
tify pathogenic microorganisms in meat and meat products. Due to the fact that 
the DNA to be amplified is directly isolated from the meat matrix, its components 
can inhibit the subsequent amplification, which can cause false negative results 
or an underestimation of pathogen levels. Consequently, the elimination of such 
inhibitory substances from DNA is a paramount prerequisite for the success of 
the qPCR procedure. Thus, qPCR protocols have to be adapted for each meat or 
meat product type since each one has a different nature mainly based on their 
composition. Different methods of sample preparation to eliminate PCR inhibi-
tors from meat matrices have been reported included filtration, centrifugation, 

115
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
the use of detergents and organic solvents, enzyme treatment, dilution of the 
sample, the use of PCR components, flotation, and immunomagnetic separation 
(IMS) (Botteldoorn et al., 2008; Gordillo et al., 2014; Melero et al., 2011; Rodríguez 
et al., 2012b; Wolffs et al., 2005). Several commercial DNA extraction kits as well 
as in-house developed protocols are currently available to obtain DNA with 
high purity and quantitative yields. For instance, Gattuso et al. (2014) used a 
DNA extraction protocol based on a washing step with phosphate saline buffer 
(PBS) combined with a Chelex resin for detecting Listeria monocytogenes in pork 
meat. For the same pathogenic bacterium, Rodríguez-Lázaro et al. (2014) com-
pared simple boiling of the culture after washing the bacterial pellet with PBS, 
the use of a Chelex resin, and the QIAamp DNA Mini kit (QIAGEN), which con-
tains a silica column, obtaining the best results with the commercial kit. In gen-
eral, many commercial kits have proved to be adequate for a pathogen’s DNA 
extraction in meat and meat products.
After isolating the DNA, its quantity and quality should be checked. 
Measurement of absorbance is the most commonly used method for such 
purposes. For determining DNA purity, the OD260/OD280 ratio should be 
calculated. When this ratio is around 1.8, it indicates a good purity of the 
obtained DNA. The concentration of DNA can also be quickly estimated by 
agarose gel electrophoresis (Thermo Scientific. 2016).
Due to the fact that one of the limitations of qPCR methods consists of their 
high limit of quantification considering the microbiological criteria required by 
international legislations, nowadays their application for quantifying patho-
gens in meat and meat products generally requires a sample enrichment of a 
few hours prior to further preparation and thus yields appropriate sensitivity. 
Besides it has to be kept in mind that in most cases low levels of pathogenic 
bacteria are able to cause disease. Apart from allowing the concentration of 
the target microorganism, such an enrichment step diminishes the probabil-
ity of detecting dead microorganisms and dilutes the inhibitory food matrix 
components. However, it should be considered that the disadvantage of using 
an initial enrichment step is the impossibility to quantify the initial loads of 
pathogenic microorganisms (Postollec et al., 2011). Regarding the enrichment 
medium, both nonselective and selective media have been proposed. For 
example Gattuso et al. (2014) and Rodríguez-Lázaro et al. (2014) successfully 
used the selective Half Fraser Broth for enrichment of pork and poultry meat 
for L. monocytogenes. For Campylobacter spp., Bolton broth with selective sup-
plements has been normally used. However, the presence of blood in this 
medium could be problematic because of its PCR inhibitors. The omission of 
such a component in Bolton enrichment broth has not been reported to have 
a negative influence in Campylobacter recovery by qPCR in poultry samples 
(Melero et al., 2011). Rodríguez et al. (2016) used Mannitol Salt broth (MSB) 
for selective enrichment of Staphylococcus aureus from different kinds of meat 
products. On the contrary, the nonselective tryptone soy broth (TSB) modified 
by the addition of yeast extract has been used for detecting pathogenic Yersinia 
enterocolitica and Yersinia pseudotuberculosis (Thisted Lambertz et al., 2008a,b)

116
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Another important limitation of qPCR consists of the lack of differentiation 
between viable and dead cells. To circumvent this disadvantage, propidium 
monoazide (PMA) coupled with qPCR has been used in meat and meat prod-
ucts (Josefsen et al., 2010). Such DNA intercalating dye can only penetrate 
membranes of damaged cells, thus preventing the following PCR reaction 
(Barbau-Piednoir et al., 2014). However, this PMA treatment should not replace 
the initial enrichment for a rapid and reliable foodborne bacteria detection 
(Barbau-Piednoir et al., 2014). Controversial results have been obtained when 
performing treatment of samples with PMA. Therefore, Josefsen et al. (2010) 
obtained a good correlation between Campylobacter counts obtained by qPCR 
with PMA sample treatment and counts from culture-based enumeration in 
chicken carcass rinse and Pacholewicz et al. (2013) did not obtain concordant 
results when testing the same protocol in broiler chicken carcass rinse sam-
ples. On the other hand, Wolffs et al. (2005) developed a flotation method to be 
used prior to qPCR capable of selecting viable and viable nonculturable Cam-
pylobacter and Y. enterocolitica cells for being subsequently quantified by qPCR.
4.1.2 Main Considerations for qPCR
In qPCR methods, the accumulation of amplification products is continu-
ously monitored through the reaction by using fluorescent reporters without 
the necessity of post-PCR handling of the obtained products. The change in 
fluorescence during the reaction is measured by an instrument that combines 
thermal cycling with fluorescent dye scanning capability. The fluorescence 
intensity during qPCR is proportional to the amount of amplification products 
(Law et al., 2015). By plotting fluorescence against the number of cycles, the 
qPCR instrument generates an amplification curve that represents the accu-
mulation of PCR product over the duration of the entire reaction (Invitrogen, 
2008). The quantification cycle (Cq), also known as threshold cycle (Ct), is deter-
mined from the amplification plot and used to calculate the initial concentra-
tion of the target DNA because this value is inversely related to the amount 
of starting template (Invitrogen, 2008). Cq is the cycle number at which the 
fluorescent signal of the reaction crosses the threshold (Invitrogen, 2008).
Many fluorescence chemistries are available including nonspecific dyes, 
such as SYBR® Green, and sequence-specific primers or probes coupled to 
fluorescent dyes, including hydrolysis probes, fluorescence resonance energy 
transfer (FRET) probes, molecular beacons, and scorpions primers. SYBR 
Green chemistry and TaqMan® hydrolysis probes are the most commonly 
used technologies for detecting and quantifying pathogenic microorganism 
in meat and meat products by qPCR. As SYBR Green binding is not specific 
for a target DNA sequence this system can be readily used for different gene 
assays, it is inexpensive and flexible (Postollec et al., 2011). Regarding the Taq-
Man chemistry, this is more expensive than DNA-binding dye assays, but 
the presence of the hydrolysis probe ensures that only specific amplification 
products are measured (Postollec et al., 2011). Furthermore, the last technology 

117
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
allows the development of multiplex PCR reactions, although an important 
optimization procedure is needed (Postollec et al., 2011). When using SYBR 
Green dyes melting curve analysis should be performed to determine the 
specificity of qPCR procedure and assure accurate results. This is normally 
generated by the qPCR instrument and allows the calculation of the Tm value 
of the amplification products.
To estimate the initial DNA concentration and consequently the unknown 
target pathogen load in the analyzed meat or meat product, a linear standard 
curve based on tenfold serial dilutions (know concentrations) of the DNA 
should be set up. At least four but preferably six or more points should be 
included in the curve (Kavanagh et al., 2011). It has to be kept in mind that 
the concentrations of DNA chosen for the standard curve should cover the 
expected concentration range of the target DNA (Invitrogen, 2008). For con-
structing the standard curve, the Cq values of diluted reference material 
are plotted against the logarithm of the samples’ concentrations, number of 
template copies, or dilution factor (Raymaekers et al., 2009). When the Cq 
values of the analyzed meat or meat product samples are determined, they 
are correlated to a certain concentration by placement on the standard curve. 
It is recommended to use the same matrix as the one containing samples to 
be tested and the same target DNA sequence for constructing the standard 
curve as well as to include it on each experiment (Postollec et al., 2011).
Standard curves also allow for calculating the efficiency of the amplification 
reaction by using their slope (S) in the formula E = [10(−1/S)]−1 (Bustin et al., 2009). 
The acceptable range is generally between 90% and 110% (Raymaekers et al., 
2009). Furthermore, the coefficient of correlation (R2) derived from the stan-
dard curve must be between 0.99 and 0.999 (Raymaekers et al., 2009). Despite 
the fact that it is possible to automatically elaborate standard curves and 
calculate the efficiency using the software of the qPCR instruments, it 
can be manually determined.
4.1.3 Targets
The basis of the qPCR methods is the detection of a characteristic and spe-
cific DNA sequence in the DNA of the pathogen. Thus the design or selec-
tion of the primers and probes is a key factor for the correct detection of a 
pathogenic microorganism (Chapela et al., 2015). Although a wide variety 
of DNA targets have been selected for developing qPCR methods to detect 
microbial pathogens in meat and meat products, multicopy ribosomal RNA 
(rRNA) genes and those encoding virulence microbial factors have been the 
most commonly employed. rRNA genes have been commonly used because 
they span both variable and highly conserved sequences, are easily available 
from public databases for many species, and often result in sensitive detec-
tion due to their multicopy nature (Chapela et al., 2015; Postollec et al., 2011). 
Housekeeping genes involved in essential cellular processes have also been 
considered adequate for detecting pathogens (Bonjoch et al., 2010).

118
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
4.1.4 Controls of the qPCR
Owing to the fact that the qPCR is an instrumental technique, false negative 
and false positive results can be produced (Rodríguez-Lázaro and Hernández, 
2013). Consequently, proper controls must be carried out for monitoring the 
critical steps and assuring the validity of the results. Controls necessary for 
assessing the analytical performance of PCR methods have been summarized 
(Hernández et al., 2009). Process or amplification controls can be used to 
check the entire method or only the PCR, respectively. Positive and nega-
tive PCR controls and internal amplification control (IAC) are highly recom-
mended. Positive PCR control consists of a negative sample spiked with target 
DNA (Hernández et al., 2009; Postollec et al., 2011). Negative or nontemplate 
PCR control does not contain the target DNA and water is used instead of 
it (Hernández et al., 2009; Postollec et al., 2011). IAC consists of a nontarget 
DNA sequence present in the same sample reaction tube which is coamplified 
simultaneously with the target sequence, but with an amplicon size visually 
distinguishable from the target sequence (Hoorfar et al., 2004a,b). In a qPCR 
with an IAC, a control signal will be always produced when there is no target 
sequence present. When neither IAC nor target signal is produced, it indicates 
that the amplification reaction has been inhibited due to malfunction of the 
thermal cycler, incorrect PCR mixture, poor polymerase activity, and/or the 
presence of inhibitors in the sample matrix (Hoorfar et al., 2004a,b). Postollec 
et al. (2011) have proposed a Cq shift ≥1 between qPCR performed with the 
IAC alone and with the IAC and the sample as cut-off inhibition value.
The use of the abovementioned analytical controls also assures the accu-
rate quantification of the target pathogen. Additionally, to avoid false posi-
tive results due to sample contamination, precautionary measurements are 
required in the laboratory (Rodríguez-Lázaro and Hernández, 2013).
The most used controls for detecting pathogens in meat and meat products 
are IAC (Bonjoch et al., 2010; Josefsen et al., 2010; Thisted Lambertz et al., 
2008a,b). The controls are processed throughout the whole protocol in paral-
lel with samples to be analyzed (Postollec et al., 2011).
4.1.5 Validation
Despite the fact that many qPCR protocols have been reported for detecting 
and quantifying different pathogenic microorganisms in meat and meat prod-
ucts, they have not normally been implemented in the meat industry for routine 
analysis. This could be due to the lack of validation and/or standardization.
Validation of qPCR methods is necessary to ensure that their performance 
is equal or better when comparing with the conventional culture-based refer-
ence methods (Ceuppens et al., 2014). Validation of qPCR methods assures that 
the target pathogens are detected without false negative or positive results.
During the validation process, the performance characteristics and limita-
tions of a method are established. Validation also allow identification of the 
influences that may change these characteristics (Jones and Marengo, 2016).

119
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
Raymaekers et al. (2009) proposed practical guidelines for the validation of 
qPCR procedures. Apart from studying the amplification efficiency and using 
appropriate controls as previously mentioned, checking of several parameters 
such as precision, linearity, trueness, limit of detection, and specificity, among 
others, was recommended when validating qPCR methods before their appli-
cation for routine analysis (Raymaekers et al., 2009). Additionally, the use of 
the specific meat matrix to be checked is vital for detecting potential inhibitors 
and determining the competition of the target pathogen in the presence of the 
natural microbial population (Gorski and Csordas, 2010).
There are some commercial qPCR methods that have been validated 
by official independent organizations, such as the Association of Official 
Analytical Chemists (AOAC), for the detection of foodborne bacterial patho-
gens including shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli, S. aureus, L. monocyto-
genes, Salmonella, and Campylobacter.
On the other hand, the International Standardization Organization (ISO) 
has provided guidelines to detect foodborne pathogens by qPCR. Concretely, 
ISO 22119:2011 (Anonymous, 2011) is focused on the general requirements for 
food testing by means of qPCR.
4.2  qPCR for Detecting Bacterial Pathogens 
in Meat and Meat Products
Microorganisms that are involved in foodborne illness include Salmonella 
spp., L. monocytogenes, Campylobacter spp., and E. coli O157:H7 are known to be 
responsible for the majority of foodborne infections outbreaks (Velusamy et al., 
2010). A TaqMan qPCR procedure to simultaneously detect 20 foodborne patho-
gens, including all of the abovementioned pathogenic bacteria, in complex food 
matrices such as meat has been reported (Cremonesi et al., 2014). Although no 
meat matrix interferences were observed, the sensitivity of this method in artifi-
cially contaminated meat matrices ranged between 108 and 104 cfu/g. Thus, this 
qPCR has the potential to be a powerful tool for a high-throughput screening 
for multiple pathogens, enabling simultaneous processing of several samples 
and reducing the total time required for analysis. However, for a more sensitive 
quantification specific qPCR should be conducted to analyze each of the most 
common and important pathogenic bacteria. In this section, qPCR methods to 
detect bacteria involved in foodborne infections and foodborne intoxications in 
meat and meat products will be separately analyzed.
4.2.1 qPCR for Detecting Bacteria Foodborne Infection
4.2.1.1 Salmonella
The European Commission through regulation No. 2073/2005 (European 
Commission. 2005) established EN/ISO 6579  (Anonymous, 2002) as the 

120
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
official analytical reference method for detection of Salmonella in foods. 
This procedure is a culture-based method that includes pre-enrichment 
and selective enrichment steps and subsequent plating in selective media 
and final confirmatory tests. This takes four to five days of analysis. The 
scientific community, in response to the demands of the European Com-
mission and the industrial sector, aimed to identify novel molecular-based 
methods of high accuracy, specificity, sensitivity, and reduced time of 
analysis for Salmonella detection (Pasquali et al., 2014). Thus, several qPCR 
methods based on the target sequences the virulence hilA, invA, Sal, and 
ttrRSBCA genes have been developed for rapid and sensitive detection 
of Salmonella in meat carcasses (Krämer et al., 2011; Löfström et al., 2009; 
McCabe et al., 2011; Zheng et al., 2014) and pork and meat products (Deli-
bato et al., 2013; Pasquali et al., 2014).
Most of the developed PCR methods include an enrichment step of 7–24 h at 
37°C (Figure 4.1) to increase the number of the target Salmonella at detectable 
levels (Martin et al., 2012; Zheng et al., 2014). Although most of the reported 
Detection of Salmonella by qPCR 
Detection of Salmonella
by ISO 6579, 2004
(traditional culture-based 
techniques)
Total time of
analysis 2 days 
Total time of
analysis 7 days 
Meat/meat products
Enrichment (7–24 h at 37°C)
qPCR with IAC
(Targets for design primers and probes)
Buffered peptone water
DNA extraction
(DNeasy tissue kit,
Martín et al. 2012)
ttrRSBCA gene
hilA gene
invA gene Sal gene
Immunomagnetic
separation
Limit of detection 1–100 cfu/g
(Alves et al., 2016; Delibato et al., 2013; Löfström et al., 2009;
McCabe et al., 2011; Pasquali et al., 2014; Zheng et al., 2014)
ONE Broth Salmonella medium 
FIGURE 4.1
Flow diagram of the detection of Salmonella in meat and meat products by quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) protocols validated with ISO 6579–2004. IAC, internal 
amplification control; ONE, oxoid noel enrichment. (From Rodríguez, A. et al, Food Control, 60, 
302–308, 2016.)

121
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
qPCR methods include buffered peptone water as culture medium for enrich-
ment, it has been demonstrated that oxoid noel enrichment (ONE) Broth Salmo-
nella medium increases the growth of Salmonella in the presence of competitive 
microbial population in meat products compared with buffered peptone water 
(Delibato et al., 2013). Thus, ONE Broth could be used in enrichment protocol 
in order to minimize the effect of the competitive microflora naturally present 
in meat samples. In addition, in meat and meat products, a pre-PCR treatment 
consisting of a treatment with the DNeasy Tissue kit could be recommended to 
reduce the risk of false negative results and increase the probability of Salmonella 
detection, since PCR inhibitors present in these complex food matrices or in the 
enrichment media would be eliminated (Martin et al., 2012). Some of the devel-
oped qPCR methods have been validated against the reference culture-based 
method, ISO 6579 (Anonymous, 2002), providing an alternative testing protocol 
to this reference microbiological method. Thus, Löfström et al. (2009) reported a 
qPCR method that included an IAC, making it useful for detecting Salmonella in 
meat. This method was validated in comparative and collaborative trials, based 
on the recommendations from the Nordic organization for validation of alterna-
tive microbiological methods (NordVal) of a same-day, noncommercial qPCR 
method for detection of Salmonella in meat and carcass swabs. This method 
includes a short pre-enrichment of 18 h in buffered peptone water followed by 
automated DNA purification and targets a part of the ttrRSBCA locus specific 
for Salmonella. This locus, located in the Salmonella pathogenicity island 2, is 
essential for tetrathionate-based anaerobic respiration and significant for Salmo-
nella survival and outgrowth in anaerobic competitive environments (Hensel 
et al., 1999; Pasquali et al., 2014). The detection level of this method was between 
1 and 100 cfu/25 g of sample. The ttrRSBCA locus has been used to design new 
primers and a hydrolysis fluorescent probe for accurate and validated detection 
of Salmonella spp. by qPCR using IAC (Delibato et al., 2013).
Furthermore, McCabe et al. (2011) developed a DNA and a RNA qPCR 
validated assays amplifying a 270 bp region of the hilA gene of Salmonella 
enterica serovars which includes an IAC that coamplified with the hilA gene 
to monitor potential PCR inhibitors and ensure successful amplification. The 
hilA target gene is located in the Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 (SPI1) and 
regulates the expression of Salmonella invasion genes (Pasquali et al., 2014). 
Both DNA and RNA PCR methods include an adapted two-step enrichment 
protocol before DNA or RNA extraction that is able to detect between 1 and 
10 cfu per carcass swab.
Different validated qPCR methods for accurate detection of Salmonella 
using as the target the invA, ttrRSBCA, and Sal genes (Figure 4.1) have been 
also reported (Zheng et al., 2014). The former authors reported qPCR proto-
cols combined with IMS for detecting healthy and heat-injured Salmonella 
typhimurium on raw duck wings increasing sensitivity of the methods. From 
the developed qPCR-IMS protocols that used primers targeting Sal genes 
showed lower limit of detection and higher amplification efficiency than 
those obtained with the invA and ttrRSBCA-based primers (Zheng et al., 2014).

122
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Apart from simplex qPCR methods to detect Salmonella, a multiplex pro-
tocol that detect this pathogen and other worrying pathogenic microorgan-
ism in chicken meat such as Campylobacter spp. has been recently developed 
(Alves et al., 2016). For the Salmonella gene, the invA was targeted. This 
method showed a sensitivity of 1 cfu of each of these pathogens per milliliter 
of rinse after 24 h of the selective enrichment of Campylobacter spp. and the 
nonselective enrichment of Salmonella spp.
When the sensitivity and specificity of validated qPCR methods for Sal-
monella detection are tested possible differences between artificially and 
naturally contaminated meat and meat products should be considered, since 
during their shelf life, the number of Salmonella-stressed cells and the related 
positive deviation might be increased (Pasquali et al., 2014). To avoid dif-
ferences on sensitivity of the new qPCR validated method due to stressed 
cells, Pasquali et al. (2014) evaluated the relative accuracy, sensitivity, and 
specificity of a qPCR targeting the ttrRSBCA locus, for detection of poten-
tially stressed Salmonella in naturally contaminated pork cuts from packag-
ing, during storage at retail and at the consumer’s house, in comparison with 
ISO 6579:2004. The same authors reported that the qPCR assay targeting the 
ttrRSBCA locus is an accurate, sensitive, and specific method for the rapid 
and routine detection of Salmonella spp. also in naturally contaminated pork 
cuts subject to physical stresses. Thus, the reference ISO method might be 
applied only on positive samples for confirmatory and isolation purposes, 
which are mandatory in epidemiological investigations.
Finally, the investigation of Salmonella serotypes in meat and meat prod-
ucts could be needed, especially when the traditional culture-based method 
according to ISO 6579 (Anonymous, 2002) is followed. Recently, Mauris-
chat et al. (2015) developed a validated multiplex qPCR assay targeting the 
partial sequences of the safA, fliAIS200, fljB-hin, and hin-iroB genes and the 
pUC18/19 plasmid as IAC. This protocol detects Salmonella enteritidis and 
Salmonella typhimurium and differentiates Salmonella serovars in 24 h after 
sampling with a detection probability of 100% between 3 and 5 cfu in 25 g of 
sample, showing a direct correlation with serovars determined by the tradi-
tional method using slide agglutination according to the White–Kauffman–
Le Minor scheme (Grimont and Weill, 2007). Thus, this qPCR assay could be 
used to serotype Salmonella isolates from meat and meat products.
4.2.1.2 Listeria monocytogenes
The current ISO 11290-1 standard method (Anonymous, 2004) for the detec-
tion of L. monocytogenes that includes two consecutive enrichment steps in 
the selective medium Half Fraser Broth and full concentrations, followed by 
plating out on two selective solid media (PALCAM and ALOA) and sub-
sequent presumptive colonies confirmation through hemolysis and bio-
chemical tests (Anonymous, 2004), usually takes more than seven days. The 
availability of rapid methods such as qPCR is one of the most important 

123
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
advancements to managing L. monocytogenes along the meat chain, allow-
ing faster hazard analysis critical control points (HACCP) verification and 
positive release of finished food products (Gattuso et al., 2014). Several qPCR 
methods have been developed for rapid and sensitive detection of L. mono-
cytogenes in meat and meat products targeting different virulence hlyA, inlA, 
prfA genes (Figure 4.2; Bolocan et al., 2016; Dalmasso et al., 2014; De Cesare 
et al., 2014; Heo et al., 2014). From these target sequences, the hlyA gene encod-
ing for the virulence factor listeriolisin O has been the most frequently used 
to design primers and probes for developing qPCR protocols (Rodríguez-
Lázaro et al., 2004; De Cesare et al., 2014). Until now, the developed methods 
do not have sufficient sensitivity for direct detection of such pathogens in 
meat samples without the use of an enrichment procedure (Bolocan et al., 
2016; Dalmasso et al., 2014).
Thus, qPCR methods for accurate and sensitive detection of L. monocyto-
genes in meat and meat products should include an enrichment step around 
24–48 h at 37°C to increase the number of the target L. monocytogenes to 
Meat/meat products
1. Enrichment in Half Frasser
Broth (24 h at 37ºC)
qPCR with IAC
(Targets for design primers and probes)
Detection of Listeria monocytogenes by qPCR
Detection of Listeria monocytogenes
by ISO 11290-1
(traditional culture-based
techniques) 
hilA gene
inlA gene
prfA gene
Immunomagnetic
separation
(Bolocan et al., 2016; Dalmasso et al., 2014; De Cesare et al., 2014;
Gattuso et al., 2014; Heo et al., 2014; Rodríguez-Lázaro et al., 2004)
Total time of
analysis 2–3 days
Total time of
analysis 7 days
2. Enrichment in Frasser Broth
(24 h at 37ºC)
DNA extraction
(DNeasy tissue kit,
Martín et al., 2012) 
Limit of detection 1–10 cfu/g
FIGURE 4.2
Flow diagram of the detection of Listeria monocytogenes in meat and meat products by qPCR 
validated with International Standardization Organization (ISO) 11290-1. IAC, internal ampli-
fication control; ONE, oxoid noel enrichment. (From Rodríguez, A. et al, Food Control, 60, 
302–308, 2016.)

124
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
detectable levels (Figure 4.2). Dalmasso et al. (2014) demonstrated that the 
use of the second enrichment broth in the qPCR reduces time for a confirmed 
result from seven days needed for the ISO standard procedure performance 
to three days. Besides, Gattuso et al. (2014) reported that a combination of 
an incubation step in 100 mL of Half Fraser Broth for 24 h coupled to a DNA 
extraction and a qPCR assay could detect about 8 cfu of L. monocytogenes 
per sample in less than 27 h. This approach is fully compatible with the 
ISO standard for detection of L. monocytogenes if 1:10 and 1:5 dilutions are 
used, providing results more rapidly (27 h vs. 7 days) and cost-effectively 
(five times cheaper, Gattuso et al., 2014). Recently, Bolocan et al. (2016) dem-
onstrated that the analysis of the second enrichment of the ISO method by 
qPCR was more sensitive for the detection of L. monocytogenes than when the 
ISO method was used alone.
4.2.1.3 Verotoxigenic E. coli
Verotoxin-producing E. coli (VTEC) are a group of foodborne pathogenic 
E. coli strains that produce two cytotoxins called shiga-like toxins or vero-
toxins (Stx1 and Stx2). VTEC can cause diarrhea and hemorrhagic colitis and 
may lead to hemolytic uremic syndrome. Although E. coli O157:H7 is the 
serotype that has been linked to most of the outbreaks of foodborne dis-
eases, other VTEC serotypes such as O26, O103, O145, O91, O146, and O111 
are related to sporadic cases (EFSA, 2015). This diversity of microorganisms is 
a difficulty when designing primers for qPCR. Despite the fact that it would 
be easier to screen for the presence of the shiga-like toxins gene sequences, 
its value remains controversial, since not all VTEC have been proven to be 
clinically significant in humans. Furthermore, each shiga-like toxin contains 
several subtypes which differ in their sequence gene, biological activity, and 
association with disease which complicates the design of appropriate targets 
(Gyles, 2007). The Stx1 type is divided into three subtypes: Stx1a, Stx1c, and 
Stx1d, and the Stx2 have been classified into seven subtypes: Stx2a, Stx2b, 
Stx2c, Stx2d, Stx2e, Stx2f, and Stx2g (Scheutz et al., 2012). Therefore, for a cor-
rect Stx screening, the greatest amount of Stx subtypes should be considered. 
For all these reasons, there are many methods of qPCR for the detection of 
VTEC in meat products based on different targets. Different virulence genes 
such as stx1, stx2, and eae, which encode the bacterial outer-membrane pro-
tein intimin, have been targeted to assess the presence of VTEC in minced 
beef (Verhaegen et al., 2016), processed meat product (Bardasi et al., 2015), 
and lamb (Osés et al., 2010). Other authors have developed multiplex qPCR 
procedures to detect all known stx gene variants in ground and minced beef 
(Brusa et al., 2015; Derzelle et al., 2011).
A commercial method known as the “BAX® System real-time PCR Assay” 
was approved by the United States Department of Agriculture-Food Safety 
and Inspection Service (USDA-FSIS) and AOAC for VTEC detection in raw 
ground beef and beef trim (DuPont, 2014). The system amplifies and detects 

125
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
the virulence genes stx and eae in less than an hour, and allows the screening 
of samples containing any of the top six non-O157 serogroups. Furthermore, 
there is a specific kit for detecting E. coli O157:H7 certified by AENOR and 
another kit, the “BAX System Real-Time PCR STEC Suite” for detecting O26, 
O45, O103, O111, O121, and O145 serogroups recommended by USDA-FSIS.
The ISO/TS 13136:2012 (Anonymous, 2012) describes a multiplex qPCR tar-
geting the virulence genes eae, stx1 and stx2, and after the samples result 
positive for the presence of stx2 gene are tested for E. coli O104 serogroup-
associated gene. Positive samples for the presence of the stx1 and/or stx2 in 
association with the eae gene were tested for the detection of E. coli O103, 
O111, O145, O157, O26, serogroup-associated genes. When such genes are 
detected, the isolation of the strain is needed to confirm the presence of the 
stx genes in addition to relevant virulence factor in the same live cell while 
excluding the presence of free DNA or free stx phages in the enrichment cul-
ture (EFSA, 2013). A sensitive multiplex qPCR using a melting curve analysis 
for simultaneously detecting eight serogroups of VTEC has been developed 
to sensitive detection of specific VTEC serotypes during preliminary screen-
ings (Singh and Mustapha, 2015).
In this sense, methods in which the combination of virulence genes with 
serogroup-specific genes such as the wzx (O antigen flippase) and wzy 
(O antigen polymerase) genes in minced meat and ground beef have been 
developed (Kagkli et al., 2011; Perelle et al., 2007; Hara-Kudo et al., 2016). Nev-
ertheless, other authors have published a duplex-specific mRNA-based qPCR 
tests for detection and quantification of viable E. coli O157:H7 in ready-to-eat 
(RTE) meat products. This assay includes a combination of serotype-specific 
markers of E. coli O157:H7 such as the rfbE and fliCh7 genes, encoding the 
O157 antigen and the H7 flagellar antigen, respectively, to ensure specific-
ity in the detection of this pathogenic microorganism (Gordillo et al., 2014). 
Recently, these two targets have been used in the commercial validated 
“Thermo Scientific SureTect Escherichia coli O157:H7” procedure through the 
AOAC as well (Cloke et al., 2015).
Finally, another E. coli O157:H7-specific qPCR assay targeting the highly 
conserved mutation at position +93 of the uidA (β-glucuronidase) gene in 
such pathogen has been used in raw ground meat for its accurate detection 
(Miszczycha et al., 2012).
Detection limits of the listed methods are variable (Table 4.1), ranging 
between 0.25 and 104 cfu/g, but most of them are below 100 cfu/g, the advis-
able limit of this microbial group in most foods. All assays include a previ-
ous enrichment ranging between 6 and 24 h (Table 4.1). From those methods 
the one developed by Gordillo et al. (2014) may be the most suitable for the 
detection of E. coli O157:H7 in meat and meat products. Regarding the assay 
proposed by Singh and Mustapha (2015), it seems to be the most appropriate 
qPCR for simultaneously detecting eight serogroups of VTEC in different 
meat products. Finally, the multiplex qPCR developed by Brusa et al. (2015) is 
the most appropriate to detect all known stx gene variants in meat.

126
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 4.1
Target Sequence, Meat Matrix, Sample Preparation, Technology, and Limit of Detection for qPCR Detection of E. Coli VTEC in Meat 
and Meat Products
Target Sequence
Matrix
Sample 
Preparation
qPCR 
Technology
Limit of Detection/
Quantification
References
stx1 and stx2 genes
Minced beef and cattle 
carcass
Enrichment 20 h
TaqMan
0.25 cfu/g
Verhaegen et al. (2016).
stx1, stx2, and eae genes
Meat product
Lamb
Ground beef, beef trim
Enrichment 18–24 h
Enrichment 18 h 
Enrichment 9–12 h
TaqMan
TaqMan
Scorpion/
TaqMan
1–5 copies per 
reaction
3–4 log cfu/g
4 log cfu/mL
ISO/TS 13136:2012
Osés et al. (2010)
0BAX System (DuPont, 
2014)
stx1a–stx1d genes
stx2a–stx2g genes
Ground beef
Minced beef
Enrichment 20 h
Enrichment 18 h
SYBR Green
TaqMan
2 log cfu/mL
2 log cfu/g
Brusa et al. (2015)
Derzelle et al. (2011)
wzxO26, wzxO45, wzxO103, wzxO111, wzxO121 
genes, glycosyl transferase gene 
(O104), uidA gene (O157)
Ground beef, ground 
chicken, ground turkey
Enrichment 6 h
SYTO 9, HRM 
dye
10 cfu/25 g
Singh and Mustapha 
(2015)
stx, wzxO26, wzxO103, wzxO141, wzxO145, 
wbdIO111, rfbEO157 genes
stx1a, stx2a–stx2d, eae, wzxO26, 
wzxO103, ihp1O145, wbdIO111, rfbEO157 
genes
Ground beef
Minced meat
Enrichment 20–24 h
Enrichment 18–24
TaqMan
TaqMan
10 cfu/25 g
2–10 cfu/g
Hara-Kudo et al. (2016)
Kagkli et al. (2011)
rfbEO157 and fliCh7 genes
Raw beef
Dry-cured ham, dry-cured 
pork loin, dry-fermented 
sausages (“chorizo,” 
“salchichón” and “salami”), 
cooked ham, cooked turkey 
breast, chopped, mortadella
Enrichment 9–24 h
Enrichment 6 h
TaqMan
SYBR Green
–
1 cfu/g
Thermo Sci. Sure Test 
(Cloke et al., 2015)
Gordillo et al. (2014)
uidA gene (O157)
Raw ground meat
Enrichment 24 h
TaqMan
2 log cfu/mL
Miszczycha et al. (2012)
HRM, high-resolution melting; ISO, International Standardization Organization; VTEC, verotoxin-producing E. coli.

127
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
4.2.1.4 Campylobacter
Since Campylobacter detection by traditional culture-based methods is prob-
lematic owing to its presence in low concentration and its sensitivity to cul-
ture conditions (Botteldoorn et al., 2008), qPCR methods seem to be more 
adequate for its detection.
As illustrated in Table 4.2, most qPCR methods were developed for chicken 
due to the fact that poultry is often implicated as a main source of human 
infections with Campylobacter spp.
For the detection of Campylobacter spp., two different alternatives have 
been proposed depending on the whole genus or the most important species 
(Campylobacter jejuni, Campylobacter Coli, and Campylobacter lari). The detec-
tion of Campylobacter genus without differentiating the species may be an 
ideal approach from a risk assessment point of view, and it is particularly 
based on the thermotolerant C. jejuni, C. coli, and C. lari (Chapela et al., 2015).
rRNA gene sequences, mainly 16S, have been applied for specific detection 
of Campylobacter genus and/or the three species (Table 4.2).
In the case of the differentiation of the thermotolerant species, the design 
of appropriate primers and probes is a challenge since such species are 
remarkably similar to each other in their genome sequences (He et al., 2010). 
Different genes have been targeted for each species (Table 4.2).
Botteldoorn et al. (2008) evaluated the ability of three qPCR methods, two 
of them already described, to quantify Campylobacter genus, thermotolerant 
Campylobacter (Josefsen et al., 2004), and C. jejuni in chicken carcass rinses. 
The most sensitive and specific method was the first one, based on the Taq-
Man technology (Table 4.2). The other two methods used SYBR Green but 
they were not appropriate because of cross-reactions with other species 
closely related with Campylobacter. Consistently, most of the published qPCR 
for detecting and quantifying Campylobacter in meat and meat products have 
used the TaqMan technology (Table 4.2).
On the other hand, Botteldoorn et al. (2008) compared the qPCR results 
with those from traditional culture-based methods, obtaining lower detec-
tion sensitivity than from the latter. They suggested the presence of viable but 
non-culturable or dead Campylobacter spp. and the sensitivity and difficulty of 
enumerating them as the reason for such underestimation. This feature has 
also been established by other authors working with Campylobacter detection.
The described qPCR methods for detecting Campylobacter in meat and 
meat products are generally characterized for not having low detection lim-
its, although a few of them are able to detect as low as 1 cfu/g (Table 4.2).
4.2.1.5 Yersinia
Several qPCR protocols mainly using TaqMan technology have been reported 
for detecting and quantifying pathogenic Yersinia in meat and meat products 
(Table 4.2). Most of them have been developed for Y. enterocolitica and employ 

128
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 4.2
Target Sequence, Meat Matrix, Sample Preparation, Technology, and Limit of Detection for qPCR Detection of Pathogenic Campylo-
bacter and Yersinia Species in Meat and Meat Products
Microorganisms
Target Genes
Matrix
Sample 
Preparation
qPCR 
Technology
Limit of Detection/
Quantification
References
Campylobacter jejuni, 
Campylobacter coli, 
Campylobacter lari
hipO, cdtA, pepT
Chicken (skin)
24 h selective 
enrichment
TaqMan IAC
1 cfu/g
He et al. (2010)
C. jejuni, C. coli, C. lari
16S rRNA
Chicken rinse 
(skin)
Flotation
Hybridiza-
tion probes
8.6 × 102 cfu/mL
Wolffs et al. (2005)
C. jejuni, C. coli, C. lari, 
Campylobacter upsaliensis
bipA, cje0832
Meat and meat 
products
Selective enrichment TaqMan
IAC
1–5 cfu/g
Bonjoch et al. (2010)
Campylobacter spp.
16S rRNA
Chicken carcass 
rinse
TaqMan
2 × 103 cfu/carcass
Botteldoorn et al. 
(2008)
C. jejuni, C. coli, C. lari
16S rRNA
Chicken carcass 
rinse
PMA
TaqMan
IAC
102 cfu/mL
Josefsen et al. (2010)
C. jejuni
rpoB
Chicken, turkey
18–48 h selective 
enrichment
SYBR® Green 1–10 cfu/g or mL
Rantsiou et al. (2010); 
Melero et al. (2011)
Yersinia enterocolitica
ail
Ground beef, 
cold-smoked 
sausage, raw pork
18–20 h nonselective 
enrichment
TaqMan
IAC
5.5–55 cfu/10g
Thisted Lambertz 
et al. (2008)
Yersinia enterocolitica
ail
Ground pork
24 h selective 
enrichment
TaqMan
≤1 cfu/g
Jourdan et al. (2000)
Y. enterocolitica
ail
Pork
16–18 h nonselective 
enrichment
TaqMan
1–10 cfu/g
Fredriksson-Ahomaa 
et al. (2007)
Yersinia pseudotuberculosis
ail
Ground beef
18–24 h nonselective 
enrichment
TaqMan
IAC
28 cfu/10g
Thisted Lambertz 
et al. (2008)
Yersinia pestis
Virulence plasmids 
(pPCP1, pMT1), cnp60
Ground beef
TaqMan
102 cfu/g
Amoako et al. (2010)
IAC, internal amplification control; PMA, propidium monoazide; qPCR, quantitative polymerase chain reaction.

129
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
the chromosomally located virulence-associated gene ail (Table 4.2). Such 
protocols are of great interest since some difficulties are associated with the 
isolation of pathogenic Y. enterocolitica consisting of its low number in the 
samples and the presence of competing microbial population (Fredriksson-
Ahomaa and Korkeala, 2003). The ability of the ail gene to detect Y. pseudotu-
berculosis has been also proven (Table 4.2). Thisted Lambertz et al. (2008a,b) 
reported a multiplex qPCR assay for the simultaneous detection and differ-
entiation of Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis based on the ail gene. 
However, the utility of this gene seems to be limited due to the fact that it 
is also found in some nonpathogenic strains of Y. enterocolitica (Fredriksson-
Ahomaa and Korkeala, 2003).
For the detection of Y. enterocolitica, its specific region of the 16SrRNA gene 
and the plasmid-borne virulence gene yadA have also been described in pork 
and chicken samples (Wolffs et al., 2005).
qPCR methods for detecting pathogenic Yersinia spp. other than Y. enteroco-
litica and Y. pseudotuberculosis in meat and meat products are scarce (Table 4.2). 
Concretely, Amoako et al. (2010) described qPCR assays involving four primer 
sets and their corresponding probes based on two virulence plasmids able to 
distinguish Yersinia pestis from the various Yersinia and other bacterial spe-
cies tested. They designed an additional primer and probe set based on the 
cnp60 chromosomal gene for distinguishing Y. pestis and Y. pseudotuberculosis 
from the various Yersinia and other bacterial species tested.
4.2.2 qPCR for Detecting Bacteria Foodborne Intoxications
4.2.2.1 Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcal foodborne poisoning is an intoxication produced by con-
sumption of foods containing high enough amounts of preformed staph-
ylococcal enterotoxins (Argudín et al., 2010). Staphylococcus aureus is a 
recognized causative agent of this poisoning and has been considered 
the main representative of the genus Staphylococcus capable of produc-
ing enterotoxins (SEs) (Podkowik et al., 2013). However, some coagulase 
negative Staphylococci strains showing enterotoxigenic capacity have been 
found in Spanish dry-cured hams (Rodríguez et al., 1996) and even in 
starter cultures (Zell et al., 2008).
The correct choice of the target sequence to design primers is essential for 
a good power of discrimination and sensitivity of a qPCR method. Several 
qPCR procedures to detect S. aureus on meat and meat products are based 
on different staphylococcal genes, coding genes for thermonuclease (nuc), 
chromosomal DNA fragment (Sa442), methicillin resistance (mecA), and heat 
shock protein (htra) (Chiang et al., 2007; Cremonesi et al., 2014; Martinon and 
Wilkinson, 2011; Table 4.3). Nevertheless, these target genes are not related to 
the production of SEs, and not all S. aureus are enterotoxin-producers. In this 
sense, other simplex or multiplex qPCR procedures based on genes involved 

130
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 4.3
Target Sequence, Meat Matrix, Sample Preparation, Technology, and Limit of Detection for qPCR Detection of Toxin-Producing 
Staphylococcus aureus and Clostridium botulinum in Meat and Meat Products
Microorganisms
Target Sequence
Matrix
Sample 
Preparation
qPCR 
Technology
Limit of 
Detection/
Quantification
References
Staphylococcus aureus
nuc gene
Ham, chicken, raw 
minced meat
Enrichment 18 h
SYBR Green
2 cfu/g
Martinon and 
Wilkinson (2011)
16S rRNA, nuc, 
mecA, PVL genes
Meat (beef, pork, 
poultry) and deli meat 
(chicken, ham. turkey)
Primary enrichment 
18–20 h
Second enrichment 
18–20 h
TaqMan
–
Velasco et al. (2014)
htrA gene
Pork sausage
Direct qPCR
TaqMan
1pg genomic DNA Cremonesi et al. (2014)
Sa422 gene
Pork
Inmunomagnetic 
separation 30 min
SYBR Green
9.6 cfu/g
Ma et al. (2014)
conserved regions 
of enterotoxin 
genes
Dry-cured ham, 
dry-cured pork loin, 
dry-fermented 
sausages, cooked ham, 
mortadella
Enrichment 8 h
SYBR Green
2–40 cfu/g
Rodríguez et al. (2016)
Clostridium botulinum
BoNT/A,
sausage
–
TaqMan
100 spores/mL
Yoon et al. (2005)
BoNT/A, BoNT/B, 
BoNT/E, and 
BoNT/F gene
“foie gras” salami, meat 
juice and homogenized 
meat
Sausages, canned meat, 
salami, meat juice and 
homogenized meat, 
blood sausage
Enrichment 48 h
Enrichment 4 days
TaqMan
TaqMan
103–104 cfu/mL
103–104 cfu/mL
Fach et al. (2009, 
2011)
Fenicia et al. (2011)
NTNH gene
“foie gras”
Enrichment 48 h
TaqMan
103–104 cfu/mL
Fach et al. (2009)
qPCR, quantitative polymerase chain reaction.

131
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
in the production of several SEs have been developed (Letertre et al., 2003; 
Rodríguez et al., 2016; Table 4.3).
The qPCR methods designed for screening single genes encoding each SE 
require several sets of specific primers targeting each SE gene. Therefore, a 
rapid and specific method is still necessary able to detect the potential pro-
duction of all the described SEs using universal primers. Sharma et al. (2000) 
reported a single-reaction multiplex PCR assay using a universal toxin gene 
forward primer (SA-U) in combination with various toxin-specific reverse 
primers for detecting SE genes between A and E from pure cultures of 
S. aureus. Letertre et al. (2003) designed a qPCR using such a forward primer 
and another universal reverse primer suitable to check for SE genes from A 
to J but not for the remaining SE genes. Rodríguez et al. (2016) developed 
a SYBR Green-based qPCR procedure for detecting most of the described 
staphylococcal SE (A to V) in meat products.
Detection limits of the listed methods are variable (Table 4.3) but all are 
below 100 cfu/g, the advisable limit of this microbial group in most foods. 
Considering all the abovementioned methods, it seems that the method 
developed by Rodríguez et al. (2016) may be the most suitable for the detec-
tion of enterotoxigenic Staphylococci in meat and meat products. In this pro-
cedure, the detection limits were about 2–40 cfu/g after an 8 h enrichment 
period at 30°C, and the total time for assay completion was approximately 
12 h. This qPCR method offers a useful, rapid, and efficient tool for screening 
SEs-producing Staphylococci in meat products.
4.2.2.2 Clostridium botulinum
Foodborne botulism is caused by the ingestion of foods containing botuli-
num neurotoxin (BoNT). BoNT is produced by some species of the genus 
Clostridium, particularly Clostridium botulinum, but some strains of Clos-
tridium baratii and Clostridium bytiricum can also produce it. BoNTs can also 
be separated into one of seven distinct serotypes (A–G) on the basis of the 
immunological characteristics of its botulinum toxin. Moreover, five immu-
nologically or genetically distinct BoNT/A subtypes, five BoNT/B subtypes, 
six BoNT/E subtypes, and three BoNT/F subtypes have been identified 
(Satterfield et al., 2010).
Several qPCR procedures to detect C. botulinum on meat and meat product 
rely on different BoNT genes. Yoon et al. (2005) have designed primers for 
detecting only the BoNT/A gene, while other authors have proposed qPCR 
methods for identifying and typing BoNT-producing C. botulinum types A, 
B, E, and F using a specific target based on the BoNT/A, BoNT/B, BoNT/E, 
and BoNT/F genes on meat and meat products (Fach et al., 2009, 2011; Fenicia 
et al., 2011).
Another strategy consists of using universal primers that recognize all 
BoNT genes, but the nucleotide diversity among the BoNT genes may present 
a potential problem (Hauser et al., 1995). Nonetheless, BoNTs are generated 

132
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
as part of a progenitor toxin complex and a conserved component among 
serotypes is nontoxic nonhemagglutinin (NTNH) (East and Collins, 1994). 
These authors demonstrated that the gene encoding NTNH reveals a high 
level of similarity and is present in all strains that produce BoNTs while it 
is missing in nontoxic strains. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the cluster of 
genes associated with the BoNT gene demonstrates that the presence of the 
NTNH gene is directly upstream of the BoNT gene in all tested toxin types 
(Raphael and Andreadis, 2007). A qPCR assay based on the detection of the 
NTNH gene has been developed; its specificity in naturally contaminated 
samples of “foie gras” has been also shown (Fach et al., 2009).
Detection limits of the listed methods are higher than methods for detect-
ing C. botulinum (Table 4.3), ranging between 102 and 104 cfu/g. All assays 
include a previous enrichment ranging between 48 h and four days, except-
ing the protocol of Yoon et al. (2005). This assay was the most sensitive 
and fast, but only detected the BoNT/A gene (Table 4.3). Fenicia et al. (2011) 
included an external amplification control that gives more robustness to the 
technique, but the disadvantage was that the enrichment period is too long.
4.3 qPCR for Detecting Toxigenic Molds
Only a few qPCR methods have been developed for detecting and quan-
tifying foodborne molds in meat and meat products. Generally, molds do 
not grow on meats, which do not have a ripening step within their process-
ing. However, the processing of cured meat products such as dry-cured 
ham and dry-cured fermented sausages have a ripening step which favors 
mold colonization on their surface. Normally, this mycobiota only has 
positive effects on these cured meats, nevertheless some mold species may 
contaminate such products with mycotoxins (Núñez et al., 1996), which 
are secondary metabolites produced by molds which have toxic effects in 
both animals and humans. Among them, ochratoxin A (OTA) is the most 
important mycotoxin found in dry-cured meat products (Bertuzzi et al., 
2013; Comi and Iacumin, 2013; Markov et al., 2013; Perši et al., 2014; Pleadin 
et al., 2013; Rodríguez et al., 2011). Rodríguez et al. (2011) developed two 
new qPCR methods to detect and quantify ochratoxigenic molds in dry-
cured meat products by using both TaqMan and SYBR Green methodol-
ogies (Table 4.4). For these qPCR protocols primers and probe target the 
otanps gene involved in OTA biosynthesis were developed. The specificity 
of the methods has been tested on 75 mold strains distinguishing between 
producing and nonproducing strains. The efficiencies and R2 values of the 
standard curves were within the recommended range (Rodríguez et al., 
2015b) so they can be used for quantification purposes in dry-cured meat 
products. Therefore, such methods have been widely used in further stud-

133
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
ies to quantify OTA-producing molds in the dry-cured ham industry 
(Rodríguez et al., 2012d), to test different DNA extraction methods from 
inoculated meat matrices (Rodríguez et al., 2012b) and to evaluate the 
efficacy of different antagonist microorganisms to control ochratoxigenic 
mold growth on dry-cured ham and dry-fermented sausages (Andrade 
et al., 2014; Bernáldez et al., 2013; Rodríguez et al., 2015a). Besides, other 
types of toxigenic molds can be quantified in cured meat products using 
qPCR. Thus, Rodríguez et al. (2012c) optimized two qPCR methods, which 
use both SYBR Green and TaqMan methodologies for detection and quan-
tification of aflatoxigenic molds in such products (Table 4.4). Specific prim-
ers and probe based on the aflP gene involved in aflatoxin biosynthesis 
have been designed. The specificity of the two methods has been tested on 
53 producing and nonproducing strains and their efficiencies of around 
90% allows using both methods to quantify the load of aflatoxigenic molds 
contaminating cured meat products. These methods can be carried out in 
any laboratory/equipment and performed by different operators since they 
also show good repeatability and reproducibility. On the other side, two 
TaqMan-based qPCR methods have been reported for detection and quan-
tification of cyclopiazonic acid (CPA)- and verrucosidin-producing molds 
in dry-cured meat products (Rodríguez et al., 2012a,e; Table 4.4). Both 
methods utilize IAC to assess the validity of qPCR and avoid false negative 
results as has been explained in Section 4.1. However, the IAC methodol-
ogy used for both methods is different. The qPCR for detecting produc-
ers of CPA includes a competitive IAC, while the method for producers of 
TABLE 4.4
Target Sequence, Meat Matrix, Sample Preparation, Technology, and Limit of 
Detection for qPCR Detection of Toxigenic Molds in Dry-Cured Meat Products
Toxigenic 
Mold
Target 
Genes
Matrix
Sample 
Prepara-
tion
qPCR 
Technol-
ogy
Limit of 
Detection/
Quantifi-
cation
References
Ochratoxin 
A-producing 
mold
otanps
Dry-cured ham, 
dry-fermented 
sausage
Direct 
qPCR
SYBR® 
Green/
TaqMan®
10 cfu/g
Rodríguez 
et al. (2011)
Aflatoxin-
producing 
mold
aflP
Dry fermented 
sausages 
“salchichón” 
and “chorizo,” 
dry-cured ham, 
dry-cured pork 
loin
Direct 
qPCR
SYBR 
Green/
TaqMan
10 cfu/g
Rodríguez al. 
(2012c)
Cyclopiazonic 
acid-produc-
ing mold
dmaT
Dry-cured ham
Direct 
qPCR
TaqMan/
Competi-
tive IAC
10–100 
cfu/g
Rodríguez 
et al. (2012e)
IAC, internal amplification control; qPCR, quantitative polymerase chain reaction.

134
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
verrucosidin uses a noncompetitive IAC. For the qPCR for CPA-producing 
mold detection, the design of primers and probe is based on the dmaT gene 
that encodes the enzyme dimethylallyl tryptophan synthase involved in 
the biosynthesis of CPA. The competitive IAC consists of a 105 bp chimeric 
DNA fragment containing a region of the hly gene of L. monocytogenes. The 
qPCR method for quantifying verrucosidin-producing molds was devel-
oped with primers and probes designed from the SVr1 probe sequence of a 
verrucosidin-producing Penicillium polonicum (Aranda et al., 2002). The con-
served regions of the β-tubulin gene have been used to design primers and 
probe of the noncompetitive IAC included in such qPCR. Both methods 
are specific, able to quantify only CPA- or verrucosidin-producing molds 
between other toxigenic molds, which normally contaminate dry-cured 
ham and dry-fermented sausages. The functionality of both methods is 
demonstrated by high linear relationships of the standard curves relating 
to log10 cfu/g and the Cq values obtained from the different producers of 
CPA and verrucosidin tested, respectively. The described qPCR for detect-
ing toxigenic molds in cured meat products are characterized as having 
detection limits between 1 and 2 cfu/g (Table 4.4).
4.4  Reverse Transcription Quantitative PCR as a 
Tool for Evaluating Gene Expression of Food-
borne Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
Reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) could also be a useful 
technique for evaluation of meat and meat products safety. RT-qPCR has 
been proven to be a powerful method to study population dynamics and 
activities through quantification of gene expression (Gadkar and Filion, 
2013), which is increasingly important in a variety of food research fields 
(Ishii et al., 2007). qPCR when combined with reverse transcription (RT) can 
also estimate transcript amounts, providing data on microbial activity (Post-
ollec et al., 2011). The main difference between the qPCR and RT-qPCR meth-
ods is that in the latter mRNA is used as a template. Altered levels of specific 
mRNAs may indicate a change in the level of the proteins encoded by the 
mRNA required in response to specific environmental conditions. Such a 
technique can also be used in foodborne pathogen viability studies. How-
ever, the major drawback is that mRNA itself cannot be stable for a quite long 
time after cell death (Birch et al., 2001; Rijpens and Herman, 2004). Design of 
RT-qPCR methods should be based on the targeting sequences of virulence 
genes and/or stress-related genes instead of housekeeping genes.
Target detection chemistries for RT-qPCR are the same as those used for 
qPCR and they are detailed in depth in Section 4.1. RT-qPCR can be conducted 
in one step within a single reaction, or in two steps with cDNA synthesis done 

135
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
independently of qPCR (Nolan et al., 2006). Despite the fact that both RT-qPCR 
procedures are acceptable, it is preferable to choose the two-step protocol 
when several qPCR analyses will be carried out from the same RNA sample. 
Analysis of data derived from RT-qPCR can be performed either at absolute 
levels to determine the absolute transcript copy number or at relative levels 
to measure differences in the expression level of a specific target between dif-
ferent samples (VanGuilder et al., 2008). For absolute quantification, a RNA 
standard curve of the gene of interest is required in order to calculate the 
number of copies. However, for the relative one, an endogenous control (e.g., 
housekeeping gene) and a calibrator (control or reference sample) are needed. 
Although several mathematical models have been set up for relative quanti-
fication, the most common one is the 2−ΔΔC
T method (Livak and Schmittgen, 
2001), which relies on two assumptions. The first one is that the amplification 
efficiencies of the target and the reference must be approximately equal. The 
second assumption of the 2−ΔΔC
T method is that the endogenous gene should 
be expressed at a constant level between the samples. This endogenous con-
trol will be used to correct any difference in sample loading. Depending on 
the chosen quantification method, different results can be observed. Com-
pared to absolute quantification, relative quantification is simpler. However, 
it can only be applied to the samples run within the same PCR.
Generally, gene expression studies in foodborne bacteria and molds nor-
mally growing in meat and meat products have been conducted in culture 
media and not in such complex matrices. This makes it difficult to analyze the 
real gene expression of pathogens in food environments due to several reasons: 
(a) differences between growth medium and meat matrices, (b) the isolation of 
stable mRNA from complex matrices such as meat and meat products that 
contains nucleases and PCR inhibitors, and (c) the substantial technique chal-
lenges associated with accurately measuring bacteria and mold-related gene 
expression in complex matrices. Due to the fact that gene expression measure-
ments can vary depending on the substrate that the pathogen grows on, only 
studies which have investigated quantitative gene expression of foodborne 
pathogens on complex meat matrices are discussed in Sections 4.4.1 to 4.4.7.
This section provides brief descriptions of the currently available RT-qPCR-
based methods for gene expression studies of the most relevant foodborne 
pathogens in meat and meat products: Salmonella, Campylobacter, shiga toxin-
producing E. coli, S. aureus, L. monocytogenes, viruses, and OTA-producing 
Penicillia. RT-qPCR methods to analyze gene expression responses by Yersinia 
and C. botulinum in meats have not been developed yet. A review of RT-qPCR 
methods developed to quantify gene expression of the most relevant 
foodborne pathogens in meat and meat products is summarized in Table 4.5.
4.4.1 Salmonella
Several RT-qPCR methods have been developed to analyze gene expression 
of Salmonella spp. contaminating meat and meat products. Most of them 

136
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 4.5
Target Sequence and Sample Preparation for Gene Expression by RT-qPCR of Pathogenic Microorganisms in Meat and Meat Products
Foodborne
Pathogen
Target Sequence 
(Reference Gene)
Matrix
Sample 
Preparation
Detection 
Chemistry
Gene Expres-
sion Quantifi-
cation Method
Factor Analyzed
References
Salmonella
rpoE, rpoH, rpoS, htrA, 
uspA, uspB (rpoD)
dnaK, otsB (rpoD)
rpoS, nlpD, clpD (gmk)
adrA, bapA, csgB, csgD, 
csrA, rpoS, invA, sipB-C, 
sdiA, luxS (16S rRNA)
Poultry
Minced beef
Meat extract 
broth
Meat-based 
growth 
medium
Enrichment
Direct qPCR
Enrichment
Enrichment
NA
SYBR Green
SYBR Green
SYBR Green
Relative
Relative
Relative
Relative
Temperature/time
Heat/salt stress
Tolerance to acid 
(lactic acid and 
acetic acid)
Biofilm formation
Yadav et al. 
(2016)
Kjeldgaard 
et al. (2011)
Burin et al. 
(2014)
Wang et al. 
(2016)
Escherichia coli dnaK, ostB (gapA)
asnB, rbsB, rplD, uhpT, 
asr, melA, osmY, melB, 
melR, grxB (16S rRNA)
fliCh7, rfbE
Minced beef
Beef
Dry-cured meat 
products, 
dry-fermented 
sausages and 
cooked meat 
products
Direct qPCR
Enrichment
Enrichment
SYBR Green
SYBR Green
SYBR Green/
TaqMan
Relative
Relative
Absolute
Heat/salt stress
Beef composition
Viability
Kjeldgaard 
et al. (2011)
Fratamico 
et al. (2011)
Gordillo 
et al. (2014)
Campylobacter 
jejuni
rplA, cheA, Cj0006, hslV, 
glyA (Cj0402)
dps (Cj0402)
dnaJ, dnaK, groEL (rpoA)
Chicken
Chicks
Chicken
In vivo inoculation 
and direct qPCR
In vivo inoculation 
and direct qPCR
In vivo inoculation 
and direct qPCR
SYBR Green
SYBR Green
SYBR Green
Relative
Relative
Relative
Interaction between 
chicken-C. jejuni
Biofilm formation
Heat shock response, 
motility, and 
maintenance of cell 
length homogeneity
Hu et al. 
(2014)
Theoret et al. 
(2012)
Apel et al. 
(2012)
(Continued)

137
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
TABLE 4.5 (Continued)
Target Sequence and Sample Preparation for Gene Expression by RT-qPCR of Pathogenic Microorganisms in Meat and Meat Products
Foodborne
Pathogen
Target Sequence 
(Reference Gene)
Matrix
Sample Prepara-
tion
Detection 
Chemistry
Gene Expres-
sion Quantifi-
cation Method
Factor Analyzed
References
Staphylococcus 
aureus
sec (rpoB and hu)
sea (16S rRNA)
Pepper beef 
salami, turkey 
ham, chicken 
ham, pork ham
Frankfurter 
type sausage
Direct qPCR
Direct qPCR
EvaGreen
TaqMan
Relative
Relative
Gene expression 
through various 
meat products 
processing
Gene expression 
through sausage 
storage and lactic 
acid effect
Alibayov 
et al. (2015)
Zeaki et al. 
(2014)
Listeria 
monocyto-
genes
sigB, lmo0669, lmo2434, 
gbuA, gbuB, lmo1421, 
betL, opuCA, lmo1038, 
lmo0442, lmo0115, 
lmo0938, prfA (rpoB, 
rplD, gap, bglA and tuf)
prfA, inlA, sigB, clpC (gap 
and rpoB)
hly, sigB, iap, plcA (IGS)
hly
Salami
Liver pâtés
Fermented 
sausage, 
minced meat
Chilled pork
Direct qPCR
Enrichment
Direct qPCR
Direct qPCR
SYBR Green
TaqMan
TaqMan
SYBR Green
Relative
Relative
Relative
Absolute
Potential stress 
resistance
NaCl content
Common (4°C) and 
abuse (12°C) 
refrigeration 
conditions
Viability
Mataragas 
et al. (2015)
Olesen et al. 
(2010)
Rantsiou 
et al. (2012)
Ye et al. 
(2012)
(Continued)

138
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 4.5 (Continued)
Target Sequence and Sample Preparation for Gene Expression by RT-qPCR of Pathogenic Microorganisms in Meat and Meat Products
Foodborne
Pathogen
Target Sequence 
(Reference Gene)
Matrix
Sample 
Preparation
Detection 
Chemistry
Gene Expres-
sion Quantifi-
cation Method
Factor Analyzed
References
Viruses
HEV (MNV-1)
HEV (MS2 phage)
Murine norovirus and 
F-RNA coliphage MS2
Pork liver 
sausages/Raw 
pig liver 
products
Liver raw 
sausages
Pork chop
Direct qPCR
Direct qPCR
Direct qPCR
TaqMan
TaqMan
TaqMan
Absolute
Detection
Absolute
Viability of hepatitis 
E virus
Viability of hepatitis 
E virus
Viability of hepatitis 
E virus
Survival of viruses 
during meat 
processing
Di Bartolo 
et al. (2015); 
Martin-
Latil et al. 
(2014)
Szabo et al. 
(2015)
Brandsma 
et al. (2012)
Ochratoxi-
genic molds
otapks, otanps
otapks
Dry-cured 
ham-based 
medium
Salami
Direct qPCR
Direct qPCR
SYBR Green
SYBR Green
Relative
Absolute
NaCl content on 
temporal gene 
expression
Seasoning process of 
salami on temporal 
gene expression
Rodríguez 
et al. (2014)
Ferrara et al. 
(2016)
MNV, murine norovirus; RT-qPCR, reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction.

139
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
use the nonspecific dye SYBR Green to monitor the fluorescence through 
the qPCR reactions and the relative quantification method is the method of 
choice to analyze gene expression data. Only a few studies have investigated 
quantitative gene expression of Salmonella in meat matrices (Table 4.5). The 
majority of them have examined the behavior of such foodborne pathogens 
in culture media (González-Gil et al., 2012).
Depending on the objective of the study, different genes have been used 
as targets of the RT-qPCR designed to analyze gene expression of Salmo-
nella in meat and meat products. For studying the cue of genes involved in 
imparting thermotolerance or thermal stress response of S. typhimurium 
and S. enteritidis on dressed poultry skin surface, relative expression of heat 
stress-related genes has been analyzed (Yadav et al., 2016). The target genes 
of such RT-qPCR are the heat stress-related sigma factor (rpoH), alternative 
sigma factor (rpoE), universal stress protein (uspA and uspB), and the serine 
protease htrA. However, for in-depth analysis on heat and salt stress changes 
of S. enterica in minced beef, a RT-qPCR method has been devised based on 
the targeting sequences of the dnaK related to many cellular processes (e.g., 
DNA replication of the bacterial chromosome, RNA synthesis, and auto-
regulation of the heat shock response) and ostB genes involved in trehalose 
biosynthesis connected to osmotic stress (Kjeldgaard et al., 2011). Both inves-
tigations use the gene encoding the RNA polymerase sigma factor (rpoD) as 
the reference gene to normalize quantification of the mRNA targets.
Other authors use model systems such as meat extract broth and agar to 
simulate meat matrix composition to study the influence of lactic acid and ace-
tic acid and biofilm formation on expression of related genes by Salmonella, 
respectively (Burin et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2016). Burin et al. (2014) have devel-
oped a RT-qPCR method targeting three genes involved in a complex tolerance 
mechanism of survival under acid stress: rpoS and nlpD, which are responsible 
for protein expression, and clpP, which is associated with the regulation of 
these proteins inside the cell (Foster, 2001). The essential gmk gene encoding 
guanylate kinase is used as endogenous control in such RT-qPCR. Wang et al. 
(2016) have investigated the expression of the attachment (adrA, bapA, csgB, 
csgD, and csrA), virulence (invA and sipB-C), and quorum sensing (sidA and 
luxS) genes in Salmonella biofilm formed on meat-based medium. They have 
also identified the relationships between each tested gene involved in biofilm 
formation. In this case, 16s rRNA has been used as endogenous control.
4.4.2 Listeria monocytogenes
Different meat products including fermented sausage “salami,” liver pâtés, 
minced meats, and chilled pork have been used as meat matrices to study 
expression of different stress- and virulence-related genes of L. monocyto-
genes. Mataragas et al. (2015) examined the gene expression profiling of the 
pathogen in response to the conditions encountered during the fermenta-
tion and ripening of sausages (salami). For this, SYBR Green-based RT-qPCR 

140
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
methods based on one gene related to general stress (sigB) and eleven genes 
relative to various stresses commonly found during fermented sausage pro-
duction, such as acid (lmo0669 and lmo2434 or gadD), osmotic (gbuA, gbuB, 
lmo1421, betL, and opuCA) and competition for nutrients (lmo1038, lmo0442, 
lmo0115, and lmo0938), are used as targets. Five housekeeping genes (rpoB, 
rplD, gap, bglA, and tuf) are included as reference genes for performing rela-
tive quantification. Ye et al. (2012) have also used the nonspecific SYBR Green 
dye to detect rapidly viable L. monocytogenes in chilled pork by RT-qPCR. 
This method is able to quantify the absolute expression of the L. monocyto-
genes-specific hly gene encoding listeriolysin.
Other researchers have used the sequence-specific double-labeled probes 
for their gene expression studies of such pathogens in meat products. Ole-
sen et al. (2010) analyzed the effect of NaCl content on relative transcription 
of several L. monocytogenes virulence genes such as prfA, inlA, sigB, and clpC 
in liver pâtés. However, Rantsiou et al. (2012) studied the influence of com-
mon (4°C) and abuse (12°C) refrigeration conditions on the relative expres-
sion profile of a stress response gene (sigB) and three virulence genes (hly, 
iap, and plcA) of this foodborne pathogen in fermented sausages and minced 
meat.
4.4.3 Shiga Toxin-Producing E. coli
A limited number of RT-qPCR methods have been devised to analyze gene 
expression of verocytotoxic E. coli contaminating meat and meat products. 
Two of them have analyzed the relative expression of virulence-related genes 
of E.coli in beef using the SYBR Green chemistry as the detection system 
(Kjeldgaard et al., 2011; Fratamico et al., 2011). One of them analyses the effect 
of heat and salt stress on the dnaK and ostB genes using the gapA gene as the 
reference gene. The other one evaluates the influence of 10 genes (asnB, rbsB, 
rplD, uhpT, asr, melA, osmY, melB, melR, and grxB) with the nonribosomal 16s 
rRNA region as the housekeeping gene. On the other hand, Gordillo et al. 
(2014) quantifies the viability of E. coli 0157:H7 in meat products by means 
of duplex qPCR assays based on two serotype-specific markers such as the 
fliCh7 and rfbE genes in RTE meat products. Both detection qPCR methodolo-
gies, SYBR Green and TaqMan, are proposed to be used to quantify expres-
sion of verocytotoxic E. coli in meat products.
4.4.4 Campylobacter jejuni
Chicken is the only meat matrix used for C. jejuni gene expression studies 
by RT-qPCR. In such studies, chickens were in vivo inoculated by C. jejuni 
through oral or intramuscular administration (Hu et al., 2014; Theoret et al., 
2012; Apel et al., 2012). In addition, regarding RT-qPCR performance, SYBR 
Green chemistry is utilized and Cq data from qPCR are analyzed using 

141
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
the 2−ΔΔC
T method (Table 4.5). Although earlier studies have several similari-
ties, they set different research goals. Hu et al. (2014) have studied the genes 
expressed in vivo during interaction between chicken and the host infection 
by the pathogen. For this, the virulence-associated genes plA, cheA, Cj0006, 
hslV, and glyA have been used as target genes. However, Theoret et al. (2012) 
have analyzed the expression of the dps gene for a role in biofilm formation 
and cecal colonization in poultry. The housekeeping gene Cj0402 was used 
as endogenous control in both abovementioned RT-qPCR methods. On the 
other hand, the RT-qPCR method, reported by Apel et al. (2012), targets three 
genes (dnaJ, dnaK, and groEL) to analyze their role in the heat shock response 
of C. jejuni when it colonizes the cecum of birds. The rpoA gene is used to 
normalize cDNA quantities in the qPCR reactions.
4.4.5 Staphylococcus aureus
Scarce RT-qPCR methods have been developed to examine gene expression 
of S. aureus in meat products. In all studies, expression of genes encoding 
enterotoxin A (SEA) and C (SEC) has been analyzed throughout process-
ing of different meat products. In addition, Zeaki et al. (2014) investigated 
the effect of lactic acid on the sea gene expression through sausage storage. 
A detection method using hydrolysis probes and relative gene expression 
measurements are used by Zeaki et al. (2014). The sea gene, which has pre-
viously shown that regulates the expression and production of SEA, and 
16s rRNA are utilized as target and endogenous genes, respectively. The 
main difference between the abovementioned two methods were the dif-
ferent types of meat matrix used. The first one evaluates gene expression 
on several pork meat products (boiled ham, hot-smoked ham, Serrano ham, 
and black pepper salami), and the second one checked expression of the sea 
gene on frankfurter type sausage. Recently, Alibayov et al. (2015) studied 
differences in transcription and expression of the sec gene associated with 
SEC formation in processed meat products such as pepper beef salami and 
turkey, chicken, and pork ham. This method used two genes (rpoB and hu) 
as endogenous control to calculate relative expression of the target gene. 
Fluorescence changes occurring during qPCR are measured by the DNA-
binding EvaGreen® dye.
4.4.6 Viruses
Human foodborne viruses are not usually found in meat and meat prod-
ucts. However, the meat industry and laboratories should be prepared 
to detect viruses in meat matrices due to the increase in recent years of 
foodborne outbreaks involving viruses. Detection of worrying foodborne 
viruses requires preferably RT-qPCR instead of qPCR. All the RT-qPCR 
methods developed to check gene expression of viruses in meat products 
use the TaqMan chemistry. Most of these methods target hepatitis E virus 

142
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
and their purpose was to study the viability of the pathogen in different 
meats and meat products such as pigs, pork liver sausages, and raw pig liver 
products (Di Bartolo et al., 2015; Martin-Latil et al., 2014; Szabo et al., 2015). 
On the other hand, Brandsma et al. (2012) have devised a method to evaluate 
the survival of murine norovirus and F-RNA coliphage MS2 on pork chop 
during storage and retail display.
4.4.7 Ochratoxin A-Producing Penicillia
Only two RT-qPCR methods have been developed to study expression of 
genes involved in mycotoxin of unwanted molds in cured meat products. 
Both protocols have used the nonspecific SYBR Green dye to monitor fluo-
rescence during qPCR reactions. Rodríguez et al. (2014) have evaluated the 
effect of NaCl content on relative temporal expression of the otapks and otanps 
genes associated with OTA biosynthesis of Penicillium nordicum on dry-cured 
ham-based medium. However, Ferrara et al. (2016) have analyzed the influ-
ence of the seasoning process of a dry-fermented sausage (salami) on the 
absolute expression of the otapks gene.
4.5 Conclusions
Recently, several qPCR protocols have been reported as accurate, specific, 
and sensitive methods to detect pathogenic microorganisms of concern in 
meat and meat products. Some of these methods such as those reported for 
detecting Salmonella and L. monocytogenes are validated against the corre-
sponding ISO methods and thus they could be used in the meat industry for 
routine analysis. Although in most of the qPCR protocols an enrichment step 
of 7–48 h could be included, time of analysis is greatly reduced in compari-
son to traditional culture-based techniques proposed by ISO methods. The 
limit of detection of these methods is around 1–100 cfu/g. The high sensitiv-
ity and reasonably low time of analysis of the reported qPCR protocols make 
them very useful tools to evaluate raw material and preprocessed and fin-
ished products; they allow for the use of rapid and efficient corrective actions 
during processing in the meat industry. In addition, RT-qPCR could be also 
a valuable technique for evaluation of meat and meat products safety. RT-
qPCR has proved to be a powerful method to evaluate population dynamics 
and activities through quantification of gene expression. Several RT-qPCR 
protocols have been reported for accurate and sensitive evaluation of gene 
expression of the most important foodborne pathogenic bacteria and mold 
in meat products. These protocols could be used to detect live pathogenic 
microorganisms in meat and meat products, which could allow for the use of 
corrective actions during processing in the meat industry. Although further 

143
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
studies should be developed to reduce the time of analysis and protocols 
validation, the current qPCR and RT-qPCR methods allow a rapid and sensi-
tive detection and gene expression analysis respectively of concern microor-
ganisms in the meat industry.
Acknowledgments
This work has been funded by the Instituto Nacional de Investigación 
y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), the Spanish Ministry of Economy 
and Competitiveness, the Government of Extremadura, and FEDER (INIA-
RTA-2013-00070-C03-03, AGL2013-45729-P, GR15108). Dr. Alicia Rodríguez is 
a recipient of a Juan de la Cierva senior fellowship from the Spanish Ministry 
of Economy and Competitiveness (IJCI-2014-20666).
References
Alibayov, B., Karamonova, L., Hollerova, R., Zdenkova, K. and Demnerova, K. (2015). 
Differences in transcription and expression of staphylococcal enterotoxin C in 
processed meat products. LWT–Food Science and Technology, 64, 578–585.
Alves, J., Hirooka, E. Y. and Oliveira, T. C. R. M. D. (2016). Development of a multi-
plex real-time PCR assay with an internal amplification control for the detection 
of Campylobacter spp. and Salmonella spp. in chicken meat. LWT—Food Science 
and Technology, 72, 175–181.
Amoako, K. K., Goji, N., Macmillan, T. et al. (2010). Development of multitarget real-
time PCR for the rapid, specific, and sensitive detection of Yersinia pestis in milk 
and ground beef. Journal of Food Protection, 73, 18–25.
Andrade, M. J., Thorsen, L., Rodríguez, A., Córdoba, J. J. and Jespersen. L. (2014). 
Inhibition of ochratoxigenic moulds by Debaryomyces hansenii strains for bio-
preservation of dry-cured meat products. International Journal of Food Microbiol-
ogy, 170, 70–77.
Anonymous. (2002). International Standard Organisation 6579. Microbiology of food 
and animal feeding stuffs: horizontal method for the detection of Salmonella. Avail-
able at: https://www.iso.org/standard/29315.html (Accessed on 19 June 17).
Anonymous. (2004). International Standard Organisation 11290-1. Microbiology 
of food and animal feeding stuffs—Horizontal method for the detection and 
enumeration of Listeria monocytogenes—Part 1: Detection method. Available at: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/19268.html (Accessed on 19 June 17).
Anonymous. (2011). International Standard Organisation 22119:2011. Microbiology 
of food and animal feeding stuffs—Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
for the detection of food-borne pathogens—General requirements and defini-
tions. Available at:https://www.iso.org/standard/45035.html (Accessed on 
19 June 17).

144
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Anonymous. (2012). International Standard Organisation 13136. Microbiology of food 
and animal feed—Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based method 
for the detection of food-borne pathogens—Horizontal method for the detec-
tion of shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) and the determination of 
O157, O111, O26, O103 and O145 serogroups (ISO/TS 13136:2012). Available at: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/53328.html (Accessed on 19 June 17).
Apel, D., Ellermeier, J., Pryjma, M., DiRita, V. J. and Gaynor, E. C. (2012). Character-
ization of Campylobacter jejuni RacRs reveals roles in the heat shock response, 
motility, and maintenance of cell length homogeneity. Journal of Bacteriology, 194, 
2342–2354.
Aranda, E., Rodríguez, M., Benito, M. J., Asensio, M. A. and Córdoba, J. J. (2002). 
Molecular cloning of verrucosidin-producing Penicillium polonicum genes by dif-
ferential screening to obtain a DNA probe. International Journal of Food Microbiol-
ogy, 76, 55–61. Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12038578
Argudín, M. Á., Mendoza, M. C. and Rodicio, M. R. (2010). Food poisoning and Staph-
ylococcus aureus enterotoxins. Toxins, 2, 1751–1773.
Barbau-Piednoir, E., Mahillon, J., Pillyser, J., Coucke, W., Roosens, N. H. and Bottel-
doorn, N. (2014). Evaluation of viability-QPCR detection system on viable and 
dead Salmonella serovar enteritidis. Journal of Microbiological Methods, 103, 131–137.
Bardasi, L., Taddei, R., Nocera, L., Ricchi, M. and Merialdi, G. (2015). Shiga toxin-
producing Escherichia coli in meat and vegetable products in Emilia Romagna 
region, years 2012–2013. Italian Journal of Food Safety, 4, 33–35.
Bernáldez, V., Córdoba, J. J., Rodríguez, M., Cordero, M., Polo, L. and Rodríguez, A. 
(2013). Effect of Penicillium nalgiovense as protective culture in processing of dry-
fermented sausage “salchichón.” Food Control, 32, 69–76.
Bertuzzi, T., Gualla, A., Morlacchini, M. and Pietri, A. (2013). Direct and indirect con-
tamination with ochratoxin A of ripened pork products. Food Control, 34, 79–83.
Birch, L., Dawson, C. E., Cornett, J. H. and Keer, J. T. (2001). A comparison of nucleic 
acid amplification techniques for the assessment of bacterial viability. Letters in 
Applied Microbiology, 33, 296–301.
Bolocan, A. Nicolau, S. A. I., Alvarez-Ordóñez, A. et al. (2016). Dynamics of Listeria 
monocytogenes colonisation in a newly-opened meat processing facility. Meat Sci-
ence, 113, 26–34.
Bonjoch, X., Calvó, L., Soler, M., Ruiz-Rueda, O. and Garcia-Gil, L. J. (2010). A new 
multiplexed real-time PCR assay to detect Campylobacter jejuni, C. coli, C. lari, 
and C. upsaliensis. Food Analytical Methods, 3, 40–46.
Botteldoorn, N., Van Coillie, E., Piessens, V. et al. (2008). Quantification of Campylo-
bacter spp. in chicken carcass rinse by real-time PCR. Journal of Applied Microbiol-
ogy, 105, 1909–1918.
Brandsma, S. R., Muehlhauser, V. and Jones, T. H. (2012). Survival of murine norovi-
rus and F-RNA coliphage MS2 on pork during storage and retail display. Inter-
national Journal of Food Microbiology, 159, 193–197.
Brusa, V., Galli, L., Linares, L. H., Ortega, E. E., Lirón, J. P. and Leotta, G. A. (2015). 
Development and validation of two SYBR Green PCR assays and a multiplex 
real-time PCR for the detection of shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli in meat. 
Journal of Microbiological Methods, 119, 10–17.
Burin, R., Konrad, C., Silva, A. and Nero, L. A. (2014). Influence of lactic acid and 
acetic acid on Salmonella spp. growth and expression of acid tolerance-related 
genes. Food Research International, 64, 726–732.

145
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
Bustin, S. A., Benes, V., Garson, J. A. et al. (2009). The MIQE guidelines: Minimum 
information for publication of quantitative real-time PCR experiments. Clinical 
Chemistry, 55, 611–622.
Ceuppens, S., Li, D., Uyttendaele, M. et al. (2014). Molecular methods in food safety 
microbiology: Interpretation and implications of nucleic acid detection. Compre-
hensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 13, 551–577.
Chapela, M. J., Garrido-Maestu, A. and Cabado, A. G. (2015). Detection of foodborne 
pathogens by qPCR: A practical approach for food industry applications. Cogent 
Food and Agriculture, 1, 1013771.
Chiang, Y.-C., Fan, C.-M., Liao, W.-W., Lin, C.-K. and Tsen, H.-Y. (2007). Real-time 
PCR detection of Staphylococcus aureus in milk and meat using new primers 
designed from the heat shock protein gene htrA sequence. Journal of Food Pro-
tectection, 70, 2855–2859.
Cloke, J., Crowley, E., Bird, P. et al. (2015). Validation of the Thermo Scientific SureTect 
Escherichia coli O157: H7 real-time PCR assay for raw beef and produce matrixes. 
Journal of AOAC International, 98, 1301–1314.
Comi, G. and Iacumin, L. (2013). Ecology of moulds during the pre-ripening and rip-
ening of San Daniele dry cured ham. Food Research International, 54, 1113–1119.
Cremonesi, P., Pisani, L. F., Lecchi, C. et al. (2014). Development of 23 individual 
 TaqMan® real-time PCR assays for identifying common foodborne pathogens 
using a single set of amplification conditions. Food Microbiology, 43, 35–40.
Dalmasso, M., Bolocan, A. S., Hernandez, M. et al. (2014). Comparison of polymerase 
chain reaction methods and plating for analysis of enriched cultures of Liste-
ria monocytogenes when using the ISO11290-1 method. Journal of Microbiological 
Methods, 98, 8–14.
De Cesare, A., Pasquali, F., Lucchi, A. and Manfreda, G. (2014). Relative accuracy, 
specificity and sensitivity of a 5’nuclease real-time PCR assay for Listeria mono-
cytogenes detection in naturally contaminated pork cuts. Food Analytical Methods, 
7, 1359–1365.
Delibato, E., Anniballi, F., Sinibaldi Vallebona, P. et al. (2013). Validation of a 1-day 
analytical diagnostic real-time PCR for the detection of Salmonella in different 
food meat categories. Food Analytical Methods, 6, 996–1003.
Derzelle, S., Grine, A., Madic, J. et al. (2011). A quantitative PCR assay for the detection 
and quantification of shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) in minced 
beef and dairy products. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 151, 44–51.
Di Bartolo, I., Angeloni, G., Ponterio, E., Ostanello, F. and Ruggeri, F. M. (2015). Detec-
tion of hepatitis E virus in pork liver sausages. International Journal of Food Micro-
biology, 193, 29–33.
DuPont (2014). Dupont™ BAX® system real-time PCR assays e STEC suite. Available 
at: http://www2.dupont.com/Qualicon/en_US/assets/downloads/BAX%20
product%20descrip-RealTimeSTEC.pdf (Accessed on 15 June 17).
East, A. K. and Collins, M. D. (1994). Conserved structure of genes encoding compo-
nents of botulinum neurotoxin complex-m and the sequence of the gene coding 
for the nontoxic component in nonproteolytic Clostridium botulinum type-F. Cur-
rent Microbiology, 29(2), 69–77.
EFSA. (2013). Scientific opinion on VTEC-Seropathotype and scientific criteria regard-
ing pathogenicity assessment. EFSA Journal, 11(4), 3138.
EFSA. (2015). The European Union summary report on trends and sources of zoono-
ses, zoonotic agents and food-borne outbreaks in 2011 has been published. Euro 

146
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Surveillance: Bulletin Europe en Sur Les Maladies Transmissibles European Commu-
nicable Disease Bulletin, 18(15), 20449.
European Commission. (2005). Commission regulation (EC) No. 2073/2005 of 15 
November 2005 on microbiological criteria for foodstuffs. Official Journal of the 
European Union, 338, 1–26.
Fenicia, L., Fach, P., van Rotterdam, B. J. et al. (2011). Towards an international stan-
dard for detection and typing botulinum neurotoxin-producing clostridia types 
A, B, E and F in food, feed and environmental samples: A European ring trial 
study to evaluate a real-time PCR assay. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 
145(Suppl. 1), S152–S157.
Fach, P., Fenicia, L., Knutsson, R. et al. (2011). An innovative molecular detection tool 
for tracking and tracing Clostridium botulinum types A, B, E, F and other botu-
linum neurotoxin producing Clostridia based on the GeneDisc cycler. Interna-
tional Journal of Food Microbiology, 145(Suppl. 1), S145–S151.
Fach, P., Micheau, P., Mazuet, C., Perelle, S. and Popoff, M. (2009). Development of 
real-time PCR tests for detecting botulinum neurotoxins A, B, E, F producing 
Clostridium botulinum, Clostridium baratii and Clostridium butyricum. Journal of 
Applied Microbiology, 107, 465–473.
Ferrara, M., Magistà, D., Epifani, F. et al. (2016). Study of gene expression and OTA 
production by Penicillium nordicum during a small-scale seasoning process of 
salami. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 227, 51–55.
Foster, J. W. (2001). Acid stress responses of Salmonella and E. coli: Survival mecha-
nisms, regulation, and implications for pathogenesis. Journal of Microbiology, 39, 
89–94.
Fratamico, P. M., Wang, S., Yan, X., Zhang, W. and Li. Y. (2011). Differential gene 
expression of E. coli O157:H7 in ground beef extract compared to tryptic soy 
broth. Journal of Food Science, 76, 79–87.
Fredriksson-Ahomaa, M., Hartmann, B., Scheu, P. and Stolle. A. (2007). Detection of 
pathogenic Yersinia enterocolitica in meat using real-time PCR. Journal Für Verbr-
aucherschutz Und Lebensmittelsicherheit, 2, 202–208.
Fredriksson-Ahomaa, M. and Korkeala, H. (2003). Low occurrence of pathogenic Yer-
sinia enterocolitica in clinical, food, and environmental samples: A methodologi-
cal problem. Society, 16, 220–229.
Gadkar, V. J. and Filion, M. (2013). New developments in quantitative real-time poly-
merase chain reaction technology. Current Issues in Molecular Biology, 16, 1–6.
Gattuso, A., Gianfranceschi, M. V. and Sonnessa, M. (2014). Optimization of a real 
time PCR based method for the detection of Listeria monocytogenes in pork meat. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 184, 106–108.
González-Gil, F., Le Bolloch, A., Pendleton, S., Zhang, N., Wallis, A. and Hanning. I. 
(2012). Expression of hila in response to mild acid stress in Salmonella enterica is 
serovar and strain dependent. Journal of Food Science, 77, 292–297.
Gordillo, R., Rodríguez, A., Werning, M. L., Bermúdez, E. and Rodríguez, M. (2014). 
Quantification of viable Escherichia coli O157: H7 in meat products by duplex 
real-time PCR assays. Meat Science, 96, 964–970.
Gorski, L. and Csordas, A. (2010). Molecular detection: Principles and methods. In: 
Liu, D. (ed.) Molecular Detection of Foodborne Pathogens. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press (Taylor and Francis), pp. 1–20.
Grimont, P. and Weill, F. X. (2007). Antigenic formulae of the Salmonella serovars. 
WHO collaborating centre for reference and research on Salmonella, 1–167. Available 

147
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
at: http://www.serotest-thailand.com/upload/news/download/9-8310-0.pdf 
(Accessed on 15 June 17). 
Gyles, C. L. (2007). Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli: An overview. Journal of Ani-
mal Science, 85(Suppl. E), E45–E62.
Hara-Kudo, Y., Konishi, N., Ohtsuka, K. et al. (2016). An interlaboratory study on effi-
cient detection of shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli O26, O103, O111, O121, 
O145, and O157 in food using real-time PCR assay and chromogenic agar. Inter-
national Journal of Food Microbiology, 230, 81–88.
Hauser, D., Gibert, M., Marvaud, J. C., Eklund, M. W. and Popoff, M. R. (1995). Botuli-
nal neurotoxin C1 complex genes, clostridial neurotoxin homology and genetic 
transfer in Clostridium botulinum. Toxicon, 33, 515–526.
He, Y., Yao, X. and Gunther, N. W. et al. (2010). Simultaneous detection and differen-
tiation of Campylobacter jejuni, C. coli, and C. lari in chickens using a multiplex 
real-time PCR assay. Food Analytical Methods, 3, 321–329.
Hensel, M., Nikolaus, T. and Egelseer, C. (1999). Molecular and functional analysis 
indicates a mosaic structure of Salmonella pathogenicity island 2. Molecular 
Microbiology, 31, 489–498.
Heo, E. J., Song, B. R., Park, H. J. et al. (2014). Rapid detection of Listeria monocytogenes 
by real-time PCR in processed meat and dairy products. Journal of Food Protec-
tion, 77, 453–458.
Hernández, M., Hansen, F., Cook, N. and Rodríguez-Lázaro, D. (2009). Real-time 
PCR methods for detection of foodborne bacterial pathogens in meat and meat 
products. In: Toldrá, F. (ed.) Safety of Meat and Processed Meat. New York, NY: 
Springer, pp. 427–446.
Hoorfar, J., Cook, N., Malorny, B. et al. (2004a). Diagnostic PCR: Making internal 
amplification control mandatory. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 38, 79–80.
Hoorfar, J., Malorny, B., Abdulmawjood, A., Cook, N., Wagner, M. and Fach, P. 
(2004b). Practical considerations in design of internal amplification controls for 
diagnostic PCR assays. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 42, 1863–1868.
Hu, Y., Huang, J. and Jiao, X. A. (2014). Screening of genes expressed in vivo during 
interaction between chicken and Campylobacter jejuni. Journal of Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 24, 217–224.
Invitrogen. (2008). Real-time PCR. Real-Time PCR: From Theory to Practice. Available at: 
www.invitrogen.com (Accessed on 15 June 17).
Ishii, T., Sootome, H., Shan, L. and Yamashita, K. (2007). Validation of universal con-
ditions for duplex quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
assays. Analytical Biochemistry, 362, 201–212.
Jones, M. and Marengo, S. (2016). Laboratory validation, verification and accredita-
tion of molecular methods. In: Cook, N., D’Agostino, M. and Thompson, K. C. 
(eds.) Molecular Microbial Diagnostic Methods: Pathways to Implementation for the 
Food and Water Industries. London: Academic Press, pp. 107–133.
Josefsen, M. H., Jacobsen, N. R. and Hoorfar, J. (2004). Enrichment followed by quan-
titative PCR both for rapid detection and as a tool for quantitative risk assess-
ment of food-borne thermotolerant Campylobacters. Applied and Enviromental 
Microbiology, 70, 3588–3592.
Josefsen, M. H., Löfström, C., Hansen, T. B., Christensen, L. S., Olsen, J. E. and Hoorfar, J. 
(2010). Rapid quantification of viable Campylobacter bacteria on chicken carcasses, 
using real-time PCR and propidium monoazide treatment, as a tool for quantita-
tive risk assessment. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 76, 5097–5104.

148
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Jourdan, A. D., Johnson, S. C. and Wesley, I. V. (2000). Development of a fluorogenic 
5’nuclease PCR assay for detection of the ail gene of pathogenic Yersinia entero-
colitica. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 66, 3750–3755.
Kagkli, D. M., Weber, T. P., Van den Bulcke, M. et al. (2011). Application of the modu-
lar approach to an in-house validation study of real-time PCR methods for the 
detection and serogroup determination of verocytotoxigenic Escherichia coli. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 77, 6954–6963.
Kavanagh, I., Jones, G. and Nayab, S. N. (2011). Significance of controls and stan-
dard curves in PCR. In: Kennedy, S. and Oswald, N. (eds.) PCR Troubleshooting 
and Optimization: The Essential Guide. Norfolk, VA: Caister Academic Press, pp. 
67–78.
Kjeldgaard, J., Henriksen, S., Cohn, M. T. Aabo, S. and Ingmer, H. (2011). Method 
enabling gene expression studies of pathogens in a complex food matrix. Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology, 77, 8456–8458.
Krämer, N., Vigre, C. L. H., Hoorfar, J., Bunge, C. and Malorny, B. (2011). A novel 
strategy to obtain quantitative data for modelling: Combined enrichment and 
real-time PCR for enumeration of Salmonellae from pig carcasses. International 
Journal of Food Microbiology, 145, S86–S95.
Law, J. W. F., Ab Mutalib, N. S., Chan, K. G. and Lee, L. H. (2015). Rapid methods for 
the detection of foodborne bacterial pathogens: Principles, applications, advan-
tages and limitations. Frontiers in Microbiology, 5, 1–19.
Letertre, C., Perelle, S., Dilasser, F. and Fach, P. (2003). Detection and genotyping by 
real-time PCR of the staphylococcal enterotoxin genes sea to sej. Molecular and 
Cellular Probes, 17, 139–147.
Livak, K. J. and Schmittgen, T. D. (2001). Analysis of relative gene expression data 
using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-delta delta C(T)) method. Methods, 
25, 402–408.
Löfström, C., Krause, M., Josefsen, M. H., Hansen, F. and Hoorfar, J. (2009). Validation 
of a same-day real-time PCR method for screening of meat and carcass swabs 
for Salmonella. BMC Microbiology, 9, 85.
Ma, K., Deng, Y., Bai, Y. et al. (2014). Rapid and simultaneous detection of Salmonella, 
Shigella, and Staphylococcus aureus in fresh pork using a multiplex real-time PCR 
assay based on immunomagnetic separation. Food Control, 42, 87–93.
Markov, K., Pleadin, J., Bevardi, M. et al. (2013). Natural occurrence of aflatoxin B1, 
ochratoxin A and citrinin in Croatian fermented meat products. Food Control, 
34, 312–317.
Martin, B., Garriga, M. and Aymerich. T. (2012). Pre-PCR treatments as a key factor on 
the probability of detection of Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella in ready-to-
eat meat products by real-time PCR. Food Control, 27, 163–169.
Martin-Latil, S., Hennechart-Collette, C., Guillier, L. and Perelle, S. (2014). Method for 
HEV detection in raw pig liver products and its implementation for naturally 
contaminated food. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 176, 1–8.
Martinon, A. and Wilkinson, M. G. (2011). Selection of optimal primer sets for use in a 
duplex SYBR green-based, real-time polymerase chain reaction protocol for the 
detection of Listeria monocytogenes and Staphylococcus aureus in foods. Journal of 
Food Safety, 31, 297–312.
Mataragas, M., Rovetto, F., Bellio, A. et al. (2015). Differential gene expression profil-
ing of Listeria monocytogenes in cacciatore and felino salami to reveal potential 
stress resistance biomarkers. Food Microbiology, 46, 408–417.

149
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
Maurischat, S., Baumann, B., Martin, A. and Malorny, B. (2015). Rapid detection 
and specific differentiation of Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica Enteritidis, 
Typhimurium and its monophasic variant 4,[5],12:i: By real-time multiplex PCR. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 193, 8–14.
McCabe, E. M., Burgess, C. M., Walsh, D. et al. (2011). Validation of DNA and RNA 
real-time assays for food analysis using the hila gene of Salmonella enterica 
serovars. Journal of Microbiological Methods, 84, 19–26.
Melero, B., Cocolin, L., Rantsiou, K., Jaime, I. and Rovira, J. (2011). Comparison 
between conventional and qPCR methods for enumerating Campylobacter jejuni 
in a poultry processing plant. Food Microbiology, 28, 1353–1358.
Miszczycha, S. D., Ganet, S., Duniere, L., Rozand, C., Loukiadis, E. and Thevenot-
Sergentet, D. (2012). Novel real-time PCR method to detect Escherichia coli 
O157: H7 in raw milk cheese and raw ground meat. Journal of Food Protection, 
75, 1373–1381.
Nolan, T., Hands, R. E. and Bustin, S. (2006). Quantification of mRNA using real-time 
RT-PCR. Nature Protocols, 1, 1559–1582.
Núñez, F., Rodríguez, M., Bermúdez, M. E., Córdoba, J. J. and Asensio, M. A. (1996). 
Composition and toxigenic potential of the mould population on dry-cured Ibe-
rian ham. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 32, 185–197.
Olesen, I., Thorsen, L. and Jespersen, L. (2010). Relative transcription of Listeria mono-
cytogenes virulence genes in liver pates with varying NaCl content. International 
Journal of Food Microbiology, 141, S60–S68.
Osés, S. M., Rantsiou, K., Cocolin, L., Jaime, I. and Rovira, J. (2010). Prevalence and 
quantification of shiga-toxin producing Escherichia coli along the lamb food chain 
by quantitative PCR. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 141, S163–S169.
Pacholewicz, E., Swart, A., Lipman, L. J., Wagenaar, J. A., Havelaar, A. H. and Duim, 
B. (2013). Propidium monoazide does not fully inhibit the detection of dead 
Campylobacter on broiler chicken carcasses by qPCR. Journal of Microbiological 
Methods, 95, 32–38.
Pasquali, F., De Cesare, A., Bovo, F., Serraino, A. and Manfreda, G. (2014). Relative 
accuracy, specificity and sensitivity of a 5’nuclease real-time PCR assay for Sal-
monella detection in naturally contaminated pork cuts. Molecular and Cellular 
Probes, 28, 133–137.
Perelle, S., F. Dilasser, J. Grout, and P. Fach. 2007. Screening food raw materials for 
the presence of the world’s most frequent clinical cases of shiga toxin-encoding 
Escherichia coli O26, O103, O111, O145 and O157. International Journal of Food 
Microbiology 113, 284–88.
Perši, N., Pleadin, J., Kovačević, D., Scortichini, G. and Milone, S. (2014). Ochratoxin A 
in raw materials and cooked meat products made from OTA-treated pigs. Meat 
Science, 96, 203–210.
Pleadin, J., Perši, N., Kovačević, D., Vahčić, N., Scortichini, G. and Milone, S. (2013). 
Ochratoxin A in traditional dry-cured meat products produced from subchronic-
exposed pigs. Food Additives and Contaminants: Part A, 30, 1827–1836.
Podkowik, M, Park, J. Y, Seo, K. S., Bystroń, J. and Bania, J. (2013). Enterotoxigenic 
potential of coagulase-negative Staphylococci. International Journal of Food Micro-
biology, 163, 34–40.
Postollec, F., Falentin, H., Pavan, S., Combrisson, J. and Sohier, D. (2011). Recent 
advances in quantitative PCR (qPCR) applications in food microbiology. Food 
Microbiology, 28, 848–861.

150
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Rantsiou, K., Lamberti, C. and Cocolin, L. (2010). Survey of Campylobacter jejuni in 
retail chicken meat products by application of a quantitative PCR protocol. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 141, S75–S79.
Rantsiou, K., Mataragas, M., Alessandria, V. and Cocolin, L. (2012). Expression of 
virulence genes of Listeria monocytogenes in food. Journal of Food Safety, 32, 
161–168.
Raphael, B. H. and Andreadis, J. D. (2007). Real-time PCR detection of the nontoxic 
nonhemagglutinin gene as a rapid screening method for bacterial isolates har-
boring the botulinum neurotoxin (A-G) gene complex. Journal of Microbiological 
Methods, 71, 343–346.
Raymaekers, M., Smets, R., Maes, B. and Cartuyvels, R. (2009). Checklist for opti-
mization and validation of real-time PCR assays. Journal of Clinical Laboratory 
Analysis, 23, 145–151.
Rijpens, N. and Herman, L. (2004). Comparison of selective and nonselective primary 
enrichments for the detection of Listeria monocytogenes in cheese. International 
Journal of Food Microbiology, 94, 15–22.
Rodríguez, A., Bernáldez, V., Rodríguez, M., Andrade, M. J., Núñez, F. and Córdoba, 
J. J. (2015a). Effect of selected protective cultures on ochratoxin A accumulation 
in dry-cured Iberian ham during its ripening process. LWT—Food Science and 
Technology, 60, 923–928.
Rodríguez, A., Córdoba, J. J., Werning, M. L., Andrade, M. J. and Rodríguez, M. 
(2012a). Duplex real-time PCR method with internal amplification control for 
quantification of verrucosidin producing molds in dry-ripened foods. Interna-
tional Journal of Food Microbiology, 153, 85–91.
Rodríguez, A., Gordillo, R., Andrade, M. J., Córdoba, J. J. and Rodríguez, M. (2016). 
Development of an efficient real-time PCR assay to quantify enterotoxin-
producing staphylococci in meat products. Food Control, 60, 302–308.
Rodríguez, A., Medina, Á., Córdoba, J. J. and Magan, N. (2014). The influence of salt 
(NaCl) on ochratoxin A biosynthetic genes, growth and ochratoxin A produc-
tion by three strains of Penicillium nordicum on a dry-cured ham-based medium. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 178, 113–119.
Rodríguez, M., Núñez, F., Córdoba, J. J., Bermúdez, E. and Asensio, M. A. (1996). 
Gram-positive, catalase-positive cocci from dry cured Iberian ham and their 
enterotoxigenic potential. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 62, 1897–1902.
Rodríguez, A., Rodríguez, M., Córdoba, J. J. and Andrade, M. J. (2015b). Design of 
primers and probes for quantitative real-time PCR methods. In PCR Primer 
Design (Series: Methods in Molecular Biology), Chhandak Basu (ed). New York, 
NY: Springer.pp. 189–191.
Rodríguez, A., Rodríguez, M., Luque, M. I., Justesen, A. F. and Córdoba, J. J. (2011). 
Quantification of ochratoxin A-producing molds in food products by SYBR 
Green and TaqMan real-time PCR methods. International Journal of Food Micro-
biology, 149, 226–235.
Rodríguez, A., Rodríguez, M., Luque, M. I., Justesen, A. F. and Córdoba, J. J. (2012b). 
A comparative study of DNA extraction methods to be used in real-time PCR 
based quantification of ochratoxin A-producing molds in food products. Food 
Control, 25, 666–672.
Rodríguez, A., Rodríguez, M., Luque, M. I., Martín, A. and Córdoba, J. J. (2012c). Real-
time PCR assays for detection and quantification of aflatoxin-producing molds 
in foods. Food Microbiology, 31, 89–99.

151
Real-Time PCR for the Detection of Pathogens in Meat and Meat Products
Rodríguez, A., Rodríguez, M., Martín, A., Delgado, J. and Córdoba, J. J. (2012d). Pres-
ence of ochratoxin A on the surface of dry-cured Iberian ham after initial fungal 
growth in the drying stage. Meat Science, 92, 728–734.
Rodríguez, A., Werning, M. L., Rodríguez, M., Bermúdez, E. and Córdoba, J. J. (2012e). 
Quantitative real-time PCR method with internal amplification control to quan-
tify cyclopiazonic acid producing molds in foods. Food Microbiology, 32, 397–405.
Rodríguez-Lázaro, D., Gonzalez-García, P., Gattuso, A., Gianfranceschi, M. V. and Her-
nandez, M. (2014). Reducing time in the analysis of Listeria monocytogenes in meat, 
dairy and vegetable products. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 184, 98–105.
Rodríguez-Lázaro, D. and Hernández, M. (2013). Real time PCR in food science: 
Introduction. Current Issues in Molecular Biology, 15, 25–38.
Rodríguez-Lázaro, D., Jofre, A., Aymerich, T., Hugas, M. and Pla, M. (2004). Rapid 
quantitative detection of Listeria monocytogenes in meat products by real-time 
PCR. Society, 70, 6299–6301.
Satterfield, B. A., Stewart, A. F., Lew, C. S. et al. (2010). A quadruplex real-time PCR 
assay for rapid detection and differentiation of the Clostridium botulinum toxin 
genes A, B, E and F. Journal of Medical Microbiology, 59, 55–64.
Scheutz, F., Teel, L. D., Beutin, L. et al. (2012). Multicenter evaluation of a sequence-
based protocol for subtyping shiga toxins and standardizing stx nomenclature. 
Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 50, 2951–2963.
Sharma, N. K, Rees, C. E. D., Christine, E. R. and Dodd, C. E. R. (2000). Development 
of a single-reaction multiplex PCR toxin typing assay for Staphylococcus aureus 
strains. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 66, 1347–1353.
Singh, P. and Mustapha, A. (2015). Multiplex real-time PCR assays for detection of 
eight shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli in food samples by melting curve 
analysis. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 215, 101–108.
Szabo, K., Trojnar, E., Anheyer-Behmenburg, H. et al. (2015). Detection of hepatitis E 
virus RNA in raw sausages and liver sausages from retail in Germany using an 
optimized method. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 215, 149–156.
Theoret, J. R., Cooper, K. K., Zekarias, B. et al. (2012). The Campylobacter jejuni Dps 
homologue is important for in vitro biofilm formation and cecal colonization of 
poultry and may serve as a protective antigen for vaccination. Clinical and Vac-
cine Immunology, 19, 1426–1431.
Thermo Scientific. (2016). T042-TECHNICAL BULLETIN NanoDrop Spectro-
photometers, Assessment of Nucleic Acid Purity. Available at http://www 
.nanodrop.com/Library/T042-NanoDrop-Spectrophotometers-Nucleic-Acid-
Purity-Ratios.pdf (accessed 23 May 2016).
Thisted Lambertz, S., Nilsson, C. and Hallanvuo, S. (2008a). TaqMan-based real-time 
PCR method for detection of Yersinia pseudotuberculosis in food. Applied and Envi-
ronmental Microbiology, 74, 6465–6469.
Thisted Lambertz, S., Nilsson, C., Hallanvuo, S. and Lindblad, M. (2008b). Real-time 
PCR method for detection of pathogenic Yersinia enterocolitica in food. Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology, 74, 6060–6067.
VanGuilder, H. D., Vrana, K. E. and Freeman, W. M. (2008). Twenty-five years of quan-
titative PCR for gene expression analysis. BioTechniques, 44, 619–626.
Velasco, V.,  Sherwood J.S., Rojas-García P.P., Logue, C.M. Multiplex Real-Time PCR 
for Detection of Staphylococcus aureus, mecA and Panton-Valentine Leukocidin 
(PVL) Genes from Selective Enrichments from Animals and Retail Meat. PLOS 
ONE 9, e97617.

152
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Velusamy, V., Arshak, K., Korostynska, O., Oliwa, K. and Adley, C. (2010). An over-
view of foodborne pathogen detection: In the perspective of biosensors. Biotech-
nology Advances, 28, 232–254.
Verhaegen, B., Van Damme, I., Heyndrickx, M. et al. (2016). Evaluation of detection 
methods for non-O157 shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli from food. Interna-
tional Journal of Food Microbiology, 219, 64–70.
Wang, H., Dong, Y., Wang, G., Xu, X. and Zhou, G. (2016). Effect of growth media on 
gene expression levels in Salmonella typhimurium biofilm formed on stainless 
steel surface. Food Control, 59, 546–552.
Wolffs, P., Norling, B., Hoorfar, J., Griffiths, M. and Radström, P. (2005). Quantification 
of Campylobacter spp. in chicken rinse samples by using flotation prior to real-
time PCR. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 71, 5759–5764.
Yadav, A. S., Saxena, G. K., Saxena, V. K. and Kataria, J. M. (2016). Study on heat stress 
response in Salmonella typhimurium and Salmonella enteritidis and its impact on 
their attachment to dressed broiler skin surface. Asian Journal of Animal and Vet-
erinary Advances, 11, 114–121.
Ye, K., Zhang, Q., Jiang, Y., Xu, X., Cao, J. and Zhou, G. (2012). Rapid detection of 
viable Listeria monocytogenes in chilled pork by real-time reverse-transcriptase 
PCR. Food Control, 25, 117–124.
Yoon, S. Y., Chung, G. T., Kang, D. H., Ryu, C., Yoo, C. K. and Seong, W. K. (2005). 
Application of real-time PCR for quantitative detection of Clostridium botulinum 
type A toxin gene in food. Microbiology and Immunology, 49, 505–511.
Zeaki, N., Cao, R., Skandamis, P. N., Rådström, P. and Schelin, J. (2014). Assessment 
of high and low enterotoxin a producing Staphylococcus aureus strains on pork 
sausage. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 182, 44–50.
Zell, C., Resch, M., Rosenstein, R., Albrecht, T., Hertel, C. and Götz, F. (2008). Charac-
terization of toxin production of coagulase-negative staphylococci isolated from 
food and starter cultures. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 127, 246–251.
Zheng, Q., Mikš-Krajnik, M., Yang, Y., Xu, W. and Gyun Yuk, H. (2014). Real-time PCR 
method combined with immunomagnetic separation for detecting healthy and 
heat-injured Salmonella typhimurium on raw duck wings. International Journal of 
Food Microbiology, 186, 6–13.

153
5
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat 
Safety: Recent Advances in Nano-
technology Integration
Rosa Pilolli, Nicoletta Ditaranto, and Linda Monaci
CONTENTS
5.1 
Introduction ................................................................................................154
5.1.1 Nanomaterial Implementation for Enhanced Sensing 
Performance ....................................................................................156
5.2 
 Advances in Screening Methods for Meat Contamination 
Monitoring .................................................................................................. 157
5.2.1 Microbial Contamination ............................................................. 157
5.2.1.1 Optical Fibers and Microarrays .................................... 159
5.2.1.2 FTIR Spectroscopy ..........................................................164
5.2.1.3 Light-Scattering Sensors ................................................ 166
5.2.1.4 Hyperspectral Imaging .................................................. 166
5.2.1.5 Latest Trends in Optical Sensors .................................. 166
5.2.1.6 Electrochemical and Electromechanical
 
Sensors .............................................................................. 167
5.2.1.7 Electronic Nose-Based Sensors ..................................... 169
5.2.1.8 Advances in Nanotechnology Integration for 
Microbial Contamination ............................................... 171
5.2.2 Chemical Contamination ..............................................................172
5.2.2.1 Veterinary Drug Residues: Overview and 
Legislative Frame ............................................................ 173
5.2.2.2 Optical Sensors ................................................................177
5.2.2.3 Electromechanical Sensors ............................................183
5.2.2.4 Advances in Nanotechnology Integration for 
Chemical Contamination ...............................................184
5.3 
Concluding Remarks ................................................................................. 187
References ............................................................................................................. 187

154
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
5.1 Introduction
Meat is an important constituent of the human diet and is consumed world-
wide mainly because of its valuable nutrients such as protein, fat, iron, zinc, 
niacin, and vitamins B6 and B12, all of which are essential for balanced and 
healthy nutrition. However, both meat and poultry can also become a vehicle 
of human foodborne diseases, mainly due to the potential contamination of 
food from chemical and biological hazards. In spite of extensive food safety 
regulations and excellent monitoring systems in the food industry, one of 
the greatest challenges for authorities is the control of foodborne diseases. 
The number of foodborne outbreaks associated with eating meat and poul-
try products is still raising intense consumer concern about meat safety. The 
continuous developments in livestock practices have posed newer threats 
in terms of physical, chemical, and biological hazards for the final product 
quality and related consumer health. New risks, in addition to the most com-
mon pathogens, toxins, drugs, pesticides, and heavy metals, have emerged 
in recent years due to indiscriminate agriculture and animal husbandry 
practices causing serious health implications in terms of causing illness.
The more quality and safety are challenged, the more stringent tools are 
needed to monitor effectively the contamination and to provide marketable 
products according to prescribed standard parameters. Traditional analyti-
cal methods, such as culture and colony counting for pathogen monitoring or 
liquid chromatography (LC)–tandem mass spectrometry, for the detection of 
chemical contaminants are still widely used in the meat industry to preserve 
food safety and quality. However, most of them are time consuming (up to 
several days), and they are sometimes expensive and require strict adherence 
to protocol, complicated procedures, and trained personnel. Increase in meat 
production and threat of contamination have led the industry to pursue rapid 
and innovative methods of analysis to safeguard the health and safety of con-
sumers. In this context, sensor technology is nowadays gaining more interest, 
as it is perceived to comprise several advantages over conventional methods 
such as cost-effectiveness and the possibility for real-time and on-site analysis.
Physical and biological sensors (biosensors) are the two most promising 
technologies that might fit this purpose. According to the International Union 
of Pure and Applied Chemistry, a chemical sensor is “a device that transforms 
chemical information, ranging from the concentration of a specific sample 
component to total composition analysis, into an analytically useful signal. 
The chemical information, mentioned above, may originate from a chemi-
cal reaction of the analyte or from a physical property of the system investi-
gated” (Hulanicki et al., 1991). Biosensors  are “chemical sensors in which the 
recognition system utilizes a biochemical mechanism” (Thevenot et al., 1999). 
The recognition mechanism is crucial in biosensing performance. For a long 
time, recognition elements, such as enzymes or antibodies, isolated from 
living organisms were preferred for their unquestionable selectivity and 

155
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
specificity, but new artificial and/or engineered recognition elements, such 
as aptamers, molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs), phages, and affibodies, 
were recently tested and improved for their implementation in chemical sen-
sors and biosensors (Table 5.1). Most of these alternative recognition elements 
TABLE 5.1
Advantages and Limitations of Recognition Elements in Chemical Sensors and 
Biosensors
Recognition Elements
Sensor Designation
Advantages
Limitations
Classical
Enzymes
Enzymatic biosensor
Specificity
Purification is costly 
and time consuming
–
Simple apparatus 
and procedures
Poor stability
–
–
Efficient only at 
optimum pH and 
temperature
Antibodies
Immunosensor
High affinity
Limited target (protein)
–
Specificity
Laborious production
–
–
Production requires 
use of animals
–
–
Lack of stability
Nucleic acid
Genosensor
Stability
Limited target 
(complimentary 
nucleic acid)
Whole cells
Whole cell biosensor
Low-cost 
preparation
–
Reduced purifica-
tion requirements
–
Recent
Phages
Phage biosensor
Specificity and 
sensitivity
Laborious selection
Stability
Skilled personnel 
required for selection
Aptamers
Aptasensor
Easy to modify
Laborious selection
–
Possibility to 
design structure
Affinity constant not 
always comparable to 
the relevant antibody
–
Possibility to 
denaturalize and 
to rehybridize
–
–
Possibility to 
distinguish 
targets with 
different 
functional groups
–
–
Thermally stable
–
–
In vitro synthesis
–
(Continued)

156
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
were initially devised to reduce the cost of production but a few of them were 
proved comparable in term of selectivity with traditional solutions.
Together with the discovery of new recognition elements, the integration of 
nanotechnology has contributed to progress in sensor performance (Inbaraj 
and Chen, 2016; Cho et al., 2014; Warriner et al., 2014). In the following sec-
tions, an overview of the most recent and relevant achievements in the devel-
opment of analytical methods for chemical and biological contamination 
monitoring in meat samples is provided. The contribution will start from the 
critical discussion of consolidated sensing platforms, and then widen to the 
new trends and advances achieved by nanotechnology integration.
5.1.1 Nanomaterial Implementation for Enhanced Sensing Performance
The development of novel sensors and biosensors targeted to the food 
industry has gained a growing interest over the years and represents one 
of the key fields that has pushed the development of nanobiotechnology 
and nanomaterial science. The sensing capacity of the detection systems 
is being improved by employing nanomaterials due to their unique physi-
cal and chemical properties. When used in electrical biosensors, they pos-
sess a very high capacity for charge transfer, which makes them suitable to 
reach lower detection limits and higher sensitivity values. Nanomaterials 
can also contribute as labels or transducers modifiers so as to improve the 
performance of the biosensor. Some of the reported nanomaterials are quan-
tum dots: they are crystalline clusters in the nanometer range that can be 
TABLE 5.1 (Continued )
Advantages and Limitations of Recognition Elements in Chemical Sensors and 
Biosensors
Recognition Elements
Sensor Designation
Advantages
Limitations
MIPs
MIP sensor
High thermal, 
chemical, and 
mechanical 
tolerance
Complex fabrication 
methodology
–
Reusability
Time-consuming 
process
–
Low cost
Incompatibility with 
aqueous media
–
–
Leakage of template 
molecules
Affibodies
Affibody sensor
Lack of disulfide 
bonds that 
enables 
intracellular 
applications
–
–
Long shelf life
–
MIPs, molecularly imprinted polymers.

157
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
synthesized from semiconductor materials. If so, their exceptional optical 
properties (such as high quantum yield, high molar extinction coefficients, 
high resistance to photobleaching, and exceptional resistance to photo and 
chemical degradation) make them one of the most interesting materials for 
bioimaging, labeling, and sensing. Similarly, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and 
metal nanoparticles (NPs) (AuNPs, AgNPs, etc.) have attracted considerable 
attention for the assembling of novel electrochemical biosensing systems 
due to their excellent conductivity and electrocatalytic activity, high surface/
volume ratio, and their ability to be functionalized. Thanks to these incom-
parable properties, nanobiosensors can achieve very low detection limits 
(even single molecule or cell), can be easily implemented in portable devices, 
and may ensure higher stability compared to the usual enzymes or dyes 
employed in the classical methods/devices. In recent years, novel nanoma-
terials have been greatly used in modifying electrode surfaces to achieve 
a faster electron transfer of biomolecules. The introduction of nanomate-
rials into electrochemical sensors also brings further advantages such as 
decreased overpotentials, ensuring the reversibility of some redox reactions, 
which are irreversible at unmodified electrodes, and novel labeling opportu-
nities including multidetection capabilities (Pérez-Lόpez and Merkoçi, 2011).
5.2  Advances in Screening Methods for 
Meat Contamination Monitoring
5.2.1 Microbial Contamination
Foodborne diseases can often be caused by the consumption of food contami-
nated by pathogenic microorganisms such as bacteria, viruses, parasites, and 
related toxins. Conventional methods for detecting pathogens include micros-
copy-, nucleic acid-, and immunoassay-based techniques. The gold standard for 
food pathogen detection is colony counting (CFU) on an agar plate, which takes 
two to three days for initial results, and up to one week for confirming pathogen 
specificity. In addition, with the progress made in DNA management and poly-
merase chain reaction (PCR) researcher attention was moved from targeting 
the microorganism itself to targeting specific genes. Although the PCR-based 
techniques and several other molecular diagnostics are highly sensitive and 
selective, they require undamaged DNA, experienced personnel, and expen-
sive equipment as well as reagents, thus making the overall cost of detection 
high enough to prevent wide-scale application. As an alternative, immunoas-
says can be preferred, such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) 
and Western blot analyses, targeting specific proteins or carbohydrate moieties 
related to pathogens (Gopinath et al., 2014), providing high sensitivity and 
molecular fingerprinting of the pathogen. Still, the major enduring limitation 
of such traditional detection methods is time to results. In Figure 5.1, a scheme 
of conventional and innovative methods for pathogen detection is presented as 

158
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Pathogen detection schemes
Whole organism
Conventional
methods:
• Cell culture using agar
   or broth medium
• Immunofluorescence
• Enzyme immunoassay
• Latex agglutination
Current technologies:
• Elastic light scattering
• Phage-based methods
• SPR biosensor
• Micro/nano devices
• Aptamer-based method
• Nanoparticlemethods
• Ramanspectroscopy
• Lateral flow assay
Peptides/proteins
Conventional
methods:
• Immunofluorescence
• Enzyme immunoassay
Current technologies:
• Microfluidic ELISA
• Optofluidic biosensors
• SPR biosensor
• Photonic crystal
   biosensors
• Nanoparticle methods
• FT-IR
• Raman spectroscopy
• Phage-based methods
• Micro/nano devices
• Aptamer-based method
• Mass spectrometry
Nucleic acids
Conventional
methods: 
• PCR followed by
- Gel electrophoresis
- Restriction endonu-
   clease digestion
- Dot blots
- High-pressure liquid
   chomatography
- Electrochemilumines-
   cence
- Direct sequencing
Current technologies:
• Microfluidic PCR
• Microelectrode arrays
• Nanoparticle methods
• Nanopore sequencing
• FTIR
• Phage-based methods
• Micro/nano devices
Lipopolysaccharides
Conventional
methods:
• Limulus amebocyte
   assay
• Cell-based assays
• EndoLISA
• Pyrogene rFC assay
Current technologies:
• Limulus amebocyte
   assay
• Cell-based assays
• EndoLISA
• Pyrogene rFC assay
Metabolites
Conventional
methods:
• Radio labeled CO2
   release by culture
• Detect O2 tension
   (ESP® culture)
• Acidified pH check
• GC–MS
Current
technologies:
• Impedance biosensors
• Gas microsensors
• Microcalorimetry
• Microfluidic pH
   sensors
FIGURE 5.1
Overview of pathogen detection techniques. ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; FTIR, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy; GC–MS, 
gas chromatography–mass spectrometry; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; rFC, recombinant factor C; SPR, surface plasmon resonance.

159
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
a general overview. Rapid detection of food pathogens is challenging because 
microorganisms need to be recovered from food matrices, differentiated from 
nonpathogenic microorganisms, and then detected and quantified. This is a big 
issue for both industry and regulatory agencies because products with short 
shelf life may spoil before test results are available and because time is critical 
when identifying and controlling foodborne disease outbreaks.
Food contamination can be spoted by direct targeting of the pathogen itself 
or by indirect detection of specific metabolites produced by the biochemi-
cal processes occurring into the microorganism. In the following sections, 
some of the most recent and representative investigations on the develop-
ment of sensing platforms for microbial contamination in meat samples are 
presented; particular attention is devoted to sensors already tested on real 
samples and on enhancement. The works have been classified based on the 
transduction mechanism employed for the detection, and the main features 
of each investigation are itemized in Table 5.2.
5.2.1.1 Optical Fibers and Microarrays
Among the various phenomena exploited for optical detection, fluorescence, 
chemiluminescence and absorbance measurements by optical fibers or 
microarray configurations, and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectros-
copy represent the most well-established approaches for meat contamination 
monitoring. More recently, light scattering and hyperspectral imaging (HI) 
have been proposed as alternative optical transductions in sensing platforms 
for their potential to combine spectral and spatial information of the food 
sample under investigation.
Biosensors based on optical fiber exploit a tapered fiber in total internal reflec-
tion operating mode, to send excitation laser light signals to the detection sur-
face and receive emitted light. Light propagation through a fiber or waveguide 
can be a very sensitive phenomenon, which makes the optical fibers excellent 
detectors for a variety of applications in the industry, especially the detection 
of pathogenic organisms. A portable evanescent-wave fiber-optic biosensor 
to detect Escherichia coli O157:H7 in seeded ground beef samples was demon-
strated by DeMarco and Lim (2002), reporting 100% correct identification of 
positive samples obtained at 9.0 × 103 CFU/g for 25 g and at 5.2 × 102 CFU/g 
for 10 g ground beef samples with silica and polystyrene waveguides, respec-
tively. Similarly, Liu et al. (2003) developed a biosensor, consisting of a chemi-
luminescence reaction cell, a fiber-optic light guide, and a luminometer linked 
to a personal computer, in conjunction with immunomagnetic separation for 
rapid detection of E. coli O157:H7. The chemiluminescence biosensor was selec-
tive toward E. coli O157:H7 even in the presence of other bacteria in the sample, 
including Salmonella typhimurium, Campylobacter jejuni, and Listeria monocyto-
genes. The authors could detect E. coli O157:H7 in ground beef and chicken car-
cass, with detection limits of 3.2 × 102 and 4.4 × 102 CFU/g, respectively, and 
time to results of 1.5 hours without any enrichment. Another fiber-optic portable 

160
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 5.2
Summary of Sensors for Microbial/Fungal Contamination Detection
Target Analyte
Transduction 
System
Nanomaterial 
Integration
Food Matrix
Recognition 
Element
Reference
Salmonella typhimurium
Optical fiber 
(fluorescence)
None
Ground pork samples
Antibody
Ko and Grant (2006)
S. typhimurium
e-nose
None
Fresh beef
None
Balasubramanian et al. (2008)
S. typhimurium
SPR biosensor
None
Chicken carcass
Antibody
Lan et al. (2008)
Salmonella enterica
Optical fiber 
(fluorescence)
None
Shell egg and chicken 
breast
Antibody
Valadez et al. (2009)
Listeria monocytogenes
Optical fiber 
(fluorescence)
None
Ready-to-eat beef, 
chicken, and turkey
Antibody–
aptamer
Ohk et al. (2010)
L. monocytogenes, Escherichia coli O157:H7 
and S. enterica
Optical fiber 
(fluorescence)
None
Ready-to-eat beef, 
chicken, and turkey 
meats
Antibody
Ohk and Bhunia (2013)
E. coli O157:H7
FTIR
None
Ground beef
None
Davis et al. (2010a)
S. typhimurium
QCM
None
Chicken
Antibody
Su and Li (2005)
S. typhimurium
e-nose
None
Beef strip loins
None
Balasubramanian et al. (2005)
S. typhimurium
e-nose
None
Beef strip loins
None
Balasubramanian et al. (2008)
E. coli O157:H7
FTIR
None
Ground beef
None
Davis et al. (2010b)
S. typhimurium
FTIR
None
Beef
None
Amamcharla et al. (2010)
S. typhimurium, Salmonella dublin, 
Salmonella thompson, Staphylococcus 
aureus, Yersinia enterocolitica, L. monocyto-
genes, Shigella flexneri, Shigella bogdii, 
Campylobacter jejuni, E. coli O157:H7, 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus, Vibrio cholerae, 
Enterobacter sakazakii, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
Optical microar-
ray
None
Pork
ss-DNA
Bai et al. (2010)
(Continued)

161
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
TABLE 5.2 (Continued)
Summary of Sensors for Microbial/Fungal Contamination Detection
Target Analyte
Transduction 
System
Nanomaterial 
Integration
Food Matrix
Recognition 
Element
Reference
Toxigenic Penicillum nordicum
e-nose
None
Ham
None
Leggieri et al. (2011)
L. monocytogenes
BARDOT 
light-scattering 
sensor
None
Hotdog
Protein 60
Koo et al. (2011)
Salmonella
QCM
None
Beef
Odorant-
binding 
protein
Sankaran et al. (2011)
S. typhimurium
e-nose
None
Beef strip loin
None
Balasubramanian et al. (2012)
Salmonella
e-nose
None
Beef
Peptide
Panigrahi et al. (2012)
S. typhimurium
Electrochemical 
impedence 
spectroscopy
None
Pork
Antibody
Kim et al. (2013)
E. coli K12
Mie scattering 
(smartphone)
None
Ground beef
None
Liang et al. (2014)
Salmonella and Campylobacter
DVD microarray
None
Chicken
ss-DNA
Tortajada-Genaro et al. (2015)
Campylobacter
Square wave 
voltammetry
None
Chicken
ss-DNA
Morant-Miñana and Elizalde 
(2015)
C. jejuni and Campylobacter coli
BARDOT 
light-scattering 
sensor
None
Chicken
None
He et al. (2015)
P. nordicum
e-nose
Nose
Dry-cured meats
None
Lippolis et al. (2016)
Y. enterocolitica
Differential pulse 
voltammetry
Chitosan/
nano-V2O5/ 
MWCNTs
Pork
ss-DNA
Sun et al. (2010)
(Continued)

162
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 5.2 (Continued)
Summary of Sensors for Microbial/Fungal Contamination Detection
Target Analyte
Transduction 
System
Nanomaterial 
Integration
Food Matrix
Recognition 
Element
Reference
Salmonella
Electrochemical 
impedence 
spectroscopy
GO and gold 
NPs
Pork
Aptamer
Ma et al. (2014)
S. aureus
Differential 
pulse 
voltammetry
PbS NPs
MWCNTs
Beef
ss-DNA
Abdalhai et al. (2014)
E. coli O157:H7
Differential 
pulse 
voltammetry
CdS NPs
MWCNTs
Beef
ss-DNA
Abdalhai et al. (2015)
Shiga toxin-producing E. coli
Microarray 
(absorbance)
Gold NPs
Ground beef
ss-DNA
Quintela et al. (2015)
E. coli O157:H7
Portable 
evanescent-
wave fiber-
optic
None
Beef
Antibody
De Marco and Lim (2002)
E. coli O157:H7
Chemilumines-
cence 
fiber-optic 
biosensor
None
Ground beef, 
chicken carcass, 
and lettuce samples
Antibody
Liu et al. (2003)
S. typhimurium
FRET-based 
optical fiber
None
Pork
Antibody
Ko and Grant (2006)
Salmonella
Electrochemical 
impedance 
spectroscopy
Gold NPs
Pork
Antibody
Yang et al. (2009)
BARDOT, bacterial rapid detection using optical scattering technology; CNT, carbon nanotubes; FRET, fluorescence resonance energy transfer; FTIR, 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy; GO, graphene oxide; MWCNTs, multiwalled carbon nanotubes; NP, nanoparticle; SPR, surface plasmon 
resonance; QCMs, quartz-crystal microbalances.

163
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
biosensor working on the principle of fluorescence resonance energy transfer 
(FRET) for rapid detection of S. typhimurium in pork samples was reported in 
2006 by Ko and Grant. Valadez et al. (2009) also achieved a limit of detection 
(LOD) of 102 CFU/mL for Salmonella enterica in egg and chicken after six hours 
enrichment by a fiber-optic biosensor integrating a fluorescently labeled second-
ary antibody. Ohk et al. (2010) described an alternative, optical (fluorescence) 
based, fiber-optic approach in which they used a capture antibody and a flu-
orescently labeled aptamer to sandwich L. monocytogenes with an LOD of 102 
CFU/25 g in ready-to-eat meat samples. The investigation was recently updated 
with the same authors achieving multiplexing: L. monocytogenes, E. coli O157:H7, 
and S. enterica were simultaneously detected in a single assay (Ohk and Bhunia, 
2013). Optical waveguides were functionalized with polyclonal antibodies and 
exposed to bacterial suspensions or enriched food samples (ready-to-eat beef, 
chicken, and turkey meats) for two hours. Pathogens were detected after react-
ing with Alexa-Fluor 647-labeled monoclonal antibodies (McAbs). The biosensor 
was able to detect each pathogen, individually or in a mixture with very little 
cross-reactivity. The LOD for the sensor was 103 CFU/mL for all three patho-
gens. Furthermore, the biosensor successfully detected each pathogen, grown 
in a mixture from enriched meat samples in under 24 hours.
Optical microarrays have been quite popular sensing solutions in recent 
decades for several application fields mainly due to the high multiplexing 
capabilities and easy read-out not requiring expensive equipment. A few 
investigations dealt with the detection of microbiological contamination in 
meat samples, mainly based on the detection of specific DNA target genes 
preliminarily amplified by PCR.
Bai et al. (2010) described the development of a silicon-based optical thin-
film biosensor for the detection of 11 foodborne pathogens, in pork meat, using 
a microarray approach with biospecific DNA probes immobilized on a sensor 
surface. Specific probes with aldehyde moieties were arrayed and covalently 
attached to a hydrazine-derivatized chip surface, and then the biotinylated 
PCR products were hybridized with their relevant probes. To complete the 
sandwich assay format, anti-biotin IgG conjugated to horseradish peroxidase 
(HRP) was then passed over the surface, followed by substrate, which allowed 
the detection of the target DNA sequence as a concentration-dependent color 
change on the surface of the optical biosensor. Interestingly, the detection of 
PCR fragment targets took only 30 minutes. Very recently, a novel microar-
ray biosensor was presented for identification and genotyping of Salmonella 
and Campylobacter in meat products (Tortajada-Genaro et al., 2015). Also, this 
method was based on a DNA microarray developed on a standard DVD as 
support for the hybridization assay and a DVD driver as scanner; a scheme of 
the set up was presented in Figure 5.2. This approach was found to be highly 
sensitive, reproducible, and, interestingly, high working capacity (20 samples 
per disc). One hundred isolates from meat samples, collected in a poultry fac-
tory, were analyzed by the DVD microarraying and fluorescent real-time PCR. 
An excellent correlation was observed for both generic and specific.

164
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
5.2.1.2 FTIR Spectroscopy
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy is another technique with 
considerable potential for application in foodborne pathogen optical detec-
tion. Among the first applications, in 2002 Ellis et al. reported on an FTIR-
based method used directly on the food surface to produce biochemically 
interpretable fingerprints of meat substrate. The strength of this approach 
relies on the potential to enhance and accelerate the detection of microbial 
spoilage. Quantitative interpretation of FTIR spectra was possible using par-
tial least squares (PLSs) regression, which provided accurate estimates of 
bacterial loads calculated directly from the meat surface in 60 s (Ellis et al., 
2002).
Since then, the use of FTIR techniques coupled with different chemometric 
analyses has been expanded and successfully applied to detect, discriminate, 
identify, and classify bacteria belonging to different species, including food-
borne pathogens such as Listeria (Davis et al., 2011), E. coli (Kim et al., 2006a; 
1
(d)
(b)
(a)
(c)
(e)
hns
DVD disc
Laser
λ = 650 nm
C+
ceuE
hipO
16S
STM4497
sdf
hns
C. jeujuni
C. coli
S. Enteridis
C. Typhimurium
C+
  ceuE
hipO
16S
STM4497
sdf 
hns
C+
  ceuE
hipO
16S
STM4497
sdf 
hns
C+
ceuE
hipO
16S
STM4497
sdf
hns
C+
ceuE
hipO
16S
STM4497
sdf
hns
DVD method
Rotatory
motor
Optical pick-up
assembly
Reference method
hipO
16S
STM
Sdf
CeuE
hns
hipO 
16S
STM
Sdf
CeuE
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
–
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
–
–
–
–
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
C–
FIGURE 5.2
(a) Scheme of reading principle by a DVD drive: the reflections of the laser beam following 
the spiral track are converted into electrical pulses and collected by a data acquisition card. 
(b) Microarray layout: inter-spot distance 1.5 mm, spot diameter 0.55 mm. C−: negative con-
trol, noncomplementary probe; C+: positive control, digoxigenin-labeled probe. (c) Microar-
ray images obtained for pure cultures (pathogen concentration 16 × 103 CFU/μL). (d) Results 
for 25 poultry samples with positive presence of pathogens (color scheme based on optical 
densities registered by DVD drive: mid-grey-positive, light-grey positive with a low signal 
(concentration <102), grey-positive with an intermediate signal (concentration 102–104), dark 
grey-positive with a high signal (concentration >104). (e) Results of reference methods (quan-
titative polymerase chain reaction [qPCR] and microbiological/biochemical analysis) are 
expressed as positive presence (+) or negative presence. (With kind permission from Springer 
Science+Business Media: Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry, Microarray on digital versatile 
disc for identification and genotyping of Salmonella and Campylobacter in meat products, 407, 
2015, 7285–7294, Tortajada-Genaro, L. A. et al.)

165
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
Mura et al., 2012; Davis et al., 2012), and Salmonella (Kim et al., 2006b). Detecting 
pathogenic bacteria in food using FTIR has been done using direct and indi-
rect methods, although the indirect approach is most common. In the direct 
method, infrared (IR) spectra of the contaminated food are collected directly 
from the sample and compared with the spectra of a blank (uncontaminated) 
sample. If successful, direct analyses could enable near real-time food analysis 
because spectral acquisition requires at most five minutes. The presence of a 
new absorbance peak and/or a change in peak intensity compared to baseline 
spectra of uncontaminated sample may indicate the presence of a pathogen. 
However, in many cases, the spectra collected in a direct method contain a 
complex spectral background owing to the presence of food matrix, which 
challenges the spectral interpretation. Indirect detection reduces or eliminates 
this spectral background from food by using a bacterial separation step such 
as filtration or immunomagnetic separation prior to spectral acquisition.
Concerning microbial contamination monitoring, beside the total bacterial 
amount, specific information about their viability is also of major concern in 
the food industry because injured bacteria pose a significant health threat if 
they propagate during food distribution and storage. Since FTIR methods rely 
on the analysis of the biochemical composition of cells, they may be used to 
differentiate live and dead microorganisms. As an example, Davis et al. (2010b) 
used an FTIR method coupled with filtration and immunomagnetic separa-
tion to discriminate heat-killed E. coli O157:H7 in ground beef. Differences in 
the spectra were very small and occurred mainly in the amide and nucleic 
acid regions, likely generated by heat-induced denaturation of these biomol-
ecules in the killing step. For discrimination studies, second derivative spectra 
were generated to increase the number of distinctive spectral features, and 
principal component analysis was used to successfully classify live and dead 
E. coli O157:H7. A similar approach was also successfully employed by the 
same authors for the detection and differentiation of live and heat-treated S. 
enterica serovars inoculated onto chicken breast (Davis et al., 2010a).
In general, microbial contamination can be spotted not only by detection 
of the offending microorganism itself but also via detection of volatile com-
pounds produced by its metabolism. As an example of such an approach, 
Amamcharla et al. (2010) proposed an interesting investigation based on the 
FTIR fingerprinting of headspace volatile compounds in packaged meat to 
discriminate Salmonella-contaminated packed commodities. A suitable head-
space sampling setup was designed to collect the headspace volatiles from 
the packed meat to the FTIR gas cell (Amamcharla et al., 2010). The whole 
FTIR spectrum was divided into several regions, based on the absorbance 
properties of various volatiles components in the headspace of meat package. 
Principal component analysis was performed on the entire spectrum (4000–
500 cm−1) as well as on the selected subregions of entire spectrum. Two sta-
tistical classification techniques (linear and quadratic discriminate analysis) 
were used to develop classification models for nondestructive discrimination 
of Salmonella-contaminated packed beef samples from uncontaminated ones.

166
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
5.2.1.3 Light-Scattering Sensors
Light-scattering sensors measure the spatial distribution of the scattered 
light from an object, captured by a photodetector, photomultiplier tube 
(PMT), or charge-coupled device (CCD): the PMT provides high signal 
gain through signal amplification and is typically used as a point detector, 
whereas a CCD collects the two-dimensional (2D) spatial distribution of scat-
tered light, allowing the sample imaging. A light-scattering device called 
BARDOT (bacterial rapid detection using optical scattering technology) that 
utilizes a 635 nm laser and a CCD detector was firstly developed by Purdue 
University to capture 2D scattering patterns from bacterial colonies grown 
on agar medium (Bae et al., 2007; Banada et al., 2007). It directly applies the 
laser beam to the center of a colony and creates a circular symmetric scatter 
pattern without destroying the cells; the resulting forward light-scattered 
image is automatically captured by a CCD sensor. Depending on the colony’s 
physical characteristics (size, shape, and refractive index), cell surface chemi-
cal compositions, and the interactions with different agar media, scatter 
patterns distinctive among bacterial species can be produced. These light-
scattering images are automatically processed via software for image fea-
tures extraction and analysis associated with the BARDOT instrument and 
bacterial classification can be accomplished at the genus, species, and serovar 
level based on their similarity to known scatter patterns in a library. Very 
recently, a novel BARDOT-based sensor was proposed for high-throughput 
screening of Campylobacter colonies in spiked ground chicken and naturally 
contaminated fresh chicken cuts. Combined with real-time PCR verification, 
BARDOT was able to identify Campylobacter isolates from retail chicken. 
Moreover, applying passive filtration to food samples facilitated the isolation 
of pure Campylobacter colonies and therefore overcame the interference from 
the food matrix (He et al., 2015).
5.2.1.4 Hyperspectral Imaging
HI represents an emerging technology based on light scattering, raising 
interest for its ability of performing real-time assessment and spectral 2D 
mapping. This technique integrates digital imaging and traditional spectros-
copy into a single system to achieve simultaneously both spatial and spectral 
characterization from an object; such an approach is not detailed in this sec-
tion, because it is already the subject of Chapter 2 of this book.
5.2.1.5 Latest Trends in Optical Sensors
Among the latest trends in optical sensors, great attention has been paid to 
smartphone integration in the sensing platform, due to its portability and 
ubiquitous availability. The ubiquitous availability guarantees a convenient 
and cost-effective acquisition of smartphones and a large number of poten-
tial subscribers for smartphone-based sensor systems. Smartphones can be 

167
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
integrated in biosensing approaches as optical detectors for imaging and 
optical intensity measurements thanks to their integrated cameras. Sev-
eral studies suggested that Mie scattering from a biomodified microparticle 
scan be digitally imaged to report concentrations of proteins and bacteria 
(San Park et al., 2013). Starting from this idea, Liang et al. (2014) developed 
a reagentless approach using a smartphone to detect microbial spoilage on 
ground beef (Figure 5.3). In their work, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) 
and fluorescence microscopy experiments revealed that E. coli could change 
the size and morphology of fat particles in beef, which modulated Mie scat-
tering in color. The smartphone was also used to record the color at differ-
ent angles for microbial spoilage detection without antibodies, microbeads, 
or any other reagents. This study provided a promising approach to apply 
smartphone-based color quantification in practical monitoring of microbial 
contamination on food products.
5.2.1.6 Electrochemical and Electromechanical Sensors
By definition, an electrochemical biosensor is a self-contained integrated 
device, which is capable of providing specific quantitative or semiquantitative 
(a)
(b)
iPhone 4S
and holder
Ground beef
sample
Angle of
scatter detection
NIR LED
and holder
(c)
(d)
(e)
FIGURE 5.3
(a) The benchtop system consists of an iPhone 4S and its holder, a near-infrared light-emitting 
diode (NIR LED) and its holder, and a ground beef sample and its holder. The angle of scatter 
detection refers to the angle between the iPhone camera and the NIR LED light source. Pho-
tographs showing the operation of the smartphone application at the four specific angles of 
scatter detection: (b) 15°, (c) 30°, (d) 45°, and (e) 60°. (Reprinted by permission from Macmillan 
Publishers Ltd., Scientific Reports, Liang et al., 2014, copyright 2014.)

168
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
analytical information using a biological-recognition element, which is 
retained in direct spatial contact with an electrochemical transduction ele-
ment (Pilolli et al., 2013). Due to the low cost and ease of miniaturization, 
electrochemical biosensors hold great promise for particular applications 
where minimizing size and cost is crucial, such as online contamination 
monitoring and point-of-care (POC) diagnosis.
Electrochemical biosensors can be classified into potentiometric, ampero-
metric, voltammetric, and impedance types. Potentiometric sensors have 
been traditionally defined as zero-current devices that measure the poten-
tial across an interface, often a membrane. By contrast, both amperometry 
and voltammetry are based on the measurement of current as a function 
of applied electrode-solution voltage. During amperometric measurement, 
the working electrode (i.e., the sensing electrode) is held at constant poten-
tial, while the current is monitored as a function of time and related to the 
concentration of the analyte. During voltammetric measurement, the current 
of the working electrode is recorded as a function of the potential. Several 
types of experiment may be performed to gather information from voltam-
metry (e.g., cyclic, linear sweep, square wave, stripping, and pulse). Recently, 
Morant-Miñana and Elizalde (2015) reported on the first electrochemical 
genosensor based on thin-film gold electrodes deposited onto cyclo-olefin 
polymer (COP) substrates for the detection of Campylobacter spp. in poultry 
meat. This was presented as the last step for the fabrication of a Lab on a Chip, 
integrating DNA sensor technology into a microfluidic system, believed to 
perform an automated and complete assay, including sample preparation, 
PCR amplification, and electrochemical detection of Campylobacter spp. in 
real samples. The sensing element was characterized by several surface tech-
niques and provided a good linear relationship for the concentrations of PCR 
amplicon of Campylobacter spp. between 1 and 25 nM with an LOD of 90 pM.
Impedance biosensors measure the electrical impedance of an interface by 
imposing a small sinusoidal voltage at a particular frequency and measuring 
the resulting alternating current. The current–voltage ratio gives the imped-
ance. The impedance of the interface may be measured at a single frequency 
or at different frequencies, the latter approach known as electrochemical 
impedance spectroscopy (EIS). An example of an impedimetric biosensor 
to quantify S. typhimurium in meat was developed by Kim et al. in 2013. To 
allow impedimetric biosensing, an interdigitated microelectrode was fabri-
cated by using a semiconductor fabrication process and a functionalization 
with anti-Salmonella antibodies. A multivariate data analysis was performed 
on the impedimetric responses. It was assessed that the PLS regression 
model based on the whole frequency range produced better results than the 
PLS model based on part of the frequency range or the univariate regression 
model for the quantitative determination of S. typhimurium in PBS and pork 
samples. The PLS model built with impedance data improved R2 to 0.85 and 
0.89, and reduced the root mean square of error in prediction to 1.13 and 1.02 
log CFU/mL for PBS and pork samples, respectively.

169
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
As electromechanical platforms, quartz crystal microbalances (QCMs) 
demonstrated remarkable performance in biosensing such as high sensitiv-
ity and label-free detection. However, only a few examples of the application 
of such approaches to meat contamination management can be found. In 
QCM biosensors, the biological-recognition event generates a mass change 
of the sensing layer, giving rise to a change in the resonant frequency of the 
microbalance. Su and Li in 2005 demonstrated a QCM immunosensor for the 
detection of S. typhimurium with simultaneous measurements of significant 
changes in the resonance frequency and motional resistance. In the direct 
detection of S. typhimurium in chicken meat sample, resonance frequency 
and motional resistance were proportional to the cell concentration in the 
range of 105–108 and 106–108 cells/mL, respectively. Using anti-Salmonella 
magnetic beads as a separator/concentrator for sample pretreatment as 
well as a marker for signal amplification, the detection limit was lowered to 
102 cells/mL based on the resistance measurement.
5.2.1.7 Electronic Nose-Based Sensors
Electronic noses (e-noses) have been applied to microbial contamination 
detection as artificial olfactory systems to sense the volatile metabolites pro-
file that arise from various food products during bacteria growth. Four major 
sensor technologies are currently used in commercially available e-noses—
metal–oxide–semiconductors (MOSs), metal–oxide–semiconductor field-
effect transistors (MOSFETs), conducting organic polymers (CPs), and 
piezoelectric crystals (Loutfi et al., 2015). In food applications, MOS and CP 
sensors are most commonly used. The output of MOS and CP sensors to a 
target compound is represented by a resistance or voltage change caused by 
two phenomena—one related to chemical interaction of the volatile compo-
nent with the sensor surface and the other related to electron transport. The 
rate of change occurring due to these two phenomena defines the magnitude 
of the sensor responses. Typically, the sensing element in MOS e-noses is 
usually sensitive to a specific volatile organic compound (VOC) while those 
of CP sensors are mostly nonspecific. The success and reliability of e-nose 
systems for safety of food products through their headspace monitoring 
depend to a large extent on appropriate statistical data analysis and pattern 
recognition. These pattern recognition techniques help to construct a reliable 
algorithm for discerning the “smell patterns” acquired from food products 
for classification or prediction purposes. Smell patterns obtained from the 
e-nose sensors can be analyzed using various statistical-based pattern rec-
ognition tools such as principal component regression, PLSs, factorial dis-
criminant analysis, cluster analysis, and linear and quadratic discriminant 
analysis (Loutfi et al., 2015).
MOS- and CP-based sensors have been used individually with moderate 
success in identifying spoilage and contamination in stored beef. Balasub-
ramanian et al. (2005) used a commercially available Cyranose-320™ e-nose 

170
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
system to identify S. typhimurium in inoculated beef samples. An e-nose 
containing an array of 32 conducting polymer sensors was used to obtain 
the odor patterns of meat headspace emanated from vacuum-packaged 
beef strip. The system was able to identify meat samples contaminated with 
S. typhimurium at a population concentration level ≥0.7 log CFU/g. Starting 
from these achievements, the same research group deepened the focus on 
engineering intelligent olfactory sensors using various sensor techniques to 
detect Salmonella contamination in packaged beef (Panigrahi et al., 2006a,b; 
Balasubramanian et al., 2008, 2009). More recently, they also investigated the 
potential of integrating the information from different sensing elements to 
enhance the discriminatory power of the detection system. As a fact, the reli-
ability and efficiency in olfactory pattern recognition depend on the quality 
of information obtained by the sensing system and the ability to discard 
unnecessary information; thus combining information from different sens-
ing systems can increase the prediction capabilities (Steinmetz et al., 1996). 
In 2012, they proposed the combination of sensor responses from two dif-
ferent e-nose systems, MOS and CP based, as a screening tool in order to 
identify the presence of S. typhimurium in fresh beef strip loins (stored at 
two temperatures) (Balasubramanian et al., 2012). The data from the two sys-
tems were ranked based on their Fisher criteria to evaluate their importance 
in discriminant analysis. The most informative sensors were then used to 
develop linear discriminant analysis and quadratic discriminant analysis-
based classification models.
In the last two decades, e-noses have been also successfully applied to early 
detection of fungal growth and potential discrimination between toxigenic 
and nontoxigenic strains in food samples. Focusing on meat contamination, 
some examples can be found concerning fungal detection on the surface 
of dry-cured meat products. Although the fungal colonization contributes 
to the improvement of the final product quality, some uncontrolled fungal 
development may also occur on these products causing undesirable altera-
tion and/or synthesis of mycotoxins, such as ochratoxin A (OTA). OTA is 
a strong nephrotoxic agent and it has been shown to be teratogenic, muta-
genic, hepatotoxic, and immunosuppressive to animal species (EFSA, 2006). 
Clearly, it becomes crucial to prevent and monitor possible contamination 
of meat by OTA-producing species to avoid undesirable negative economic 
impact and a potential health hazard to consumers. Penicillium nordicum is 
the most important OTA-producing species frequently isolated from dry-
cured meats. Leggieri et al. (2011) demonstrated the potential use of e-nose 
analysis to analyze qualitatively volatile patterns produced by P. nordicum 
and discriminate between OTA-producing and nonproducing strains on a 
ham-based medium. Very recently, Lippolis et al. (2016) presented another 
investigation, which aimed at developing and validating an e-nose-based 
method for early detection of OTA-producing and nonproducing strains 
of Penicillium during the seasoning process of dry-cured meat. In particu-
lar, a MOS e-nose was initially trained by using yeast extract sucrose and 

171
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
meat-based agar media inoculated with OTA-producing and nonproducing 
strains of Penicillium. Afterwards multivariate statistical analysis was used to 
discriminate the inoculated samples based on the pattern of VOCs. Finally, 
the approach was validated in dry-cured meat samples produced both at the 
laboratory (240 e-nose analyses carried out on inoculated sausages, seasoned 
and sampled at 5, 7, 10, and 14 days) and at an industrial scale (60 dry-cured 
meat samples produced by an industrial-scale seasoning process) showing a 
total recognition percentage of 73%.
5.2.1.8  Advances in Nanotechnology Integration 
for Microbial Contamination
The development of nanoscale materials such as nanowires (NWs), nanofi-
bers, NPs, nanobelts or nanorods (NRs), and nanotubes (NTs) has dramati-
cally changed clinical and molecular biology thanks to their significant use 
as bioanalyzers. When nanomaterials are being used for the analysis of 
pathogens, the recognition element in the (bio) sensing platform is typically 
bound to the surface of the nanomaterial, and the interaction of this hybrid 
with a pathogen is monitored through a signal transduction mechanism, 
which explicitly detects the interaction between the pathogen and the recog-
nition element, improving the sensitivity of the analysis. Among the others, 
Salmonella, E. coli, and Staphylococcus aureus are the most detected pathogens 
with such an approach in food matrices.  Yang  et al. (2009) immobilized Sal-
monella spp. McAbs on AuNPs fabricating a capacitive immunosensor. They 
detected the interaction using the EIS for the recognition of Salmonella spp. in 
pork samples. The linear relationship between the relative change in capaci-
tance and logarithm of Salmonella concentration was obtained in the range of 
1.0 × 102 to 1.0 × 105 CFU/mL. The lowest detection limit of Salmonella antigen 
concentration was 1.0 × 102 CFU/mL. This capacitive immunosensor proved 
to have the advantage of high nonspecific interactions and short analysis 
time (40 minutes) in comparison with the PCR method. More recently, an 
electrochemical biosensor was developed for Salmonella detection using a 
Salmonella-specific recognition aptamer. The biosensor was based on a glassy 
carbon electrode modified with graphene oxide (GO) and gold NPs. Then, 
the aptamer ssDNA sequence was linked to the electrode. After incubation 
of the modified electrode with Salmonella, the electrochemical impedance 
spectrum was measured to quantify the Salmonella. The results revealed 
an inverse correlation between Salmonella added to the reaction system and 
the current between the electrode and electrolyte, with a detection limit as 
low as 3 CFU/mL. In particular, the introduction of GO and AuNPs con-
ferred biocompatibility and high electron transfer to the sensor; moreover, 
the aptamer sensor proved to have a very good selectivity and specificity 
in the presence of L. monocytogenes, Bacillus subtilis, S. aureus, Streptococcus 
pyogenes, E. coli, and Enterobacter sakazakii (Ma et al., 2014). Abdalhai et al. 
(2014, 2015) developed electrochemical genosensors to detect S. aureus by 

172
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
using lead sulfide NPs and E. coli O157:H7 using cadmium sulfide NPs. The 
genosensors were prepared by immobilization of complementary DNA on 
the gold electrode surface, which hybridizes with a specific fragment gene 
from pathogenic to make a sandwich structure. The conductivity and sensi-
tivity of the sensor were increased by using multiwalled carbon nanotubes 
(MWCNTs). The peak currents of microorganisms correlated in a linear fash-
ion with the concentration of tDNA. The detection limit was 1.97 × 10−14 M 
and 3.17 × 10−14 M for E. coli and S. aureus, respectively. Both the DNA sensors 
were successfully applied to the pathogens detection in beef samples, after 
enrichment, extraction, and DNA amplification.
A direct detection of STEC was obtained by Quintela at al. (2015) by an 
optical biosensing method using oligonucleotide-functionalized AuNPs. 
This approach allowed a simultaneous visual discrimination and identifica-
tion of STEC DNA samples following DNA hybridization with highly spe-
cific thiol-modified probes immobilized on the surface of AuNPs. Stability 
and reproducibility of this optical method were demonstrated using artifi-
cially inoculated pooled and individual ground beef and blueberry samples. 
The detection limit was <1 log CFU/g requiring less than 1 hour to complete 
and achieved 100% specificity.
The biocompatibility of some nanostructures and the excellent electron 
transfer of carbon NTs have been properly exploited by Sun et al. (2010) in 
the fabrication of an electrochemical DNA biosensor by using V2O5 nano-
belts (nano-V2O5), MWCNTs, and chitosan (CTS) nanocomposite materials 
modified carbon ionic liquid electrode to detect Yersinia enterocolitica gene 
sequence in pork meat. Differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) was used to 
record the electrochemical response of the specific ssDNA sequence with a 
detection limit as low as 1.76 × 10−12 mol/L.
Overall, the effective detection of pathogens in food samples can be facili-
tated by nanomaterial-based sensors. Although several classical and modified 
methods have considerably reduced the incubation time, the nanomaterial-
based sensors can detect pathogens and toxins at very low concentrations as 
they can react and produce a strong signal in a very short incubation time. 
However, there is still a need for critical evaluation of nanomaterials toxicity as 
pointed out in several papers (Inbaraj and Chen, 2016, and references therein).
5.2.2 Chemical Contamination
Chemical contamination of meat products can be caused by a large variety 
of potential health hazards like veterinary drug residues, pesticide residues, 
toxins, heavy metals, and anions. In this chapter, we focused the discussion 
only on the first category given the wider existing literature devoted to sens-
ing platforms for detection of such contaminants. In fact, a lot of effort has 
been spent in developing screening methods for drug residue detection in 
real meat samples, achieving successful integration of nanotechnology for 
enhancement of the performance.

173
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
5.2.2.1 Veterinary Drug Residues: Overview and Legislative Frame
Veterinary drugs are used in livestock to treat disease, promote growth, 
and improve meat quality in terms of reducing fat and increasing lean meat 
yield. Very small amounts of veterinary medicines or any related degrada-
tion product could accumulate in animal products and enter the food chain, 
posing a risk factor for public health. The chemical structures of veterinary 
drugs available are as diverse as their applications, but two main categories 
can be identified for classification purposes basing on their function, anti-
biotics, and hormones. The extensive use of antibiotics in food-producing 
animals has triggered the development of bacterial resistance (Novais et al., 
2010), which in recent years has become an international concern as a poten-
tial source of antibiotic-resistant bacteria in humans. In addition, the misuse 
of hormone and growth promoters can cause drastic side effects in humans, 
such as cramps or tremors in muscles.
Government regulatory authorities control the use of veterinary drugs by 
approving or registering safe uses and monitoring food for unsafe or prohib-
ited residues, with a quite complex legislative frame. Within the European 
Union (EU), legislation regarding the control of such drugs is given in Council 
Directive 96/23/EC (European Commission, 1996), which establishes measures 
to monitor certain substances and residues thereof, mainly veterinary medici-
nal products, in live animals and animal products, integrated by Commis-
sion Decision 97/747/EC which lays down levels and frequencies of sampling 
for certain animal products (European Commission, 1997). In order to protect 
public health, concerns have been raised about the need for a clear definition 
of the maximum concentration of residues resulting from the use of a veteri-
nary medicinal product that may be accepted by the Community as “legally 
permitted.” With this aim, regulation no. 470/2009 defined procedures for the 
establishment of maximum residue limits (MRLs) of veterinary medicinal 
products in food-producing animals and animal products (European Com-
mission, 2009), and regulation no. 37/2010 reported a list of pharmacologically 
active substances and their classification regarding MRLs (European Com-
mission, 2010). Efforts toward harmonization of regulatory systems across the 
world led to the agreement among members of Codex Alimentarius Commis-
sion concerning the MRLs and Risk Management Recommendations (RMRs) 
for residues of veterinary drugs in foods (CAC, 2015), but significant differ-
ences remain on how risk assessment principles should be placed into practice.
In addition, for those veterinary drugs that have no permitted limit by law 
(zero-tolerance), minimum required performance limits (MRPLs, defined as 
the minimum content of an analyte in a sample which has to be detected and 
confirmed) have been identified according to Commission Decision 2002/657/
EC in order to harmonize the analytical performance of specific methods under 
development and validation (European Commission, 2002). MRPLs for chloram-
phenicol (CAP), nitrofurans metabolites, and medroxyprogesterone acetate were 
established by Commission Decision 2003/181/EC (European Commission, 2003).

174
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Effective drug residue control requires cost-effective routine screening 
with the capability of high sample throughput, eventually followed by more 
expensive chemical confirmation. False negative results are not acceptable 
in screening assays, although a limited number of false positives may be 
tolerated. Sensors and particular biosensors that can meet these require-
ments are probably the most promising solutions for this need; in fact in the 
last 15 years, a large variety of screening methods were developed (Cháfer-
Pericás et al., 2010; Samsonova et al., 2012). Note that only a few of them 
achieved detection on real samples.
In the following section, an overview of the most interesting and recent 
achievements in the development of sensing and biosensing platforms for 
detection of veterinary drugs residues in meat samples is provided; only 
analytical approaches whose applicability was already assessed on real food 
matrix are discussed.
5.2.2.1.1 Antibiotics
The antibiotic category includes substances or compounds that either kill 
bacteria, and are therefore defined as bactericidal, or inhibit their growth, 
and are therefore defined as bacteriostatic. Antibiotics that target the bacte-
rial cell wall, cell membrane, or interfere with essential bacterial enzymes 
are usually bactericidal in nature; among these are β-lactams (penicillins and 
cephalosporins), nitrofurans, polymixins, quinolones, and sulfonamides. 
Those that target protein synthesis such as the aminoglycosides, macrolides, 
tetracyclines, and amphenicols are usually bacteriostatic. Some antibiotics 
occur naturally and can be isolated by fungi, though nowadays most of them 
are produced industrially, either synthetically or semisynthetically. Among 
the aforementioned veterinary drugs, the most frequently investigated anti-
biotic compounds can be identified due to their widespread use, toxicity, and 
resulting concerns about consumers safety (Baynes et al., 2016).
β-lactam antibiotics have a long history in the treatment of infectious 
diseases; for nearly six decades, penicillins have been widely used to treat 
bacterial infections. However, the development of multidrug resistance has 
reduced their effectiveness. This type of antibiotic can be classified into sev-
eral groups according to their structural characteristics, but their unique 
structural feature is the presence of the four-membered β-lactam (2-azetidi-
none) ring (Figure 5.4). They include penicillins, cephalosporins, and more 
recently, carbapenems. Many of these feed additives have therapeutic indica-
tions such as use for the treatment of erysipelas in turkeys (e.g., penicillin G 
potassium) or they may have indications for increased rate of weight gain 
and improved feed efficiency in poultry or swine (e.g., penicillin G).
Quinolones are a family of synthetic broad-spectrum antibiotic drugs, which 
share the basic structure and a number of common functional groups reported 
in Figure 5.4. Various modifications of the end moieties have produced com-
pounds with different physical, chemical, pharmacokinetic, and antimicrobial 

175
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
properties. For example, substitution at position 6 with a fluorine moiety (fluo-
roquinolones) markedly enhances activity against gram-negative pathogens 
and broadens the spectrum of activity against gram-positive pathogens. Cip-
rofloxacin is a powerful antibiotic belonging to the fluoroquinolone class and is 
used to treat severe and life-threatening bacterial infections. It interferes with 
bacterial cell division by inhibition of the enzyme DNA gyrase (necessary for 
the separation of replicated DNA). However, ciprofloxacin also affects mam-
malian cell replication and can result in adverse side effects. In most cases, cip-
rofloxacin causes tendinitis and tendon rupture; other side effects may include 
central nervous system toxicity, cardiovascular toxicity, renal failure, seizures, 
etc. Ciprofloxacin is the active metabolite of enrofloxacin, a veterinary anti-
biotic used in poultry, cattle, pigs, and aquaculture. This wide distribution 
has raised concern over the possible emergence of fluoroquinolones-resistant 
strains and resistance transfer between animal and human pathogens, such as 
E. coli, Salmonella, and Campylobacter in humans.
CAP, thiamphenicol (TAP), and florfenicol (FF) are members of the amphen-
icol family of broad-spectrum antibacterial agents. They are effective against 
a wide variety of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, including most 
anaerobic organisms. CAP was first isolated from Streptomyces venezuelae 
in 1947 but it is relatively cheap to produce by industrial processes. CAP is 
highly effective as a bacteriostatic, and may also be bactericidal at high con-
centrations. It diffuses readily into all body tissues and it is rather rapidly 
β-Lactams
H
H
N
S
N
R
O
O
O
OH
N
R
R
R
R
N
+
O–
O
OH
HN
H3C
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
CI
O
O
O
O O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
S
S
OH
OH
OH
F
N
H
HO
H
N
ŏF)
O
O
HO
(Fluoro)quinolons
R1
R3
R2
N
S
O
O
Sulfonamides
HN
O
O
O
HO
HO
HO
OH
OH
B
H
H
CH2NH2
CH2NH2
C
HO
HO
O
OH
CH3
NH2
R1
R1
R2
R2
NH2
H2N
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
HO
HO
H3C
H3C
H2N
H3C
H2N
Aminoglycosides
Amphenicols
Chloramphenicol
Thiamphenicol
Florfenicol
Neomycin
Gentamycin
Neomycin
HN
O
O
O
O
OHC
OH
OH
OH
OH
CH3
NH2
NH2
NH2
H2N
N
N
HO
HO
HO
Streptomycin
FIGURE 5.4
Chemical structures of the main drugs or drug categories occurring as chemical contaminants 
in food-producing animals.

176
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
metabolized by conjugation with glucuronic acid. These properties under-
line the reasons why CAP was widely used for many years in veterinary 
practice both therapeutically and prophylactically. However, CAP is hema-
totoxic for humans and may cause life-threatening side effects such as bone 
marrow aplasia (loss of ability to produce blood cells) and therefore aplastic 
anemia or fetotoxicity. Since the size of the CAP dose that may lead to these 
pathologies is still not defined, the use of this antibiotic for the treatment of 
animals and livestock meant for food production in many countries has been 
prohibited (EU, United States, Canada, and others). Currently, TAP and FF 
are used as alternatives to CAP for animal treatment. However, because of its 
high efficiency, broad spectrum of action, relatively low cost, and availability, 
CAP is still in use, often illegally.
The sulfonamides have been used in food animal production for over 60 
years and they are still utilized in cattle, swine, and poultry; however, their 
use has somewhat declined, this drug class being the third most commonly 
used antimicrobial used in food animals (Baynes et al., 2016). A recent study 
across 25 European countries found that sulfonamides were the third most 
popular class of antimicrobials used in veterinary medicine (behind tetra-
cyclines and penicillins) and that sulfonamides represented 11% of the total 
sales of veterinary antimicrobial drugs across Europe in 2011 (Grave et al., 
2014). Oral sulfonamides are commonly given to calves with diarrhea, to pigs 
as a treatment for septicemia and bacterial pneumonia, and to turkeys for 
the treatment of E. coli and Pasteurella multocida (fowl cholera). Occasionally, 
potentiated sulfonamides are used in the poultry industry to control coc-
cidiosis.
Gentamicin, neomycin, and streptomycin make up the majority of amino-
glycosides used in livestock production. The immunogenicity of these antimi-
crobials has not been deeply investigated, but the amino sugars appear to be 
important epitopes for aminoglycosides. They are employed for treatment of 
infectious keratoconjunctivitis caused by Moraxella bovis in cattle, and for treat-
ment or control of bacterial enteritis in piglets or young chickens and turkeys.
5.2.2.1.2 Hormones Acting as Growth Promoters
A hormone is a chemical messenger produced by all multicellular organ-
isms. They are released by localized cells in the organism and can affect cells 
in different parts of the organism. Hormones are used for animal breeding to 
enhance body protein accumulation, metabolize fat stores, and increase lean 
growth rate. Growth promotion using anabolic hormone treatment rises up 
to 20% compared to nontreated animals. The β-agonists group (salbutamol 
[SAL], clenbuterol [CLB], and ractopamine [RAC]) are proven repartitioning 
agents in meat-producing animals, causing a reduction in fat content and 
improved production of lean meat. Another group of hormones is cortico-
steroids (Dexamethasone, Triamcinolone), which help control metabolism, 
inflammation, immune functions, salt and water balance, development of 
sexual characteristics, and the ability to withstand illness and injury.

177
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
β-agonists such as β2-adrenergic receptor agonists are sympathomimetic 
drugs that mimic the action of epinephrine and norepinephrine. They act 
on the target cell via membrane-bound G protein-coupled receptors, and are 
used therapeutically in humans, as well as in veterinary medicine for the 
treatment of asthmatic respiratory diseases, for tocolysis, and for the treat-
ment of peripheral disturbed blood flow. In higher doses, β2-adrenergic ago-
nists (BAAs) show effects as partitioning agents in food animals, whereby 
they cause a modification of growth by increasing accretion of skeletal 
muscle and decreasing fat stores (Mersmann, 1998). Use of BAAs late in the 
feeding period results in consistent increases in the rate of weight gain with-
out an increase in feed consumption, thereby increasing feed efficiency and 
cost-effectiveness (Loneragan et al., 2014). The most prominent example is 
CLB; other β-agonists are RAC, salbumatol, terbutaline, fenoterol, zilpaterol, 
brombuterol, cimaterol, and mabuterol. The misuse of these agents can cause 
drastic side effects in humans, such as cramps or tremors in muscles. The 
more common symptoms shown are aggression, agitation, increased blood 
pressure, dizziness, and nausea. Typical side effects also include tachycardia, 
arrhythmia, tremor, hyperglycemia, and hypocalcemia.
CLB is a sympathomimetic amine and β2 agonist with some structural and 
pharmacological similarities with epinephrine and SAL. It works mostly 
through increasing the production and secretion of catabolic hormones 
and leads to increased aerobic capacity. When the central nervous system 
is stimulated, blood pressure and oxygen transportation increase and this 
in turn raises the rate of body fat metabolism. It is most commonly avail-
able as hydrochloride salt, but is currently prohibited from use as a growth-
promoting agent worldwide. RAC is another very common BAA used as a 
feed additive to promote growth and leanness in pigs. Food safety concerns 
about RAC divide the global community. Although RAC is not as toxic to 
humans compared to other β-agonists such as SAL and CLB, long-term mis-
use of RAC may still result in potentially harmful side effects. In toxicol-
ogy studies, the primary side effects of RAC are those classically related to 
BAA, such as dose-dependent increases in heart rate and decreases in dia-
stolic blood pressure, and it is unlikely to be carcinogenic. It should be noted 
that there have been no reported cases of adverse health effects in humans 
exposed to livestock products containing RAC residues.
5.2.2.2 Optical Sensors
The most common optical biosensors tailored to antibiotics detection are 
based on surface plasmon resonance (SPR) transduction (see Table 5.3). SPR 
biosensors utilize the principle of label-free interaction analysis, with inter-
actions between molecules such as antigen and antibody being monitored 
in real time. Various assay formats are available (Pilolli et al., 2013); however, 
as for antibiotics detection, usually indirect assays (mainly inhibition) are 
preferred given the low molecular weight of the target analyte.

178
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 5.3
Summary of Sensors for Chemical Contamination Detection
Target Analyte
Transduction System
Nanomaterial 
Integration
Food Matrix
Recognition 
Element
Reference
Clenbuterol
Differential pulse 
voltammetry
None
Bovine liver
MIP
Pizzariello et al. (2001)
Streptomycin, dihydro-
streptomycin
SPR
None
Milk, honey, and meat
Antibody
Ferguson et al. (2002)
Sulfonamides (sulfa-
methazine and 
N4-acetyl-sulfametha-
zine)
SPR
None
Chicken serum
Antibody
Haasnoot et al. (2003)
Multisulfonamides 
(sulfamethoxazole and 
sulfadiazine)
SPR
None
Chicken serum and plasma
Antibody
Haasnoot et al. (2005)
Multisulfonamides 
(sulfamethazine, 
sulfadiazine, sulfa-
methoxazole, sulfaqui-
noxaline, 
sulfachloropyridazine)
SPR
None
Chicken serum
Antibody and 
binding protein
Bienenmann-Ploum et al. 
(2005)
CAP, CAP glucuronide
SPR
None
Poultry muscle, honey, 
Prawn, and milk
Antibody
Ferguson et al. (2005)
CAP, CAP glucuronide
SPR
None
Honey, prawns, and porcine 
kidney
Antibody
Ashwin et al. (2005)
Multisulfonamides
SPR
None
Porcine muscles
Binding protein
McGrath et al. (2005)
(Continued)

179
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
TABLE 5.3 (Continued)
Summary of Sensors for Chemical Contamination Detection
Target Analyte
Transduction System
Nanomaterial 
Integration
Food Matrix
Recognition 
Element
Reference
CAP
Chemiluminescence
None
Pork, beef, chicken, shrimp, 
and milk
Antibody
Park and Kim (2006)
Multi-(fluoro)quinolones
SPR
None
Egg, fish, and poultry meat
Antibody
Huet et al. (2008)
Multi-(fluoro)quinolones
SPR
None
Egg, fish, and poultry meat
Antibody
Huet et al. (2009)
Tetracyclines
Luminescence
None
Poultry muscle
Cell (bacteria)
Pikkemaat et al. (2010)
Florfenicol
Fluorescence
None
Liver, pork, chicken, and fish
MIP
Ge et al. (2010)
CAP
QCM
None
Chicken muscles
Hapten–protein 
conjugate and 
antibody
Karaseva and Ermolaeva 
(2012)
Ractopamine
SPR
None
Pork
Antibody
Lu et al. (2012)
Ractopamine
Differential pulse 
voltammetry
None
Pork
None
Yang et al. (2014a)
PenicillinG, ampicillin
QCM
None
Milk, pork, beef, liver
Hapten–protein, 
antibody
Karaseva and Ermolaeva 
(2014)
CLB hydrochloride
SPR
None
Pork
Antibody
Li et al. (2014)
Neomycin
Amperometry
Gold NP-deco-
rated CNTs
Beef, pork, chicken
Antibody
Zhu et al. (2010)
CAP
Amperometry
Cadmium sulfide
NPs modified-
dendrimer
Beef, chicken, pork
Antibody
Kim et al. (2010)
CLB, SAL, terbutaline, 
ractopamine, dopamine, 
dobutamine, adrenaline, 
isoprenaline
Linear sweep voltamme-
try
GO
Pork (spiked only with CLB)
None
Lin et al. (2013)
(Continued)

180
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 5.3 (Continued)
Summary of Sensors for Chemical Contamination Detection
Target Analyte
Transduction System
Nanomaterial 
Integration
Food Matrix
Recognition 
Element
Reference
Ractopamine, SAL, CLB
Cyclic voltammetry
Reduced GO and 
silver–palladium 
alloy NPs
Pork
Antibody
Wang et al. (2013)
Enrofloxacin
Fluorescence
Ru(phen)3
2+–
doped silica FN
Chicken
Antibody
Huang et al. (2013)
Streptomycin
Differential pulse 
voltammetry
Gold–silica 
nanostructures
Honey, milk, and porcine 
kidney and muscle
Antibody
Liu et al. (2011)
Quinoxaline-2-carboxylic 
acid (metabolites of 
carbadox)
Square wave voltamme-
try
GO
Pork and chicken muscles
MIP
Yang et al. (2014b)
CLB
Linear sweep voltamme-
try
Poly(sodium 
4-styrenesulfo-
nate) functional-
ized graphene
Pork
None
Wang et al. (2014)
Tetracycline
Differential pulse 
voltammetry
Iron/zinc 
cation–
exchanged 
montmorillonite
Fish, chicken, shrimp
None
Gan et al. (2014)
Penicillin G, ampicillin
QCM
Nanoparticulate 
MIPs
Chicken meat
MIPs
Karaseva et al. (2016)
Florfenicol
Fluorescence
Mn-doped ZnS 
quantum dots
Chicken and fish
MIPs
Sadeghi et al. (2016)
Ractopamine and CLB
Differential pulse 
voltammetry
GO and reduced 
GO
Pork
None
Wu et al. (2012)
Ractopamine
Differential pulse 
voltammetry
MWCNT
Pork and liver
None
Liu et al. (2012)
(Continued)

181
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
TABLE 5.3 (Continued)
Summary of Sensors for Chemical Contamination Detection
Target Analyte
Transduction System
Nanomaterial 
Integration
Food Matrix
Recognition 
Element
Reference
Ractopamine and SAL
Linear sweep voltamme-
try
Poly taurine/
zirconian NPs
Pig meat (and human urine)
None
Rajkumar et al. (2013)
Ractopamine and SAL
Differential pulse 
voltammetry
Hybrid CNTs 
(single- and mul-
tiwalled) and 
Nafion compos-
ites
Pork
None
Lin et al. (2013)
Ractopamine
Fluorescence
CdSe quantum 
dots
Pork
MIP
Liu et al. (2014)
Ractopamine
Electromotive force
Ractopamine–tet-
raphenylborate 
complexed NPs
Pork
None
Zhang et al. (2014)
Multisulfonamides
SPR
None
Milk and porcine muscle
Antibody
Gaudin et al. (2007)
Flumequine
SPR
None
Chicken serum and muscles
Antibody
Haasnoot et al. (2007)
CAP, chloramphenicol; CLB, clenbuterol; CNT, carbon nanotubes; FN, fluorescent nanoparticles; GO, graphene oxide; MIPs, molecularly imprinted 
polymers; MWCNT, multiwalled carbon nanotube; NP, nanoparticles; SAL, salbutamol; SPR, surface plasmon resonance; QCMs, quartz-crystal 
microbalances.

182
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
One of the first examples of SPR-based detection of antibiotics dates back 
2002 and reported on the development of an immunosensor inhibition assay 
for detection of aminoglycoside antibiotics residues (streptomycin and dihy-
drostreptomycin) in different food matrices (whole bovine milk, honey, por-
cine kidney, and porcine muscle) (Ferguson et al., 2002). After a few years, 
the same authors used and validated a commercially available Qflex® kit for 
Biacore® Q biosensor for the highly accurate and reliable detection of CAP 
and CAP glucuronide in poultry muscle, honey, prawns, and milk in concen-
trations below the MRPL (Ferguson et al., 2005). Analogously, another SPR-
based screening method for the same analytes was developed and validated 
according to the EU legislation (European Commission, 2002). This included 
the determination of decision limits (CCα) and detection capabilities (CCβ) 
and associated data such as stability of the analyte in matrix. Incurred tis-
sues were used in this study to evaluate the long-term performance and 
agreement between the screening and a confirmatory LC–mass spectrom-
etry (LC–MS)-based procedure (Ashwin et al., 2005).
As for the screening methods tailored to the specific detection of sul-
fonamides in food-producing animals, several investigations were car-
ried for single and multiple detection of such drugs in chicken serum (as 
a predictor of contamination levels in edible tissues) (Haasnoot et al., 2003, 
2005; Bienenmann-Ploum et al., 2005) or porcine muscles (McGrath et al., 
2005; Gaudin et al., 2007). However, among these, only the latter authored 
by Gaudin et al. (2007) was subjected to a full validation. In their work, a 
multisulfonamide antibody was used for the development of two differ-
ent Biacore protocols, one for the screening of milk samples, the other for 
muscle samples. The Biacore 3000 system, which is completely automated, 
was used for high-throughput screening in muscle protocol, widening the 
applicability assessment to porcine, bovine, and poultry muscle. The differ-
ent performance characteristics, according to European Decision 2002/657/
EC (detection capability CC, specificity/selectivity, precision, stability, and 
applicability) were determined in relation to the European Union MRL of 
100 g/kg for sulfonamides.
Focusing on quinolones monitoring, after the first investigation by Haasnoot 
et al. (2007), achieving the specific quantitative detection of flumequine in 
broiler serum and muscle, the research trend pushed toward the development 
of high-throughput platforms for multiple detection of chemicals belonging to 
the quinolones category.
With this aim, Huet et al. (2008) developed an optical biosensor inhibition 
immunoassay, based on the SPR principle, for the screening of 13 quinolones 
(norfloxacin, sarafloxacin, difloxacin, ciprofloxacin, enrofloxacin, flume-
quine, danofloxacin, marbofloxacin, pefloxacin, enoxacin, lomefloxacin, 
ofloxacin, and oxolinic acid). An innovative feature of this investigation was 
the recourse to bi-active antibody, specifically produced by a dual immuno-
gen prepared after combining features of two complexes (i.e., norfloxacin-
BSA and flumequine-BSA). The assay was optimized for detection in three 

183
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
matrices (poultry muscle, fish, and egg), and tested on incurred samples 
prepared by liquid extraction followed by two washing steps. The biosen-
sor was validated afterward according to criteria specified by European 
legislation, through assessment of the performance characteristics, that is, 
detection capability, specificity/selectivity, decision limit, repeatability, rug-
gedness, and stability (Huet et al., 2009).
Researchers have also described a membrane-based immunosensor for 
the detection of CAP by chemiluminescence phenomenon in samples of 
pork, beef, chicken, and shrimp (Park and Kim, 2006). A flow-through cell 
was devised, connected to an injector and a peristaltic pump inside a dark 
box, and facing a PMT as light detector in front of it; it exploits competi-
tion between CAP and a CAP–HRP conjugate for binding to an anti-CAP 
antibody immobilized on the membrane. Addition of the peroxidase sub-
strate luminol catalyzed a light-emitting reaction which was measured for 
the quantification.
Ge et al. (2010) proposed an online coupling of molecular imprinted solid-
phase extraction with flow-injection fluorescence sensing for the detection 
of FF. The method described an FF-imprinted polymer as the recognition 
part followed by a solid-phase extraction to remove potential interferences 
from the matrix component. Fluorescence intensity in fluorescence energy 
transfer (FET) based sensing was inhibited by FF. The proposed sensor was 
applied successfully to the determination of FF in liver and meat samples.
Focusing on the most recent investigations tailored to the detection of 
hormone and growth promoters, two different works were reported on the 
development of SPR-based biosensors for the label-free detection of CLB 
hydrochloride and RAC, respectively (Li et al., 2014; Lu et al., 2012). In partic-
ular, in the latter the authors achieved good results in pork matrix by using 
a low cost SPR-2004 biosensor and chip created by the Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, proposed as an alternative to the most common but expensive com-
mercial instruments.
5.2.2.3 Electromechanical Sensors
The application of electromechanical gravimetrical sensors allows for the 
detection of drug residues in composite matrixes at quite a low level, usu-
ally carried out in a competitive format with the preliminary introduction of 
fixed antibody quantities into the samples. The sensing performance (detec-
tion limit, range of detection, accuracy, and reproducibility) of the assay 
would be mainly influenced by the quality of the sensor electrode coating, 
which includes the formation of the substrate and the immobilization of 
the receptor. The use of direct electropolymerization on the gold electrode 
provides a promising solution for the immobilization of biomolecules since 
it is possible to control the mass and thickness of the coating in real time 
by tuning the potential and the scan rate (Cosnier, 2005). Electrogenera-
tion of polyelectrolyte films provides strong binding with the surface of a 

184
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
gold electrode, and hence the immunoaffinity layer resistance to detection/
regeneration cycles increases improving the sensor lifetime.
Recently, Karaseva and Ermolaeva (2012, 2014) proposed, in two different 
investigations, the development and application of a piezoelectric immuno-
sensor prepared by electrogenerated polymer for single and multiresidual 
contamination monitoring in several food matrixes. In 2012, they developed 
a competitive assay for CAP detection in meat, milk, eggs, and honey. In 
2014, the same authors proposed a QCM-based immunosensor for detecting 
penicillin G, ampicillin, and the total content of penicillin antibiotics by inte-
gration of homologous and group-specific antibodies. The receptor coating 
of the sensor was obtained by the immobilization of penicillin G or ampicil-
lin hapten–protein conjugates on the polypyrrole film obtained by electropo-
lymerization and activated by glutaraldehyde. The sensors were tested in 
detecting penicillins in milk, pork, beef, and liver.
5.2.2.4  Advances in Nanotechnology Integration 
for Chemical Contamination
One of the main concerns in the real samples analysis is the drug extraction 
procedure, especially when the matrix is a complex one, like food in general 
and meat in particular. Therefore, sensors able to achieve good performances 
upon simple treatment procedures are highly desirable. Among them, elec-
trochemical approaches using properly modified electrodes are able to com-
bine the high sensitivity, low cost, and simplicity of the methods with the 
selectivity induced from the specific nanomaterials employed. This strategy 
has also the great advantage of eliminating the use of enzymes and media-
tors, and all the possible negative effects coming from them.
The use of the “rising star” graphene has been described by Wang et al. to 
successfully determine CLB in pork meat (Wang et al., 2014). They propose 
poly (sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS) functionalized graphene nanocom-
posite as the electrode modifier material for the fabrication of an electro-
chemical sensor. It was found not only to enhance the enrichment of CLB 
on the electrode surface by strong π–π interaction, but also had an extraordi-
narily fast electron transfer rate. Moreover, the PSS functionalized graphene 
is water-soluble, which facilitates its application in many fields. Applying 
linear sweep voltammetry, a good linear relationship of the oxidation peak 
current with respect to concentrations of CLB was achieved with a detection 
limit of 2.2 × 10–8 mol/L.
A further approach based on the use of graphene is the development 
of a multiplexed electrochemical sensor for the simultaneous detection of 
RAC, SAL, and CLB, three β-agonists with similar structure (Wang et al., 
2013). Graphene with high conductivity was used as an electrode material to 
immobilize artificial antigens and amplify electrochemical signal. AgPdNPs 
are used to label antibodies and generate a strong electrochemical signal in 
phosphate-buffered saline without any other substrates. Artificial antigens 

185
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
of RAC, SAL, and CLB are, respectively, immobilized onto three working 
electrodes. RAC, SAL and CLB are separately pre-reacted with the corre-
sponding antibody functionalized AgPd NPs (Ab/AgPdNPs). The free Ab/
AgPdNPs are then captured by the corresponding antigens in the competi-
tive electrochemical biosensors. A simple pork extract solution was therefore 
used, with good recovery percentages and detection limits of 1.52, 1.44, and 
1.38 pg/mL for RAC, SAL, and CLB, respectively.
Since RAC contains phenolic hydroxyl group, it could be oxidized at the 
electrode surface. However, sensors based on direct electrochemical detection 
of RAC are still limited, maybe due to the poor response activity on ordinary 
electrode surface. Recently, ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) has attracted 
great attention as a novel advanced carbon material, due to its uniform and 
tailored pore structure, high specific surface area, large pore volume, chemical 
inertness, and good conductivity; such properties suggest its implementation 
in electrochemical sensors for the enhancement of sensitivity. In particular, 
Yang et al. (2014) proposed an electrochemical sensor based on OMC modified 
glass carbon electrode (OMC/GCE) to detect toxic RAC, demonstrating that 
the mesoporous film increases the oxidation signal of RAC, given the remark-
ably enhanced electrocatalytic activity compared with bare GCE surface (Yang 
et al., 2014). The signal for the determination of RAC was recorded using DPV 
and after optimization of the experimental conditions, the analytical perfor-
mances of the electrochemical sensor were evaluated by the determination of 
RAC in pork samples, obtaining a good linear correlation over drug concentra-
tion, with a detection limit of 0.06 μM (Yang et al., 2014a).
In their work, Wu et al. also gave a rationale for the electrochemical 
behavior of RAC and CLB on the surface of different carbon materials elec-
trode. The presence of graphene resulted in a strong enhancement effect 
and an increased oxidation signal due to the presence of a large number of 
oxygen-containing groups responsible for high electrochemical activities 
(Wu et al., 2012).
Recently, an interesting study has been published reporting the electro-
catalytic activity of eight different β-agonists at the surface of a glassy carbon 
electrode modified with GO and a sodium salt (acid chrome blue K [ACBK]) 
possessing good electrocatalytic activity toward metal ions and proteins. 
Electrochemical oxidation of CLB, SAL, adrenaline, RAC, terbutaline, dopa-
mine, dobutamine, and isoprenaline was investigated by cyclic voltammetry 
at differently modified electrodes (Lin et al., 2014). Briefly, no redox peaks 
were observed on the simple GCE; the current somewhat increased when 
measuring at GO/GCE or at ACBK/GCE, while it significantly increased at 
the ACBK/GO/GCE modified electrode. The detection limits for the eight 
drugs were in the range 0.58–1.46 ng/mL; the method proved to be reproduc-
ible and stable and successfully applicable for quantitative analysis of CLB 
in pork samples.
Along with the excellent electrochemical properties of graphene, other 
carbon-based materials like CNTs have gained attention as novel electrode 

186
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
materials due to their fascinating structural, mechanical, physical prop-
erties, and effective catalytic activity for the promotion of charge transfer 
processes. Liu et al. (2012) reported the use of MWCNT water dispersion 
as a GCE modifier to detect RAC at an LOD of 20 μg/L, with high recovery 
percentages in pork samples. Hybrid single-walled and MWCNT compos-
ites have been also investigated, where the synergistic effect allowed for a 
more compact structure between single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) 
and MWCNT, resulting in higher electroactive CNTs concentration on the 
electrode surface. Amperometric sensors using these electrodes were able 
to simultaneously detect RAC and SAL in pork samples with LOD as low as 
0.05 and 0.1 μM, respectively (Lin et al., 2013).
Following a diverse approach, the NPs can also be intercalated into the 
electrode modifier film, achieving the same enhancement effect of the drug 
catalytic activity: the determination of tetracycline in chicken meat samples 
with a detection limit of 0.10 μM (Gan et al., 2014) and the detection of RAC 
in pork samples in the range 1–114 μM (Rajkumar et al., 2013) are valuable 
examples.
As an alternative solution to reduce the effect of the matrices and improve 
sensitivity, molecularly imprinted technology has attracted increasing atten-
tion due to a possible predetermined recognition ability. In particular, MIPs 
may be used as a synthetic alternative for biomolecular recognition elements 
(Wei et al., 2006; Dickert et al., 2000; Piletsky and Turner, 2006; Wackerlig and 
Lieberzeit, 2015). The synthesis of MIPs is carried out in the presence of the 
molecules that selectivity should be entailed for, ideally establishing selec-
tive binding sites within a polymer matrix. Hence, MIPs constitute porous 
materials providing complementary functional groups capable of specifi-
cally recognizing the “template” molecules and subsequently binding them 
with similar affinities as natural antibodies. Very recently, the introduction 
of nanomaterials either as the support matrix (Zhang et al., 2011) or as the 
nanostructured polymer itself (Karasevaa et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2014) further 
increased selectivity toward determination of antibiotics like erythromycin 
and penicillins in meat and chicken muscle, respectively.
In the design of a biosensor, NPs can also play the role of the antibody-
bearing constituent that is the immunosensor probe. The main advantage is 
the significant amplification of the response, allowing for the fabrication of 
ultrasensitive sensors. Usually, metal NPs are employed, such as gold, thanks 
to the enhancement of catalytic properties at nanometer size. Zhu et al. (2010) 
reported AuNP-decorated CNTs for the determination of neomycin in real 
meat samples at an LOD of 6.76 ng/mL; melamine functionalized AuNPs 
were successfully employed for the simultaneous detection of RAC and SAL 
in swine meat at an LOD of 10−11 mol/L (Zhou et al., 2013). Moreover an ultra-
sensitive electrochemical immunoassay for streptomycin was accomplished 
by gold–silica nanostructures (LOD = 5 pg/mL, in kidney and muscle) (Liu 
et al., 2011). Examples of different nanostructures have been reported as well, 
such as cadmium sulfide NPs modified-dendrimer for CAP detection were 

187
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
investigated by Kim et al. for real meat samples analysis (LOD = 45 pg/mL) 
(Kim et al., 2010).
The real goal in the field of food control would be a total portable device 
sensor, able to perform a fast and selective screening analysis. In this respect, 
there are very few published papers presenting real tests already performed 
on food matrices (Chen et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2008). The Huang research 
group reported a aRu(phen)3
2+-doped silica fluorescent nanoparticle (FN)-
based immunochromatographic test strip sensor (ICTS) for rapid, high sensi-
tivity, easy to use, and low-cost quantitative detection of enrofloxacin residues 
in chicken meat. The fluorescence signal intensity of the FNs at the test line 
(FIT) and control line (FIC) was determined with a prototype of a portable 
fluorescent strip reader. The signal was based on FIT/FIC ratio to effectively 
eliminate strip-to-strip variation and matrix effects (Huang et al., 2013).
5.3 Concluding Remarks
In this chapter, an overview of the most recent and relevant achievements 
in the development of screening methods for chemical and biological con-
tamination monitoring in meat samples was provided, including critical 
discussion of consolidated sensing platforms and new trends and advances 
achieved by nanotechnology integration. A variety of platforms has been 
reported, and many have shown good promise for high sensitivity and low 
detection limits, eventually enhanced by the inclusion of NPs and nanostruc-
tures. A massive recourse to nanomaterials in the development of routine 
sensor platforms for the marketplace would require a preventive evaluation 
of the potential toxicity and proper disposal strategies. Effective success of 
this technology in the food safety and regulatory field requires rigorous vali-
dation with conventional methodologies, testing of real samples with sta-
tistically relevant sample numbers, careful evaluation of interferences, and 
interlaboratory studies; this represents the most important enduring chal-
lenge which prevents the achievement of full industry acceptance and regu-
latory approvals.
References
Abdalhai, M. H., Fernandes, A. M., Bashari, M., Ji, J., He, Q. and Sun, X. (2014). Rapid 
and sensitive detection of foodborne pathogenic bacteria (Staphylococcus aureus) 
using an electrochemical DNA genomic biosensor and its application in fresh 
beef. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 62, 12659−12667.

188
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Abdalhai, M. H., Fernandes, A. M., Xia, X., Musa, A., Ji, J. and Sun, X. (2015). Elec-
trochemical genosensor to detect pathogenic bacteria (Escherichia coli O157:H7) 
as applied in real food samples (fresh beef) to improve food safety and quality 
control. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 63, 5017−5025.
Amamcharla, J. K., Panigrahi, S., Logue, C. M., Marchello, M. and Sherwood, J. S. 
(2010). Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) as a tool for discriminat-
ing Salmonella typhimurium contaminated beef. Sensing and Instrumentation Food 
Quality and Safety, 4, 1–12.
Ashwin, H. M., Stead, S. L., Taylor, J. C. et al. (2005). Development and validation 
of screening and confirmatory methods for the detection of chloramphenicol 
and chloramphenicol glucuronide using SPR biosensor and liquid chromatog-
raphy–tandem mass spectrometry. Analytica Chimica Acta, 529, 103–108.
Bae, E., Banada, P. P., Huff, K., Bhunia, A. K., Robinson, J. P. and Hirleman, E. D. 
(2007). Biophysical modeling of forward scattering from bacterial colonies using 
scalar diffraction theory. Applied Optics, 46, 3639–3648.
Bai, S., Zhao, J., Zhang, Y. et al. (2010). Rapid and reliable detection of 11 food-
borne pathogens using thin-film biosensor chips. Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 86, 983–990.
Balasubramanian, S., Amamcharla, J., Panigrahi, S., Logue, C. M., Marchello, M. and 
Sherwood, J. S. (2012). Investigation of different gas sensor-based artificial olfac-
tory systems for screening Salmonella typhimurium contamination in beef. Food 
and Bioprocess Technology, 5, 1206–1219.
Balasubramanian, S., Panigrahi, S., Logue, C. M., Doetkott, C., Marchello, M. and 
Sherwood, J. S. (2008). Independent component analysis-processed electronic 
nose data for predicting Salmonella typhimurium populations in contaminated 
beef. Food Control, 19, 236–246.
Balasubramanian, S., Panigrahi, S., Logue, C. M., Gu, H. and Marchello, M. (2009). 
Neural networks-integrated metal oxide-based artificial olfactory system for 
meat spoilage identification. Journal of Food Energy, 91, 91–98.
Balasubramanian, S., Panigrahi, S., Logue, C. M., Marchello, M. and Sherwood, 
J. S. (2005). Identification of Salmonella-inoculated beef using a portable elec-
tronic nose system. Journal of. Rapid Methods and Automation in Microbiology, 
13, 71–95.
Baynes, R. E., Dedonder, K., Kissell, L. et al. (2016). Health concerns and management 
of select veterinary drug residues. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 88, 112–122.
Banada, P. P., Guo, S., Bayraktar, B. et al. (2007). Optical forward-scattering for detec-
tion of Listeria monocytogenes and other Listeria species. Biosensors and Bioelectron-
ics, 22, 1664–1671.
Bienenmann-Ploum, M., Korpimäki, T., Haasnoot, W. and Kohen, F. (2005). Compari-
son of multi-sulfonamide biosensor immunoassays. Analytica Chimica Acta, 529, 
115–122.
Codex Alimentarius Commission. (2015). Joint FAO/WHO Food Standard Program 
Codex Alimentarius Commission Thirty-Eighth Session. Maximum Residue 
Limits (MRLs) and Risk Management Recommendations (RMRs) for Residues 
of Veterinary Drugs in Foods. Geneva. Available at: http://www.fao.org/fao-
who-codexalimentarius/standards/vetdrugs/en/ (accessed 21 June 2016).
Cháfer-Pericás, C., Maquieira, A. and Puchades, R. (2010). Fast screening methods 
to detect antibiotic residues in food samples. Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 29, 
1038–1049.

189
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
Chen, X., Xu, H., Lai, W., Chen, Y., Yang, X. and Xiong, Y. (2012). A sensitive chromato-
graphic strip test for the rapid detection of enrofloxacin in chicken muscle. Food 
Additives and Contaminants: Part A, 29, 383−391.
Cho, I.-H., Radadia, A. D., Farrokhzad, K. et al. (2014). Nano/micro and spectroscopic 
approaches to food pathogen detection. Annual Review of Analytical Chemistry, 
7, 65–88.
Cosnier, S. (2005). Affinity biosensors based on electropolymerized films. Electroanaly-
sis, 17, 1701–1712.
Davis, R., Burgula, Y., Deering, A., Irudayaraj, J., Reuhs, B. L. and Mauer, L. J. (2010a). 
Detection and differentiation of live and heat-treated Salmonella enterica serovars 
inoculated onto chicken breast using Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spec-
troscopy. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 109, 2019–2031.
Davis, R., Irudayaraj, J., Reuhs, B. L. and Mauer, L. J. (2010b). Detection of E. coil 
O157:H7 from ground beef using Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectros-
copy and chemometrics. Journal of Food Science, 75, M340–M346.
Davis, R. and Mauer, L. J. (2011). Subtyping of Listeria monocytogenes at the haplotype 
level by Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy and multivariate statis-
tical analysis. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 150, 140–149.
Davis, R., Paoli, G. and Mauer, L. J. (2012). Evaluation of Fourier transform infra-
red (FT-IR) spectroscopy and chemometrics as a rapid approach for sub-typing 
Escherichia coli O157:H7 isolates. Food Microbiology, 31, 181–190.
De Marco, D. R. and Lim, D. V. (2002). Detection of Escherichia coli O157:H7 in 10- and 
25-gram ground beef samples with an evanescent-wave biosensor with silica 
and polystyrene waveguides. Journal of Food Protection, 65, 596–602.
Dickert, F. L., Lieberzeit, P. and Tortschanoff, M. (2000). Molecular imprints as artifi-
cial antibodies—A new generation of chemical sensors. Sensors and Actuators B, 
65, 186–189.
Ellis, D. I., Broadhurst, D., Kell, D. B., Rowland, J. J. and Goodacre, R. (2002). Rapid 
and quantitative detection of the microbial spoilage of meat by Fourier trans-
form infrared spectroscopy and machine learning. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 68, 2822–2828.
European Commission. (1996). Council Directive 96/23/EC of 29 April 1996 on mea-
sures to monitor certain substances and residues thereof in live animals and animal 
products and repealing Directives 85/358/EEC and 86/469/EEC and Decision 
89/187/EEC and 91/664/EEC. Official Journal of the European Union, L125, 10–32.
European Commission. (1997). Commission Decision of 27 October 1997 fixing the 
levels and frequencies of sampling provided for by Council Directive 96/23/EC 
for the monitoring of certain substances and residues thereof in certain animal 
products. Official Journal of the European Union, L303, 12–15.
European Commission. (2002). Commission Decision 2002/657/EC of 12 August 
2002 implementing Council Directive 96/23/EC concerning the performance of 
analytical methods and the interpretation of results. Official Journal of the Euro-
pean Union, L221, 8–36.
European Commission. (2003). Commission Decision 2003/181/EC of 13 March 2003 
amending Decision 2002/657/EC as regards the setting of minimum required 
performance limits (MRPLs) for certain residues in food of animal origin. Offi-
cial Journal of the European Union, L71, 17–18.

190
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
European Commission. (2009). Regulation (EC) No 470/2009 of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council of 6 May 2009 laying down Community procedures 
for the establishment of residue limits of pharmacologically active substances 
in foodstuffs of animal origin, repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 2377/90 
and amending Directive 2001/82/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council and Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 of the European Parliament and of 
the Council. Official Journal of the European Union, L152, 11–22.
European Commission. (2010). Commission Regulation (EU) No 37/2010 on pharma-
cologically active substances and their classification regarding maximum resi-
due limits in foodstuffs of animal origin. Official Journal of the European Union, 
L15, 1–72.
European Food Safety Authority. (2006). Opinion of the scientific panel on contami-
nants in the food chain of the EFSA on a request from the Commission related 
to ochratoxinA in food. EFSA Journal, 365, 1–56.
Ferguson, J. P., Baxter, G. A., McEvoy, J. D. G., Stead, S., Rawlings E. and Sharman, M. 
(2002). Detection of streptomycin and dihydrostreptomycin residues in milk, 
honey and meat samples using an optical biosensor. Analyst, 127, 951–956.
Ferguson, J., Baxtera, A., Young, P. et al. (2005). Detection of chloramphenicol and 
chloramphenicol glucuronide residues in poultry muscle, honey, prawn and 
milk using a surface plasmon resonance biosensor and Qflex® kit chloram-
phenicol. Analytica Chimica Acta, 529, 109–113.
Gan, T., Shi, Z., Sun, J. and Liu, Y. (2014). Simple and novel electrochemical sensor for 
the determination of tetracycline based on iron/zinc cations-exchanged mont-
morillonite catalyst. Talanta, 121, 187–193.
Gaudin, V., Hdou, C. and Sanders, P. (2007). Validation of a Biacore method for 
screening eight sulfonamides in milk and porcine muscle tissues according to 
European decision 2002/657/EC. Journal of AOAC International, 90, 1706–1715.
Ge, S., Yan, M., Cheng, X. et al. (2010). On-line molecular imprinted solid-phase 
extraction flow-injection fluorescence sensor for determination of florfenicol in 
animal tissues. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis, 52, 615–619.
Gopinath, S. C. B., Tang, T.-H., Chen, Y., Citartan, M. and Lakshmipriya, T. (2014). 
Bacterial detection: From microscope to smartphone Biosensors and Bioelectron-
ics, 60, 332–342.
Grave, K., Torren-Edo, J., Muller, A., Greko, C., Moulin, G. and Mackay, D. (2014). 
Variations in the sales and sales patterns of veterinary antimicrobial agents in 24 
European countries. Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 69, 2284–2291.
Haasnoot, W., Bienenmann-Ploum, M. and Kohen, F. (2003). Biosensor immunoassay 
for the detection of eight sulfonamides in chicken serum. Analytica Chimica Acta, 
483, 171–180.
Haasnoot, W., Bienenmann-Ploum, M., Lamminmäki, U., Swanenburg, M. and van 
Rhijn, H. (2005). Application of a multi-sulfonamide biosensor immunoassay 
for the detection of sulfadiazine and sulfamethoxazole residues in broiler serum 
and its use as a predictor of the levels in edible tissue. Analytica Chimica Acta, 
552, 87–95.
Haasnoot, W., Gerçek, H., Cazemier, G. and Nielen, M. W. (2007). Biosensor immuno-
assay for flumequine in broiler serum and muscle. Analytica Chimica Acta, 586, 
312–318.

191
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
He, Y., Reed, S., Bhunia, A. K., Gehring, A., Nguyen, L. H. and Irwin, P. L. (2015). 
Rapid identification and classification of Campylobacter spp. Using laser optical 
scattering technology. Food Microbiology, 47, 28–35.
Huang, X., Aguilar, Z. P., Li, H. et al. (2013). Fluorescent Ru (phen)3
2+-doped silica 
nanoparticles-based ICTS sensor for quantitative detection of enrofloxacin resi-
dues in chicken meat. Analytical Chemistry, 85, 5120–5128.
Huet, A. C., Charlier, C., Singh, G. S. et al. (2008). Development of an optical sur-
face plasmon resonance biosensor assay for (fluoro) quinolones in egg, fish, and 
poultry meat. Analytica Chimica Acta, 623, 195–203.
Huet, A. C., Charlier, C., Weigel, S., Godefroy, S. B. and Delahaut, P. (2009). Validation 
of an optical surface plasmon resonance biosensor assay for screening (fluoro) 
quinolones in egg, fish and poultry. Food Additives & Contaminants. Part A, Chem-
istry, Analysis, Control, Exposure & Risk Assessment, 26, 1341–1347.
Hulanicki, A., Glab, S. and Ingman, F. (1991). Chemical sensors. Definitions and clas-
sification. Pure and Applied Chemistry, 63, 1247–1250.
Inbaraj, B. S. and Chen, B. H. (2016). Nanomaterial-based sensors for detection of 
foodborne bacterial pathogens and toxins as well as pork adulteration in meat 
products. Journal of Food and Drug Analysis, 24, 15–28.
Karaseva, N. A. and Ermolaeva, T. N. (2012). A piezoelectric immunosensor for chlor-
amphenicol detection in food. Talanta, 93, 44–48.
Karaseva, N. A. and Ermolaeva, T. N. (2014). Piezoelectric immunosensors for the 
detection of individual antibiotics and the total content of penicillin antibiotics 
in foodstuffs. Talanta, 120, 312–317.
Karasevaa, N., Ermolaevaa, T. and Mizaikoff, B. (2016). Piezoelectric sensors using 
molecularly imprinted nanospheres for the detection of antibiotics. Sensors and 
Actuators B: Chemical, 225, 199–208.
Kim, S., Burgula, Y., Ojanen-Reuhs, T., Cousin, M. A., Reuhs, B. L. and Mauer, U. J. 
(2006a). Differentiation of crude lipopolysaccharides from Escherichia coli strains 
using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and chemometrics. Journal of 
Food Science, 71, M57–M61.
Kim, S., Kim, H., Reuhs, B. L. and Mauer, L. J. (2006b). Differentiation of outer 
membrane proteins from Salmonella enterica serotypes using Fourier transform 
infrared spectroscopy and chemometrics. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 42, 
229–234.
Kim, G., Moon J. H. and Morgan, M. (2013). Multivariate data analysis of impedi-
metric biosensor responses from Salmonella typhimurium. Analytical Methods, 
5, 4074–4080.
Kim, D. M., Rahman, M. A., Do, H., Ban, C. and Shim, Y. B. (2010). An amperomet-
ric chloramphenicol immunosensor based on cadmium sulfide nanoparticles 
modified-dendrimer bonded conducting polymer. Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 
25, 1781–1788.
Ko, S. H. and Grant, S. A. (2006). A novel FRET-based optical fiber biosensor for rapid 
detection of Salmonella typhimurium. Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 21, 1283–1290.
Koo, O.K., Aroonnual, A., Bhunia, A.K. (2011). Human heat-shock protein 60 recep-
tor-coated paramagnetic beads show improved capture of Listeria monocyto-
genes in the presence of the other Listeria in food. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 
111, 93-104.

192
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Lan, Y.B., Wang, S.-Z., Yin, Y.-G., Hoffmann W.C., Zheng X. (2008) Using a surface 
plasmon resonance biosensor for rapid detection of Salmonella Typhimurium in 
Chicken Carcass. Journal of Bionic Engineering, 5, 239–246.
Leggieri, M. C., Pont, N. P., Battilani, P. and Magan, N. (2011). Detection and dis-
crimination between ochratoxin producer and non-producer strains of Penicil-
lium nordicum on a ham-based medium using an electronic nose. Mycological 
Research, 27, 29–35.
Li, Y., Qi, P., Ma, X. and Zhong, J. (2014). Quick detection technique for clenbuterol 
hydrochloride by using surface plasmon resonance biosensor. European Food 
Research and Technology, 239, 195–201.
Liang, P. S., San Park, T. and Yoon, J.-Y. (2014). Rapid and reagentless detection of 
microbial contamination within meat utilizing a smartphone-based biosensor. 
Scientific Reports, 4, 5953.
Lin, K. C., Hong, C. P. and Chen, S. M. (2013). Simultaneous determination for toxic 
ractopamine and salbutamol in pork sample using hybrid carbon nanotubes. 
Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 177, 428–436.
Lin, X., Ni, Y. and Kokot, S. (2014). A novel electrochemical sensor for the analysis of 
β-agonists: The poly (acid chrome blue K)/graphene oxide-nafion/glassy car-
bon electrode. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 260, 508–517.
Lippolis, V., Ferrara, M., Cervellieri, S. et al. (2016). Rapid prediction of ochratoxin 
A-producing strains of Penicillium on dry-cured meat by MOS-based electronic 
nose. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 218, 71–77.
Liu, H., Fang, G. and Wang, S. (2014). Molecularly imprinted optosensing material 
based on hydrophobic CdSe quantum dots via a reverse microemulsion for spe-
cific recognition of ractopamine. Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 55, 127–132.
Liu, Y., Ye J. and Li, Y. (2003). Rapid detection of Escherichia coli O157:H7 inoculated 
in ground beef, chicken carcass, and lettuce samples with an immunomagnetic 
chemiluminescence fiber-optic biosensor. Journal of Food Protection, 66, 512–517.
Liu, B., Zhang, B., Cui, Y., Chen, H., Gao, Z. and Tang, D. (2011). Multifunctional gold 
silica nanostructures for ultrasensitive electrochemical immunoassay of strepto-
mycin residues. ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces, 3, 4668–4676.
Liu, Z., Zhou, Y., Wang, Y., Cheng, Q. and Wu, K. (2012). Enhanced oxidation and 
detection of toxic ractopamine using carbon nanotube film-modified electrode. 
Electrochimica Acta, 74, 139–144.
Loneragan, G. H., Thomson, D. U. and Scott, H. M. (2014). Increased mortality in 
groups of cattle administered the beta-adrenergic agonists ractopamine hydro-
chloride and zilpaterol hydrochloride. PLOS ONE, 9, e91177, 1–13.
Loutfi, A., Coradeschi, S., Mani, G. K., Shankar, P., Bosco J. and Rayappan, B. (2015). 
Electronic noses for food quality: A review. Journal of Food Engineering, 144, 
103–111.
Lu, X., Zheng, H., Li, X. Q. et al. (2012). Detection of ractopamine residues in pork 
by surface plasmon resonance-based biosensor inhibition immunoassay. Food 
Chemistry, 130, 1061–1065.
Ma, X., Jiang, Y., Jia, F., Yu, Y., Chen, J. and Wang, Z. (2014). An aptamer-based elec-
trochemical biosensor for the detection of Salmonella. Journal of Microbiological 
Methods, 98, 94–98.
McGrath, T., Baxter, A., Ferguson, J., Haughey, S. and Bjurling, P. (2005). Multi sulfon-
amide screening in porcine muscle using a surface plasmon resonance biosen-
sor. Analytica Chimica Acta, 529, 123–127.

193
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
Mersmann, H. J. (1998). Overview of the effects of beta-adrenergic receptor agonists 
on animal growth including mechanisms of action. Journal of Animal Science, 76, 
160–172.
Morant-Miñana, M. C. and Elizalde, J. (2015). Microscale electrodes integrated on 
COP for real sample Campylobacter spp. detection. Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 
70, 491–497.
Mura, S., Greppi, G., Marongiu, M. L. et al. (2012). FT-IR nanobiosensors for Esch-
erichia coli detection. Beilstein Journal of Nanotechnology, 3, 485–492.
Novais, A., Comas, I., Baquero, F. et al. (2010). Evolutionary trajectories of beta-lac-
tamase CTX-M-1 cluster enzymes: Predicting antibiotic resistance. PLOS Patho-
gens, 6, e1000735, 1–16.
Ohk, S. H. and Bhunia, A. K. (2013). Multiplex fiber optic biosensor for detection 
of Listeria monocytogenes, Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Salmonella enterica from 
ready-to-eat meat samples. Food Microbiology, 33, 166–171.
Ohk, S. H., Koo, O. K., Sen T., Yamamoto, C. M. and Bhunia, A. K. (2010). Antibody 
aptamer functionalized fibre-optic biosensor for specific detection of Listeria 
monocytogenes from food. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 109, 808–817.
Panigrahi, S., Balasubramanian, S., Gu, H., Logue, C. M. and Marchello, M. (2006a). 
Neural network-integrated electronic nose system for identification of spoiled 
beef. LWT Food Science and Technology, 39, 135–145.
Panigrahi, S., Balasubramanian, S., Gu, H., Logue, C. M. and Marchello, M. (2006b). 
Design and development of a metal oxide based electronic nose for spoilage 
classification of beef. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 119, 2–14.
Panigrahi, S., Sankaran, S., Mallik, S., Gaddam, B. and Hanson, A. A. (2012). Olfactory 
receptor-based polypeptide sensor for acetic acid VOC detection. Materials Sci-
ence and Engineering: C, 32, 1307–1313.
Park, I. S. and Kim, N. (2006). Development of a chemiluminescent immunosensor for 
chloramphenicol. Analytica Chimica Acta, 578, 19–24.
Pérez-Lόpez, B. and Merkoçi, A. (2011). Nanomaterials based biosensors for food 
analysis applications. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 22, 625–639.
Pikkemat, M.G., Rapallini, M.L.B.A., Karp M.T., Elferink, J.W.A. (2010). Application 
of a luminescent bacterial biosensor for the detection of tetracyclines in rou-
tine analysis of poultry muscle samples, Food Additives & Contaminants: Part A: 
Chemistry, Analysis, Control, Exposure & Risk Assessment, 27, 1112–1117.
Piletsky, S. and Turner, A. (2006). New generation of chemical sensors based on MIPs. 
In: Molecular Imprinting of Polymers, Piletsky, S. and Turner, A.P.F. (Eds.), United 
States:  1–16.
Pilolli, R., Monaci, L. and Visconti, A. (2013). Advances in biosensor development 
based on integrating nanotechnology and applied to food-allergen manage-
ment. Trends in Analytical Chemistry, 47, 12–26.
Pizzariello, A., Stred’ansky, M., Stred’anska, S., Stanislav, M. (2001). A solid binding 
matrix/molecularly imprinted polymer-based sensor system for the determina-
tion of clenbuterol in bovine liver using differential-pulse voltammetry. Sensors 
and Actuators B, 76, 286–294.
Quintela, I. A., de los Reyes, B. G., Lin, C. S. and Wu, V. C. H. (2015). Simultane-
ous direct detection of Shiga-toxin producing Escherichia coli (STEC) strains 
by optical biosensing with oligonucleotide-functionalized gold nanoparticles. 
Nanoscale, 7, 2417–2426.

194
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Rajkumar, M., Li, Y. S. and Chen, S. M. (2013). Electrochemical detection of toxic rac-
topamine and salbutamol in pig meat and human urine samples by using poly 
taurine/zirconia nanoparticles modified electrodes. Colloids and Surfaces. B, Bio-
interfaces, 110, 242–247.
Sadeghi, S., Jahani, M. and Belador, F. (2016). The development of a new optical sen-
sor based on the Mn doped ZnS quantum dots modified with the molecularly 
imprinted polymers for sensitive recognition of florfenicol. Spectrochimica Acta. 
Part A, Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 159, 83–89.
Samsonova, J. V., Cannavan A. and Elliott, C. T. (2012). A critical review of screening 
methods for the detection of chloramphenicol, thiamphenicol, and florfenicol 
residues in foodstuffs. Critical Reviews in Analytical Chemistry, 42, 50–78.
San Park, T., Li, W., McCracken, K. E. and Yoon, J. Y. (2013). Smartphone quantifies 
Salmonella from paper microfluidics. Lab on a Chip, 13, 4832–4840.
Sankaran, S., Suranjan, P., Mallik, S. (2011). Odorant binding protein based biomi-
metic sensors for detection of alcohols associated with Salmonella contamina-
tion  in packaged beef. Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 26, 3103–3109.
Su, X. L. and Li, Y. B. (2005). A QCM immunosensor for Salmonella detection with 
simultaneous measurements of resonant frequency and motional resistance. 
Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 21, 840–848.
Steinmetz, V., Crochon, M., BellonMaurel, V., Garcia Fernandez, J. L., Barreiro Elorza, 
P. and Verstreken, L. (1996). Sensors for fruit firmness assessment: Comparison 
and fusion. Journal of Agricultural Engineering Research, 64, 15–28.
Sun, W., Qin, P., Gao, H., Li, G. and Jiao, K. (2010). Electrochemical DNA biosen-
sor based on chitosan/nano-V2O5/MWCNTs composite film modified carbon 
ionic liquid electrode and its application to the LAMP product of Yersinia entero-
colitica gene sequence. Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 25, 1264–1270.
Thevenot, D. R., Toth, K., Durst, R. A. and Wilson, G. S. (1999). Electrochemical bio-
sensors: recommended definitions and classification. Pure and Applied Chemistry, 
71, 2333–2348.
Tortajada-Genaro, L. A., Rodrigo, A., Hevia, E., Mena, S., Niñoles, R. and Maquieira, 
Á. (2015). Microarray on digital versatile disc for identification and genotyping 
of Salmonella and Campylobacter in meat products. Analytical and Bioanalytical 
Chemistry, 407, 7285–7294.
Valadez, A. M., Lana, C. A., Tu, S.-I., Morgan, M. T. and Bhunia, A. K. (2009). Eva-
nescent wave fiber optic biosensor for Salmonella detection in food. Sensors, 
9, 5810–5824.
Wackerlig, J. and Lieberzeit, P. A. (2015). Molecularly imprinted polymer nanopar-
ticles in chemical sensing—synthesis, characterisation and application. Sensors 
and Actuators B Chemical, 207, 144–157.
Wang, L., Yang, R., Chen, J., Li, J., Qu, L. and Harrington, P. B. (2014). Sensitive voltam-
metric sensor based on isopropanol–Nafion–PSS–GR nanocomposite modified 
glassy carbon electrode for determination of clenbuterol in pork. Food Chemistry, 
164, 113–118.
Wang, H., Zhang, Y., Li, H. et al. (2013). A silver–palladium alloy nanoparticle-based 
electrochemical biosensor for simultaneous detection of ractopamine, clen-
buterol and salbutamol. Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 49, 14–19.
Warriner, K., Reddy, S. M., Namvar A. and Neethirajan, S. (2014). Developments in 
nanoparticles for use in biosensors to assess food safety and quality. Trends in 
Food Science & Technology, 40, 183–199.

195
Sensors and Biosensors for Meat Safety
Wei, S., Jakusch, M. and Mizaikoff, B. (2006). Capturing molecules with templated 
materials—Analysis and rational design of molecularly imprinted polymers. 
Analytica Chimica Acta, 578, 50–58.
Wu, C., Sun, D., Li, Q. and Wu, K. (2012). Electrochemical sensor for toxic ractopamine 
and clenbuterol based on the enhancement effect of graphene oxide. Sensors and 
Actuators B Chemical, 168, 178–184.
Yang, Y., Fang, G., Wang, X. et al. (2014b). Sensitive and selective electrochemical 
determination ofquinoxaline-2-carboxylic acid based on bilayer of novel poly 
(pyrrole) functional composite using one-step electro-polymerization and 
molecularly imprinted poly (o-phenylenediamine). Analytica Chimica Acta, 806, 
136–143.
Yang, X., Feng, B., Yang, P., Ding, Y., Chen, Y. and Fei, J. (2014a). Electrochemical 
determination of toxic ractopamine at an ordered mesoporous carbon modified 
electrode. Food Chemistry, 145, 619–624.
Yang, G. J., Huang, J. L., Meng, W. J., Shen, M. and Jiao, X. A. (2009). A reusable capaci-
tive immunosensor for detection of Salmonella spp. based on grafted ethylene 
diamine and self-assembled gold nanoparticle monolayers. Analytica Chimica 
Acta, 647, 159–166.
Zhang, J., Shao, X., Yue, J., Li, D. and Chen, Z. (2014). Preparation of ractopamine-
tetraphenylborate complexed nanoparticles used as sensors to rapidly deter-
mine ractopamine residues in pork. Nanoscale Research Letters, 9, 639(1–7).
Zhang, Z., Yang, X., Zhang, H. et al. (2011). Novel molecularly imprinted polymers 
based on multi-walled carbon nanotubes with binary functional monomer 
for the solid-phase extraction of erythromycin from chicken muscle. Journal of 
Chromatography. B, Analytical Technologies in the Biomedical and Life Sciences, 879, 
1617–1624.
Zhao, Y., Zhang, G., Liu, Q., Teng, M., Yang, J. and Wang, J. (2008). Development 
of an immunochromatography strip for the rapid detection of 12 fluoroquino-
lones in chicken muscle and liver. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 56, 
12138−12142.
Zhou, Y., Wang, P., Su, X., Zhao, H. and He, Y. 2013. Colorimetric detection of racto-
pamine and salbutamol using gold nanoparticles functionalized with melamine 
as a probe. Talanta, 112, 20–25.
Zhu, Y., Son, J. I. and Shim, Y. B. (2010). Amplification strategy based on gold nanopar-
ticle-decorated carbon nanotubes for neomycin immunosensors. Biosensors and 
Bioelectronics, 26, 1002–1008.


197
6
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
Dong U. Ahn, Eun Joo Lee, and Aubrey Mendonca
CONTENTS
6.1 
Introduction ................................................................................................ 198
6.2 
Food Irradiation .........................................................................................199
6.2.1 History of Food Irradiation ..........................................................199
6.2.2 Irradiation Process .........................................................................201
6.3 
Microbial Decontamination of Meat by Irradiation .............................204
6.3.1 Factors Affecting Radiation Destruction of 
Microorganisms in Meat ...............................................................205
6.3.1.1 Irradiation Dose ..............................................................205
6.3.1.2 Meat Composition ...........................................................205
6.3.1.3 Temperature .....................................................................205
6.3.1.4 Microbial Factors .............................................................206
6.3.2 Combinations of Irradiation and Other Antimicrobial 
Interventions ...................................................................................207
6.4 
Quality Changes in Meat by Irradiation ................................................209
6.4.1 Lipid Oxidation ..............................................................................209
6.4.2 Off-Odor Production ..................................................................... 210
6.4.2.1 Sources of Off-Odor Production in  
Irradiated Meat ................................................................ 210
6.4.2.2 Mechanism of Off-Odor Production in 
Irradiated Meat ................................................................ 211
6.4.3 Color Change .................................................................................. 212
6.4.3.1 Color Changes in Irradiated Raw and  
Cooked Meat ................................................................. 212
6.4.3.2 Mechanism of Color Changes in  
Irradiated Meat ................................................................ 213
6.4.4 Texture Change .............................................................................. 215
6.4.5 Consumer Acceptance of Irradiated Meat ................................. 215
6.5 
Control of Quality Changes in Meat by Irradiation ............................. 216
6.5.1 Additives ......................................................................................... 216
6.5.2 Packaging ........................................................................................ 217
6.5.3 Packaging and Additive Combinations ...................................... 217
6.6 
Future Research Needed .......................................................................... 218
References ............................................................................................................. 219

198
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
6.1 Introduction
Meat is one of the major sources of pathogens that cause foodborne illness 
in humans. The intervention strategies for pathogens in meat can be divided 
into preharvest reduction of microorganisms in livestock and postharvest 
decontamination on carcass and meat. The reduction of bacteria in animal 
is achieved by priming their immune system via the use of dietary supple-
mentation with known immune stimulants. Postharvest interventions are 
traditional meat decontamination methods that use various physical and 
chemical methods during slaughtering and processing steps (Farkas, 2006). 
Irradiation is among the most effective physical decontamination technolo-
gies for inactivating foodborne pathogens and improving the safety of meats 
(Roberts, 2014). Irradiation of meat for the purpose of killing indigenous 
microflora, and thereby extending shelf life, has been known as a preser-
vation technique for several decades. The major advantages of irradiating 
meat are it is a nonthermal processing, maintains the integrity of products, 
and leaves no chemical residues. Also, the products can be treated after final 
packaging, which prevents further cross-contamination during postprocess-
ing handling.
The bacteriocidal action of ionizing irradiation is through the damage 
of bacterial DNA by the free radicals produced during the irradiation 
process. The effect of irradiation in inhibiting foodborne pathogens and 
spoilage bacteria in meat products is dose dependent. The survival of 
microbial cells upon irradiation treatments is influenced by the nature 
and extent of direct damage produced inside the cell; the number, nature, 
and longevity of irradiation-induced chemical species; and the inherent 
ability of cells to withstand the assaults and undergo repair. Extracellu-
lar conditions such as pH, temperature, and chemical composition of the 
food, in which the microorganisms are also suspended, have significant 
effects on the microcidal efficiency of irradiation. Although very effective 
for controlling pathogens, irradiation can deplete antioxidants in muscle, 
induce color change, increase production of off-odor volatiles, and neg-
atively alter the sensory characteristics of meat products. Formation of 
2-alkylcyclobutanones, benzene, and methyl benzene (toluene) in irradi-
ated foods is also another important issue that consumers are concerned 
about.
This chapter discusses the history, principles, and microcidal effects of 
irradiation as well as how irradiation influences quality, sensory characteris-
tics, and consumer acceptance of meat products. The combinations of physi-
cal and/or chemical treatments that can improve the efficacy of irradiation 
and the quality and consumer acceptance of irradiated meat products are 
also discussed.

199
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
6.2 Food Irradiation
6.2.1 History of Food Irradiation
Food irradiation has been studied for over 70 years. Most of the food products 
approved for irradiation have been investigated for more than 40 years before 
approval in the United States. To date, no other food technology has as long a 
history of scientific research and testing before gaining approval. Food irradi-
ation research has been comprehensive, and included toxicological, microbio-
logical evaluation, and wholesomeness (WHO, 1994). Although two patents 
were filed in 1905 and x-ray treatment was applied to kill Trichina in pork in 
1921, food irradiation was economically unfeasible in the United States until 
World War II because of the high cost of ionizing radiation sources. In the 
1940s, machines that can produce high-energy electron beams of up to 24 
million electron volts (eV) became available. This energy was strong enough 
to penetrate six inches deep into food when electron beams were “fired” 
from both sides of the product. Also, man-made radionuclides such as Co-60 
and Cs-137, which emit gamma rays during their radioactive decay, became 
available through the development of atomic energy. The availability of these 
sources stimulated research in food irradiation aimed at the development 
of commercial processes. In the mid-1940s, the use of irradiation to preserve 
foods was suggested. From 1940 to 1953, exploratory research on food irra-
diation in the United States was sponsored by the Department of the Army, 
the Atomic Energy Commission, and private industry. In the late 1940s and 
early 1950s, researchers investigated the potential of ultraviolet light, x-rays, 
electrons, neutrons, and alpha particles for food preservation and concluded 
that only electrons had the necessary characteristics of efficiency, safety, and 
practicality. They considered x-rays to be impractical because of very low con-
version efficiency from electron to x-ray at that time (Hayashi, 1991). Ultravio-
let light and alpha particles were also considered to be impractical because 
of their limited ability to penetrate matter. Neutrons exhibited an excellent 
penetration capability and were very effective in the inactivation of bacteria, 
but were considered inappropriate for use because of the potential for induc-
ing radioactivity in food. Proctor and Goldblith (1951) found that the physi-
cal characteristics of food products were important factors in determining 
the correct dose of radiation for bacterial inactivation. Enzymes were more 
resistant to ionizing radiation than bacteria, and irradiation in frozen state 
minimized the development of off-flavor.
Most in-depth studies in food irradiation since 1952 have been govern-
ment-sponsored because of military interest in this type of food processing. 
Much of the early research to sterilize foods was done by the Quartermas-
ter Corps of the U.S. Army at the Food and Container Institute in Chicago 

200
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
because of its need to provide high-quality, shelf-stable field rations for 
troops. The Army Quartermaster Corps concluded that wholesome, eco-
nomical, shelf-stable field rations could be provided through irradiation. 
Department began to assess the safety of irradiated foods in 1955, petitions 
to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the approval of irradiation 
of specific foods followed, and commercial radiation equipment and sources 
were developed. In the meantime, the International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA) that promoted nuclear technologies was working on the global 
acceptance of food irradiation. In 1959, IAEA signed an agreement with the 
World Health Organization (WHO) giving IAEA “the primary responsibility 
for encouraging, assisting and coordinating research on, and development 
and practical application of atomic energy for peaceful uses throughout the 
world.” As a result, IAEA has had authority over nuclear energy programs, 
has played a major role in encouraging people to accept irradiated food, and 
has organized scientific committees that promote the wholesomeness of irra-
diated food (IAEA, 1991).
In 1962, the U.S. Army built a food irradiation facility at the Army’s 
research laboratories and conducted research in sterilizing meat products 
using high-dose irradiations; it developed shelf-stable bacon, ham, pork, 
beef, hamburger, corned beef, pork sausage, codfish cakes, and shrimp, 
but the first products approved for irradiation by the FDA were wheat and 
wheat powder in 1963. In the early 1970s, the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) adopted an irradiation process to sterilize meats for 
astronauts in space, and added them to the flight menu of Apollo 17 in 1972. 
In 1975, irradiated ham, turkey, beef steak, and corned beef were used on the 
Apollo–Soyuz Test Project (ASTP) where irradiated foods were shared with 
the Russian cosmonauts.
In 1980, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United 
Nations, the IAEA, and the WHO stated that “irradiation of any food com-
modity up to an overall average dose of 1 Mrad (10 kGy) presents no toxi-
cological hazard and introduces no special nutritional or microbiological 
changes; hence, toxicological testing of foods so treated is no longer required” 
(WHO, 1981). During the 1980s, the FDA approved petitions for irradiation of 
spices and seasonings, pork, fresh fruits, and dry or dehydrated substances. 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) approved irradiation of pork to 
destroy Trichinella spirallis (USDA-FSIS, 1986), and pathogen control for poul-
try and red meats (USDA-FSIS, 1999). More recently, WHO convened a Study 
Group to review all data on products irradiated above the 10-kGy ceiling 
and concluded the products to be safe and wholesome. As a result, WHO 
has recommended removing the dose limit so that irradiation can be used to 
sterilize foods commercially as in canning (WHO, 1999). During the past six 
decades, the commercial development of food irradiation has been delayed 
because of consumers’ notion that food irradiation is linked to the atomic 
bomb and nuclear radiation. More than 60 countries have permitted irradia-
tion of food, and more than 600,000 tons of food is irradiated annually in the 

201
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
world (Kume et al., 2009). The United States also has more than 40 licensed 
irradiation facilities, most of which are used to sterilize medical and phar-
maceutical supplies. The approval date, dose, and purpose of food irradia-
tion in the United States are listed in Table 6.1.
6.2.2 Irradiation Process
Atoms are made up of three types of particles: protons, neutrons, and elec-
trons. These particles are held together by energy, and atomic nuclei contain 
protons (+ charge) and neutrons (uncharged) in about 1:1–1:1.5 ratio (Thakur 
and Singh, 1994). If any changes of number and arrangements in the forces 
of the nuclear particles occur, they lose balance and consequently become 
TABLE 6.1
Approval of Food Irradiation in the United States
Date
Products
Dose (kGy)
Purpose
1963
Wheat and wheat powder
0.2–0.5
Disinfect insects
1964, 1965
Potatoes
0.05–0.15
Inhibit sprouting
1983
Spices and dry seasonings
<30
Disinfestation and 
decontamination
1985
Pork
0.3–1.0
Control of Trichinella spiralis
1985, 1986
Dehydrated enzymes
<10
Control insects and microbes
1986
Fruits and vegetables
<1
Delay maturation and 
disinfection
1986
Herb, spices, and  
seasonings
<30
Control of microorganisms
1990
Poultry, fresh and frozen
<3.0
Control of microorganisms
1995
Meat, frozen and  
packaged
>44
Sterilization only for NASA
1997, 1999
Red meat, chilled
<4.5
Control of microorganisms
Red meat, frozen
<7.5
2000
Shell eggs
<3.0
Control of Salmonella 
enteriditis
2000
Sprouts
<8.0
Control of pathogens in seeds
2005
Fresh or frozen molluscan 
and other shellfish
<5.5
Control of Vibrio species and 
foodborne pathogens
2008
Iceberg lettuce and 
spinach
<4.0
Control of foodborne 
pathogens and extension of 
shelf life
2012
Uncooked meat, meat 
by-products, and certain 
meat food products
<4.5
Control of foodborne 
pathogens and extension of 
shelf life
2014
Chilled or frozen raw, 
cooked, or partially 
cooked crustaceans
<6.0
Control of foodborne 
pathogens and extension of 
shelf life
NASA, National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

202
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
an unstable or “radioactive” atom. This unstable atom can be restabilized 
by emitting energy to rebalance the nucleus. To emit energy, electrons are 
removed from the outer shell of atoms and the energy levels of electrons 
are changed as the electrons return to their original energy levels. This 
energy is electromagnetic and its emission, as particles or waves, is termed 
“radiation” (Halliwell and Gutteridge, 1989).
The amounts of emission energy depend on the level of energy being 
released. Low-energy electromagnetic radiations occur in TV, radio, and 
microwave as long waves; intermediate radiations occur in visible light, 
heat, and solar energy; high-energy radiations occur in x-ray and gamma 
ray; very high-energy radiations occur in the radioactive decay of radionu-
clides like uranium (Lagunas-Solar, 1995). If radiation has sufficient energy 
to move atoms in another material without chemical changes it is called a 
“nonionizing radiation,” and if it also has sufficient energy to break chemi-
cal bonds it is called “ionizing radiation.” The amount of energy to break a 
carbon–carbon bond is about ~33 eV and a dose of 1 kGy has been estimated 
to break <1 chemical bond in 1 million bonds present (CAST, 1986).
Radionuclides, such as 60Co, 137Cs, and uranium, are defined as the atoms 
that contain excess energy in the nucleus due to an excess of either proton or 
neutron. They emit energy as alpha particles, beta particles, and photons, and 
emitting the energy in these atoms is called “decay.” Alpha particles are emit-
ted from very large atoms such as radium, uranium, and plutonium when the 
neutron:proton ratio is too low. Alpha particles travel slowly and lose energy 
rapidly due to their charge and mass, expanding it in a few centimeters. Beta 
particles are emitted when the neutron:proton ratio is too high, and 60Co, 137Cs, 
and 14C release beta particles. They have ~1/2000 mass of a neutron or pro-
ton. So, they can travel several feet from their source but are stopped by solid 
materials. The movement of a neutron does not reduce the nuclear energy level 
enough, and the extra energy is released as a gamma photon (Efiok, 1996).
Photons such as gamma rays and x-rays are emitted when the energy of 
atoms (60Co and 137Cs) is exhausted: gamma rays are emitted from nucleus 
and x-rays are from electron fields. Gamma rays have such high energy and 
are so small that they pass through living tissues without interacting with 
them (Jarrett, 1982). These gamma rays do not ionize atoms directly. They 
transfer energy to secondary electrons, which then interact with other mate-
rials to form ions. When a photon or an accelerated electron enters material, 
the energy can be transferred or absorbed by an electron of an atom in the 
material. The electron of an atom in the material increases in energy level 
and leaves its orbit. The ejected electron, called a “Compton electron,” trans-
fers its energy to a secondary electron and reduces the total energy of the 
Compton electron (Diehl, 1995). By the same token, Compton electrons cause 
further excitation and ionization in the material and this primary effect is 
called the “Compton effect.” Because of this effect, energy is passed through 
a cascade of electrons until not enough energy to cause electrons to escape 
their orbitals is left (Venugopal et al., 1999).

203
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
As the basic principle of the radiation process, irradiation energy applied 
to biological materials ejects electrons from the atoms/molecules of the 
material and produces ions and free radicals (Woods and Pikaev, 1994). The 
first target of highly energized electrons is water molecules in biological sub-
stances. The dispersion of ions and free radicals is greater when water is 
present in free form than in bound form (dried products) or in crystalline 
form (frozen products) (Thakur and Singh, 1994). The hydroxyl radical (HO·), 
the primary radiolytic product of water, is a powerful oxidizing agent, and 
this free radical tends to recombine to form stable products (Taub et al., 1979). 
Because the dispersion and capture of electrons are purely random, large 
molecules and compounds have a greater probability of being affected than 
smaller molecules. The cellular components such as DNA, pigments, fatty 
acids, and membrane lipids can be damaged by ionizing radiation. When the 
DNA of living cells is exposed to OH· by radiation, both single and double 
strands in the molecule are broken.
Radionuclides such as 137Cs and 60Co are used as the major sources of 
gamma rays, and a linear accelerator is used to generate high-energy elec-
trons and x-rays. 137Cs is produced when uranium and plutonium absorb 
neutrons and a undergo fission in nuclear reactors. 137Cs produces 0.66 MeV 
gamma radiations, and it decays to nonradioactive barium (56Ba137) by emit-
ting beta particles and strong gamma rays (Lagunas-Solar, 1995). 60Co, the 
most common energy source for irradiation, produces 1.33 MeV gamma 
radiations as it decays to nonradioactive nickel by emitting beta particles 
and powerful gamma rays. 60Co is a man-made radionuclide produced in 
linear accelerators and as a nuclear reactor by-product by bombarding 59Co 
with neutrons. Gamma rays are highly penetrable and can be used to treat 
food contained inside a package. From a practical point of view, 60Co is pre-
ferred to 137Cs because the latter, apart from having weaker gamma rays, 
is also water soluble and thus poses environmental hazards (Venugopal 
et al., 1999).
An electon beam is a stream of high-energy electrons that are generated 
electrically then accelerated through an electron gun. The electrons can be 
accelerated to different energy levels including particles of high-energy elec-
trons and x-rays that are produced when high-energy electrons strike a thin 
metal film (Josephson and Peterson, 2000). Electron beam accelerators accel-
erate electrons to a beam (up to 10 MeV) with minimal penetrating power into 
thin foods (5–10 cm). Electron beams are with single-sided treatment, and 10 
MeV electrons can give adequate treatment for thicknesses up to about 35 
mm of unit density material. Using a conveyor belt with double-sided treat-
ment can give a bit more than double the single-sided depth because of the 
way the two depth-dose curves superimpose; hence, a product thickness of 
8 cm can be used (Satin, 2002). Although electrons are less penetrable than 
gamma rays, they can be useful for irradiating large volumes of free flow-
ing food items such as grains or packages of fish fillets with no more than 
8–10 cm thickness with a density of 1 g/cm3.

204
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Each of these sources has specific advantages and disadvantages (Jarrett, 
1982). The advantages of 60Co include high penetration and dose uniformity, 
allowing treatment of products of variable sizes, shapes, and densities, a long 
history of satisfactory use in similar applications, ready availability, and low 
environmental risk. The disadvantages include 12% of the source must be 
replaced annually because of its short half-life (5.3 years) and a rather slow 
processing rate compared with electron beam irradiation. The advantages of 
a linear accelerator compared with the gamma irradiators are the following: 
can simply be turned off when not in use, does not need to be replenished, 
established history of use, and a high throughput rate. The disadvantages are 
the complexity of the machine and the consequent need for regular mainte-
nance and the large requirements for power and cooling. Currently, e-beam 
and gamma rays are used as radiation sources for commercial food irradia-
tion. Although x-rays have relatively high penetrating power, x-rays are not 
used in food irradiation due to poor conversion of accelerated electrons to 
x-rays (Hayashi, 1991). The comparative characteristics of ionizing radiation 
sources used for food irradiation are shown in Table 6.2.
The quantity of energy absorbed by something (food) as it passes through a 
radiation field is called “radiation absorbed dose.” The unit (SI) for irradiation 
dose is Gray (Gy), which is equal to the absorption of energy equivalent to one 
Joule per kilogram of absorbing material (1 Gy = 1 J·kg–1 = 6200 billion MeV 
absorbed/kg of food = 0.01 calorie/lb of food = 100 rad, 1 rad = 100 erg/g).
6.3 Microbial Decontamination of Meat by Irradiation
Food irradiation is an effective technology for microbial decontamination of 
foods including meats. The antimicrobial efficacy of food irradiation against 
pathogenic microorganisms has been recognized for decades. The use of this 
technology with the aim of destroying meat-borne pathogenic microorgan-
isms will also bring a reduction in the number of spoilage microorganisms 
to increase shelf life of meats (Olson, 1998).
TABLE 6.2
The Characteristics of Ionizing Radiation Sources
Gamma Ray
Electron Beam
X-Ray
Energy type
Electromagnetic
Charged particle
Electromagnetic
Energy volt (MeV)
1.17 + 1.33
~10
~5
Energy efficiency
Low (~30%)
High (~85%)
Low (~10%)
Penetration capability
Deep (60–80 cm)
Low (8–10 cm)
Deep
Source control
Continuous
Switch (on/off)
Switch (on/off)
Source: Kwon, 2010, Korea Food Safety Research Institute.

205
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
6.3.1 Factors Affecting Radiation Destruction of Microorganisms in Meat
6.3.1.1 Irradiation Dose
Significant reductions in microbial populations in meats can be achieved 
by using high radiation doses; however, such an approach can have adverse 
effects on the desirable sensory attributes of meats. Therefore, emerging 
trends in the application of irradiation include the use of this technology 
and other interventions (e.g., antimicrobial food preservatives, heat, and 
high hydrostatic pressure) as part of a hurdle technology approach to control 
meat-borne pathogens. This approach allows the use of relatively low doses 
of irradiation to improve microbial safety of meats while maintaining the 
desirable sensory attributes of these nutritious food products.
6.3.1.2 Meat Composition
Meat composition affects the destruction of microorganisms by irradiation. 
The proteins in the meat may protect microorganisms against the damaging 
effects of irradiation by neutralizing free radicals (Diehl, 1995). This neutral-
izing effect of proteins may explain the relatively high radiation resistance 
of microorganisms in meats and dairy products compared to nonprotein 
foods of similar moisture content (Soladoye et al., 2015). Proteins and other 
meat constituents, including natural antioxidants such as carnosine and 
vitamin E, compete for free radicals formed by the radiolysis of water (Galan 
et al., 2011). This competition for free radicals decreases the antimicrobial 
efficacy of ionizing radiation. Carnosine has been reported to increase the 
radiation resistance of Aeromonas hydrophila in minced turkey meat (Stec-
cheni et al., 1998). Irradiation produces peroxides from dextrose, and free 
fatty acids, carbonyl compounds, hydrogen peroxide, and hydroperoxides 
from fat. However, dextrose added in processed meat and fat content of meat 
had no effect on microbial inactivation by irradiation (Sommers and Fan, 
2002), probably because other meat constituents such as proteins may have 
protected bacteria and other microorganisms from the antimicrobial prod-
ucts of fats and dextrose (Diehl, 1995).
6.3.1.3 Temperature
The temperature of meat during irradiation is an important factor that affects 
the extent of irradiation destruction of microorganisms. Microbial resistance 
to irradiation increases with decreases in temperature below the freezing 
point of water. The impact of meat temperature on the survival of patho-
genic bacteria following irradiation has been reported for Campylobacter 
jejuni (Clavero et al., 1994), Salmonella (Thayer and Boyd, 1991), Escherichia 
coli O157:H7 (Arthur et al., 2005), Staphylococcus aureus (Thayer and Boyd, 
1992), Listeria monocytogenes (Thayer and Boyd, 1995), and Clostridium botuli-
num spores (El-Bisi et al., 1966). Microorganisms exhibit a greater sensitivity 

206
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
to irradiation at ambient temperatures than at subfreezing temperatures: 
D10-values (dose required to destroy 90% of the bacterial population) for 
E. coli O157:H7 in mechanically deboned chicken meat were 0.28 and 0.44 
kGy at 5°C and at –5°C, respectively (Thayer and Boyd, 1993). Significantly 
higher D10-values have been reported for E. coli O157:H7 in ground beef pat-
ties irradiated at –15°C than at 5°C. Freezing meat reduces water activity by 
converting the water to ice, drastically reduce the generation of free radi-
cals from the radiolysis of water (Diehl, 1995). Additionally, the frozen state 
impedes the migration of free radicals to other parts of the frozen product 
beyond those areas of limited free radical production (Taub et al., 1979).
6.3.1.4 Microbial Factors
Microbial factors including numbers and types of microorganisms in meats 
as well as the physiological state of the microorganisms can affect the extent 
of microbial destruction by irradiation. As observed with other food pres-
ervation processes, the presence of large populations of microorganisms 
reduces the effectiveness of a given irradiation dose. Therefore, decontami-
nation of meat using irradiation would be more efficient if the meat to be 
treated is of good microbial quality. With regard to types of microorgan-
isms, microbial sensitivity to irradiation in meats, as in other foods, can vary 
among microbial types. For example, viruses have much higher radiation 
resistance than bacterial spores, which in turn show a higher radiation resis-
tance than vegetative bacterial cells. Bacterial vegetative cells are more radia-
tion resistant than fungi (yeast and molds). More complex life forms have a 
higher sensitivity to irradiation than simpler life forms. This phenomenon is 
supported by the observation that a dose as high as 40 kGy is necessary for 
destroying viruses; however, a dose as low as 0.01 kGy could cause death in 
humans (Satin, 1993). Gram-negative bacteria are more sensitive to ionizing 
radiation than gram-positive bacteria. In fact irradiation doses of at least 1.0 
kGy, which could virtually destroy gram-negative bacteria in food, exhibit a 
much less destructive effect on gram-positive bacteria such as the lactic acid 
producing bacteria (Lambert et al., 1992). Nonspore-forming bacteria exhibit 
a greater sensitivity to irradiation than spore formers.
With regard to the physiological state of bacteria, exponential phase cells 
are more sensitive to irradiation than lag phase cells or stationary phase 
cells. More importantly, meat-borne bacteria that have adapted to certain 
environmental stress demonstrate even greater radiation resistance than 
stationary-phase bacteria. More recently, significant increases in the radia-
tion resistance (D10-value) of starved L. monocytogenes cells in ground pork at 
4°C have been reported (Mendonca et al., 2004). Irradiation of ground pork at 
2.5 kGy decreased initial populations of nonstarved cells (control) by about 
6.0 log, whereas starved cells were decreased by only 3.8 log. D10-values for 
exponential, stationary, and starved L. monocytogenes cells in ground pork 
were reported to be 0.35, 0.42, and 0.66 kGy, respectively. Kundu et al. (2014) 

207
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
reported that 1 kGy irradiation treatment of beef reduced ≤1.9 log of Salmo-
nella and ≤4.0 log of E. coli O157:H7. Xavier et al. (2014) applied 2.5 kGy irra-
diation doses to beef and found 2 log cfu/g for L. monocytogenes and 5 log 
cfu/g for E. coli O157: H7. The D10-values of foodborne pathogens, parasite, 
and spoilage bacteria are listed in Table 6.3.
6.3.2  Combinations of Irradiation and Other 
Antimicrobial Interventions
Doses of irradiation used alone for microbial decontamination of meat may 
result in adverse sensory changes in these food products. Combinations 
of relatively mild antimicrobial treatments and preservative hurdles can 
enhance each other’s antimicrobial activity. In this regard, combinations of 
marginally effective antimicrobials may result in enhanced microbial safety 
and improved quality of foods. Food preservation methods applied to meats 
including acidification, heating, and the addition of chemical food preserva-
tives can improve the decontamination efficacy of irradiation by increasing 
the radiation sensitivity of meat-borne microorganisms and by inhibiting 
the proliferation of microbial survivors following irradiation.
Various acidifying agents have been widely used in combination with 
irradiation for controlling pathogens and extending the microbial shelf life 
of meat products. Farkas and Andrassy (1993) examined the antimicrobial 
effects of gamma irradiation (2 kGy) and acidulants (0.1% ascorbic acid or 
0.5% glucono-delta-lactone) in vacuum-packaged minced meat and found 
TABLE 6.3
D10-Values of Foodborne Pathogens, Parasite, and Spoilage Bacteria
Pathogen
D10 (kGy)
Medium
Pathogen
D10 (kGy)
Medium
Trichinella 
spiralis
0.3–0.6
Pork
Yersinia 
enterocolitica
0.11
Beef
Bacillus cereus 
(vegetative)
0.14–0.19
Beef
Clostridium 
botulinum 
(spore)
3.56
Chicken
Campylobacter 
jejuni
0.18
Beef
Clostridium 
perfringens
0.58
Meat
Escherichia coli 
O157:H7
0.25
Beef
Clostridium 
sporogenes 
(spore)
6.3
Beef fat
Listeria 
monocytogenes
0.51–059
Beef
Moraxella 
phenylpyruvica
0.63–0.88
Chicken
Salmonella spp.
0.48–0.70
Meat
Pseudomonas 
putida
0.08–0.11
Chicken
Staphylococcus 
aureus
0.42
Chicken
Streptococcus 
faecalis
0.65–0.7
Chicken

208
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
that acidulants delayed the growth of Enterobacteriaceae in nonirradiated 
meat for two weeks at 0°C–2°C. However, a combination of acidulant with 
irradiation completely prevented the growth of this microbial group during 
refrigerated storage and temperature abuse (10°C). Bhide et al. (2001) sprayed 
sheep carcasses with 1% propionic acid, 2% lactic acid, or 2% acetic acid at 
a pressure of 3 kg/cm2 for two to four minutes. The meat harvested from 
the carcasses was packaged and exposed to gamma irradiation at 1, 2, or 
3 kGy. All organic acids used increased the sensitivity of Bacillus cereus to 
irradiation. Acetic acid (2%) plus irradiation at 3 kGy was the most effec-
tive in reducing total viable count and B. cereus count during refrigerated 
storage (5°C–7°C) of the meat samples. Citric acid, used as a surface treat-
ment for frankfurters, has been shown to decrease the irradiation resistance 
of L. monocytogenes in this ready-to-eat (RTE) meat product. The D10-values 
for L. monocytogenes on frankfurters dipped in 0, 1, 5, or 10% (w/v) citric acid 
were 0.61, 0.60, 0.54, and 0.53 kGy, respectively (Sommers et al., 2003). Alaha-
koon et al. (2015) reported that 2% citrus peel extract treatment was effective 
to extend the shelf life of 2 kGy irradiated chicken breast meat. Combinations 
of organic acid and irradiation were more effective than each intervention 
used alone for controlling the growth of total microbial counts and coliforms 
in pork during storage at 4°C for 14 days.
Various other antimicrobial treatments have shown potential in enhanc-
ing destruction of microorganisms by irradiation. Kim and Thayer (1996) 
reported that irradiation and heating combination significantly decreased 
survival of Salmonella typhimurium irrespective of the order of application 
of each treatment. Interestingly, application of irradiation before rather 
than after heating was consistently more lethal to the pathogen. Huq et al. 
(2015) indicated that microencapsulation of oregano and cinnamon essen-
tial oils combined with nisin showed an antimicrobial effect to reduce L. 
monocytogenes in RTE ham. By using a combination of hurdles (low aw, 
vacuum packaging, and irradiation), Kanatt et al. (2002) developed a few 
RTE shelf-stable intermediate moisture (IM) spiced mutton and spiced 
chicken products. Those researchers reduced the aw of the meat products 
to 0.80 by grilling or hot-air drying. The IM meat products were then 
vacuum sealed, treated with gamma irradiation at 0 (control), 2.5, 5.0, and 
10.0 kGy, then stored at 30°C for six months (spiced chicken cubes) or 
nine months (mutton kababs). No viable microorganisms were detected 
in meat products treated with 10 kGy and those products retained accept-
able sensory quality for up to nine months. More recently, Chen et al. 
(2004) demonstrated a synergistic effect between the bacteriocin pediocin 
(in ALTA 2341) and electron beam irradiation for inhibiting L. monocy-
togenes in frankfurters. Storage of the frankfurters at 4°C enhanced the 
antilisterial effects of the combined treatments; little or no growth of the 
pathogen occurred in packages of frankfurters during 12 weeks of stor-
age. The combined treatments did not alter the sensory characteristics of 
the frankfurters negatively.

209
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
6.4 Quality Changes in Meat by Irradiation
The main goal of irradiating meat is eliminating pathogens and improving 
the safety and storage stability of meat. However, the application of irradia-
tion technology by the meat industry is limited because of quality concerns 
about irradiated meat products. Irradiation produces a characteristic odor as 
well as alters meat flavor and color, which significantly influences consumer 
acceptance. Consumers associate the brown/gray color in irradiated raw 
beef with old or low-quality meat, and off-odor and off-flavor with undesir-
able chemical reactions. Thus, developing methods that can prevent these 
quality changes in meat by irradiation is essential for implementing irradia-
tion technology in the meat industry.
6.4.1 Lipid Oxidation
Lipid is one of the main meat components, and polyunsaturated fatty acids 
are the most susceptible to oxidation by irradiation. Hydroxyl radicals are 
the most reactive oxygen species that can initiate lipid oxidation in meat. 
Thakur and Singh (1994) reported that ionizing radiation generates hydroxyl 
radicals in aqueous systems. Because meat contains near 75% water, irradia-
tion is expected to accelerate oxidative changes in meat. Irradiation-induced 
lipid oxidation in meat is dose dependent (Ahn et al., 1997). The presence 
of oxygen also has a significant effect on the development of oxidation and 
odor production (Merritt et al., 1975; Badr, 2004). Without oxygen, lipid oxida-
tion in raw and cooked meat did not progress and thiobarbituric acid reac-
tive substances (TBARS) and volatiles of vacuum-packaged irradiated raw 
and cooked meat did not correlate well. Under aerobic conditions, however, 
TBARS had very high correlations with the amounts of aldehydes, total vola-
tiles, and ketones in aerobically packaged irradiated meat. Therefore, exclud-
ing oxygen from meat and meat products, whether they are irradiated or 
not, is critical to stop oxidative chain reactions (Ahn et al., 2000b). Ahn et al. 
(1998b) reported that preventing oxygen, especially for cooked meat, was 
more important than irradiation dose and storage time (Ahn et al., 2000a). 
Aerobically packaged sausages irradiated at a higher dose produced greater 
amounts of TBARS than those irradiated at lower doses (Kanatt et al., 2015b). 
The TBARS of sausages with higher polyunsaturated fatty acids was greater 
than those with lower polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Diehl (1995) reported that irradiation of aqueous systems produced hydro-
gen peroxide, particularly in the presence of oxygen. During postirradiation 
storage, hydrogen peroxide gradually disappears while other constituents 
of the system are oxidized. A series of dienes, trienes, and tetraenes were 
formed from unsaturated fatty acids by irradiation at high dose (60 kGy) 
under vacuum conditions (Nawar, 1986). Shahidi and Pegg (1994) reported 
that aldehydes contributed the most to oxidation flavor and rancidity in 

210
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
cooked meat, and hexanal was the major volatile aldehyde. Lee and Ahn 
(2003) reported that the TBARS values of oil emulsion immediately after 
irradiation were lower than those of the nonirradiated ones, but rapidly 
increased during storage. Especially, arachidonic acid, linolenic acid, and 
fish oil, which had a large proportion of polyunsaturated fatty acids, had 
accelerated lipid oxidation after irradiation.
Under frozen conditions, irradiation increased the TBARS of pork pat-
ties and turkey breast but storage time had no effect on lipid oxidation even 
under aerobic packaging conditions (Nam and Ahn, 2002b). Taub et al. (1979) 
reported that with less mobility in the frozen state, free radicals tend to 
recombine to form the original substances rather than diffuse through the 
food and react with other food components. Thus, the minimal lipid oxida-
tion detected in frozen turkey after irradiation should be due to the lim-
ited mobility of free radicals in frozen states. During the warming process, 
however, they tend to react with each other rather than with the substrates 
(Javanmard et al., 2006).
6.4.2 Off-Odor Production
6.4.2.1 Sources of Off-Odor Production in Irradiated Meat
All irradiated meat produces a characteristic, readily detectable, irradia-
tion odor regardless of the degree of lipid oxidation (Ahn et al., 1997). 
Meat sterilized through irradiation develops a characteristic odor, which 
has been described as “metallic,” “sulfide,” “wet dog,” “wet grain,” or 
“burnt.” These investigators assumed that the off-odor was the result 
of free-radical oxidation, which was initiated by the irradiation pro-
cess. Others described the irradiated meat odor as “bloody and sweet” 
(Hashim et al., 1995) and “barbecued corn-like” (Ahn et al., 2000a). Batzer 
and Doty (1955) found that methyl mercaptan and hydrogen sulfide were 
important to irradiation odor, and the precursors of the undesirable odor 
compounds in irradiated meat were sulfur-containing compounds that 
were water soluble. Others postulated that hydrocarbons and carbonyl 
from fats were the major source of irradiation off-odor. Sensory results, 
however, clearly indicated that the major source of irradiation off-odor 
was sulfur compounds. More recent studies showed that irradiation 
greatly increased or newly produced many volatile compounds such 
as 2-methyl butanal, 3-methyl butanal, 1-hexene, 1-heptene, 1-octene, 
1-nonene, cis-3- and trans-6-nonenals, oct-1-en-3-one, hydrogen sulfide, 
sulfur dioxide, mercaptomethane, bis(methylthio-)methane, methyl thio-
acetate, dimethyl disulfide, and trimethyl sulfide from meat (Patterson 
and Stevenson, 1995; Fan et al., 2002). Among those volatile compounds, 
sulfur volatiles showed much stronger and stringent odor intensity than 
other compounds because sulfur compounds had very low odor thresh-
olds (Angelini et al., 1975). Volatiles from lipids played only a small part 

211
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
of the irradiation off-odor (Lee and Ahn, 2003). This indicated that sulfur 
compounds would be the major volatile components responsible for the 
characteristic off-odor in irradiated meat, and supported the concept that 
the changes that occur following irradiation were different from those of 
warmed-over flavor in the oxidized meat.
6.4.2.2 Mechanism of Off-Odor Production in Irradiated Meat
Ahn (2002) found that side chains of amino acids were susceptible to radio-
lytic degradation. More than one site of amino acid side chains was suscepti-
ble to free radical attack and many volatiles were produced by the secondary 
chemical reactions after the primary radiolytic degradation of side chains. 
The majority of volatiles produced by irradiation were sulfur compounds, 
indicating that sulfur-containing amino acids are among the most suscep-
tible to irradiation (Ahn and Lee, 2002).
The perception of odor from samples containing sulfur volatiles changed 
greatly depending upon their composition and amounts present in the 
sample. The sulfur compounds were not only produced by the radiolytic 
degradation of amino acid side chains (primary reaction), but also by the sec-
ondary reactions of the primary sulfur compounds with other compounds 
around them. The amounts and types of sulfur compounds produced from 
irradiated sulfur amino acids indicated that methionine is the major amino 
acid responsible for the production of sulfur volatiles. Sensory panelists con-
firmed that all irradiated liposomes containing “sulfur amino acids” pro-
duced similar odor characteristics to irradiated meat, indicating that sulfur 
amino acids are mainly responsible for irradiation odor (Ahn, 2002). The 
volatile profiles and sensory characteristics of amino acids clearly explained 
why irradiation odor was different from lipid oxidation odor, and why lipid 
oxidation was responsible for only a small part of the off-odor in irradiated 
meat (Ahn and Lee, 2002).
The mechanisms of volatile production from meat indicated that the 
majority of the volatiles were from the radiolytic degradation of amino acid 
side chains, but deamination and decarboxylation from α-carbon were also 
involved in the production of volatile compounds (Dogbevi et al., 1999). The 
Strecker degradation, ketonic decarboxylation, and oxidation–reduction were 
involved in the production of aldehydes. Each amino acid monomers produced 
different odor characteristics, but the intensities of odor from all nonsulfur 
amino acid groups were weak. Cysteine and methionine produced similar 
odor characteristics to that of the irradiated meat, but the amounts of sulfur 
volatiles from methionine were far greater than that of the cysteine. This indi-
cated that the contribution of volatiles produced from nonsulfur amino acids 
was minor, although interactions among volatiles, especially aldehydes with 
other volatile compounds, can contribute to the off-odor of irradiated meat 
products significantly. Although this study is done using a model system, 
the results can be extrapolated to a meat system because about 70% of meat is 

212
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
water, and protein (amino acid) is the major component involved in volatile 
production in meat by irradiation (Ahn et al., 2002, 2016a,b).
Mottram et al. (2002) reported that the degradation of amino acids by oxi-
dative deamination–decarboxylation via Strecker degradation produced 
branched-chain aldehydes. 2-methyl butanal, 3-methyl butanal, and 2-methyl 
propanal are the main Strecker degradation products from isoleucine, leu-
cine, and valine, respectively, by irradiation (Ahn et al., 2016a). Davies (1996) 
reported that irradiation of N-acetyl amino acids and peptides in the pres-
ence of oxygen give high yields of side-chain hydroperoxides, which can be 
formed on both the backbone (at α-carbon positions) and the side chain. In 
addition to amino acids, fatty acids are also degraded by irradiation. When 
triglycerides or fatty acids are irradiated, hydrocarbons are formed from 
fatty acids through various free-radical reactions. Radiolytic degradation of 
fatty acid methyl ethers were affected by irradiation dose, irradiation tem-
perature, oxygen pressure, and fatty acid composition (Miyahara et al., 2002).
The release of nonpolar hydrocarbons was not influenced, but polar com-
pounds such as aldehydes, ketones, and alcohols were greatly influenced 
by water. The volatility of aroma compounds depends on the vapor–liquid 
partitioning of volatile compounds, which determines the affinity of volatile 
molecules for each phase (Buttery et al., 1973). The interactions among food 
components such as carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins (Godshall, 1997), and 
the physicochemical conditions of foods, which influence conformation of 
proteins, also affect the release of volatile compounds in foods (Lubbers et al., 
1998). Jo and Ahn (1999) reported that the amount of volatiles released from 
oil emulsion correlated negatively with fat content. This indicated that the 
relative amounts of volatile compounds released from meat systems could be 
significantly different from those in the aqueous system (Jo and Ahn, 2000).
6.4.3 Color Change
6.4.3.1 Color Changes in Irradiated Raw and Cooked Meat
The color of meat depends on the concentration and chemical status of heme pig-
ments. Oxygen (O2), CO, S, or NO can be the sixth ligand of heme pigments and 
is formed only when the heme iron is in reduced form. Although three common 
forms of myoglobin exist in different proportions, fresh meat color is imparted 
mainly by oxymyoglobin and deoxymyoglobin. The color of fresh meat is deter-
mined by oxygen partial pressure, oxygen diffusion rate, and oxygen consump-
tion rate at meat surface. Under normal conditions, enzymes use up all oxygen 
available and generate reducing conditions inside meat block. Thus, the pig-
ments in the middle of a meat block are usually in the reduced form (deoxymyo-
globin, purple color) and weakly bind with water molecules or are stabilized by 
distal histidine of globin. Discoloration in fresh meat is mainly caused by oxida-
tion of myoglobin to metmyoglobin when oxygen partial pressure is low, result-
ing in an unattractive brown color. The oxidized brown color can be turned into 

213
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
a bright red color under air (blooming or oxygenation) if the meat has strong 
enough reducing power or purple-red under full-vacuum conditions.
The color changes in irradiated meat vary significantly depending on 
various factors such as irradiation dose, animal species, muscle type, and 
packaging type (Luchsinger et al., 1996; Ahn et al., 1998a; Nanke et al., 1999). 
Millar et al. (1995) found that irradiated chicken breasts had a definite color 
change from the usual brown or purple to a more vivid pink or red as a 
result of ionizing irradiation in the oxygen-permeable film. Nam and Ahn 
(2002c) also reported that irradiation increased redness of both aerobically 
and vacuum-packaged raw turkey breast. However, the vacuum-packaged 
meat was redder than the aerobically packaged meat and was stable during 
storage (Luchsinger et al., 1997; Nanke et al., 1998, 1999). Jo et al. (2000) found 
a significant increase in redness of cooked pork sausages after irradiation. 
Irradiation and subsequent storage of pork improved the red color even in 
pale soft and exudative (PSE) pork, indicating that irradiation can be used 
to increase the acceptability of low-quality pork (Nam et al., 2002b). During 
the frozen storage, irradiation increased pink color in both aerobically and 
vacuum-packaged turkey breast, and the pink color was stable (Nam et al., 
2002c). Sensory evaluations of irradiated raw turkey breast meat indicated 
that sensory panelists preferred the red color of irradiated meats to nonir-
radiated ones because irradiated meat looked fresh (Lefebvre et al., 1994). 
However, increased redness is a problem in irradiated light meats such as 
poultry breast and pork loin if the red color of irradiated meats persists in 
meat after cooking.
In cooked turkey meat, the increased redness was greater inside than on the 
surface, and the pink color intensity of the inside was stronger in irradiated 
meat than the nonirradiated (Nam and Ahn, 2003c). Tappel (1957) noted that 
when precooked meat was irradiated, the gray-brown hematin pigments were 
converted to uncharacteristic red pigments, especially when the cooked meat 
was irradiated in the absence of oxygen. Irradiation of red meat changes the red 
color to brown or gray under aerobic conditions. Immediately after irradiation, 
the color of ground beef changed from a bright red to a greenish brown, which 
would be an unattractive beef color for consumers (Nam and Ahn, 2003a).
6.4.3.2 Mechanism of Color Changes in Irradiated Meat
Irradiation produces ligand-forming compounds that can act as the sixth 
ligand of myoglobin. Tappel (1956) postulated a bright red color of irradiated 
fresh meat in an inert atmosphere was oxymyoglobin formed by the reaction 
between metmyoglobin and hydroxyl radicals. However, it is not logical that 
the pigment is an oxymyoglobin because the red color formed by irradiation 
has been produced mainly in anoxic conditions. Millar et al. (1995) postu-
lated that the red/pink color in irradiated meat was due to a ferrous myo-
globin derivative such as carboxymyoglobin or nitric oxide myoglobin other 
than oxymyoglobin. Nam and Ahn (2002a,b) characterized the pink pigment 

214
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
formed in irradiated raw and cooked turkey breast as carbon monoxide-
myoglobin (CO-Mb). In cooked meat, both undenatured and denatured 
heme pigments were involved in heme-complex formations with ligands 
available under the conditions. In aerobically and vacuum-packaged tur-
key breast, the a*-values were positively correlated with the irradiation dose 
and the amount of CO gas produced (Nam and Ahn, 2003d). Considerable 
amounts of CO were produced by radiolysis of organic components and meat 
(Furuta et al., 1992; Woods and Pikaev, 1994; Nam and Ahn, 2002a,b). Lee and 
Ahn (2004) reported that glycine, asparagine, glutamine, pyruvate, glyceral-
dehyde, α-ketoglutarate, and phospholipids were the primary sources of CO 
production among meat components by irradiation. They indicated that the 
production of CO was via the radiolytic degradation of meat components 
and was closely related to the structure of component molecules. They sug-
gested three essential factors for the pink color formation of light meats by 
irradiation: production of CO, generation of reducing conditions, and CO-Mb 
ligand formation that intensified the red color greatly.
Watts et al. (1978) found that fresh meat exposed to low levels of CO 
gas turned red with the formation of CO-Mb. The decrease of oxidation–
reduction potential (ORP) in meat played a significant role in CO-Mb forma-
tion because the CO-Mb complex can only be formed when heme pigment 
is in reduced form. Nam and Ahn (2002a,b) showed that irradiation low-
ered ORP of both aerobically and vacuum-packaged raw and cooked turkey 
breast meat because irradiation produces hydrated electrons (aqueous e–), a 
powerful reducing agent, from water (Swallow, 1984). However, the ORP in 
irradiated meat increased rapidly during storage under aerobic conditions 
while stayed stable under vacuum-packaging conditions. The irradiation-
induced red pigments were relatively stable against the increased oxidative 
environment stress during the storage time (Nam and Ahn, 2003d). The 
increase in ORP facilitated the conversion of myoglobin from ferrous to ferric 
form, which reduced the affinity of CO to heme pigments, and thus, reduced 
pink color intensity in such meat. Also, during the storage of irradiated meat 
under aerobic conditions, CO-Mb receives continuous challenge by oxygen 
to form Mb-O2, and eventually oxidizes to metmyoglobin.
The mechanisms of color change in irradiated red meat are different 
from those of light meats, and the proposed color changing mechanisms in 
irradiated beef is as follows: irradiation produces aqueous electrons (eaq
–) 
and hydrogen radicals that have reducing power from water molecules 
(Thakur and Singh, 1994). Thus, in the absence of O2, a reducing environ-
ment is established, and all the heme pigments in beef are in ferrous form 
and color is red (Satterlee et al., 1971). In the presence of oxygen, however, 
strong oxidizing agents (superoxide and hydroperoxyl radicals) are formed 
from the reactions of O2 and eaq
– and O2 and · H, respectively (Giddings and 
Markakis, 1972). Therefore, irradiation under aerobic conditions favors ferric 
Mb (brown color) but produces ferrous Mb (red color) under vacuum condi-
tions. The amount of heme pigments in beef is about >10 times of the light 

215
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
meats, and the proportion of CO-Mb, the compound responsible for color 
changes in irradiated light meats, to total heme pigments in irradiated red 
meat is small. Thus, overall beef color is mainly determined by the status of 
heme pigments, which is determined by the reducing potential of the meat. 
Irradiation of meat under vacuum conditions or addition of ascorbic acid to 
aerobically packaged meat creates reducing environments (Wheeler et al., 
1996) and can prevent brown color development in ground beef.
6.4.4 Texture Change
The texture change of meat by irradiation is related to protein denaturation 
and the reduction of water holding capacity (Kanatt et al., 2015a). Zhu et al. 
(2004) found that irradiation significantly increased centrifugation loss of 
water from pork loins, but it was partly reversed during refrigerated stor-
age, which could be due to the hydrolysis of muscle proteins. Yoon (2003) 
reported that irradiated chicken breasts had more cooking loss and higher 
shear force than the nonirradiated ones. The mechanism for irradiation-
induced water loss could be caused by: (1) the damage to the integrity of 
membrane structure of muscle fibers and (2) denaturation of muscle pro-
teins, which reduced water holding capacity by irradiation. Significant dif-
ferences in size of sarcomeres between irradiated and nonirradiated breast 
muscle fibers were observed. However, the texture attributes of chicken 
breasts were not influenced by low-dose irradiation (1.0 and 1.8 kGy) (Lewis 
et al., 2002).
6.4.5 Consumer Acceptance of Irradiated Meat
Consumers easily distinguish odor differences between nonirradiated and 
irradiated meat. Lynch et al. (1991) reported that a set of the unpleasant odor 
was produced from irradiated turkey breast fillet and the odor was differ-
ent from nonirradiated samples. Aerobic packaging reduced irradiation off-
aroma of raw meat, and consumers could not detect the aroma difference 
between nonirradiated and irradiated raw and cooked meat after three days 
of storage. This happened because S-compounds responsible for irradiation 
off-odor volatilized during storage under aerobic packaging conditions. Lee 
and Ahn (2003) reported that antioxidants had no significant effect on the 
off-odor intensity of irradiated turkey meat in the consumer acceptance test 
but prevented lipid oxidation. Therefore, the combined use of aerobic pack-
aging and antioxidants is recommended to improve consumer acceptance of 
irradiated poultry meat.
Surveys (AMIF, 1993) showed that most supermarket shoppers believed 
that irradiated foods pose a health risk. The acceptance of irradiated food 
was affected by consumers’ knowledge about food irradiation. Market simu-
lation studies showed that the consumer acceptance of irradiated meat and 
poultry increased when the participants received additional information 

216
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
about food irradiation (Hashim et al., 1995). The less knowledgeable the par-
ticipants were about food irradiation, the higher was their level of concern 
about the process (Bruhn, 1995). However, the effects of positive and nega-
tive information about irradiation on consumer response were different: a 
favorable description of irradiation increased the willingness to pay, and an 
unfavorable description decreased willingness to pay (Farkas and Mohacsi-
Farkas, 2011). When both positive and negative descriptions about irradiation 
were provided, however, the negative description dominated. The willing-
ness to pay decreased even though the source of negative information was 
from a consumer advocacy group and was written in a nonscientific manner 
(Fox et al., 2002).
6.5 Control of Quality Changes in Meat by Irradiation
6.5.1 Additives
Efforts have been made to minimize the negative quality effect of irradia-
tion using various food additives (O’bryan et al., 2008). Antioxidants added 
to nonirradiated fresh and further processed meat prevented oxidative ran-
cidity, slowed the development of off-flavors, and improved color stability 
(Morrissey et al., 1997). Phenolic antioxidants interrupt autoxidation of lipids 
in irradiated meat either by donating hydrogen atom or quenching free radi-
cals (Hsieh and Kinsella, 1989; Nam and Ahn, 2003b). Dietary antioxidant 
treatments stabilized lipids in membranes, and reduced the extent of lipid 
oxidation in meat during storage (Morrissey et al., 1997). However, the anti-
oxidant effects of dietary tocopherol in chicken meat differ among muscles 
types (Ahn et al., 1997).
Lactic acid improved cooked meat appearance and increased myoglobin 
denaturation during cooking, but produced a tangy off-flavor. However, acid 
(citric or ascorbic acid) did not affect the redness of irradiated turkey breast 
(Nam and Ahn, 2002c). Ascorbic acid incorporated to ground beef at the level 
of 0.1% (w/w) was very efficient in maintaining redness of irradiated ground 
beef and the color stabilizing effects of ascorbic acid were more distinct in 
“long-term-aged” than in “pre-aged” irradiated ground beef (Nam and Ahn, 
2003a). Ascorbic acid significantly lowered the ORP values, which helped 
the heme pigments in ferrous status, and stabilized the color of irradiated 
ground beef (Nam et al., 2003; Nam and Ahn, 2003a).
The addition of antimicrobial agents had synergistic effects with irradia-
tion in killing microorganisms in meat (Jensen et al., 2003). However, the 
effect of antimicrobial agents on the texture, color, and sensory properties 
of meat products was not consistent (Sommers and Fan, 2003; Choi and 
Chin, 2003). The addition of benzoate increased the content of benzene in the 
volatiles of irradiated RTE turkey ham and breast rolls, and thus caution is 
needed to use benzoate salt in products for irradiation (Zhu et al., 2004, 2005).

217
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
6.5.2 Packaging
Packaging is a major factor influencing color and the amounts and types of vol-
atiles detected in irradiated meat. The greenish brown color was problematic 
when ground beef was irradiated under aerobic conditions, but anaerobic condi-
tions protected the beef from discoloration (Nam et al., 2004). Vacuum packag-
ing prevented oxidative changes and color fading and retained sulfur volatiles 
inside the packaging bag during storage, which reduced the odor acceptance of 
irradiated meat (Nam et al., 2002a). Vacuum packaging is an excellent strategy 
to inhibit lipid oxidation in meat during storage because oxygen is essential for 
the progress of lipid oxidation (Ahn et al., 2001). Vacuum-packaged meats have 
mainly purple deoxymyoglobin if the oxygen partial pressure reaches zero. 
Failure to remove oxygen completely, however, can result in oxidizing condi-
tions associated with low partial oxygen pressure. The impacts of irradiation 
on meat color are related to oxygen availability and the amount of free radicals 
formed during irradiation. Nanke et al. (1999) reported that irradiated meat in 
aerobic packaging discolored more rapidly than nonirradiated samples during 
display. In irradiated meat, vacuum packaging was better than aerobic pack-
aging in preventing lipid oxidation and oxidation-dependent volatile produc-
tion, but increased pink color intensity. Aerobic packaging was more desirable 
for the irradiated meat color than vacuum packaging if lipid oxidation could 
be controlled (Ahn et al., 2000b, 2001). An appropriate combination of aerobic 
and anaerobic packaging conditions was effective in minimizing both off-odor 
volatiles and lipid oxidation in irradiated raw turkey breast during storage, and 
it also was effective in reducing the generation of pink color in irradiated meat 
compared to vacuum packaging alone (Nam and Ahn, 2003c,d). Sulfur com-
pounds, the most critical volatiles for off-odor development in irradiated meat, 
could easily be eliminated under aerobic conditions (Ahn et al., 2001). Nam and 
Ahn (2003c,d) found that irradiation and aerobic packaging promoted aldehydes 
production, especially propanal and hexanal, highly correlated with lipid oxida-
tion in turkey breast and thigh meats. The term “double-packaging” describes a 
packaging method in which meat pieces are individually packaged in oxygen-
permeable bags at first, and then a few of them are vacuum packaged in a larger 
vacuum bag. After a certain period of storage time, the outer vacuum bag is 
removed and stored until the last day of storage. Double-packaging was very 
effective in controlling both lipid oxidation-dependent (aldehydes) and radio-
lytic off-odor (S-compounds) volatiles. However, double-packaging alone was 
not enough to reduce the pink color of irradiated raw turkey meat (Nam and 
Ahn, 2003c,d).
6.5.3 Packaging and Additive Combinations
The addition of antioxidants to irradiated meat was an effective method in 
complementing problems of double-packaging. The addition of sesamol + 
tocopherol (S + E) or gallate + tocopherol (G + E) combinations lowered the 

218
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
amount of propanal and total volatiles in double-packaged and irradiated 
raw turkey meat (Nam and Ahn, 2003c). After 10 days of refrigerated stor-
age, however, volatile profiles of irradiated turkey breast were highly depen-
dent upon antioxidant and packaging conditions: sulfur volatiles were not 
detected in irradiated aerobically packaged or double-packaged meat. How-
ever, aerobically packaged irradiated meat without antioxidants produced 
large amounts of aldehydes (propanal, hexanal) and 2-butanone during stor-
age. The double-packaged meat had lower lipid oxidation products than aer-
obically packaged meat, but antioxidant combinations significantly reduced 
the amounts. Therefore, the double-packaging in combination with antioxi-
dants was effective in reducing sulfur volatiles responsible for the irradia-
tion off-odor without any problem in lipid oxidation (Nam and Ahn, 2003c).
The beneficial effects of double-packaging and antioxidant combinations 
on volatiles were more clearly shown in irradiated cooked meat (Nam and 
Ahn, 2003c). Double-packaging in combination with gallate + α-tocopherol 
(G + E) or S + E significantly reduced the redness of irradiated cooked 
turkey breast meat, but G + E was more effective than S + E. Double-
packaging itself was more effective than vacuum-packaging in reducing 
sulfur volatiles and lipid oxidation-dependent volatiles compared with 
aerobic packaging in cooked meat. The total amounts of sulfur volatiles 
in double-packaged irradiated turkey meat with antioxidants were only 
about 5%–7% of the irradiated vacuum-packaged cooked meat without 
antioxidants. Production of most aldehydes in irradiated cooked turkey 
breast was prevented by using antioxidants and double-packaging com-
binations. The combined use of double-packaging and ascorbic acid was 
also very effective in reducing off-odor volatiles and maintaining the 
bright red color of irradiated ground beef (Nam et al., 2004). Both irra-
diating under vacuum condition and the added ascorbate was helpful in 
maintaining low ORP of irradiated beef and caused myoglobin to remain 
in a reduced form.
6.6 Future Research Needed
Most of the irradiation studies are done with raw meat because irradiation 
is not permitted for meats treated with additives, further processed, or RTE 
meat products. Therefore, future studies on irradiation should be focused 
on flavor, color, and taste changes in further processed and precooked RTE 
meat products. Although odor and color are important factors for consumer 
acceptance of irradiated raw meat, the most important quality parameter for 
cooked meat is taste because if irradiated meat has undesirable taste, con-
sumers will never choose irradiated meat again. Currently, no information 
on the mechanisms and causes of taste/flavor changes in irradiated cooked 

219
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
meat is available. Therefore, research to elucidate the causes and mecha-
nisms of taste changes in irradiated cooked meat to determine the roles 
of spices and additives on taste/flavor of irradiated processed meat and to 
develop methods that can control taste/flavor changes in irradiated further 
processed meat are needed. The effect of those additives on the microcidal 
efficiency of irradiation should also be determined.
References
Ahn, D. U. (2002). Production of volatiles from amino acid homopolymers by irradia-
tion. Journal of Food Science, 67(7), 2565–2570.
Ahn, D. U. and Lee, E. J. (2002). Production of off-odor volatiles from liposome-
containing amino acid homopolymers by irradiation. Journal of Food Science, 
67(7), 2659–2665.
Ahn, D. U., Jo, C. and Olson, D. G. (2000a). Analysis of volatile components and the 
sensory characteristics of irradiated raw pork. Meat Science, 54, 209–215.
Ahn, D. U., Jo, C., Olson, D. G. and Nam, K. C. (2000b). Quality characteristics of pork 
patties irradiated and stored in different packaging and storage conditions. 
Meat Science, 56, 203–209.
Ahn, D. U., Lee, E. J., Feng, X. et al. (2016a). Mechanisms of volatile production from 
non-sulfur amino acids by irradiation. Radiation Physics and Chemistry, 119, 64–73.
Ahn, D. U., Lee, E. J., Feng, X. et al. (2016b). Mechanisms of volatile production from 
sulfur-containing amino acids by irradiation. Radiation Physics and Chemistry, 
119, 80–84.
Ahn, D. U., Nam, K. C., Du, M. and Jo, C. (2001). Effect of irradiation and packag-
ing conditions after cooking on the formation of cholesterol and lipid oxidation 
products in meats during storage. Meat Science, 57, 413–418.
Ahn, D. U., Olson, D. G., Jo, C., Chen, X., Wu, C. and Lee, J. I. (1998a). Effect of muscle 
type, packaging, and irradiation on lipid oxidation, volatile production and 
color in raw pork patties. Meat Science, 49, 27–39.
Ahn, D. U., Olson, D. G., Lee, J. I., Jo, C., Wu, C. and Chen, X. (1998b). Packaging and 
irradiation effects on lipid oxidation and volatiles in pork patties. Journal of Food 
Science, 63(1), 15–19.
Ahn, D. U., Sell, J. L., Jeffery, M. et al. (1997). Dietary vitamin E affects lipid oxida-
tion and total volatiles of irradiated raw turkey meat. Journal of Food Science, 62, 
954–959.
Alahakoon, A. U., Jayasena, D. D., Jung, S., Kim, S. H., Kim, H. J. and Jo, C. (2015). 
Effect of electron beam irradiation and high-pressure treatment combined with 
citrus peel extract on seasoned chicken breast meat. Journal of Food Processing and 
Preservation, 39, 2332–2339.
American Meat Institute Foundation (AMIF). (1993). Consumer Awareness, Knowledge, 
and Acceptance of Food Irradiation. Washington, DC: American Meat Institute 
Foundation.
Angelini, P., Merritt, C., Jr., Mendelshon, J. M. and King, F. J. (1975). Effect of irradiation 
on volatile constituents of stored haddock flesh. Journal of Food Science, 40, 197–199.

220
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Arthur, T. M., Wheeler, T. L., Shackelford, S. D., Bosilevac, J. M., Nou, X. W. and 
Koohmaraie, M. (2005). Effects of low-dose, low-penetration electron beam irra-
diation of chilled beef carcass surface cuts on Escherichia coli O157: H7 and meat 
quality. Journal of Food Protection, 68(4), 666–672.
Badr, H. M. (2004). Use of irradiation to control foodborne pathogens and extend the 
refrigerated market life of rabbit meat. Meat Science, 67(4), 541–548.
Batzer, O. F. and Doty, D. M. (1955). Radiation sterilization, nature of undesirable 
odors formed by gamma irradiation of beef. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 3(1), 64–67.
Bhide, M. R., Paturkar, A. M., Sherikar, A. T. and Waskar, V. S. (2001). Pre-sensitization 
of microorganisms by acid treatments to low dose gamma irradiation with spe-
cial reference to Bacillus cereus. Meat Science, 58(3), 253–258.
Bruhn, C. M. (1995). Strategies for communicating the fact on food irradiation to con-
sumers. Journal of Food Protection, 58, 213–216.
Buttery, R. G., Guadagni, D. G. and Ling, L. C. (1973). Flavor compounds: Volatilities 
in vegetable oil and oil-water mixtures: Estimation of odor thresholds. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 21, 198–201.
Council for Agricultural Science and Technology (CAST). (1986). Ionizing Energy in 
Food Processing and Pest Control: I. Wholesomeness of food treated with ion-
izing energy. In Task Force Report No.109:50, Ames, IA.
Chen, C. M., Sebranek, J. G., Dickson, J. S. and Mendonca, A. F. (2004). Combining 
pediocin with postpackaging irradiation for control of Listeria monocytogenes on 
frankfurters. Journal of Food Protection, 67, 1866–1875.
Choi, S. H. and Chin, K. B. (2003). Evaluation of sodium lactate as a replacement for 
conventional chemical preservatives in comminuted sausages inoculated with 
Listeria monocytogenes. Meat Science, 65, 531–537.
Clavero, M. R., Monk, J. D., Beuchat, L. R., Doyle, M. P. and Brackett, R. E. (1994). Inactiva-
tion of Escherichia coli O157:H7, salmonellae, and Campylobacter jejuni in raw ground 
beef by gamma irradiation. Applied Environmental Microbiology, 60, 2069–2075.
Davies, M. J. (1996). Protein and peptide alkoxyl radicals can give rise to C-terminal 
decarboxylation and backbone cleavage. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 
336, 163–172.
Diehl, J. F. (1995). Safety of Irradiated Foods. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, 
283–289.
Dogbevi, M. K., Vachon, C. and Lacroix, M. (1999). Physicochemical and microbio-
logical changes in irradiated fresh pork loins. Meat Science, 51, 349–354.
Efiok, B. S. (1996). Basic Calculations for Biomedical and Biological Analyses. Gaithers-
burg, MD: AOAC International, 84–86.
El-Bisi, H. M., Snyder, O. P. and Levin, R. E. (1966). Radiation death kinetics of C. 
botulinum spores at cryogenic temperatures. In: Ingram, I. M. and Roberts, T. A. 
(eds.) Botulism. London: Chapman and Hall, 89–107.
Fan, X., Sommers, C. H., Thayer, D. W. and Lehotay, S. J. (2002). Volatile sulfur com-
pounds in irradiated precooked turkey breast analyzed with pulsed flame pho-
tometric detection. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 50(15), 4257–4261.
Farkas, J. (2006). Irradiation for better foods. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 17, 
148–152.
Farkas, J. and Andrassy, E. (1993). Interaction of ionizing radiation and acidulants on 
the growth of the microflora of a vacuum-packaged chilled meat. International 
Journal of Food Microbiology, 19, 145–152.

221
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
Farkas, F. and Mohacsi-Farkas, C. (2011). History and future of food irradiation. 
Trends in Food Science and Technology, 22, 121–126.
Fox, J. A., Hayes, D. J. and Shogren, J. F. (2002). Consumer preferences for food irra-
diation: How favorable and unfavorable descriptions affect preferences for irra-
diated pork in experimental auctions. Journal of Risk Uncertainty, 24(1), 75–95.
Furuta, M., Dohmaru, T., Katayama, T., Toratoni, H. and Takeda, A. (1992). Detection 
of irradiated frozen meat and poultry using carbon monoxide gas as a probe. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 40(7), 1099–1100.
Galan, I., García, M. L. and Selgas, M. D. (2011). Irradiation is useful for manufactur-
ing ready-to-eat cooked meat products enriched with folic acid. Meat Science, 
87, 330–335.
Giddings, G. G. and Markakis, P. (1972). Characterization of the red pigments pro-
duced from ferrimyoglobin by ionizing radiation. Journal of Food Science, 37, 
361–364.
Godshall, M. A. (1997). How carbohydrate influence flavor. Food Technology, 51, 63–67.
Halliwell, B. J. M. and Gutteridge, C. (1989). A consideration of atomic structure and 
bonding. In: Halliwell, B. J. M. and Gutteridge, C. (eds.) Free Radicals in Biology 
and Medicine. 2nd ed. London: Clarendon Press, 508–524.
Hashim, I. B., Resurreccion, A.V.A. and MaWatters, K. H. (1995). Disruptive sensory anal-
ysis of irradiated frozen or refrigerated chicken. Journal of Food Science, 60, 664–666.
Hayashi, T. (1991). Comparative effectiveness of gamma rays and electron beams in 
food irradiation. In: Thorne, S. (ed.) Food Irradiation. London: Elsevier Applied 
Science, 169–206.
Hsieh, R. J. and Kinsella, J. E. (1989). Oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids: Mech-
anisms, products, and inhibition with emphasis on fish. Advances in Food Nutri-
tion Research, 33, 233–237.
Huq, T., Vu, K. D., Riedl, B., Bouchard, J. and Lacroix, M. (2015). Synergistic effect 
of gamma (g)-irradiation and microencapsulated antimicrobials against Listeria 
monocytogenes on ready-to-eat (RTE) meat. Food Microbiology, 46, 507–514.
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). (1991). Facts about food irradiation. 
International Consultative Group on Food Irradiation. Vienna: International Atomic 
Energy Agency. (accessed 23 December 2015).
Jarrett, R. D. Sr. (1982). Isotope (gamma) radiation sources. In: Josephson, E. S. and 
Peterson, M. S. (eds.) Preservation of Food by Ionizing Radiation (Vol. 1). Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 137–163.
Javanmard, M., Rokni, N., Bokaie, S. and Shahhosseini, G. (2006). Effects of gamma 
irradiation and frozen storage on microbial, chemical and sensory quality of 
chicken meat in Iran. Food Control, 17, 469–473.
Jensen, J. M., Robbins, K. L., Ryan, K. J., Homco-Ryan, C., McKeith, F. K. and Brewer, 
M. S. (2003). Effects of lactic and acetic acid salts on quality characteristics of 
enhanced pork during retail display. Meat Science, 63, 501–508.
Jo, C. and Ahn, D. U. (1999). Fat reduces volatiles production in oil emulsion system 
analyzed by purge-and-trap dynamic headspace/gas chromatography. Journal 
of Food Science, 64(4), 641–643.
Jo, C. and Ahn, D. U. (2000). Production of volatiles from irradiated oil emulsion 
systems prepared with amino acids and lipids. Journal of Food Science, 65(4), 
612–616.
Jo, C., Jin, S. K. and Ahn, D. U. (2000). Color changes in irradiated cooked pork sausage 
with different fat sources and packaging during storage. Meat Science, 55, 107–113.

222
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Josephson, E. S. and Peterson, M. S. (2000). Preservation of Food by Ionizing Radiation 
(II). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 102–103.
Kanatt, S. R., Chander, R. and Sharma, A. (2015a). Effect of radiation processing on the 
quality of chilled meat products. Meat Science, 69, 269–275.
Kanatt, S. R., Chander, R. and Sharma, A. (2015b). Effect of radiation processing on 
meat tenderization. Radiation Physics and Chemistry, 111, 1–8.
Kanatt, S. R., Chawla, S. P., Chander, R. and Bongirwar, D. R. (2002). Shelf-stable and 
safe intermediate-moisture meat products using hurdle technology. Journal of 
Food Protection, 65, 1628–1631.
Kim, A. Y. and Thayer, D. W. (1996). Mechanism by which irradiation increases the 
sensitivity of Salmonella typhimurium ATCC 14028 to heat. Applied Environmental 
Microbiology, 62, 1759–1763.
Kume, T., Furuta, M., Todoriki, S., Uenoyama, N. and Kobayashi, Y. (2009). Status of 
food irradiation in the world. Radiation Physics and Chemistry, 78, 222–226.
Kundu, D., Gill, A., Lui, C., Goswami, N. and Holley, R. (2014). Use of low dose 
e-beam irradiation to reduce E. coli O157:H7, non-O157 (VTEC) E. coli and Sal-
monella viability on meat surfaces. Meat Science, 96, 413–418.
Kwon, J.H. (2010).  Research and application of irradiated foods (Chapter 2). In 
Safety and Understanding of Irradiated Food. Korea Food Safety Research Institute, 
pp. 1–37.
Lagunas-Solar, M. C. (1995). Radiation processing of food: An overview of scientific 
principles and current status. Journal of Food Protection, 58, 186–192.
Lambert, A. D., Smith, J. P. and Dodds, K. L. (1992). Physical, chemical, and sensory 
changes in irradiated fresh pork packaged in modified atmosphere. Journal of 
Food Science, 57, 1294–1299.
Lee, E. J. and Ahn, D. U. (2003). Production of off-odor volatiles from fatty acids and 
oils by irradiation. Journal of Food Science, 68(1), 70–75.
Lee, E. J. and Ahn, D. U. (2004). Sources and mechanisms of carbon monoxide pro-
duction by irradiation. Journal of Food Science, 69(6), c485–c490.
Lefebvre, N., Thibault, C., Charbonneau, R. and Piette, J. P. G. (1994). Improvement of 
shelf-life and wholesomeness of ground beef by irradiation 2: Chemical analysis 
and sensory evaluation. Meat Science, 36, 371–380.
Lewis, S. J., Velasquez, A., Cuppett, S. L. and McKee, S. R. (2002). Effect of electron 
beam irradiation on poultry meat safety and quality. Poultry Science, 81, 896–903.
Lubbers, S., Landy, P. and Voilley, A. (1998). Retention and release of aroma com-
pounds in foods containing proteins. Food Technology, 52, 68–74, 208–214.
Luchsinger, S. E., Kropf, D. H., Garcia-Zepeda, C. et al. (1997). Color and oxidative 
properties of irradiated ground beef patties. Journal of Muscle Foods, 8(4), 445–
464.
Luchsinger, S. E., Kropf, D. H., Garcia-Zepeda, C. M. et al. (1996). Color and oxidative 
rancidity of gamma and electron beam irradiated boneless pork chops. Journal 
of Food Science, 61(5), 1000–1005, 1093.
Lynch, J. A., Macfie, H. J. H. and Mead, G. C. (1991). Effect of irradiation and pack-
aging type on sensory quality of chill-stored turkey breast fillets. International 
Journal of Food Science and Technology, 26, 653–668.
Mendonca, A. F., Romero, M. G., Lihono, M. A., Nannapaneni, R. and Johnson, M. G. 
(2004). Radiation resistance and virulence of Listeria monocytogenes following 
starvation in physiological saline. Journal of Food Protection, 67, 470–474.

223
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
Merritt, C., Jr., Angelini, P., Wierbicki, E. and Shuts, G. W. (1975). Chemical changes 
associated with flavor in irradiated meat. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chem-
istry, 23, 1037–1043.
Millar, S. J., Moss, B. W., MacDougall, D. B. and Stevenson, M. H. (1995). The effect 
of ionizing radiation on the CIELAB color co-ordinates of chicken breast meat 
as measured by different instruments. International Journal of Food Science and 
Technology, 30, 663–674.
Miyahara, M., Saito, A., Kamimura, T., Nagasawa, T., Ito, H. and Toyoda, M. (2002). 
Hydrocarbon productions in hexane solutions of fatty acid methyl esters irradi-
ated with gamma rays. Journal of Health Science, 48, 418–426.
Morrissey, P. A., Brandon, S., Buckley, D. J., Sheehy, P. J. A. and Frigg, J. (1997). Tissue 
content of alpha-tocopherol and oxidative stability of broilers receiving dietary 
alpha-tocopheryl acetate supplementation for various periods pre-slaughter. 
British Poultry Science, 38, 84–88.
Mottram, D. S., Wedzicha, B. L. and Dodson, A. T. (2002). Acrylamide is formed in the 
Maillard reaction. Nature, 419, 448–449.
Nam, K. C. and Ahn, D. U. (2002a). Mechanisms of pink color formation in irradiated 
precooked turkey breast. Journal of Food Science, 67(2), 600–607.
Nam, K. C., and Ahn, D. U. (2002b). Carbon monoxide-heme pigment complexes are 
responsible for the pink color in irradiated raw turkey breast meat. Meat Science, 
60(1), 25–33.
Nam, K. C. and Ahn, D. U. (2002c). Effect of double-packaging and acid combination on 
the quality of irradiated raw turkey patties. Journal of Food Science, 67(9), 3252–3257.
Nam, K. C. and Ahn, D. U. (2003a). Effects of ascorbic acid and antioxidants on the 
color of irradiated beef patties. Journal of Food Science, 68(5), 1686–1690.
Nam, K. C. and Ahn, D. U. (2003b). Use of antioxidants to reduce lipid oxidation and 
off-odor volatiles of irradiated pork homogenates and patties. Meat Science, 63, 1–8.
Nam, K. C. and Ahn, D. U. (2003c). Use of double-packaging and antioxidant com-
binations to improve color, lipid oxidation, and volatiles of irradiated raw and 
cooked turkey breast patties. Poultry Science, 82(5), 850–857.
Nam, K. C. and Ahn, D. U. (2003d). Combination of aerobic and vacuum packaging 
to control color, lipid oxidation and off-odor volatiles of irradiated raw turkey 
breast. Meat Science, 63(3), 389–395.
Nam, K. C., Du, M., Jo, C. and Ahn, D. U. (2002a). Quality characteristics of vacuum-
packaged, irradiated normal, PSE, and DFD Pork. Innovative Food Science and 
Emerging Technology, 3(1), 73–79.
Nam, K. C., Hur, S. J., Ismail, H. and Ahn, D. U. (2002b). Lipid oxidation, volatiles, 
and color changes in irradiated raw turkey breast during frozen storage. Journal 
of Food Science, 67(6), 2061–2066.
Nam, K. C., Kim, Y. H., Du, M. and Ahn, D. U. (2002c). Off-odor and pink color devel-
opment in precooked, ionizing-radiated turkey breast during frozen storage. 
Poultry Science, 81, 269–275.
Nam, K. C., Min, B. R., Lee, S. C., Cordray, J. and Ahn, D. U. (2004). Prevention of 
pinking, off-odor, and lipid oxidation in irradiated pork loin using double pack-
aging. Journal of Food Science, 69(3), FTC214–219.
Nam, K. C., Min, B. R., Park, K. S., Lee, S. C. and Ahn, D. U. (2003). Effects of ascorbic 
acid and antioxidants on the lipid oxidation and volatiles of irradiated beef pat-
ties. Journal of Food Science, 68(5), 1680–1685.

224
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Nanke, K. E., Sebranek, J. G. and Olson, D. G. (1998). Color characteristics of irra-
diated vacuum-packaged pork, beef, and turkey. Journal of Food Science, 63(6), 
1001–1006.
Nanke, K. E., Sebranek, J. G. and Olson, D. G. (1999). Color characteristics of irra-
diated aerobically packaged pork, beef, and turkey. Journal of Food Science, 64, 
272–276.
Nawar, W. W. (1986). Volatiles from food irradiation. Food Review International, 2(1), 
45–78.
O’bryan, C. A., Crandall, P. G., Ricke S. C. and Olson, D. G. (2008). Impact of irradia-
tion on the safety and quality of poultry and meat products: A review. Critical 
Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 48, 442–457.
Olson, D. G. (1998). Irradiation of food. Food Technology, 52, 56–62.
Patterson, R. L. and Stevenson, M. H. (1995). Irradiation-induced off-odor in chicken 
and its possible control. British Poultry Science, 36, 425–441.
Proctor, B. E. and Goldblith, S. A. (1951). Food processing with ionizing radiations. 
Food Technology, 5(9), 376–380.
Roberts, F. B. (2014). Food irradiation is safe: Half a century of studies. Radiation Phys-
ics and Chemistry, 105(12), 78–82.
Satin, M. (1993). Food Irradiation: A Guidebook. Lancaster, England. Technomic Publishing.
Satin, M. (2002). Use of irradiation for microbial decontamination of meat: Situation 
and perspectives. Meat Science, 62, 277–283.
Satterlee, L. D., Wilhelm, M. S. and Barnhart, H. M. (1971). Low dose gamma irradia-
tion of bovine metmyoglobin. Journal of Food Science, 36(3), 549–551.
Shahidi, F. and Pegg, R. B. (1994). Lipids in Food Flavors. ACS Symposium Series (Vol. 
558). Washington, DC: American Chemical Society, 256–279.
Soladoye, O. P., Jua’rez, M. L., Aalhus, J. L., Shand, P. and Este’vez, M. (2015). Protein 
oxidation in processed meat: Mechanisms and potential implications on human 
health. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 14, 106–122.
Sommers, C. H. and Fan, X. (2002). Antioxidant power, lipid oxidation, color, and 
viability of Listeria monocytogenes in beef bologna treated with gamma radiation 
and containing various levels of glucose. Journal of Food Protection, 65, 1750–1755.
Sommers, C. H. and Fan, X. (2003). Gamma irradiation of fine-emulsion sausage con-
taining sodium diacetate. Journal of Food Protection, 66, 819–824.
Sommers, C. H., Fan, X., Handel, P. A. and Sokorai, K. B. (2003). Effect of citric acid on 
the radiation resistance of Listeria monocytogenes and frankfurter quality factors. 
Meat Science, 63, 407–415.
Steccheni, M. I., Del Torre, M., Sarais, P. G., Fuochi, F., Tubaro, F. and Ursini, F. (1998). 
Carnosine increases the radiation resistance of Aeromonas hydrophila in minced 
turkey meat. Journal of Food Science, 61, 979–987.
Swallow, A. J. (1984). Fundamental radiation chemistry of food components. In: Bai-
ley, A. J. (ed.) Recent Advances in the Chemistry of Meat. London: The Royal Soci-
ety of Chemistry, Burlington House, 165–177.
Tappel, A. L. (1956). Regeneration and stability of oxymyoglobin in some gamma 
irradiated meats. Food Research, 21, 650–654.
Tappel, A. L. (1957). The red pigment of precooked irradiated meats. Food Research, 
22, 408–412.
Taub, I. A., Karielian, R. A., Halliday, J. W., Walker, J. E., Angeline, P. and Merritt, C. 
(1979). Factors affecting radiolytic effects of food. Radiation Physics and Chemis-
try, 14, 639–653.

225
Meat Decontamination by Irradiation
Thakur, B. R. and Singh, R. K. (1994). Food irradiation: Chemistry and applications. 
Food Review International, 10, 437–473.
Thayer, D. W. and Boyd, G. (1991). Effect of ionizing radiation dose, temperature, and 
atmosphere on the survival of Salmonella typhimurium in sterile mechanically 
deboned chicken meat. Poultry Science, 70, 381–388.
Thayer, D. W. and Boyd, G. (1992). Gamma ray processing to destroy Staphylococcus 
aureus in mechanically deboned chicken meat. Journal of Food Science, 57, 848–851.
Thayer, D. W. and Boyd, G. (1993). Elimination of Escherichia coli O157 in meats by 
gamma irradiation. Applied Environmental Microbiology, 59, 1030–1034.
Thayer, D. W. and Boyd, G. (1995). Radiation sensitivity of Listeria monocytogenes on 
beef as affected by temperature. Journal of Food Science, 60, 237–240.
United States Department of Agriculture-Food Safety and Inspection Service (USDA-
FSIS). (1986). Irradiation of pork for control of Trichinella spiralis. Federal Register, 
51, 1769–1771.
United States Department of Agriculture-Food Safety and Inspection Service (USDA-
FSIS). (1999). Meat and poultry irradiation proposal. USDA Food Safety and 
Inspection Service. Available at http://www.fsis.usda.gov/Oa/background/
irradprop.htm?redirecthttp=true (accessed 23 December 2015).
Venugopal, V., Doke, S. N. and Thomas, P. (1999). Radiation processing to improve 
the quality of fishery products. Critical Review in Food Science and Nutrition, 
39(5), 391–440.
Watts, D. A., Wolfe, S. K. and Brown, W. D. (1978). Fate of [14C] carbon monoxide in 
cooked or stored ground beef samples. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 
26(1), 210–214.
Wheeler, T. L., Koohmaraie, M. and Shackelford, S. D. (1996). Effect of vitamin C con-
centration and co-injection with calcium chloride on beef retail display color. 
Journal of Animal Science, 74(8), 1846–1853.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1981). Wholesomeness of irradiated foods. In 
Technical Report Series 659. World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1994). Food irradiation. In Safety and Nutritional 
Adequacy of Irradiated Food, 5–13. World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
World Health Organization (WHO). (1999). High-dose irradiation: Wholesomeness 
of food irradiated with doses above 10 kGy: Report of a Join FAO/IAEA/WHO 
Study Group. World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
Woods, R. J. and Pikaev, A. K. (1994). Interaction of radiation with matter. Selected 
topics in radiation chemistry. In: Woods, R. J. and Pikaev, A. K. (eds.) Applied 
Radiation Chemistry: Radiation Processing. New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons, 
59–89 and 165–210.
Xavier, M. P., Dauber, C., Mussio, P. et al. (2014). Use of mild irradiation doses to 
control pathogenic bacteria on meat trimmings for production of patties aiming 
at provoking minimal changes in quality attributes. Meat Science, 98, 383–391.
Yoon, K. S. (2003). Effect of gamma irradiation on the texture and microstructure of 
chicken breast meat. Meat Science, 63, 273–277.
Zhu, M. J., Mendonca, A., Min, B. et al. (2004). Effects of electron beam irradiation and 
antimicrobials on the volatiles, color and texture of ready-to-eat turkey breast 
roll. Journal of Food Science, 69(5), C382–C387.
Zhu, M. J., Mendonca, A., Ismail, H. A., Du, M., Lee, E. J. and Ahn, D. U. (2005). Impact 
of antimicrobial ingredients and irradiation on the survival of Listeria monocyto-
genes and quality of ready-to-eat turkey ham. Poultry Science, 84, 613–620.


227
7
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure 
for Meat and Meat Processing
Sencer Buzrul
CONTENTS
7.1 
Introduction ................................................................................................228
7.2 
Effect of HHP on the Inactivation of Microorganisms in Meat 
and Meat Products .....................................................................................230
7.2.1 Inactivation of Listeria monocytogenes in Meat and Meat 
Products under HHP .....................................................................230
7.2.1.1 Different Types of Survival Curves of L. monocyto-
genes in Meat and Meat Products under HHP ............232
7.2.2 Methods Used to Improve Microbial Inactivation during 
HHP Treatment of Meat and Meat Products .............................232
7.2.2.1 Temperature .....................................................................232
7.2.2.2 Additives/Antimicrobials ..............................................238
7.2.2.3 Multipulsed HHP Treatment of Meat Products .........238
7.2.2.4 Hurdle Concept ...............................................................239
7.2.2.5 Limitations of the Abovementioned Methods ............240
7.3 
Effects of HHP on Quality Attributes of Meat and  
Meat Products ............................................................................................. 241
7.3.1 Effect of HHP on Texture of Meat and Meat Products ............. 241
7.3.2 Effect of HHP on Lipid Oxidation of Meat and  
Meat Products ................................................................................. 241
7.3.3 Effect of HHP on Color of Meat and Meat Products ................242
7.3.4 Other Effects of HHP on Meat and Meat Products...................243
7.4 
Consumer Acceptance of HHP-Treated Meat and  
Meat Products .............................................................................................244
7.5 
Some Important Results from Recent Studies of HHP on Meat 
Products .......................................................................................................245
7.6 
Opportunities for HHP Application to Meat and  
Meat Products .............................................................................................246
7.7 
Limitations of HHP on Meat and Meat Products .................................247
7.7.1 On the Application of HHP on Fresh Meat ................................247
References .............................................................................................................248

228
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
7.1 Introduction
The modern consumer requires foods that are safe and nutritious, free from 
additives, taste good, and, for certain products, have a longer shelf life. 
There are a number of possible scientific solutions to meet these demands, 
such as genetic modification and gamma irradiation, but these have met 
with consumer resistance. High hydrostatic pressure (HHP) processing is 
one technology that has the potential to fulfill both consumer and scien-
tific requirements. In HHP treatment, pressures up to 900 MPa are used to 
kill many of the microorganisms found in foods, even at room tempera-
ture, without degrading vitamins, flavor, and color molecules in the process 
(Patterson et al., 2007; Polydera et al., 2005).
Macfarlane and coworkers in Australia, who pioneered the use of pres-
sure on meat, carried out some well-designed studies in the 1970s–1980s. 
However, the main problem associated with these studies was that the 
pressure vessel used was only capable of reaching pressures of 150 MPa 
(Bouton et al., 1977; Macfarlane, 1973, 1985; Macfarlane and Morton, 1978; 
Macfarlane et al., 1981, 1982, 1986). Nevertheless, these studies were a useful 
starting point of later studies and also clearly demonstrated that treatment 
of prerigor meat at these pressures led to marked increases in tenderness 
(Ma and Ledward, 2013). After these pioneering studies, the effects of pres-
sure on meat and meat products were investigated extensively by many 
researchers and the use of HHP for meat and meat products has been 
described in different journal papers (Bajovic et al., 2012; Buckow et al., 
2013; Campus, 2010; Cheftel and Culioli, 1997; Hugas et al., 2002; Simonin 
et al., 2012; Sun and Holley, 2010; Teixeira et al., 2014) as well as in different 
book chapters (Atsushi et al., 2006; Garriga and Aymerich, 2009; Ikeuchi, 
2011; Tokuşoğlu and Vural, 2014).
The Spanish company Espuña pioneered the use of HHP for the pasteuri-
zation of meat products. Sliced cooked ham with the label “high pressure 
pasteurized product remains fresh until eaten” was launched in Spain in 
1998 (Grèbol, 2002). Even now, it is being sold and distributed in several 
supermarket chains in Spain. The product’s ham slices are vacuum skin-
packed with plastic film interleaves to facilitate the separation of slices by 
the consumer. It has a refrigerated shelf life of 60 days and it is processed 
for 10 minutes at 400 MPa (Tonello, 2011). Since then, HHP has become an 
industrial reality for the meat industry, and HHP-treated meat products are 
available in different parts of the world—see Table 7.1.
A market research study reported that as of 2013, the global HHP prod-
ucts market has achieved $3 billion. Fruit and vegetable products (35% of all 
industrial applications) are the largest product market for HHP, followed by 
meat products (31%), seafood and fish products (14%), and then other prod-
ucts (8%) (Koutchma, 2014).

229
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
In this chapter, an overview about current and fundamental knowledge of 
HHP and its impact on meat and meat products is presented and some of the 
research findings are summarized. Opportunities and limitations of HHP 
on meat and meat products are discussed, and important results of some 
recent studies are also given.
TABLE 7.1
Products, Country, and Year of Introduction of the Technology
Country
Year
Product
Spain
1998
Cooked sliced ham and tapas (pork and poultry cuts)
United States
2001
Cooked sliced ham, pork meat products, and Parma ham
United States
2001
Poultry ready-to-eat (RTE) products
United States
2002
Spicy sliced precooked chicken and beef for fajitas
Spain
2002
Sliced ham, chicken and turkey products, cooked and Serrano 
ham, and chorizo
Spain
2003
Gross slices of ham, turkey, and chicken
Italy
2003
Parma ham, salami, and mortadella
Japan
2004
Raw ham-like pork ham
Japan
2005
Cooked pork meat products, nitrite free ham, sausages, and 
bacon
Germany
2005
Smoked German ham: whole, sliced, and diced products
Spain
2006
Cooked ham
Canada
2006
Cured meat products
Canada
2006
RTE meat and vegetable meals
Japan
2007
Ham without nitrite
Greece
2010
Deli meats infused with extra virgin olive oil
Greece
2010
Sliced processed meat: mortadella, ham, and salami
Netherlands
2010
Filet American
Romania
2011
Fermented sausages
United States
2011
Hamburger
United States
2011
Deli meat and fermented meats
United Kingdom
2011
Meat and cheese snack products
United States
N.I.
Poultry strips
United States
N.I.
Oven-roasted chicken
Canada
N.I.
Sliced dry-cured meat and cooked meats
Source: Adapted from Bajovic, B. et al., Meat Science, 92, 280–289, 2012; Buzrul, S. and Alpas, 
H., In: Bhat, R., Alias, A. K. and Paliyath G. [eds.], Progress in Food Preservation. 
Wiley-Blackwell, West Sussex, 2012; Campus, M., Food Engineering Reviews, 2, 256–273, 
2010; Ikeuchi, Y., In: Kerry, J. P. and Kerry, J. F. [eds.], Processed Meats—Improving 
Safety, Nutrition and Quality, Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, 2011; and reprinted 
from Adapting High Hydrostatic Pressure (HPP) for Food Processing Operations, 
Koutchma, T., Copyright (2014), Elsevier.
Some examples of high hydrostatic pressure-treated meat products are available on the market. 
Note: N.I., No information was found about the year..

230
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
7.2  Effect of HHP on the Inactivation of 
Microorganisms in Meat and Meat Products
The main purpose of using HHP to treat meat and meat products is to 
improve microbial safety. The effectiveness of HHP to inactivate bacterial 
cells is well documented in various studies. Conditions such as the pressure 
level, process temperature, and holding time of the HHP treatment of food 
products depend on the type of microorganisms, the various ingredients, 
and the dispersion medium in foods (Ikeuchi, 2011). In the meat industry, 
HHP treatment is also an attractive method that can be used to inactivate 
various microorganisms without affecting the character and features of at 
least some of the meat products (Garriga and Aymerich, 2009; Garriga et al., 
2004; Jofré et al., 2009b; Shigehisa et al., 1991; Tassou et al., 2007). A summary 
of some research findings associated with HHP inactivation of microorgan-
isms are listed in Table 7.2.
7.2.1  Inactivation of Listeria monocytogenes in 
Meat and Meat Products under HHP
As a severe foodborne pathogen, Listeria monocytogenes requires particular 
attention during food processing and storage because it is moderately heat-
resistant and can grow anaerobically under refrigeration (Teixeira et al., 2014). 
L. monocytogenes is also considered a target microorganism of public health 
concern in dairy and meat products (Koutchma, 2014).
There are many studies on inactivation of L. monocytogenes in meat and 
meat products. Treatment of sliced Iberian and Serrano hams at 450 MPa 
for 10 minutes significantly reduced the population of L. monocytogenes Scott 
A, spiked at 6 log10CFU/g. After 60 days at 4°C or 8°C, the counts were 3.24 
and 4.70 log10CFU/g in HHP-treated and control samples, respectively, for 
Iberian and 2.73 and 5.07 log CFU/g for Serrano ham (Morales et al., 2006). 
The effectiveness of HHP (600 MPa, 31°C, 6 minutes) to reduce the risks 
associated with L. monocytogenes in sliced cooked ham was also reported 
by Garriga et al. (2004). Aymerich et al. (2005) also reported the effect of a 
treatment at 400 MPa for 10 minutes at 17°C on L. monocytogenes artificially 
spiked in vacuum-packaged sliced cooked ham. The growth of L. monocyto-
genes was inhibited until 40 days of refrigerated storage at 1°C or 6°C. After 
that period, and at 6°C, L. monocytogenes was able to grow until reaching 
counts similar to that of nonpressurized samples (about 8 log10CFU/g), while 
at 1°C, they kept to the low levels achieved after pressurization. The effec-
tiveness of HHP treatments at 600 MPa was evaluated in sliced cooked ham 
spiked with 4 log10CFU/g of L. monocytogenes after three months of storage 
at 1°C and 6°C (Jofré et al., 2008b). The HHP application reduced the levels of 
L. monocytogenes to below 10 CFU/g. These levels continued until the end of 
storage at both 1°C and 6°C.

231
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
TABLE 7.2
Summary of HHP Inactivation of Microorganisms in Meat and Meat Products
Microorganism
Product
Process 
Conditionsa
Reduction 
(log10)
Reference
Campylobacter 
jejuni
Pork slurry
300 MPa, 
25°C, 10 min
6.0
Shigehisa et al. (1991)
Poultry
375 MPa, 
25°C, 10 min
6.0
Solomon and Hoover 
(2004)
Chicken meat
200 MPa, 
25°C, 10 min
2.0
Martinez-Rodrigez 
and Mackey (2005)
Chicken slurry
450 MPa, 
15°C, 1 min
7.0b
Lori et al. (2007)
Cooked ham, 
dry-cured ham, 
marinated beef loin
600 MPa, 
31°C, 6 min
3.5b
Jofré et al. (2009b)
Escherichia coli
O157:H7
Poultry
600 MPa, 
20°C, 15 min
3.0
Patterson et al. (1995)
Raw minced meat
700 MPa, 
15°C, 1 min
5.0
Gola et al. (2000)
Ground beef patties
400 MPa, 
12°C, 20 min
2.5
Morales et al. (2008)
Dry fermented 
salami
483 MPa, 
19°C, 5 min
5.0b
Porto-Fett et al. (2010)
Salmonella 
Typhimurium
Minced meat
400 MPa, 
20°C, 2 min
4.4
Escriu and Mor-Mur 
(2009)
Salmonella 
Enteritidis
Poultry sausages
500 MPa, 
50°C, 10 min
7.2
Yuste et al. (2000b)
Salmonella 
Enteritidis
Chicken breast fillets
400 MPa, 
12°C, 15 min
4.8
Morales et al. (2009)
Salmonella 
Enterica
Fermented sausages
400 MPa, 
17°C, 10 min
2.0
Jofré et al. (2009a)
Staphylococcus 
aureus
Poultry
600 MPa, 
20°C, 15 min
3.0
Patterson et al. (1995)
Marinated beef loin
600 MPa, 
31°C, 6 min
2.5
Jofré et al. (2009b)
Dry-cured ham
600 MPa, 
31°C, 6 min
0.5
Jofré et al. (2009b)
Cooked ham
600 MPa, 
31°C, 6 min
1.1
Jofré et al. (2009b)
Staphylococcus 
carnosus
Cooked ham
500 MPa, 
40°C, 10 min
1.3
Hugas et al. (2002)
Lactobacillus sakei
Cooked ham
500 MPa, 
40°C, 10 min
4.0
Hugas et al. (2002)
Pseudomonas 
flourescens
Minced beef
200 MPa, 
20°C, 20 min
5.0
Carlez et al. (1993)
Yersinia 
enterocolitica
Pork slurry
300 MPa, 
25°C, 10 min
6.0
Shigehisa et al. (1991)
Source: From Bajovic, B. et al., Meat Science, 92, 280–289, 2012 and Simonin, H. et al., Compre-
hensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 11, 285–306, 2012.
a Temperature given is either initial or process temperature.
b Total inactivation.

232
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
HHP has already satisfied the demands of regulatory agencies such as the 
US Department of Agriculture/Food Safety Inspection Service as an accept-
able method of elimination of L. monocytogenes in processed meat prod-
ucts (Campus, 2010; Teixeira et al., 2014; USDA, 2006). A summary of some 
research findings associated with HHP inactivation of L. monocytogenes in 
meat and meat products are listed in Table 7.3.
7.2.1.1  Different Types of Survival Curves of L. monocytogenes 
in Meat and Meat Products under HHP
There is now enough evidence that a log-linear isothermal survival curve 
of bacterial cells is an exception rather than a rule and the same can be 
said about semi-logarithmic survival curves of organisms exposed to 
HHP. A number of nonlinear models for describing the HHP inactiva-
tion of microbial cells such as the (modified) Gompertz equation (Chen 
and Hoover, 2003; Patterson and Kilpatrick, 1998; Yamamoto et al., 2005), 
Fermi equation (Donsì et al., 2003), log-logistic equation (Buzrul and 
Alpas, 2004; Chen and Hoover, 2003; Yamamoto et al., 2005), modified 
Baranyi model (Koseki and Yamamoto, 2007), and Weibull model (Avsa-
roglu et al., 2006; Buzrul and Alpas, 2004; Chen and Hoover, 2003; Yama-
moto et al., 2005) have been proposed in literature—see Figure 7.1 and 
Table 7.4. While all these models—in their original and modified forms—
could be used to fit survival curves of microbial cells inactivated by HHP, 
none of them can be considered unique.
It can be observed in such figures that L. monocytogenes in foods of animal 
origin under HHP could have different survival curves (Buzrul, 2014a). Some 
examples in meat and meat products are shown in Figures 7.2 through 7.5. 
It should be noted that it is still common to report D and z values of micro-
organisms; however, these values have no or little meaning if the survival 
curve of an organism is nonlinear.
7.2.2  Methods Used to Improve Microbial Inactivation 
during HHP Treatment of Meat and Meat Products
7.2.2.1 Temperature
It is known that increase of the treatment temperature during HHP can be 
used to improve microbial inactivation. Temperatures between 45°C and 
60°C allow the use of lower pressure levels and shorter holding times for 
pathogen inactivation in meat and meat products compared to applica-
tion at ambient temperature (Moerman, 2005; Simpson and Gilmour, 1997; 
Tassou et al., 2008; Yuste et al., 2000a). For example, a 5 log10 reduction of 
Staphylococcus aureus can be achieved in chicken treated at 500 MPa, 50°C, 

233
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
TABLE 7.3
Summary of HHP Inactivation of Listeria monocytogenes in Meat and Meat Products
Product
Strain
Initial Count
Process Conditionsa
Reduction (log10)
Reference
Cooked beef mince
NCTC 11994
8.70
375 MPa, 45°C, 5 min
4.30
Simpson and Gilmour 
(1997)
Cooked chicken mince
–
–
375 MPa, 18°C, 30 min
~ 3.40
–
Raw chicken mince
–
–
375 MPa, 18°C, 25 min
~ 4.60
–
–
–
–
–
–
Turkey breast meat
Cocktail of five strains  
(PSU1), PSU2, PSU9, 
PSU21, ATCC 19115)
7.00
400 MPa, 1°C, 1 min
0.50
Chen (2007)
400 MPa, 20°C, 1 min
0.10
400 MPa, 50°C, 1 min
4.10
500 MPa, 1°C, 1 min
1.40
500 MPa, 20°C, 1 min
0.90
500 MPa, 40°C, 1 min
3.80
–
–
–
–
–
–
Cooked ham
Cocktail of three strains 
(CTC1010, CTC1011,  
CTC1034)
4.00
600 MPa, 10°C, 5 min
~ 3.50
Jofré et al. (2007)
–
–
–
–
–
–
Mortadella
CTC1034
~ 7.00
450 MPa, 15°C, 15 min
>4.00
Hereu et al. (2012)
Cooked ham
–
–
450 MPa, 15°C, 15 min
>5.00
–
–
–
–
–
–
RTE-sliced ham
Cocktail of five strains 
(ATCC 7644, NCTC 
10890, ATCC 19112, 
ATCC 19114, ATCC 
19115)
5.00
–
400 MPa, 17°C, 3 min
0.95
Myers et al. (2013)
–
–
–
–
–
–
600 MPa, 17°C, 3 min
4.25
–
a  Temperature given is either initial or process temperature.

234
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
15 minutes, whereas a pressure level of approximately 700 MPa would be 
necessary to obtain the same reduction at 20°C (Patterson and Kilpatrick, 
1998). Yuste et al. (2000b) concluded that HHP treatment (500 MPa, 65°C, 
5 minutes) could be an effective preservation method to replace heat pas-
teurization (80°C, 40 minutes) in cooked sausages, achieving the same 
preserving effect in terms of microbial inactivation and growth inhibi-
tion during chilled storage. However, heat-transfer limitations in par-
ticulate food products can still prevent their successful pasteurization by 
HHP treatments at elevated temperatures (Moerman, 2005).
The use of low temperatures (<15°C) during HHP treatment could also 
be an effective strategy to improve microbial inactivation. A pork-isolated 
strain of Pseudomonas fluorescens was reduced by 5 log10 when treated at 
200 MPa, 5°C, 10 minutes, and the bactericidal effect decreased as the 
temperature increased to 35°C (López-Caballero et al., 2002). Chen 
(2007) found that L. monocytogenes was more resistant to pressure 
(500 MPa, 1 minute) at temperatures between 10°C and 30°C. When tem-
peratures decreased below 10°C or increased above 30°C, L. monocytogenes’ 
susceptibility to pressure increased. This enhanced inactivation effect 
was more pronounced when meat samples were treated at higher tem-
peratures. In the study by Yuste et al. (2002), HHP treatment at subzero 
temperatures (450 MPa, −20°C, 15 minutes) was not effective at decreas-
ing the microbial count in poultry meat, probably because samples were 
treated while frozen and thus presented a lack of plasticity (Simonin 
et al., 2012).
Time
(a)
(b)
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
III
II
I
log10 S(t)
log10 S(t)
Time
FIGURE 7.1
Commonly observed types of survival curves. (a) Linear (I), biphasic (II), strong (extreme) 
tailing (III), convex (IV). (b) Shoulder (V), sigmoidal type 1—starting with a convex and 
ending up with concave (VI), sigmoidal type 2—starting with a concave and ending up 
with convex (VII), concave (VIII). (Adapted from Xiong, R. et al., International Journal of 
Food Microbiology, 46, 45–55, 1999; Peleg, M., Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 
43, 645-658, 2003; and Geeraerd, A. H. et al., International Journal of Food Microbiology, 102, 
95–105, 2005.)

235
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
TABLE 7.4
Models Used to Describe Survival Curves of Microorganisms
Model
Equation Number
Equation
Reference
Linear
(1)
S t
kt
( ) = −
log10
 
or
 
S t
t
D
( ) = −
log10
Chick (1908)
Biphasic
(2)
S t
fe
f e
k t
k t
(
)
(
)
=
+
−
−
−
log
( )
log
1
10
10
1
2
Cerf (1977)
Biphasic
(3)
If t ≤ ti 
S t
k t
( ) = −
log10
1
Corradini et al. (2007)
If t > ti 
S t
k t
k
t
t
i
i
( )
(
)
= −
−
−
log10
1
2
Shoulder
(4)
S t
k t
t
{
}
( )
(
)
= −
+
−
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
log
log
1
exp
10
10
min
Peleg (1996)
Shoulder
(5)
If t ≤ tlag log10 S(t) = 0
Peleg (2000)
If t > tlag log10 S(t) = –k(t – tlag)
Concave
(6)
S t
btn
( ) = −
log10
 n < 1
Peleg and Cole (1998)
Convex
(7)
S t
btn
( ) = −
log10
 n < 1
Peleg and Cole (1998)
Strong tailing
(8)
S t
at
b
t
= −
+
log
( )
10
Peleg (2006)
Sigmoid (start with 
concave end up 
with convex)
(9)
S t
at
bt
c
t
(
)(
)
= −
+
−
log
( )
1
10
Peleg (2003)
Sigmoid (start with 
convex end up 
with concave)
(10)
S t
A
kt
A
k t
t
i
i
(
)
(
)
(
)
=
−
⎡⎣
⎤⎦−
−
−
−
⎡⎣
⎤⎦
log
( )
exp
exp
exp
exp
10
Linton et al. (1995)

236
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
log10 S(t)
Time (min)
25
20
15
10
5
0
–1
–2
–3
0
30
FIGURE 7.2
Survival data (black circles) of Listeria monocytogenes NCTC 11994 in cooked chicken mince at 
375 MPa, about 18°C fitted with Equations 4 (dashed gray line) and 5 (dashed black line)—see 
Table 7.4. (From Simpson, R. K. and Gilmour, A., Food Microbiology, 14, 567–573, 1997.)
log10 S(t)
Time (min)
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
0
3.0
FIGURE 7.3
Survival data (black circles) of five-strain cocktail of L. monocytogenes (PSU1, PSU2, PSU9, 
PSU21, and ATCC 19115) in turkey breast meat at 400 MPa, 50°C fitted with Equation 6 (dashed 
black line)—see Table 7.4. (From Chen, H., International Journal of Food Microbiology, 117, 55–60, 
2007.)

237
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
log10 S(t)
Time (min)
25
20
15
10
5
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
–6
0
30
FIGURE 7.4
Survival data (black circles) of L. monocytogenes NCTC 11994 in raw chicken mince at 375 MPa, 
about 18°C fitted with Equation 7 (dashed black line)—see Table 7.4. (From Simpson, R. K. and 
Gilmour, A., Food Microbiology, 14, 567–573, 1997.)
log10 S(t)
Time (min)
25
20
15
10
5
0
–1
–2
–3
–4
–5
0
30
FIGURE 7.5
Survival data (black circles) of L. monocytogenes NCTC 11994 in cooked beef mince at 375 
MPa, 45°C fitted with Equation 8 (dashed black line)—see Table 7.4. (From Simpson, R. K. and 
Gilmour, A., Food Microbiology, 14, 567–573, 1997.)

238
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
7.2.2.2 Additives/Antimicrobials
The synergism between bacteriostatic additives and HHP has been reported 
(Aymerich et al., 2005; Krockel and Muller 2002; Marcos et al., 2008b; Ogihara 
et al., 2009). Organic acids can be used in meat products to delay the growth 
of bacteria during storage without negative effects on the sensory quality 
of the products (Diez et al., 2008). In sliced cooked ham prepared with 1.8% 
potassium lactate, the growth of L. monocytogenes during chilled storage at 
6°C was delayed, and the combination of this treatment with HHP treatment 
(400 MPa, 17°C, 10 minutes) totally inhibited the recovery of L. monocytogenes 
during chilled storage at 6°C (Aymerich et al., 2005). Lactate (1.4%) was also 
efficient for preventing L. monocytogenes growth after a cold-chain break in 
HHP-treated (400 MPa, 17°C, 10 minutes) cooked ham (Marcos et al., 2008b). 
In fact, HHP alone decreased the initial count of L. monocytogenes from 5 to 2 
log10 CFU/g, but it failed to prevent the bacteria from recovering after a cold-
chain break arising during the storage.
Among antimicrobials, bacteriocins have also been used in combination 
with HHP to increase microbial inactivation in meat and meat products 
(Garriga et al., 2002; Marcos et al., 2008b; Yuste et al., 1998, 2002). Bacteriocins 
can be either incorporated into the product formulation or applied directly 
to meat before the HHP treatment. The use of active packaging containing 
antimicrobials is an additional solution that has been shown to be effective 
(Jofré et al., 2008a; Marcos et al., 2008a).
Nisin is currently the only bacteriocin to be widely used as a food pre-
servative. Its effectiveness in reducing the Listeria risk is low, and the use 
of potassium lactate has been shown to be more effective for inhibiting cell 
recovery during chilled storage (Aymerich et al., 2005). Garriga et al. (2002) 
investigated the behavior of several foodborne bacteria inoculated in a HHP-
treated (400 MPa, 17°C, 10 minutes) meat model system with added bacte-
riocins, enterocins A and B, sakacin K, pediocin AcH, and nisin. Nisin was 
very efficient for inhibiting the recovery of Escherichia coli, S. aureus, and 
Leuconostoc carnosum during subsequent chilled storage; however, it failed to 
inhibit the recovery of L. monocytogenes. The other bacteriocins were effective 
with L. monocytogenes, but not with the other tested bacteria. In HHP-treated 
(400 MPa, 17°C, 6 minutes) cooked ham, the introduction between slices of 
alginate films containing enterocin reduced the count of L. monocytogenes 
below the level of detection, whereas either HHP treatment or active packag-
ing alone had no effect on the bacteria count (Marcos et al., 2008a).
7.2.2.3 Multipulsed HHP Treatment of Meat Products
HHP treatment can consist of a single exposure period, that is, compression 
to target pressure, holding time at the target pressure, and decompression 
to atmospheric pressure (single-pulsed HHP or spHHP), or the applica-
tion of multiple exposure periods in which more than one exposure period 

239
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
exists, that is, compression, holding time, and decompression followed by 
another compression, holding time, and decompression (multipulsed HHP 
or mpHHP) (Buzrul et al., 2009). MpHHP could be used to lower the peak 
pressure necessary to inactivate the microorganisms in foods (Pilavtepe-
Çelik et al., 2011).
Several authors have studied the potential of using mpHHP processing of 
meat to improve process lethality. MpHHP (350 or 450 MPa, 2°C, 3 pulses × 
5 minutes) applied to mechanically recovered poultry meat showed that the 
mpHHP treatment was slightly better than the spHHP treatment (350 or 450 
MPa, 2°C, 15 minutes) for psychrotrophs, but the mpHHP treatment did not 
offer better results than the spHHP treatment for mesophiles (Yuste et al., 
1998). Similar results were also obtained by Yuste et al. (2001), but in this 
case, mpHHP was applied as a 60 MPa treatment (moderate pressure) fol-
lowed by a 450 MPa treatment (high pressure). These authors did not obtain 
any increase in efficiency in comparison with spHHP at 450 MPa. On the 
other hand, the use of the mpHHP treatment instead of the spHHP treat-
ment was observed to be more advantageous for the inactivation of E. coli 
O157:H7 in ground beef (Morales et al., 2008) and Salmonella Enteritidis in 
chicken breast fillets especially at higher pressures (Morales et al., 2009).
Morales et al. (2008) and Del Olmo et al. (2010) studied the effect of the 
spHHP and mpHHP treatments on color and texture of beef patties and 
chicken breast fillets, respectively. Changes in the color and texture of 
ground beef caused by spHHP and mpHHP treatments of the same lethality 
for E. coli O157:H7 (20 minutes for spHHP at 400 MPa and 4 pulses × 1 minute 
for mpHHP at 400 MPa) were similar (Morales et al., 2008). Color parameters 
(L*, a*, and b*) were significantly higher for both treatments than for vacuum-
packaged control fillets. Similarly, the texture of chicken breast fillets was 
also significantly affected by both treatments (Del Olmo et al., 2010).
7.2.2.4 Hurdle Concept
The hurdle concept is the combination of different strategies, preservation 
factors, or techniques to produce safe, stable, and high-quality food prod-
ucts. This concept consists of adding several barriers (hurdles) to bacterial 
life and growth (Simonin et al., 2012). For example, in the study of Yuste 
et al. (1998), mpHHP treatment (450 MPa, 2°C, 3 pulses × 5 minutes), nisin 
(200 ppm), and weak acidity (pH 5.42 provided by the addition of glucono 
delta-lactone) reduced the psychrotrophic and mesophilic bacterial counts 
to levels below 2 log10 CFU/g in mechanically recovered poultry meat dur-
ing 1 month of chilled storage. Nisin proved to be more efficient in reducing 
the indigenous flora of HHP-treated poultry meat when used at a weakly 
acidic pH (Yuste et al., 1998, 2002). In fermented sausages, the inherent hur-
dles (low aw and acidity) combined with HHP (Porto-Fett et al., 2010) were 
used to reduce Listeria and Salmonella risks. In this study, fermentation and 
drying of inoculated salami at 7 log10 CFU/g induced reductions of 1.1–1.3 

240
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
log10 CFU/g for L. monocytogenes and 4.2–4.8 log10 CFU/g for Salmonella sp. In 
addition, following pressurization (600 MPa, 1–5 minutes or 483 MPa, 5–12 
minutes) L. monocytogenes and Salmonella were reduced by an additional 
1.6 to ≥ 5.0 log10 CFU/g and 1.9–2.4 log10 CFU/g, respectively, compared to 
their levels after fermentation and drying (Porto-Fett et al., 2010). The use 
of lactate, HHP, and 1°C refrigeration is a successful combination that could 
reduce the Listeria risk in cooked ham (Aymerich et al., 2005; Marcos et al., 
2008b). In fact, in HHP-treated (400 MPa, 17°C, 10 minutes) cooked ham 
inoculated with L. monocytogenes, a recovery of the bacteria was observed 
during storage at 6°C, but no recovery was observed when the ham was 
formulated with 1.4% of lactate or when it was stored at 1°C (Aymerich et 
al., 2005). Storage conditions are thus of great importance for cell recovery 
after HHP treatment. Generally, the lower the storage temperature, the bet-
ter is the resulting microbial quality, except for certain specific products, 
such as fermented sausages, that benefit from storage at ambient tempera-
ture (Jofré et al., 2009a).
7.2.2.5 Limitations of the Abovementioned Methods
The use of elevated temperatures could be advantageous to reduce the target 
pressure for some meat products; however, temperature would have nega-
tive impacts on the organoleptic properties of fresh meat. On the other hand, 
low temperature could be used for fresh meat but this will require accu-
rate control of the temperature in large-scale devices used in the industry 
(Urrutia et al., 2007).
The use of antimicrobials such as nisin has been shown to have a syner-
gistic effect on bacterial inactivation; however, antimicrobial spectrum of 
most natural preservative systems is restricted to a narrow group of micro-
organisms. For instance, nisin and other bacteriocins are effective against 
only some gram-positive bacteria, but not against gram-negative bacteria. 
Further, sensitive bacterial strains may develop resistance when exposed to 
sublethal doses of an antimicrobial. A well-studied example of this is nisin 
resistance (Mazzotta and Montville, 1999; Mendoza et al., 1999). Finally, 
protein, fat, or other components in complex foods such as meat may pro-
tect target microorganisms, for instance, by adsorbing antimicrobial com-
ponents. One way to overcome these limitations is to use combinations 
of two or more biopreservatives with different targets (Zapico et al., 1998) 
or to combine antimicrobials with other preservation techniques (García-
Graells et al., 2000).
Although there is now enough evidence that the mpHHP treatment is an 
effective way of inactivating microorganisms, there is no commercial appli-
cation of the mpHHP treatment to date. The most important reason for this is 
that the mpHHP treatment is a longer application and thus more expensive 
than the spHHP treatment (Alemán et al., 1998; Buzrul et al., 2009; Buzrul, 
2014b; Kingsley et al., 2006; Rivalain et al., 2012). In addition, more compli-

241
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
cated HHP equipment which can withstand fast compression and decom-
pression rates (to reduce the total duration of the treatment) are likely needed 
for commercial applications (Buzrul, 2015).
7.3  Effects of HHP on Quality Attributes 
of Meat and Meat Products
7.3.1 Effect of HHP on Texture of Meat and Meat Products
The effect of HHP on the texture of muscle foods has been investigated since 
1973, when Macfarlane (1973) reported the potential use of HHP for pressure-
induced tenderization of meat (Campus, 2010). There is agreement among 
consumers that tenderness is the most important factor of all attributes that 
characterize the eating quality of meat (Denoyella and Lebihan, 2003; Jung 
et al., 2000; Sun and Holley, 2010). Many authors reported that HHP treat-
ment (100–200 MPa) for a few minutes can improve meat tenderness when 
applied to prerigor meat (Bouton et al., 1977; Elgasim and Kennick, 1980; 
Ohmori et al., 1991).
In postrigor meat, HHP (150–200 MPa) causes tenderization of meat after 
long exposure times (20–30 minutes) at high temperature values (40°C–80°C) 
(Bouton et al., 1977; Locker and Wild; 1984; Ma and Ledward, 2004; Macfar-
lane, 1973; Sikes et al., 2010)
In summary, meat tenderness is dependent on rigor stage, pressure, tem-
perature, and their combination. Pressure values lower than 200 MPa can 
tenderize prerigor meat, whereas tenderization of postrigor meat with HHP 
treatment can only be achieved at higher temperatures (Sun and Holley, 
2010).
HHP also induces meat protein modifications (gelation, solubilization, and 
aggregation) differently than heat-induced changes. HHP results in vary-
ing effects on meat product texture and water retention, depending mainly 
on the product’s form and composition, the pressure level, and the pressure/
temperature combination. Combining HHP and heat can sometimes improve 
the water retention in meat batters, depending on the batter’s composition and 
the process parameters. HHP can also be used to improve meat binding in 
restructured meat. Nevertheless, each specific product should be tested indi-
vidually for the resulting effects of HHP on its quality (Simonin et al., 2012).
7.3.2 Effect of HHP on Lipid Oxidation of Meat and Meat Products
There is enough evidence that HHP treatment of meat and meat products 
can trigger lipid oxidation, and such oxidation affects eating quality through 
flavor deterioration (rancidity), color changes, loss of nutritive value, and 
alterations of textural and functional properties through concomitant pro-

242
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
tein denaturation (Buckow et al., 2013; Fuentes et al., 2010; Refsgaard et al., 
2000; Viljanen et al., 2004).
The effect of HHP on lipid oxidation on pork (Cheah and Ledward, 1995, 
1996, 1997), beef (Ma et al., 2007; McArdle et al., 2010), and poultry (Beltran 
et al., 2004; Bragagnolo et al., 2007; Dissing et al., 1997; Kruk et al., 2011; Orlien 
et al., 2000; Tuboly et al., 2003) has established that pressure levels between 
300 and 600 MPa are critical for inducing lipid oxidation in fresh meat (Bajo-
vic et al., 2012).
In cured meat products, it was reported that presliced dry-cured ham was 
more susceptible to oxidative reactions and lipid oxidation compared to the 
control (Fuentes et al., 2010) whereas the oxidative stability of dry-cured ham 
pressurized at 600 MPa was not affected (Clariana et al., 2011b). As for the 
color, the effect on lipid oxidation by HHP is more pronounced for fresh meat 
than for cured meat products (Clariana et al., 2011a).
Addition of natural antioxidants such as rosemary extract to meat and 
meat products can help to minimize the effect of HHP on lipid oxidation. 
Addition of a rosemary extract to beef patties completely prevented forma-
tion of lipid oxidation products after nine days of chilled storage in both 
control and samples pressure-treated up to 600 MPa (Robbins et al., 2006). 
Bragagnolo et al. (2007) demonstrated that addition of rosemary to minced 
chicken meat samples before HHP treatment (600 MPa, 10°C, 10 minutes) 
protected against lipid oxidation resulting from HPP when the product was 
subsequently cooked. Similar findings were observed by Ma et al. (2007) 
using additions of vitamin E to ground beef.
Lipid oxidation can also be controlled by using metal chelators such as 
citrate or EDTA (Ikeuchi, 2011). Further possibilities proposed to inhibit  lipid 
oxidation is to limit oxygen availability in the packaging, use of antioxi-
dant active packaging (Bolumar et al., 2011), or use of different antioxidants 
derived from natural by-products like tomato (Alves et al., 2012).
In conclusion, HHP treatment of fresh and processed meats induces lipid 
oxidation. Depending on the pressure level, and to a lesser extent, on holding 
time, lipid oxidation most often occurs during subsequent storage. Moreover, 
HHP can be as damaging as heat treatment in terms of the oxidation level in 
cold-stored meat products. Generally, HHP has little effect on lipid oxidation 
below 300 MPa; however, it can have a significant effect at higher pressure 
values (Simonin et al., 2012). The possible effects of enhanced lipid oxidation 
on the eating quality of HHP-treated meats during storage need to be con-
sidered and controlled either through appropriate HHP treatments (pressure 
levels and holding times), packaging, or use of natural antioxidants (Buckow 
et al., 2013; Tume et al., 2010).
7.3.3 Effect of HHP on Color of Meat and Meat Products
It is well known that HHP influences fresh meat’s color. It has often been 
reported that application of pressure above 200 MPa drastically changes 

243
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
the appearance of red meat within a few minutes of treatment even at low 
temperatures (Carlez et al., 1993; Jung et al., 2003; Korzeniowski et al., 1999; 
Ledward, 2000; Tintchev et al., 2010). As pressure is increased, major struc-
tural proteins of the muscle became denatured (Cheah and Ledward, 1996) 
resulting in an opaque appearance of the flesh, which further reduces the 
visualization of other meat pigments. Typically, the lightness (L* values) of 
red meat increases significantly after pressure treatments above 250 MPa, 
whereas the redness (a* values) decreased at 400–500 MPa resulting in a gray-
brown meat with a cooked aspect (Carlez et al., 1995; Jung et al., 2003; Tintchev 
et al., 2010). Studies of beef and minced beef meat showed a decrease of the 
total myoglobin content at pressures in the range 250–500 MPa, whereas the 
proportion of the gray metmyoglobin increased at the expense of cherry-red 
oxymyoglobin at 400–500 MPa (Carlez et al., 1995).
Overall, HHP caused drastic changes in the color of fresh meat and thus 
made the commercialization of HHP-treated fresh meat difficult (Cheftel and 
Culioli, 1997), since color is one of the most important attributes of fresh meat 
that consumers use as a purchasing criterion (Faustman and Cassens, 1990).
The color of cured products is less affected by pressure than is fresh meat’s 
color (Karlowski et al., 2002; Rubio et al., 2007), although significant changes 
have also been reported. For example, a decrease in redness in dry-cured 
ham was observed above 200 MPa (Andrés et al., 2004, 2006; Cava et al., 2009). 
Cava et al. (2009) observed that color differences between HHP-treated (300 
MPa, 14°C, 30 minutes) and untreated dry-cured ham and loin disappeared 
during subsequent storage at 4°C for 90 days. Changes induced by pressure 
were noticeable after the treatment; however, after 60 and 90 days of storage, 
differences were no longer found between treated and untreated products. 
To avoid color changes in cured meat products, cooking before HHP treat-
ment has been recommended (Goutefongea et al., 1995).
In general, the negative impact of HHP on fresh meat and meat products is 
dependent on different parameters, and not all of them are well-understood 
as of yet. In general, HHP-induced color changes vary according to the myo-
globin content and are more dramatic for fresh red meat than for white meat 
and cured meat products. Undesired changes can be limited by optimiz-
ing the process parameters of HHP treatment such as pressure, time, tem-
perature, curing, oxygen removal, and increased pH. When looking for a 
reduction of the color changes induced by HHP, one should keep in mind 
that measures to protect the color quality and stability can result in changed 
microbial inactivation and thus affect the safety and shelf‐life of the final 
product (Bajovic et al., 2012).
7.3.4 Other Effects of HHP on Meat and Meat Products
It is evident that HHP is capable of inducing various structural changes on 
muscle proteins of meat and these resulting changes are dependent on the 
magnitude of the pressures/temperatures and the duration of the treatment 

244
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
(Buckow et al., 2013). The application of HHP on proteins leads to different 
degrees of protein structure modification. As a general mechanism, the appli-
cation of HHP induces unfolding of the protein structure and subsequent fold-
ing after pressure release. This can lead, depending on the specific protein and 
conditions applied, to partial or total denaturation and tuning of electrostatic 
interactions. Based on the principle of Le Chatelier and Braun, reactions with a 
decrease in volume are favored by pressure (Bajovic et al., 2012).
One of the remarkable effects of HHP on meat is the modification of the 
actin–myosin complex. Pressure induces structural changes in the main 
constituent of muscle filaments, which are possibly caused by increased 
ATPase activity at 30 MPa as well as with an increase of soluble materials 
from the myofibrils enhanced by pressurization above 150 MPa (Nishiwaki 
et al., 1996).
Sensory acceptance of HHP-treated meat products depends on color, 
texture, aroma, and taste modifications induced by the process. Problems 
of sensory acceptance occur with raw products, mainly because of visible 
color changes. Cooked and cured products are less modified by pressure, 
and good sensory acceptance is generally reported despite some changes in 
aroma and taste profiles (Simonin et al., 2012).
7.4  Consumer Acceptance of HHP-Treated 
Meat and Meat Products
Although HHP is now a reality in the food industry, there are still many 
consumers who are not aware of this technology. One way to understand the 
consumer’s awareness/acceptance/interest on HHP technology is to admin-
ister surveys.
Personal interviews revealed that HHP was acceptable to the majority of con-
sumers in France and Germany (Butz et al., 2003). An online consumer survey in 
the United States was implemented by Hicks et al. (2009) to assess the awareness 
of alternative food-processing technologies, consumer food safety attitudes and 
knowledge, and the willingness to pay for HHP-treated products. The survey 
was completed by 1204 adults. Results revealed that while traditional meth-
ods—that is, canning, freezing, and microwaving—were all well recognized by 
over 80% of respondents, only 8% recognized HHP. Trends indicated that an 
increase in age, education, and income reflected greater food safety knowledge. 
Given an explanation of HHP and its benefits, 39% of respondents indicated they 
would be willing to pay an additional cost for such foods, with higher income 
and education having the most impact (Hicks et al., 2009).
Surveys were conducted by Cardello et al. (2007) to 225 potential consum-
ers of foods processed by innovative and emerging food technologies (HHP, 
pulsed electric fields, irradiation, ionizing energy, genetic modification) 

245
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
to assess the factors contributing to their interest in using such products. 
Respondents rated their interest in 49 different food-product concepts that 
varied in food type, processing or production technology, costs, benefits, 
risks, endorsing agencies, and product information. HHP has a strong posi-
tive influence on consumer interest, compared to irradiation and genetic 
modification (Cardello et al., 2007).
In summary, consumers are ready to pay extra for new HHP-treated meat 
products if they have higher quality. It is essential that the quality and safety 
of the new product are assessed prior to launch in the market (Ikeuchi, 2011). 
Further study is required for marketing of pressurized food products to pro-
vide consumers with clear information about the treatments, its purposes, 
and gained benefits (Teixeira et al., 2014). Consumer’s willingness to pay 
once they are informed could encourage industry to look more favorably on 
this technology (Hicks et al., 2009).
7.5  Some Important Results from Recent  
Studies of HHP on Meat Products
In this section, some results from recent studies are given. A recent work 
by de Oliveira et al. (2015) showed that the addition of carvacrol (200 ppm) 
to sliced low-sodium, vacuum-packed turkey breast ham notably improved 
the preservation effects of HHP (600 MPa, 25°C, 3 minutes) processing. This 
combined treatment was able to reduce the growth rates of lactic acid and 
psychrotrophic bacteria, and extend the lag-phase of L. innocua. In addition, 
the triggered lipid oxidation events by HHP may be delayed by the addition 
of carvacrol. The preservative effects during the shelf life can be potentiated 
by the presence of natural barriers, and the use of carvacrol represents a 
promising technology against sublethal injury and cell recovery phenomena 
(de Oliveira et al., 2015).
Montiel et al. (2015) studied the effects of reuterin, lactoperoxidase, lactoferrin, 
and HHP (450 MPa, 6°C, 5 minutes) on the inactivation of foodborne pathogens 
in cooked ham. Individual treatments of reuterin, lactoperoxidase, and HHP 
diminished the growth of L. monocytogenes in cooked ham, but a recovery of 
growth was observed during storage at 4°C after 35 days. Combined treatments 
of HHP with reuterin or lactoperoxidase increased synergistically the antimi-
crobial effect against L. monocytogenes and avoided the recovery. Reuterin and 
lactoperoxidase added individually to cooked ham diminished S. Enteritidis 
and E. coli O157:H7 levels during the 35 days of challenge at 4°C and 10°C. Pres-
sure treatments, individually and in combination with antimicrobials, inhib-
ited the growth of these Gram-negative microorganisms during the 35 days of 
storage. The result showed that lactoperoxidase combined with HHP was the 
most effective treatment at reducing the growth of pathogens tested. Also, the 

246
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
application of reuterin combined with HHP would be a useful hurdle technol-
ogy to improve the safety of cooked ham (Montiel et al., 2015).
The results of a recent study by Ros-Polski et al. (2015) indicated that, 
in general, the use of HHP treatment (0–300 MPa, ambient temperature, 
1–3 minutes) in salted (0–2.5 g/100 g) white chicken meat improved the 
texture of the cooked meat and color of raw meat. Overall, NaCl at lower con-
centrations along with HHP treatment improved white chicken meat color 
and texture. This information can be used when developing HHP treatments 
as a processing alternative to reduce NaCl content while maintaining the 
physical attributes and ensuring meat functionality and quality (Ros-Polski 
et al., 2015).
A more recent study by Teixeira et al. (2016) investigated the effect of 
growth temperature, process temperature, and sodium chloride concentra-
tion on the lethality of HHP to a five-strain cocktail of L. monocytogenes in 
cooked ham. Results reveal that cultures grown at 8°C were more resistant 
than cultures grown at 20°C and 32°C in broth; however, cultures grown at 
8°C and 32°C were equally resistant to pressurizations at 5°C and 32°C on 
ham; whereas cultures grown at 8°C tended to be more sensitive to treat-
ments at -5°C when compared to cultures grown at 32°C. L. monocytogenes 
was more pressure resistant in ham with 3% (w/v) NaCl when compared to 
ham with 1% (w/v) NaCl.
It is thus remarkable that the modest decrease of the NaCl content of ham 
from 3% to 1% had a measurable impact on pressure resistance of L. monocy-
togenes. The meat industry currently aims to reduce the salt content of ready-
to-eat meat products. The study by Teixeira et al. (2016) indicates that even a 
modest reduction of the NaCl content can improve food safety by decreasing 
the pressure resistance of L. monocytogenes (Teixeira et al., 2016).
7.6  Opportunities for HHP Application 
to Meat and Meat Products
HHP is a well-known technology to inactivate pathogenic and spoilage micro-
organisms in meat products. Commercially applied pressure levels are between 
400 and 600 MPa with processing times of three to seven minutes at ambient 
temperatures which in most cases lead to an inactivation of about four log units 
of the majority of vegetative pathogenic and spoilage microorganisms < result-
ing in increased shelf life and improved safety (Bajovic et al., 2012).
The thermo-labile nature of protein meat systems and the described effects 
of pressure on meat and meat proteins allow the development of novel meat-
based products and the usage of HHP as a time- and energy-saving process-
ing step for the meat industry. Functional and rheological properties of meat 
can be improved and novel meat-based products with decreased salt content 

247
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
or higher nutritional level can be developed (Bajovic et al., 2012). Since HHP 
has value in the formation of gels from myofibrillar protein at low (0.2 M) 
salt concentration, HHP may have potential for the development of low-
sodium-containing processed meat products. Current technological limita-
tions of 1.7%–2.1% (w/v) NaCl may be overcome by the use of HHP and will 
enable manufacture of these products with more healthful levels of NaCl 
(Sun and Holley, 2010).
7.7 Limitations of HHP on Meat and Meat Products
HHP treatment can be used to increase the safety and storage life especially 
of ready-to-eat meat products but cannot be used to establish the safety of 
these products. Further studies should be carried out to ensure microbio-
logical safety of ready-to-eat meat products. The hurdle concept could be an 
effective way to achieve this goal.
Moreover, capital equipment cost can be a problem for some companies. 
Nevertheless, as the technology improves, it may be possible to reduce the 
cost of both the equipment and the treatment. An additional problem is that 
current batch sizes are a restriction for operations with high line speeds (Sun 
and Holley, 2010).
7.7.1 On the Application of HHP on Fresh Meat
HHP at ambient temperatures increases the shelf life of fresh meat; however, 
HHP causes several transformations such as color loss and texture changes. 
The meat becomes more gel-structured and paler, losing the typical appear-
ance of fresh meat (Bajovic et al., 2012). The color changes are similar to those in 
cooked meat as the actomyosin denatures at about 200 MPa and the myoglobin 
denatures and/or coprecipitates with other proteins at about 400 MPa. In addi-
tion, at pressures ≥400 MPa the unsaturated lipids in the meat become more 
susceptible to oxidation, probably due to the release of iron from complexes 
present in meat and/or changes in the lipid membrane (Ma and Ledward, 2013).
Depending on the process parameter applied, HHP-treated meat would 
possibly not be recognized as fresh meat by consumers (Bajovic et al., 2012). 
Under European Union (EU) regulation, “fresh meat” has not undergone any 
preserving process other than chilling, freezing, or quick-freezing, includ-
ing meat that is vacuum-wrapped or wrapped in a controlled atmosphere 
(The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union, 2004). 
Overall, the color change induced by HHP in the meat as well as the current 
legal definition of fresh meat has drastically limited the use of HHP for fresh 
meat in the markets (Bajovic et al., 2012). Even if legislation would allow it, 
it is unlikely that many consumers would be prepared to buy such meat. 

248
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
However, if prerigor meat is subjected to pressures of about 100–150 MPa, 
below those necessary to cause color changes, it becomes significantly more 
tender than its untreated counterpart, and this may now be a commercially 
viable process given the decreasing cost of HHP equipment. When treated 
at 100–200 MPa, while the temperature is raised from ambient to around 
60°C postrigor meat also yields a tender product and this may also be a com-
mercially attractive process to parts of the food industry, for example, those 
involved in catering (Ma and Ledward, 2013).
Undesired color changes, especially for fresh red meat, can be limited by 
changing the process parameters such as pressure, time, and temperature as 
well as by curing, oxygen removal, and the increase of product pH by ingre-
dients (Bajovic et al., 2012).
References
Alemán, G. D., Ting, E. Y., Farkas, D. F., Mordre, S. C., Hawes, A. C. O. and Torres, J. A. 
(1998). Comparison of static and step-pulsed ultra-high pressure on the micro-
bial stability of fresh cut pineapple. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 
76, 383–388.
Alves, A. B., Bragagnolo, N., da Silva, M. G., Skibsted, L. H. and Orlien, V. (2012). 
Antioxidant protection of high-pressure processed minced chicken meat by 
industrial tomato products. Food and Bioproducts Processing, 90, 499–505.
Andrés, A., Adamsen, C., Møller, J., Ruiz, J. and Skibsted, L. (2006). High-pressure 
treatment of dry-cured Iberian ham. Effect on colour and oxidative stability 
during chill storage packed in modified atmosphere. European Food Research and 
Technology, 222, 486–491.
Andrés, A. I., Møller, J. K. S., Adamsen, C. E. and Skibsted, L. H. (2004). High pressure 
treatment of dry-cured Iberian ham. Effect on radical formation, lipid oxidation 
and colour. European Food Research and Technology, 219, 205–210.
Atsushi, S., Ken, K., Hiroyuki, T., Tadayuki, N. and Yoshihide, I. (2006). Application 
of high hydrostatic pressure to meat and meat processing. In: Nollet, L. M. L. 
and Toldrá, F. (eds.) Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press, 193–271.
Avsaroglu, M. D., Buzrul, S., Alpas, H., Akcelik, M. and Bozoglu, F. (2006). Use of the 
Weibull model for lactococcal bacteriophage inactivation by high hydrostatic 
pressure. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 108, 78–83.
Aymerich, M. T., Jofré, A., Garriga, M. and Hugas, M. (2005). Inhibition of Listeria 
monocytogenes and Salmonella by natural antimicrobials and high hydrostatic 
pressure in sliced cooked ham. Journal of Food Protection, 68, 173–177.
Bajovic, B., Bolumar, T. and Heinz, V. (2012). Quality considerations with high pres-
sure processing of fresh and value added meat products. Meat Science, 92, 
280–289.
Beltran, E., Pla, R., Yuste, J. and Mor-Mur, M. (2004). Use of antioxidants to minimize 
rancidity in pressurized and cooked chicken slurries. Meat Science, 66, 719–725.

249
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
Bolumar, T., Andersen, M. L. and Orlien, V. (2011). Antioxidant active packaging for 
chicken meat processed by high pressure treatment. Food Chemistry, 129, 1406–
1412.
Bouton, P. E., Harris, P. V., Macfarlane, J. J. and O’Shea, J. M. (1977). Effect of pressure 
treatments on the mechanical properties of pre- and post-rigor meat. Meat Sci-
ence, 1, 307–318.
Bragagnolo, N., Danielsen, B. and Skibsted, L. H. (2007). Rosemary as antioxidant in 
pressure processed chicken during subsequent cooking as evaluated by electron 
spin resonance spectroscopy. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 
8, 24–29.
Buckow, R., Sikes, A. and Tume, R. (2013). Effect of high pressure on physicochemi-
cal properties of meat. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 53, 770–786.
Butz, P., Needs, E. C., Baron, A. et al. (2003). Consumer attitudes to high pressure food 
processing. Food Agriculture and Environment, 1, 30–34.
Buzrul, S. (2014a). A review on describing the survival curves of Listeria monocytogenes 
in foods of animal origin under high hydrostatic pressure. Kafkas Üniversitesi 
Veteriner Fakültesi Dergisi, 20, 321–327.
Buzrul, S. (2014b). Multi-pulsed high hydrostatic pressure treatment of microorgan-
isms: A review. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 26, 1–11.
Buzrul, S. (2015). Multi-pulsed high hydrostatic pressure treatment of foods. Foods, 
4, 173–183.
Buzrul, S. and Alpas, H. (2004). Modeling the synergistic effect of high pressure and 
heat on the inactivation kinetics of Listeria innocua: A preliminary study. FEMS 
Microbiology Letters, 238, 29–36.
Buzrul, S. and Alpas, H. (2012). Treatment of foods using high hydrostatic pressure. 
In: Bhat, R., Alias, A. K. and Paliyath, G. (eds.) Progress in Food Preservartion. 
West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, 375–388.
Buzrul, S., Alpas, H., Largeteau, A. and Demazeau, G. (2009). Efficiency of pulse pres-
sure treatment for inactivation of Escherichia coli and Listeria innocua in whole 
milk. European Food Research and Technology, 229, 127–131.
Campus, M. (2010). High pressure processing of meat, meat products and seafood. 
Food Engineering Reviews, 2, 256–273.
Cardello, A. V., Schutz, H. G. and Lesher, L. L. (2007). Consumer perceptions of foods 
processed by innovative and emerging technologies: A conjoint analytic study. 
Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 8, 73–83.
Carlez, A., Rosec, J.-P., Richard, N. and Cheftel, J. C. (1993). High pressure inactivation 
of Citrobacter freundii, Pseudomonas fluorescens, and Listeria innocua in inoculated 
minced beef muscle. Lebensmittel-Wissenschaft und -Technologie, 26, 357–363.
Carlez, A., Veciana-Nogues, T. and Cheftel, J. C. (1995). Changes in colour and 
myoglobin of minced beef meat due to high pressure processing. Lebensmittel-
Wissenschaft und -Technologie, 28, 528–538.
Cava, R., Ladero, L., González, S., Carrasco, A. and Ramírez, M. R. (2009). Effect of 
pressure and holding time on colour, protein and lipid oxidation of sliced dry-
cured Iberian ham and loin during refrigerated storage. Innovative Food Science 
and Emerging Technologies, 10, 76–81.
Cerf, O. (1997). A review. Tailing of survival curves of bacterial spores. Journal of 
Applied Bacteriology, 42, 1–19.
Cheah, P. B. and Ledward, D. A. (1995). High-pressure effects on lipid oxidation. Jour-
nal of the American Oil Chemists’ Society, 72, 1059–1063.

250
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Cheah, P. B. and Ledward, D. A. (1996). High pressure effects on lipid oxidation in 
minced pork. Meat Science, 43, 123–134.
Cheah, P. B. and Ledward, D. A. (1997). Inhibition of metmyoglobin formation in 
fresh beef by pressure treatment. Meat Science, 45, 411–418.
Cheftel, J. C. and Culioli, J. (1997). Effects of high pressure on meat: A review. Meat 
Science, 46, 211–236.
Chen, H. (2007). Temperature-assisted pressure inactivation of Listeria monocyto-
genes in Turkey breast meat. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 117, 55–60.
Chen, H. and Hoover, D. G. (2003). Pressure inactivation kinetics of Yersinia enteroco-
litica ATCC 35669. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 87, 161–171.
Chick, H. (1908). An investigation of the laws of disinfection. Journal of Hygiene Cam-
bridge, 8, 92–158.
Clariana, M., Guerrero, L., Sárraga, C., Díaz, I., Valero, Á. and García-Regueiro, J. A. 
(2011a). Influence of high pressure application on the nutritional, sensory and 
microbiological characteristics of sliced skin vacuumpacked dry-cured ham. 
Effects along the storage period. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technolo-
gies, 12, 456–465.
Clariana, M., Guerrero, L., Sárraga, C. and Garcia-Regueiro, J. A. (2011b). Effects 
of high pressure application (400 and 900 MPa) and refrigerated storage time 
on the oxidative stability of sliced skin vacuum packed dry-cured ham. Meat 
Science, 90, 323–329.
Corradini, M. G., Normand, M. D. and Peleg, M. (2007). Modeling non-isothermal 
heat inactivation of microorganisms having biphasic isothermal survival 
curves. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 116, 391–399.
de Oliveira, T. L. C., Leite, B. R. D., Ramos, A. L. S., Ramos, E. M., Piccoli, R. H. and 
Cristianini, M. (2015). Phenolic carvacrol as a natural additive to improve the 
preservative effects of high pressure processing of low-sodium sliced vacuum-
packed turkey breast ham. LWT–Food Science and Technology, 64, 1297–1308.
Del Olmo, A., Morales, P., Ávila, M., Calzada, J. and Nuñez, M. (2010). Effect of single-
cycle and multiple-cycle high-pressure treatments on the colour and texture of 
chicken breast fillets. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 11, 441–444.
Denoyella, C. and Lebihan, E. (2003). Intramuscular variation in beef tenderness. 
Meat Science, 66, 241–247.
Diez, A. M., Santos, E. M., Jaime, I. and Rovira, J. (2008). Application of organic acid 
salts and high-pressure treatments to improve the preservation of blood sau-
sage. Food Microbiology, 25, 154–161.
Dissing, J., Bruun-Jensen, L. and Skibsted, L. H. (1997). Effect of high-pressure treat-
ment on lipid oxidation in turkey thigh muscle during chill storage. Zeitschrift 
für Lebensmitteluntersuchung und Forschung, 205, 11–13.
Donsì, G., Ferrari, G. and Maresca, P. (2003). On the modeling of the inactivation 
kinetics of Saccharomyces cerevisiae by means of combined temperature and high 
pressure treatments. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 4, 35–44.
Elgasim, E.A. and Kennick, W.H. (1980). Effect of pressurization of pre-rigor beef 
muscles on protein quality. Journal of Food Science, 45, 1122–1124.
Escriu, R. and Mor-Mur, M. (2009). Role of quantity and quality of fat in meat mod-
els inoculated with Listeria innocua or Salmonella Typhimurium treated by high 
pressure and refrigerated stored. Food Microbiology, 26, 834–840.

251
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
The European Parliament and the Council of the European Union. (2004). Regulation 
(EC) No 853/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 
2004 laying down specific hygiene rules for on the hygiene of foodstuffs. Official 
Journal of the European Union, 139, 1–155.
Faustman, C. and Cassens, R. G. (1990). The biochemical basis for discoloration in 
fresh meat: A review. Journal of Muscle Foods, 1, 217–243.
Fuentes, V., Ventanas, J., Morcuende, D., Estévez, M. and Ventanas, S. (2010). Lipid 
and protein oxidation and sensory properties of vacuum packaged dry-cured 
ham subjected to high hydrostatic pressure. Meat Science, 85, 506–514.
García-Graells, C., Valckx, C. and Michiels, C. W. (2000). Inactivation of Escherchia coli 
and Listeria innocua in milk by combined treatment with high hydrostatic pres-
sure and the lactoperoxidase system. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 66, 
4173–4179.
Garriga, M. and Aymerich, T. (2009). Advanced decontamination technologies: High 
hydrostatic pressure on meat products. In: Toldrá, F. (ed.) Safety of Meat and Pro-
cessed Meat. New York, NY: Springer, 183–208.
Garriga, M., Aymerich, M. T., Costa, S., Monfort, J. M. and Hugas, M. (2002). Bacteri-
cidal synergism through bacteriocins and high pressure in a meat model system 
during storage. Food Microbiology, 19, 509–518.
Garriga, M., Grèbol, N., Aymerich, M. T., Monfort, J. M. and Hugas, M. (2004). Micro-
bial inactivation after high-pressure processing at 600 MPa in commercial meat 
products over its shelf life. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 5, 
451–457.
Geeraerd, A. H., Valdramidis, V. P. and Van Impe, J. F. (2005). GInaFiT, a freeware tool 
to assess non-log-linear microbial survivor curves. International Journal of Food 
Microbiology, 102, 95–105.
Gola, S., Mutti, P., Manganelli, E., Squarcina, N. and Rovere, P. (2000). Behaviour of 
E. coli 0157: H7 strains in model system and in raw meat by HPP: Microbial and 
technological aspects. High Pressure Research, 19, 91–97.
Goutefongea, R., Rampon, V., Nicolas, J. and Dumont, J. P. (1995). Meat color changes 
under high pressure treatment. In Proceeding of the 41st International Congress of 
Meat Science and Technology, San Antonio, Texas, 384–385.
Grèbol, N. (2002). Commercial use of high hydrostatic pressure in sliced cooked ham 
in Spain. In: Hayashi, R. (ed.) Trends in High Pressure Bioscience and Biotechnology, 
Progress in Biotechnology, vol. 19. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, pp. 385–388.
Hereu, A., Dalgaard, P., Garriga, M., Aymerich, T. and Bover-Cid, S. (2012). Modelling 
the high pressure inactivation kinetics of Listeria monocytogenes on RTE cooked 
meat products. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 16, 305–315.
Hicks, D. T., Pivarnik, L. F., McDermott, R., Richard, N., Hoover, D. G. and Kniel, K. E. 
(2009). Consumer awareness and willingness to pay for high-pressure process-
ing of ready-to-eat food. Food Science Education Research, 8, 32–38.
Hugas, M., Garriga, M. and Monfort, J. M. (2002). New mild technologies in meat 
processing: High pressure as a model technology. Meat Science, 62, 359–371.
Ikeuchi, Y. (2011). Recent advances in the application of high pressure technology 
to processed meat products. In: Kerry, J. P. and Kerry, J. F. (eds.) Processed 
Meats—Improving Safety, Nutrition and Quality. Cambridge: Woodhead Pub-
lishing, 590–609.

252
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Jofré, A., Aymerich, T. and Garriga, M. (2008a). Assessment of the effectiveness of 
antimicrobial packaging combined with high pressure to control Salmonella spp. 
in cooked ham. Food Control, 19, 634–638.
Jofré, A., Aymerich, T. and Garriga, M. (2009a). Improvement of the food safety of 
low-acid fermented sausages by enterocins A and B and high pressure. Food 
Control, 20, 179–184.
Jofré, A., Aymerich, T., Grebol, N. and Garriga, M. (2009b). Efficiency of high hydro-
static pressure at 600 MPa against food-borne microorganisms by challenge tests 
on convenience meat products. LWT-Food Science and Technology, 42, 924–928.
Jofré, A., Garriga, M. and Aymerich, T. (2007). Inhibition of Listeria monocytogenes in 
cooked ham through active packaging with natural antimicrobials and high-
pressure processing. Journal of Food Protection, 70, 2498–2502.
Jofré, A., Garriga, M. and Aymerich, T. (2008b). Inhibition of Salmonella sp. Lis-
teria monocytogenes and Staphylococcus aureus in cooked ham by combining 
antimicrobials, high hydrostatic pressure and refrigeration. Meat Science, 
78, 53–59.
Jung, S., de Lamballerie-Anton, M. and Ghoul, M. (2000). Textural changes in bovine 
meat treated with high pressure. High Pressure Research, 19, 69–74.
Jung, S., Ghoul, M. and de Lamballerie-Anton, M. (2003). Influence of high pressure 
on the color and microbial quality of beef meat. Food Science and Technology, 36, 
625–631.
Karlowski, K., Windyga, B., Fonberg-Broczek, M. et al. (2002). Effects of high pressure 
treatment on the microbiological quality, texture and colour of vacuum-packed 
pork meat products. High Pressure Research, 22, 725–732.
Kingsley, D. H., Guan, D., Hoover, D. G. and Chen, H. (2006). Inactivation of hepatitis 
A virus by high-pressure processing: The role of temperature and pressure oscil-
lation. Journal of Food Protection, 69, 2454–2459.
Korzeniowski, W., Jankowska, B., Kwiatkowska, A. (1999). The effect of high pressure 
on some technological properties of pork. Electronic Journal of Polish Agricultural 
Universities, 2, 1–7, #04. Available at http://www.ejpau.media.pl/volume2/
issue2/food/art-04.html
Koseki, S. and Yamamoto, K. (2007). A novel approach to predicting microbial inac-
tivation kinetics during high pressure processing. International Journal of Food 
Microbiology, 116, 275–281.
Koutchma, T. (2014). Adapting High Hydrostatic Pressure (HPP) for Food Processing 
Operations. Burlington, NY: Elsevier.
Krockel, L. and Muller, W. D. (2002). Inactivation of bacteria on vacuum-packaged sliced 
Bologna-type sausage by high hydrostatic pressures. Fleischwirtschaft, 82, 121–124.
Kruk, Z. A., Yun, H., Rutley, D. L., Lee, E. J., Kim, Y. J. and Jo, C. (2011). The effect of 
high pressure on microbial population, meat quality and sensory characteristics 
of chicken breast fillet. Food Control, 22, 6–12.
Ledward, D. A. (2000). Effects of pressure on protein structure. High Pressure Research, 
19, 1–10.
Linton, R. H., Carter, W. H., Pierson, M. D. and Hackney, C. R. (1995). Use of modified 
Gompertz equation to model non-linear survival curves for Listeria monocyto-
genes Scott A. Journal of Food Protection, 9, 946–954.
Locker, R. H. and Wild, D. J. C. (1984). Tenderisation of meat by pressure-heat involves 
weakening of the gap filaments in the myofibril. Meat Science, 10, 207–233.

253
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
López-Caballero, M., Carballo, J. and Jiménez-Colmenero, R. (2002). Microbial inac-
tivation in meat products by pressure/temperature processing. Journal of Food 
Science, 67, 797–801.
Lori, S., Buckow, R., Knorr, D., Heinz, V. and Lehmacheri, A. (2007). Predictive model 
for inactivation of Campylobacter spp. by heat and high hydrostatic pressure. 
Journal of Food Protection, 70, 2023–2029.
Ma, H. J. and Ledward, D. A. (2004). High pressure/thermal treatment effects on the 
texture of beef muscle. Meat Science, 68, 347–355.
Ma, H. and Ledward, D. A. (2013). High pressure processing of fresh meat—Is it 
worth it? Meat Science, 95, 897–903.
Ma, H. J., Ledward, D. A., Zamri, A. I., Frazier, R. A. and Zhou, G. H. (2007). Effects of 
high pressure/thermal treatment on lipid oxidation in beef and chicken muscle. 
Food Chemistry, 104, 1575–1579.
Macfarlane, J. J. (1973). Pre-rigor pressurization of muscle: Effects on pH, shear value 
and taste panel assessment. Journal of Food Science, 38, 294–298.
Macfarlane, J. J. (1985). High pressure technology and meat quality. In: Lawrie, R. A. 
(ed.) Developments in Meat Science-3, London: Elsevier Applied Science, 155–184.
Macfarlane, J. J., McKenzie, I. J. and Turner, R. H. (1986). Pressure-heat treatment of meat: 
Changes in myofibrillar proteins and ultrastructure. Meat Science, 17, 161–176.
Macfarlane, J. J., McKenzie, I. J. and Turner, R. H. (1982). Pressure-induced pH and 
length changes in muscle. Meat Science, 7, 169–181.
Macfarlane, J. J., McKenzie, I. J., Turner, R. H. and Jones, P. N. (1981). Pressure treatment 
of meat: Effects on thermal transitions and shear values. Meat Science, 5, 307–317.
Macfarlane, J. J. and Morton, D. J. (1978). Effects of pressure treatment on the ultra-
structure of striated muscle. Meat Science, 2, 282–288.
Marcos, B., Aymerich, T., Monfort, J. M. and Garriga, M. (2008a). High-pressure pro-
cessing and antimicrobial biodegradable packaging to control Listeria monocyto-
genes during storage of cooked ham. Food Microbiology, 25, 177–182.
Marcos, B., Jofré, A., Aymerich, T., Monfort, J. M. and Garriga, M. (2008b). Combined 
effect of natural antimicrobials and high pressure processing to prevent Listeria 
monocytogenes growth after a cold-chain break during storage of cooked ham. 
Food Control, 19, 76–81.
Martinez-Rodriguez, A. and Mackey, B. M. (2005). Factors affecting the pressure resis-
tance of some Campylobacter species. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 41, 321–326.
Mazzotta, A. S. and Montville, T. J. (1999). Characterization of fatty acid composition, 
spore germination, and thermal resistance in a nisin-resistant mutant of Clos-
tridium botulinum 169B and in the wild-type strain. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 65, 659–664.
Mendoza, F., Maqueda, M., Galvez, A., Martinez-Bueno, M. and Valdivia. E. (1999). 
Antilisterial activity of peptide AS-48 and study of changes induced in the cell 
envelope properties of an AS-48-adapted strain of Listeria monocytogenes. Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology, 65, 618–625.
McArdle, R., Marcos, B., Kerry, J. P. and Mullen, A. (2010). Monitoring the effects of 
high pressure processing and temperature on selected beef quality attributes. 
Meat Science, 86, 629–634.
Moerman, F. (2005). High hydrostatic pressure inactivation of vegetative microorgan-
isms, aerobic and anaerobic spores in pork Marengo, a low-acidic particulate 
food product. Meat Science, 69, 225–232.

254
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Montiel, R., Martín-Cabrejas, I. and Medina, M. (2015). Reuterin, lactoperoxidase, lac-
toferrin and high hydrostatic pressure on the inactivation of food-borne patho-
gens in cooked ham. Food Control, 51, 122–128.
Morales, P., Calzada, J., Ávila, M. and Nuñez, M. (2008). Inactivation of Escherichia coli 
O157: H7 in ground beef by single-cycle and multiple-cycle high-pressure treat-
ments. Journal of Food Protection, 71, 811–815.
Morales, P., Calzada, J. and Nuñez, M. (2006). Effect of high-pressure treatment on 
the survival of Listeria monocytogenes Scott A in sliced vacuum-packaged Iberian 
and Serrano cured hams. Journal of Food Protection, 69, 2539–2543.
Morales, P., Calzada, J., Rodríguez, B., de Paz, M. and Nuñez, M. (2009). Inactivation 
of Salmonella Enteritidis in chicken breast fillets by single-cycle and multiple-
cycle high pressure treatments. Foodborne Pathogens and Diseases, 6, 577–581.
Myers, K., Cannon, J., Montoya, D., Dickson, J., Lonergan, S. and Sebranek, J. (2013). 
Effects of high hydrostatic pressure and varying concentrations of sodium 
nitrite from traditional and vegetable-based sources on the growth of Listeria 
monocytogenes on ready-to-eat (RTE) sliced ham. Meat Science, 94, 69–76.
Nishiwaki, T., Ikeuchi, Y. and Suzuki, A. (1996). Effects of high pressure treatment 
on Mg-enhanced ATPase activity of rabbit myofibrils. Meat Science, 43, 145–155.
Ogihara, H., Yatuzuka, M., Horie, N., Furukawa, S. and Yamasaki, M. (2009). Syner-
gistic effect of high-hydrostatic-pressure treatment and food additives on the 
inactivation of Salmonella enteritidis. Food Control, 20, 963–966.
Ohmori, T., Shigehisa, T., Taji, S. and Hayashi, R. (1991). Effect of high pressure on 
the protease activities in meat. Agricultural and Biological Chemistry, 55, 357–361.
Orlien, V., Hansen, E. and Skibsted, L. H. (2000). Lipid oxidation in high-pressure pro-
cessed chicken breast muscle during chill storage: Critical working pressure in rela-
tion to oxidation mechanism. European Food Research and Technology, 211, 99–104.
Patterson, M. F. and Kilpatrick, D. J. (1998). The combined effect of high hydrostatic 
pressure and mild heat on inactivation of pathogens in milk and poultry. Journal 
of Food Protection, 61, 432–436.
Patterson, M. F., Linton, M. and Doona, C. J. (2007). Introduction to high pressure 
processing of foods. In: Doona, C. J. and Feeherry, F. E. (eds.) High Pressure Pro-
cessing of Foods. Ames, IA: IFT Press/Blackwell Publishing, pp. 1–14.
Patterson, M. F., Quinn, M., Simpson, R. and Gilmour, A. (1995). Sensitivity of vegeta-
tive pathogens to high hydrostatic pressure treatment in phosphate-buffered 
saline and foods. Journal of Food Protection, 58, 524–529.
Peleg, M. (1996). Evaluation of the Fermi equation as a model of dose-response 
curves. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 46, 303–306.
Peleg, M. (2000). Microbial survival curves—The reality of flat shoulders and absolute 
thermal death times. Food Research International, 33, 531–538.
Peleg, M. (2003). Calculation of the nonisothermal inactivation patterns of microbes 
having sigmoidal isothermal semilogarithmic survival curves. Critical Reviews 
in Food Science and Nutrition, 43, 645–658.
Peleg, M. (2006). Advanced Quantitative Microbiology for Food and Biosystems: Models for 
Predicting Growth and Inactivation. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Peleg, M. and Cole, M. B. (1998). Reinterpretation of microbial survival curves. Criti-
cal Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 38, 353–380.
Pilavtepe-Çelik, M., Buzrul, S., Alpas, H., Largeteau, A. and Demazeau, G. (2011). 
Multi-pulsed high hydrostatic pressure treatment for inactivation and injury of 
Escherichia coli. Journal für Verbraucherschutz und Lebensmittelsicherheit, 6, 343–348.

255
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
Polydera, A. C., Stoforos, N. G. and Taoukis, P. S. (2005). Effect of high hydrostatic 
pressure treatment on post processing antioxidant activity of fresh navel orange 
juice. Food Chemistry, 91, 495–503.
Porto-Fett, A. C. S., Call, J. E., Shoyer, B. E. et al. (2010). Evaluation of fermenta-
tion, drying, and/or high pressure processing on viability of Listeria mono-
cytogenes, Escherichia coli O157: H7, Salmonella spp., and Trichinella spiralis in 
raw pork and Genoa salami. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 140, 
61–75.
Refsgaard, H. H. F., Brockhoff, P. M. B. and Jensen, B. (2000). Free polyunsaturated 
fatty acids cause taste deterioration of salmon during frozen storage. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 48, 3280–3285.
Rivalain, N., Roquain, J., Boiron, J. M. et al. (2012). High hydrostatic pressure treat-
ment for the inactivation of Staphylococcus aureus in human blood plasma. New 
Biotechnology, 29, 409–414.
Robbins, K. L., Lakshmanan, R., Sebranek, J. G. and Jung, S. (2006). Efficiency of rose-
mary and BHA/BHT antioxidant to delay lipid and color deterioration of pres-
surized meat products. In Proceedings of Annual Meeting and Food Exposition of the 
Institute of Food Technologists, Orlando, Florida.
Rubio, B., Martínez, B., García-Cachán, M. D., Rovira, J. and Jaime, I. (2007). Effect of 
high-pressure preservation on the quality of dry cured beef “Cecina de Leon.” 
Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 8, 102–110.
Ros-Polski, V., Koutchma, T., Xue, J., Defelice, C. and Balamurugan, S. (2015). Effects 
of high hydrostatic pressure processing parameters and NaCl concentration on 
the physical properties, texture and quality of white chicken meat. Innovative 
Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 30, 31–42.
Shigehisa, T., Ohmori, T., Saito, A., Taji, S. and Hayashi, R. (1991). Effects of high 
hydrostatic pressure on characteristics of pork slurries and inactivation of 
microorganisms associated with meat and meat products. International Journal 
of Food Microbiology, 12, 207–215.
Sikes, A., Tornberg, E. and Tume, R. (2010). A proposed mechanism of tenderising 
post-rigor beef using high pressure-heat treatment. Meat Science, 84, 390–399.
Simonin, H., Duranton, F. and de Lamballerie, M. (2012). New insights into the high-
pressure processing of meat and meat products. Comprehensive Reviews in Food 
Science and Food Safety, 11, 285–306.
Simpson, R. K. and Gilmour, A. (1997). The resistance of Listeria monocytogenes to high 
hydrostatic pressure in foods. Food Microbiology, 14, 567–573.
Solomon, E. B. and Hoover, D. G. (2004). Inactivation of Campylobacter jejuni by high 
hydrostatic pressure. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 38, 505–509.
Sun, X. D. and Holley, R. A. (2010). High hydrostatic pressure effects on the texture of 
meat and meat products. Journal of Food Science, 75, R17–R21.
Tassou, C. C., Galiatsatou, P., Samaras, F. J. and Mallidis, C. G. (2007). Inactivation kinet-
ics of a piezotolerant Staphylococcus aureus isolated from high-pressure-treated 
sliced ham by high pressure in buffer and in a ham model system: Evaluation in 
selective and non-selective medium. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Tech-
nologies, 8, 478–484.
Tassou, C. C., Panagou, E. Z., Samaras, F. J., Galiatsatou, P. and Mallidis, C. G. (2008). 
Temperature-assisted high-hydrostatic-pressure inactivation of Staphylococ-
cus aureus in a ham model system: Evaluation in selective and nonselective 
medium. Jounal of Applied Microbiology, 104, 1764–1773.

256
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Teixeira, P., Kolomeytseva, M., Silva, J., Castro, S. M. A. and Saraiva, J. A. (2014). High 
hydrostatic pressure applied to ready-to-eat meat products. Frontiers in Food Sci-
ence and Technology, 1, 14–23.
Teixeira, J. S., Maier, M. B., Miller, P., Gänzle, M. G. and McMullen, L. M. (2016). 
The effect of growth temperature, process temperature, and sodium chloride on 
the high pressure inactivation of Listeria monocytogenes on ham. European Food 
Research and Technology, 242, 2021–2029.
Tintchev, F., Wackerbarth, H., Kuhlmann, U. et al. (2010). Molecular effects of high-
pressure processing on food studied by resonance Raman. Annals of New York 
Academy of Science, 1189, 34–42.
Tonello, C. (2011). Case studies on high-pressure processing of foods. In: Zhang, 
H. Q., Barbosa-Cánovas, G. V., Balasubramaniam, V. M., Dunne, C. P., Farkas, D. 
F. and Yuan, J. T. C. (eds.) Nonthermal Processing Technologies for Food. Chichester: 
Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 36–50.
Tokuşoğlu, Ö. and Vural, H. (2014). High-pressure processing for freshness, shelf-life 
quality of meat products and value-added meat products. In: Tokuşoğlu, Ö. and 
Swanson, B. G (eds.) Improving Food Quality with Novel Food Processing Technolo-
gies. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Taylor & Francis, pp. 85–110.
Tuboly, E., Lebovics, V. K., Gaál, Ö., Mészáros, L. and Farkas, J. (2003). Microbiologi-
cal and lipid oxidation studies on mechanically deboned turkey meat treated by 
high hydrostatic pressure. Journal of Food Engineering, 56, 241–244.
Tume, R. K., Sikes, A. L. and Smith, S. B. (2010). Enriching M. Sternomandibularis with 
alpha-tocopherol by dietary means does not protect against the lipid oxidation 
caused by high-pressure processing. Meat Science, 84, 66–70.
Urrutia, G., Arabas, J., Autio, K. et al. (2007). SAFE ICE: Low-temperature pressure 
processing of foods: Safety and quality aspects, process parameters and con-
sumer acceptance. Journal of Food Engineering, 83, 293–315.
USDA, Food Safety and Inspection Service. (2006). Compliance guidelines to control 
Listeria monocytogenes in post-lethality exposed RTE Meat and Poultry Prod-
ucts. Available at http://www.fsis.usda.gov/OPPDE/rdad/FRPubs/97-013F/
LM_Rule_Compliance_Guidelines_May_2006.pdf (Accessed 28 February 2016).
Viljanen, K., Kylli, P., Kivikari, R. and Heinonen, M. 2004. Inhibition of protein and 
lipid oxidation in liposomes by berry phenolics. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 52, 7419–7424.
Xiong, R., Xie, G., Edmondson, A. E. and Sheard, M. A. (1999). A mathematical model 
for bacterial inactivation. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 46, 45–55.
Yamamoto, K., Matsubara, M., Kawasaki, S., Bari, M. L. and Kawamoto, S. (2005). 
Modeling the pressure inactivation dynamics of Escherichia coli. Brazilian Journal 
of Medical and Biological Research, 38, 1253–1257.
Yuste, J., Mor-Mur, M., Capellas, M., Guamis, B. and Pla, R. (1998). Microbiological 
quality of mechanically recovered poultry meat treated with high hydrostatic 
pressure and nisin. Food Microbiology, 15, 407–414.
Yuste, J., Pla, R., Capellas, M. and Mor-Mur, M. (2002). Application of high-pressure 
processing and nisin to mechanically recovered poultry meat for microbial 
decontamination. Food Control, 13, 451–455.
Yuste, J., Pla, R., Capellas, M., Ponce, E. and Mor-Mur, M. (2000b). High-pressure pro-
cessing applied to cooked sausages: Bacterial populations during chilled stor-
age. Journal of Food Protection, 63, 1093–1099.

257
Advances in High Hydrostatic Pressure for Meat and Meat Processing
Yuste, J., Pla, R., Capellas, M., Sendra, E., Beltran, E. and Mor-Mur, M. (2001). 
Oscillatory high pressure processing applied to mechanically recovered poultry 
meat for bacterial inactivation. Journal of Food Science, 66, 482–484.
Yuste, J., Pla, R. and Mor-Mur, M. (2000a). Salmonella enteritidis and aerobic meso-
philes in inoculated poultry sausages manufactured with high-pressure pro-
cessing. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 31, 374–377.
Zapico, P., Medina, M., Gaya, P. and Nuñez M. (1998). Synergistic effect of nisin and 
the lactoperoxidase system on Listeria monocytogenes in skim milk. International 
Journal of Food Microbiology, 40, 35–42.


259
8
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to 
Improve Meat Quality and Safety
Tomás Bolumar and Stefan Toepfl
8.1 Introduction
Meat quality and safety are essential for the meat industry. For fresh meat, 
tenderness is the most important eating quality trait (Mennecke et al., 2007), 
and thus, it has great impact on its value and repeated purchase by consumers 
(Grunert et al., 2004). Consequently, during the years, many interventions have 
been developed to improve the tenderness of low-value muscles and to ensure 
the consistency of high-value muscles. Tenderness, however, is a very complex 
trait and has proved to be very difficult to guarantee in commercial scenarios. 
CONTENTS
8.1 
Introduction ................................................................................................259
8.2 
HDP or Shock Wave Technology .............................................................260
8.2.1 Fundamentals ................................................................................. 261
8.2.2 Development of Equipment..........................................................263
8.3 
HDP for Improving Meat Quality ........................................................... 267
8.3.1 HDP for Meat Tenderization ........................................................ 267
8.3.2 HDP for Modification of Meat Functionality ............................. 274
8.3.3 Molecular and Structural Effects of HDP in Meat .................... 276
8.4 
HDP for Improving Meat Safety ..............................................................281
8.5 
Cost Analysis of HDP Technology ..........................................................286
8.5.1 Packaging ........................................................................................286
8.5.2 Equipment .......................................................................................287
8.5.3 Quantifying Meat Benefits ...........................................................289
8.5.4 Overall Cost Analysis of HDP or Shock Wave Technology 
for the Meat Industry ....................................................................289
8.6 
Future Considerations ............................................................................... 291
8.7 
Conclusion .................................................................................................. 291
Acknowledgments ..............................................................................................292
References .............................................................................................................292

260
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Therefore, the development of novel interventions to improve tenderness would 
greatly contribute to boost the profitability of the meat industry (Bolumar et al., 
2013). In addition, meat safety assurance is on top of the list of industry pri-
orities. Food safety is assured in the industry by the application of strict risk 
management systems that exclude from the food production chain the presence 
of chemical, physical, or biological materials that are harmful to human health 
upon consumption. The development of alternative processing methods for 
microbial inactivation provides the industry with tools to guarantee food safety 
and can contribute to process optimization and cost reductions.
In recent years, the use of novel food processing technologies, beyond the use 
of heat treatments, such as high-pressure processing (HPP), pulsed electric fields, 
and high-power ultrasounds, has emerged due in part to the considerable effort 
undertaken by the scientific community in the last 20 years. This has led to the 
development and scale up of different technologies which are nowadays available 
for testing in different fields and for specific applications regarding food qual-
ity and safety (Barbosa-Canovas et al., 2004; Doona et al., 2010). Hydrodynamic 
pressure processing (HDP) is one of these novel processing technologies that 
emerged on scientific ground and is now developing for transfer to the industry. 
Meat tenderization and microbial decontamination using HDP are promising 
areas to deliver alternative methods to comply with the demands of the future 
meat industry for high-quality and safe meat (Bolumar et al., 2013).
This chapter begins by describing the fundamental principles to generate 
a shock wave and presents this together with the engineering development 
of shock wave equipment. Then, the effects of HDP on meat quality traits 
such as tenderness and meat functional properties are presented. Following 
on, the effects of HDP on muscle micro- and ultrastructure are described to 
shed light on the molecular mechanisms responsible for the observed effects. 
Later, the potential use of HDP for microbial inactivation is also described 
and discussed. Throughout the chapter, the HDP method for meat tenderiza-
tion and microbial inactivation is compared with current and novel practices 
and methods applied with the same purpose in order to provide the reader 
and the industry with alternatives and set out the specific context for its use. 
Finally, a cost–benefit analysis of the technology including processing and 
packaging costs in relation to benefits on meat quality is outlined as well as 
directions on how to improve the technology.
8.2 HDP or Shock Wave Technology
HDP differs from HPP.  HPP is a processing method in which a product is 
placed within a vessel filled with a fluid, normally water, and the pressure is 
transmitted to the product by compressing the surrounding liquid with pumps. 
In HPP, pressure is applied to the product in a static way as such pressure is 
transmitted instantaneously and uniformly across the entire product, while in 
HDP, the pressure is applied in a dynamic way as pressure pulses. The fact is that 

261
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
the application of high pressure to food systems offers possibilities that cannot 
be achieved by common processing techniques, and thus, it has a high potential 
for the development of novel and future food applications. Indeed, HPP is the 
most successful nonthermal technology applied in the food industry so far with 
more than 200 units operating worldwide (Bolumar et al., 2015). Commercial 
HPP equipment operates in the pressure range up to 600 MPa. Today, the ben-
efits of HPP on microbial inactivation are well established and HPP-treated food 
products such as juices, dairy products, sauces, or meat products can be found 
in the market (Hendrickx and Knorr, 2002). Furthermore, HPP can also be used 
as a method to modify food structures with positive effects if applied under the 
right conditions. More information on the use of HPP for structure modifica-
tion is reviewed in the book chapter by Bolumar et al. (2016). In this chapter, 
HDP is presented and described. Overall, HDP, like HPP, can be used for struc-
ture modification and microbial inactivation although the way that pressure is 
applied to the system is substantially different as described above.
8.2.1 Fundamentals
HDP or shock wave is the application of high-pressure waves up to 1 GPa in 
fractions of milliseconds. A shock wave is instantaneously generated and is 
characterized by the intensity achieved (pressure level) and its propagation 
along the time course (rise time). The shock wave propagates across the sur-
rounding medium with high energy–momentum at speeds higher than the 
speed of sound. It travels rapidly through the fluids (water) and any objects 
which are an acoustical match with water (Mayer et al., 2009; Yang, 2011). 
Since meat is composed of 75% water the pressure wave crosses the meat and 
at points where acoustic impedances differ, an energy–momentum transfer 
occurs, which, in turn, creates mechanical stress that tears the muscle struc-
ture. This produces what could be termed a “rupture effect,” and as a result, 
the meat instantaneously softens; an accelerated aging of the meat has also 
been observed over time (Bolumar et al., 2013).
Shock waves are mechanical pressure pulses in fluids. The generation of 
a shock wave by electrical discharge occurs by converting electrical energy 
into mechanical energy under water. A shock wave can be generated by 
piezoelectric, electromagnetic, electrothermal, or electrodetonative methods 
(Mayer et al., 2009; Yang, 2011). The highest energy conversion rate can be 
accomplished by electrothermal and electro-detonative procedures and these 
methods have been the most applied in food processing research so far due to 
the higher energy of these shock waves. When the electro-detonative process 
takes place in a tensioned wired electrode, chemical energy is released by the 
evaporation and explosion. The explosive expansion generates a shock wave. 
The range of penetration depth of a shock wave is affected by the propaga-
tion loss and the absorption, reflection, and refraction in and on the different 
materials of the treatment area and surroundings. Due to the propagation loss 
as a consequence of the increase of the shock wave front, the power density at 

262
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
a point from the origin of the shock wave decreases with the square of the dis-
tance. Therefore to increase the energy density in medical devices, focusing 
of the shock wave is applied which leads to a locally limited workspace. To 
increase the range of energy release, particularly when used for the treatment 
of foods, it is essential to obtain sufficient processing volumes with homog-
enous distribution of treatment intensity. Simultaneously, the focusing of the 
shock wave energy to the material to be treated permits the reduction of the 
mechanical load applied to the treatment area.
As previously mentioned, the shock waves commonly used in food process-
ing so far can be generated by a detonation of an explosive or by an electrical 
discharge of a high voltage between two electrodes under water. The detona-
tion of an explosive and the subsequent generation of a dynamic pressure wave 
is obvious. But in the case of an electrical discharge, it is noteworthy to briefly 
describe the underliying mechanism. The application of high energy by use of a 
capacitor discharge underwater between two electrodes leads to the formation 
of a plasma channel wherein the medium is ionized. The electric breakdown of 
liquids is initiated by the application of the high electric field on the electrode 
followed by rapid propagation and branching of plasma channels (Locke et al., 
2006). The operational principle of shock wave equipment based on electrical 
discharge is outlined in Figure 8.1. A basic shock wave system consists of a high-
voltage power supply, a capacitor bank, and a high-voltage/current switch to dis-
charge the stored electric energy across the electrodes. By variations of charging 
voltage and capacity, the energy per pulse can be varied. The treatment intensity 
can be further adjusted with the number of pulses applied to the sample.
So far, HDP has mainly been applied for meat tenderization (Solomon et al., 
1997, 2006; Claus et al., 2001b; Claus, 2002; Bolumar et al., 2013). HDP can be 
also applied to foodstuffs for different purposes like the opening of oysters 
Capacitor
bank
Power supply
Underwater
discharge
Exploding
wire
Switch
FIGURE 8.1
Operation principle of electrohydraulic shock wave equipment. (Reprinted from Meat Science, 
92, Bajovic et al., Quality considerations with high pressure processing of fresh and value 
added meat products, 280–289. Copyright 2012, with permission from Elsevier.)

263
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
(Paparella and Allen, 1970), the improvement of the extraction of saponin 
from tomato (Manabe et al., 2011), and the production of functional rice flour 
(Miyafuji et al., 2011; Shimojima et al., 2011). In general, shock wave tech-
nology as a method for structure modification can assist in extraction pro-
cesses and waste treatment as well as cleaning and fragmentation processes 
of plant materials. Some work has also been done in the area of microbial 
inactivation as later is examined for the case of meat (Section 8.3).
8.2.2 Development of Equipment
A historical perspective of the evolution of HDP or shock wave technology 
is presented in Figure 8.2 that highlights chronologically the major events on 
the evolution of the engineering development of HDP technology from the 
1970s until now. The development of commercial shock wave equipment for 
meat tenderization is described in the following paragraphs.
The very first rudimentary systems of the use of shock waves or HDP as a 
method for food structure modification or “food tenderizer” were conceived 
early in the 1950s (Simjian, 1957) (Figure 8.2). The use of HDP as an alterna-
tive method for “food tenderization” has been investigated since the 1970s 
(Godfrey, 1970), although the first semi-industrial shock wave units were not 
developed until the 1990s in the United States and those were based on the 
detonation of explosives (Long, 1993, 1994; Solomon et al., 1997; Figure 8.2). It 
was not until then that the development of the so-called “Hydrodyne Process” 
and related equipment allowed an extensive and thorough investigation, 
mostly conducted by Professor Morse Solomon from the Food Technology 
and Safety Laboratory (Beltsville, MD) and partners (Figure 8.2). Those works 
provided clear evidence of muscle tenderization under different conditions 
and shed valuable information for future experiments and equipment design 
(Solomon et al., 2006). However, the use of explosives in the food industry 
raised different safety concerns for operators and the potential contamination 
of the meat itself with chemical residues from the explosion, and therefore, its 
transfer to the industry was never accomplished.
Vibrations and
rudimentary
detonation of
explosives systems.
1950–1970
1993–1994
2008–2011
2012–2014
2000
Hydrodyne 
process.
Use of explosives.
HE
Underwater 
electrical
discharge. 
Tender Class System.
Underwater electrical
discharge with wire
mediated explosion.
Batch-pilot equipment.
Underwater 
electrical discharge. 
Continuous pilot
equipment.
FIGURE 8.2
Historical perspective of shock wave technology for meat tenderization.

264
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
During the last decade, the second generation of HDP equipment based 
on electrical discharges underwater rather than the detonation of explo-
sives was conceived (Long, 2000) (Figures 8.1 and 8.2). The use of electri-
cal discharges underwater avoids the problems associated with the use of 
explosives and allows a continuous treatment process as there is no longer 
the need for loading/unloading of explosives between shock waves. These 
systems are favorable as they make the application more feasible in terms of 
automation and reduction in processing time, and they facilitate the modula-
tion of the shock wave intensity by delivery of gradual electrical intensities 
and number of pulses per treatment. This shock wave technology generated 
by electrical discharges underwater led to an attempt at a commercial HDP 
system intended for meat tenderization, the Tender Class System (TCS), by 
the American company Hydrodyne Incorporated. The TenderClass (TDC) is 
shown in Figure 8.3. The TDC system has not been fully applied in the meat 
industry to the best of our knowledge.
FIGURE 8.3
Photo of the Tender Class System (TCS) unit from Hydrodyne Inc. (Courtesy of Bill McKenna, 
Hydrodyne Inc. CEO and Professor Jim Claus, University of Wisconsin-Madison).

265
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
Finally, the construction firstly of a pilot-batch prototype, and then a con-
tinuous semi-industrial-scale shock wave prototype for the continuous treat-
ment of meat was undertaken at the German Institute of Food Technologies 
(DIL) (Figures 8.2, 8.4, and 8.5). During the period from 2008 to 2011 and 
within a German-funded research project, a pilot-batch prototype for the 
generation of shock waves intended for meat tenderization by electro-deto-
native and electrohydraulic underwater discharges was designed and built 
at the DIL (Heinz et al., 2011). The pilot-batch prototype relied on underwa-
ter discharges of electric energy between two electrodes mediated by metal 
wires (aluminum and copper). A prototype was developed with an average 
power output of 2 kV and a peak power of 40 kV with a vessel volume of 50 L 
(Figure 8.4). An effective energy conversion from electrical to mechanical 
energy was achieved and demonstrated to be effective to tenderize meat. 
This pilot-batch unit was successfully used to decrease the maturation time 
of beef cuts from 14 to 7 days (Toepfl and Heinz, 2009).
At a later stage, the development of an upgraded industrial prototype for 
a continuous shock wave treatment of meat was accomplished within the 
European-funded project, Shockmeat (http://www.shockmeat.eu/) (Toepfl 
et al., 2013). A drawing scheme of the main parts of the prototype is shown 
in Figures 8.5 and 8.6. The shock wave prototype has a conveyor belt for the 
transport of the meat to the treatment area where an electrically generated 
FIGURE 8.4
Shock wave prototype intended for meat tenderization developed within a German-funded 
research project, AiF-15884 N (2008–2011).

266
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Meat input
Meat output
Pulse generator
High voltage switch
Capacitors
Conveyor belt
Treatment area
y x
z
Safety door
Water basin
FIGURE 8.5
Main parts of the shock wave prototype intended for meat tenderization developed within 
the European-funded research project, ShockMeat (2012–2013). (Reprinted from Meat 
Science, 95, Bolumar et al., New developments in shockwave technology intended for meat 
tenderization: Opportunities and challenges, 931–939. Copyright 2013, with permission 
from Elsevier.)
FIGURE 8.6
Photo of the shock wave prototype intended for meat tenderization developed within the 
European-funded research project, ShockMeat (2012–2013).

267
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
shock wave is applied to the meat. Energy storage by the capacitors, cur-
rent, and voltage applied determine the shock wave intensity and this is 
controlled by an automatic programmable interface. The number of pulses 
applied in the treatment can be set up taking into account the belt speed and 
the number of pulses applied per traveled distance. These parameters allow 
for an adjustable and targeted treatment of shock wave intensity and num-
ber of pulses. This shock wave prototype showed promising effects on meat 
tenderization (10%–25% reduction of Warner–Bratzler shear force [WBSF] in 
different muscles of beef and pork). However, during the project execution, 
it was also pointed out that in order to benefit from the application of the 
HPD technology in an industrial environment some improvements were 
required. These included the development of a stronger and highly resis-
tant packaging material, better interaction between the dynamic forces of 
the shock wave and the packaging, and a further characterization of the pro-
cessing settings required for a particular meat (i.e., specific meat primal cut 
and type of animal) (Bolumar et al., 2013).
Recently, the use of high-efficiency compact sparkers, based on the 
sparker source system by Schaefer (1998), was demonstrated on a labora-
tory scale, with favorable changes in tenderness (10%–57% reduction of the 
shear force) of steaks (2.5 cm thick) and intact beef loins (Bowker et al., 2011) 
being achieved. Sparkers are electrically driven acoustic sources that pro-
duce high-pressure shock waves, similar to explosives. This system is essen-
tially equivalent to the electrohydraulic system described (Figure 8.5) but on 
a miniaturized scale. While this technique did not damage the packaging 
during HDP (major drawback of the larger unit, Figure 8.5), the scale-up to 
industrial standard for this miniaturized HDP unit would be very difficult 
given the small treatment area and the long processing times required, and 
as such, it is a laboratory-scale technology at this time.
8.3 HDP for Improving Meat Quality
8.3.1 HDP for Meat Tenderization
Meat tenderness (toughness or resistance to cut) has long been recognized 
as the most important eating quality trait of fresh meats (Mennecke et al., 
2007; Grunert et al., 2004). Basically, meat tenderness depends on three 
main components: (1) degree of contraction of the muscle sarcomere (sar-
comere length), (2) extent of integrity/degradation of structural myofibril-
lar proteins (proteolysis), and (3) connective tissue content/composition 
(“background toughness”) (Koohmaraie et al., 2002; Sentandreu et al., 2002). 
Accordingly, different intrinsic tenderness can be listed. These include the 
extent to which muscle is contracted when it sets into rigor mortis, the extent 

268
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
to which certain proteins are broken down postmortem through the action 
of proteolytic enzymes such as calpains and cathepsins, the ultimate pH, the 
amount of connective tissue and the extent of cross-linking between peptide 
chains within collagen molecules, and concentration of intramuscular fat 
(marbling) in muscle (Purchas, 2004). These determinants are dependent on 
particular phenotypes and environmental effects (Koohmaraie et al., 2002; 
Anderson et al., 2012). The relative contribution of each determinant to the 
ultimate tenderness varies with genetic-related factors such as muscle type 
and breed, production factors such as grain/pasture feeding and age, pre-
slaughter factors such as glycolytic potential, handling, temperament, and 
stress, and early postmortem events such as pH and temperature of the car-
cass’ muscles, as well as the duration and temperature at which the product 
is stored postmortem. Being such a complex quality trait, it is not surprising 
that tenderness is one of the most difficult meat quality traits to assure for 
the industry. But consumers are willing to pay more for guaranteed tender 
meat (Miller et al., 2001).
To improve meat tenderness, different interventions aiming to minimize 
muscle fiber shortening at the rigor onset and to increase the degree of prote-
olysis (aging) can be employed. Unfortunately, it is not an easy task to imple-
ment them in practice due to the high differences in cattle phenotype which 
impact on metabolic rates and muscle structure together with unpredictable 
environmental circumstances, such as weather conditions and animal stress, 
all impacting meat quality and the further ability for the meat to mature. In 
addition, aging meat involves processing costs in terms of time, room, and 
energy (14–21 days in cold storage) and certain cuts do not tenderize well. 
Alternatively, the “background toughness” associated with collagen could 
be reduced to improve tenderness. However, there are currently very few 
treatments that enable the contribution of connective tissue to tenderness to 
be manipulated (Purslow, 2005, 2014). Cooking method and consumer expec-
tations also influence meat tenderness and its perception and therefore must 
be considered.
Within the industrial practices of meat processing, tenderization interven-
tions can be classified as biological, chemical, and mechanical.
Biological interventions for meat tenderization are those that rely on muscle 
biochemistry, and thus, attempt to modulate the molecular events governing 
the conversion of muscle to meat. Such interventions impose certain condi-
tions that affect the temperature and pH of the carcass muscles, the condi-
tions at the onset of rigor mortis, and further reactions such as proteolysis by 
endogenous enzymes. The temperature at which the carcass reaches rigor 
and the actuation of endogenous proteolytic enzymes (ratio enzyme activity 
and their inhibitors) are key determinants for the level of sarcomere short-
ening and the progression of meat aging, respectively, both having a major 
impact on meat tenderness. Biological interventions include methods such 
as optimization of carcass chilling, use of electrical stimulation, prerigor 
muscle stretching, and traditional aging. Further, detailed information on 

269
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
this area can be obtained by consulting the following references: Troy (1999), 
Thompson (2002), Thompson et al. (2006), Bowker et al. (2010a), and Bolumar 
et al. (2013).
Chemical interventions for meat tenderization include the addition of chemi-
cal compounds that have different effects on muscle structure as well as of 
exogenous enzymes that contribute to the proteolysis of muscle proteins. 
Chemical compounds such as salts, organic acids, and phosphates exert 
positive effects on meat tenderness when incorporated into meats. Hence, 
the incorporation of brines with these compounds through immersion, injec-
tion, and marination is a well-established method to tenderize meat (Berge 
et al., 2001). However, there is usually a significant price reduction in com-
parison to its counterpart, “fresh steaks.” The addition of enzymes is another 
possibility to increase tenderness but the inactivation of the enzyme is prob-
lematic as it can render an over-tenderized meat with the development of 
off-flavors (Sullivan and Calkins, 2010).
Mechanical interventions for meat tenderization disrupt muscle structure with 
mechanical forces. The simplest mechanical tenderization method is chop-
ping or mincing of meat. However, this is accompanied with a significant 
reduction in price. Another possibility is to use blade or needle tenderiza-
tion of cuts. This tenderization method is used for improving tenderness 
of low-value tough meat cuts. This affects the appearance of the steaks, and 
can result in potential microbial cross-contamination and color changes 
in the penetration area. “High pressure processing” has also been investi-
gated as a method for tenderness improvement. The effect of HPP is due to 
the disruptive nature induced by pressure that causes a dissociation of the 
myofibrillar proteins (Sun and Holley, 2010). Depending on the pressure, the 
application of HPP to prerigor meat inhibits the metabolism and the conver-
sion of muscle to meat resulting in higher pH and higher tenderness score 
(Souza et al., 2011). With postrigor meat, the tenderizing effect of HPP is only 
observed if pressure is combined with heat (~60°C) (Sikes et al., 2010; Sikes 
and Tume, 2014), thought to result from the release of cathepsins from dis-
rupted lysosomes.
HDP is another postmortem mechanical intervention for meat tender-
ization. In general, tenderness improvement ranging from 10% to 70% in 
different species such as beef, pork, lamb, turkey, and chicken has been doc-
umented after application of HDP treatment. Table 8.1 provides an extensive 
summary of the effects of HDP or shock wave treatment on meat tenderness 
using different prototypes, treatment intensities, animal species, and muscles 
during the last 20 years. Red meats, especially beef, have the biggest prob-
lems with tenderness. The HDP treatment can be used to reduce tenderness 
variation within the same muscle as observed along the length of beef strip 
loins (Spanier et al., 2000), and therefore, HDP can be used to ensure consis-
tency in tenderness. The variation in tenderness improvements with regard 
to HDP treatment is due to a myriad of factors such as the initial tenderness 
of the meat, treatment of fresh or frozen/thawed meat, postmortem time of 

270
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 8.1
Effect of Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing (HDP) on Meat Tenderness
Species
Primal Cut
Process Conditions
Tenderness 
Improvement (%)a
Reference
Beef
Longissimus
Explosives (50, 75, and 100 g), container (208 L), diameter (51 
cm), steel plate (2 cm thick), distance (30.5 cm), 60–70 MPa
68
Solomon et al. (1997)
Semimembranous
59
Biceps femoris
52
Semitendinosus
55
Longissimus
Explosives (100 g), same conditions as experiment above 
(Solomon et al., 1997)
37
Zuckerman and Solomon (1998)
Strip loin
Explosives (100 g), same conditions as experiment above 
(Solomon et al., 1997)
21–40
Spanier et al. (2000)
Strip loin
Explosives (100 g), same conditions as experiment above 
(Solomon et al., 1997)
47
Spanier and Romanowski (2000)
Top rounds
Electrical discharge. Energy setting (3–2), pulses (1–2)
20–28
Claus (2002)
Biceps femoris
Explosives (105, 200, and 305 g), distance (26.7 cm), pressure 
(83, 104, and 124 MPa)
10–24
Schilling et al. (2002)
Rib eye
Explosives (100 g), distance (31 cm)
29
Solomon et al. (2008)
Strip loin
Explosives (100 g), distance (31 cm)
23
Bowker et al. (2008b)
Loin
Electrical discharge. Use of a high-efficiency sparker. Distance 
(3.75–7.5 cm), pulses (5, 10, 40, 80), pressure (6–7 MPa)
20–30
Bowker et al. (2011)
Silverside
Electrical discharge. Semi-industrial batch prototype 
manufactured at the German Institute of Food Technologies. 
Cylindrical steel vessel (1 m of diameter), distance (20 cm), 
pulses (5, for the silverside, and 1, for the loin)
25
Bolumar et al. (2013)
Loin (Longissimus 
lumborum)
18
Loin (L. lumborum) Electrical discharge. Semi-industrial batch prototype 
manufactured at the German Institute of Food Technologies. 
Cylindrical steel vessel (1 m of diameter), distance (20 cm), 
pulses (5, for the silverside, and 1, for the loin)
18
Bolumar et al. (2014)
(Continued)

271
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
TABLE 8.1 (Continued)
Effect of Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing (HDP) on Meat Tenderness
Species
Primal Cut
Process Conditions
Tenderness 
Improvement (%)a
Reference
Pork
Loin
Explosives (150 g), distance (36.0 cm), pressure (68.9 MPa)
17
Moeller et al. (1999)
Loin
Electrical discharge. Tender Class System. Energy setting (2) 
and pulses (2)
29
Claus (2002)
Topside
Electrical discharge. Cylindrical steel vessel (1 m of diameter), 
distance (20 cm), pulses (2, for the topside, and 2, for the 
silverside)
-1
Bolumar et al. (2013)
Silverside
5
Lamb
Longissimus
Explosives (100 g), same conditions as experiment above 
(Solomon et al., 1997)
33–67
Solomon et al. (1998)
Semitendinosus
no response
Turkey
Breast
Explosives (100 g), container (98 L), diameter (40 cm), steel 
plate (1.3 cm thick), distance (31.0 cm)
13
Bowker et al. (2010a)
Breast
Electrical discharge. Hydrodyne pilot plant. Energy setting 
(72%), pulses (2)
12
Claus et al. (2001a)
Chicken
Breast
Explosives (200 g at 20 cm, 350 g at 23 cm, 275 g at 20 cm, and 
350 at 20 cm)
19–28
Meek et al. (2000)
Breast
Explosives (40 g), Hydrodyne research prototype, stainless steel 
cylinder (20.3 × 48 cm)
42
Claus et al. (2001b)
Breast
Electrical discharge. Hydrodyne pilot plant. Energy setting 
(45%), pulses (2)
22
Claus et al. (2001a)
a Reduction of Warner–Bratzler shear force (WBSF) by HDP or shock wave treatment compared to control untreated.
HDP, hydrodynamic pressure processing.

272
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
application (pre- or postrigor), storage duration, and specific conditions of 
HDP treatment (e.g., configuration of the shock wave container, quantity, 
placement and shape of the explosives, and position and distance from the 
point of explosion/sparking) (Claus et al., 2001a,b; Solomon et al., 2004, 2006, 
2008, 2011). Generally, the tougher the meat the easier to gain a reduction 
in cutting force. Also, there are different effects if the meat is treated fresh 
or frozen. Treatment of fresh meat with HDP treatment gave better results 
than did frozen meat (Solomon et al., 1997). Furthermore, it was reported 
that if fresh and frozen meats were treated by HDP, freezing accounted 
for a 14% reduction of WBSF whereas treatment of fresh meat followed by 
freezing resulted in a 30% reduction of WBSF (Solomon et al., 2008). Most of 
the data regarding tenderness improvements in meat have been conducted 
using different systems/units based on explosives though some experiments 
have also been conducted using electrical discharges underwater. HDP sys-
tems based on electrical discharges, such as the TDC, have been reported 
to improve tenderness in beef loin and turkey and chicken breasts (Table 
8.1). More recently, HDP treatment using a batch-pilot prototype based on 
electrical discharge underwater manufactured at the DIL was tested on beef 
silverside. The silverside was treated as an intact primal cut whereas, for the 
loin, the HDP treatment was applied on steaks 26 mm thick. The WBSF was 
measured at seven days of storage (simulating commercial life span of the 
meat from the processor to the supermarket and consumer); an 18% and 25% 
WBSF reduction was reported, respectively (Bolumar et al., 2013). The same 
semi-industrial batch prototype was used on steaks of beef loin (Longissimus 
lumbarum) of 26 mm thickness. The WBSF was reduced by 18% in this case 
(Bolumar et al., 2014).
As well as beef, other species have been subjected to HDP treatments. In 
pork, despite the effect of HDP treatment on WBSF (17% WBSF reduction), 
no effect was detected by sensory analysis. Color, drip loss, and microbial 
counts were not affected in this study (Moeller et al., 1999). Claus (2002) and 
Bolumar et al. (2013) reported either improved tenderness or minor or no 
effect, respectively, after HDP treatment of pork meat (Table 8.1). Generally, 
pork is usually tender per se and as such it is more difficult to make it more 
tender. Lamb has also been the object of study (Table 8.1). Especially the 
Callipyge lamb, which has tougher meat than normal lambs, has been sub-
jected to HDP treatment. A 33%–67% reduction in WBSF for the loin and no 
response for the eye of round was reported for callipyge lamb meat (Solomon 
et al., 1998). Turkey breast has been reported to show improved tenderness 
following HDP treatment (13% and 12% reduction of WBSF) (Bowker et al., 
2010a; Claus et al., 2001a). However, cooking loss was higher in HDP-treated 
turkey breast though HDP facilitated early deboning and provided tender-
ness-enhanced fillets (Claus et al., 2001a). Chicken breast has also been eval-
uated. HDP treatment reduced WBSF by 20%–40% in different studies (Meek 
et al., 2000; Claus et al., 2001a,b). Regarding the time of postmortem applica-
tion, a greater effect was observed if HDP treatment was applied postrigor 

273
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
rather than prerigor. In this sense, HDP treatment of chicken breasts, when 
applied at 77 minutes postmortem, did not tenderize the meat as did when 
treatment was applied at 24 hours postmortem (Claus et al., 2001b). In these 
studies, cooking loss and color were not affected (Claus et al., 2001a,b). The 
postrigor application is consistent with the disruption of the meat structure 
as prerigor meat is more flexible and somehow malleable.
During the European-funded project “ShockMeat,” a comparison of 
HDP, or shock wave technology, with other tenderization methods such as 
low-temperature long-time treatment (LTLT) and brine injection was car-
ried out. The meat treated with the different tenderization methods was 
instrumentally and sensory analyzed. The tenderness scores assessed 
by sensory analysis are shown in Figure 8.7. The HDP effect was evalu-
ated in relation to eating quality and improved tenderness. The overall 
variation between the four treatments could be ascribed to differences 
in textural properties that clearly differentiated LTLT treatment (63°C for 
15 hours) from the other tenderizing technologies (p < .001) (tenderness 
score of 8.3, Figure 8.7). The blade injection with brine to 10% (w/w) and 
to a final concentration of salt in the product of 0.6% also resulted in a 
significant improvement in the sensorial tenderness (tenderness score of 
7.0, Figure 8.7). The shock wave treatment resulted in a tenderness score 
of 5.6, 0.6 units higher than the control untreated. Even though this dif-
ference obtained using the HDP method seems minimal there is room 
for more improvements by the efficient interaction between the HDP and 
the meat and the power of the shock wave in different ways. The use of 
LTLT treatment is an effective method to produce tender and juicy meat, 
8.3
7.0
5.6
5.0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
LTLT
Multistik
SW
REF
Sensory tenderness score (1–15)
Tenderization treatment
FIGURE 8.7
Sensory tenderness score of beef eye of round after application of different tenderization 
interventions. LTLT, low-temperature long-time treatment (63°C for 15 hours); Multistik, blade 
injection of brine (10% w/w, 0.6% salt); SW, shock wave (1 shot, 40 kV); and REF, reference 
or control (no treatment). Work performed during the European-funded research project, 
ShockMeat (2012–2013).

274
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
but in this treatment the meat is cooked, and so the meat cannot be con-
sidered “fresh meat” and there would be an associated price reduction. 
LTLT could be a good technology for ready-to-eat dishes containing meat. 
In addition, LTLT processing takes 15–20 hours whereas the shock wave 
treatment is done in seconds. The brine injection is a good method for ten-
derizing meats and is being widely used in some countries, for instance, 
for the tenderization of chicken breast with a concomitant enhancement 
in juiciness. The main problem with the blade injection of whole muscles 
is the possibility of microbial cross-contamination of the center of the cut, 
and consequently, the possibility of growth of spoilage and pathogenic 
bacteria impairing shelf life and in the worst scenario leading to food poi-
soning. Again the injected meat product could not be considered “fresh 
meat” and this always brings a significant price reduction of the meat cut. 
In contrast, HDP does not affect the visual appearance of the meat, and 
therefore, can be commercialized as “fresh meat” allowing meat proces-
sors to obtain the highest prices of the market.
8.3.2 HDP for Modification of Meat Functionality
HDP can change meat structure thereby impacting the functionality of the 
system. HDP, applied as pressure pulses, can result in pressure-induced struc-
tural modifications. These structural modifications are based on the effect of 
high pressure on cell membranes and the biopolymers present in the system 
such as proteins. In meat, muscle proteins could be modified whereby the 
functionality of the proteins is impacted. These modifications could lead to 
diverse food applications such as the creation of novel textures and improve-
ment of water binding. The modification of food structure using HPP has 
been recently reviewed (Bolumar et al., 2016). As explained in Section 8.2, 
HDP is a dynamic application of pressure in comparison to a static applica-
tion in HPP. Nevertheless, similar effects could be expected though the effect 
of HDP in the modification of the functionality has been scarcely investi-
gated. The structural changes in foods caused by HPP have been investi-
gated mostly during the last decade (Bolumar et al., 2016). Several examples 
are described using HPP for structural modification, for instance, an HPP 
treatment of meat batters that allows a salt reduction in meat products since 
HP-induced changes can result in meat batters requiring less salt to create a 
stable physical structure. HP treatment affects the disruption of noncovalent 
interactions (hydrophobic and electrostatic) followed by a rearrangement of 
intra- and intermolecular interactions at the interfaces of proteins leading to 
different degrees of denaturation, disassociation, aggregation, and gelation. 
HP induces unfolding of proteins and can modify the quaternary and ter-
tiary structure of proteins, whereby protein functionality could be affected. 
In the literature, few papers deal with the mechanisms involved in the func-
tionality changes occurring in meat and the majority of them use high pres-
sure (HPP). Regarding water-binding capacity, both improvements and no 

275
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
changes have been reported. This suggests that there is much more work 
to be done to document how HDP or shock wave might be used to improve 
the yield of processed meats. There seem to be some unraveled interactions 
between meat, the formulation, and processing that still needs to be sorted. 
Chan et al. (2011) showed that pressures of 50–100 MPa increased the water-
binding capacity of low pH meat (pale, soft, and exudative [PSE] like) and 
the pressure treatment gave a better gel network formation. Furthermore, 
they showed that protein solubility was increased in both low and normal 
pH meat. The authors suggested that HPP (50–100 MPa) could be used as an 
alternative technology to reduce salt and improve water retention in meat 
products. Flynn et al. (2014) found that HPP (150 MPa) increased emulsion 
stability and reduced cooking loss when salt was reduced in breakfast sau-
sages. At 1.5% NaCl, the cooking loss was reduced from 17.6% (0 MPa) to 
16.2% (150 MPa). HP-induced benefits on the structure of meat products are 
due to additional swelling and solubilization of muscle myofibrillar proteins. 
The modification of protein structure, and so functionality, using HDP has 
been very scarcely investigated. Increased water retention using HDP treat-
ment has been described in some cases. The U.S. patent 7,485,331 states that 
the Hydrodyne System improved water binding of sirloin during marination 
(Long, 2009). The uptake of water during marinating of Hydrodyne-treated 
sirloin increased from 10% to 14%. In another study, HDP treatment enhanced 
brine absorption, increased processing yield, and improved texture of mari-
nated turkey breasts without impacting color (L*, a*, and b*) and expressible 
moisture (Bowker et al., 2010a). Therefore, HDP treatment could be used as 
a pretreatment prior to marination or injection to increase yield. Marinated 
samples (15% and 30% brine levels) had lower (p < .001) WBSF values and 
lower (p < .05) hardness, cohesiveness, and chewiness values compared with 
nonmarinated samples (Bowker et al., 2010a). In another study, Bowker et al. 
(2010b) reported on the influence of HDP and aging on the processing charac-
teristics and final meat quality of moisture-enhanced pork loins. WBSF and 
expressible moisture decreased (p < .0001) with aging from 1 to 8 days, but 
were not significantly affected by HDP treatment. Again, HDP-treated loins 
had greater (p < .05) brine retention after overnight equilibration and thus 
a higher (p < .05) processing yield than controls. In addition, HDP samples 
had lower drip loss values than controls. HDP treatment demonstrated the 
potential to improve the texture and WHC of moisture-enhanced pork loins 
with minimal impact on the visual appearance of the final product (Bowker 
et al., 2010b). In contrast, Schillinger et al. (2002) treated beef biceps femoris 
with hydrodynamic shock waves before producing frankfurters (cooked 
to internal temperature of 71°C). They found that the HDP treatment did 
not affect the myofibrillar or sarcoplasmic protein solubility, cooking yield, 
color, textural properties, or gel strength. In this study, it was concluded that 
beef trims obtained from HDP-treated meat could be used interchangeably 
with normal beef trims in the production of frankfurters. Therefore, the use 
of HDP treatment did not provide any advantage in comparison with no 

276
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
pretreatment of the raw meat. It is noteworthy to consider that frankfurters 
are made out of minced meat of very small particle size, in contrast to mari-
nation of whole muscles, which favors protein accessibility, interactions, and 
functionality. However, only a few studies have been done in this area so far, 
and thus, more research is needed to better understand the potential of HDP 
treatment for modification of protein functionality. HDP could be a techno-
logical processing aid in the production of meat products, whole muscles, 
or meat emulsions with reduced salt and phosphate content and enhanced 
yields and texture.
8.3.3 Molecular and Structural Effects of HDP in Meat
The tenderization effect of HDP has been ascribed to two main mechanisms: 
(1) physical disruption of muscle structures and (2) enhanced proteolysis 
of structural muscle proteins. Both effects have been reported by the use 
of HDP or shock wave (Bolumar et al., 2013). A shock wave travels rapidly 
through the water and any object which is an acoustical match with water. 
At points where acoustic impedances differ stress is created, which in turn 
tears muscle structure. This produces what could be called a “rupture effect” 
and as a consequence, meat tenderization is favored. Furthermore, the high 
pressure–momentum reached during HDP treatment could increase cathep-
sin activity due to their release from lysosomes analogously as has been 
described after HPP (Ohmori et al., 1992; Homma et al., 1994; Grossi et al., 
2012). Muscle cathepsin and peptidase (amino- and dipeptidyl-) activities 
from control and shock wave-treated beef were not different (Bolumar et al., 
2014). This fact can confirm that enzyme activity per se is not enhanced but it 
cannot dismiss the possibility that shock wave facilitates the contact between 
the structural muscle proteins and the endogenous proteolytic enzymes, 
which could potentially lead to an accelerated maturation. In the same study, 
Bolumar et al. (2014) analyzed the protein pattern of sarcoplasmic and myo-
fibrillar proteins at one and seven days of chilling storage by using sodium 
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). No differ-
ences in the protein bands between control and HDP-treated meat for sar-
coplasmic and myofibrillar proteins at day 1 or at day 7 could be observed 
(Figure 8.8). In agreement with our results, other authors did not observe 
major changes in sarcoplasmic and myofibrillar protein patterns visualized 
by SDS-PAGE analysis (Bowker et al., 2008a,b). Bowker et al. (2008b) reported 
some minor changes in sarcoplasmic proteins bands corresponding to 143, 
65, 44, 36, and 19 kDa. In this study, changes in sarcoplasmic protein compo-
sition were significantly correlated to WBSF (r = −0.58 to 0.45). Sarcoplasmic 
protein solubility decreased with both HDP (p < .05) and aging (p < .0001). 
Changes in solubility were significantly correlated to SDS-PAGE band inten-
sities (r = −0.53 to 0.60). Data suggested that HDP and aging cause changes to 
sarcoplasmic proteins, which may be an indicator of proteolysis and tender-
ization. In another study, Bowker et al. (2008a) reported that HDP treatment 

277
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
influenced troponin T (TnT) degradation as confirmed by using a more sen-
sitive technique than the SDS-PAGE such as Western Blot. They reported that 
shock wave in combination with aging decreased the intensity of the TnT 
band and enhanced the accumulation of the 30-kD fragment which arose 
from the TnT degradation, suggesting that HDP tenderization was caused by 
both physical disruption of the myofibril apparatus and enhanced postmor-
tem proteolysis (Bowker et al., 2008a). Shock wave and aging decreased the 
intensity of the TnT band and enhanced the accumulation of the 30-kD TnT 
degradation product (Bowker et al., 2008b). An accelerated maturation after 
HDP treatment, enabling a shorter maturation time for the industry, has been 
described in the literature (Heinz et al., 2011). During aging, the percentage 
of proteins in the soluble fraction was increased with HDP treatment while 
the insoluble myofibrillar proteins were reduced. Similar results were seen 
when the myofibrillar fragmentation index was correlated to tenderness dur-
ing aging (Spanier and Romanowski, 2000). More recently, changes in the 
sarcoplasmic protein fraction of beef muscle with aging (0, 5, and 8 days) 
and HDP treatment were evaluated using capillary electrophoresis (CE) 
200.0
C
SW
St
St
St
St
C
C
C
SW
SW
SW
116.3
97.4
66.2
45.0
31.0
21.5
14.4
6.5
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 8.8
SDS-PAGE analysis of sarcoplasmic and myofibrillar proteins from control and shock wave-
treated beef Longissimus thoracis steaks at day 1 and 7 of storage under refrigerated condi-
tions. (a) Sarcoplasmic proteins at day 1, (b) sarcoplasmic proteins at day 7, (c) myofibrillar 
proteins at day 1, and (d) myofibrillar proteins at day 7. Lane C, control sample; lane SW, shock 
wave-treated sample; lane St, standard proteins (kDa); SDS-PAGE, sodium dodecyl sulfate-
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. (Reprinted from Meat Science, 98, Bolumar et al., Effect of 
electrohydraulic shockwave treatment on tenderness, muscle cathepsin and peptidase activi-
ties and microstructure of beef loin steaks from Holstein young bulls, 759–765. Copyright 2014, 
with permission from Elsevier.)

278
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
and reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC). 
Aging and HDP interactions were not detected using either separation tech-
nique. With CE analysis, no HDP effects were observed; however, the rela-
tive peak area of eight protein peaks ranging in size from 17 to >200 kDa 
were influenced by postmortem aging. Separation of proteins with RP-HPLC 
demonstrated that HDP influenced the relative size of two protein peaks 
while postmortem aging effects were observed in six peaks. Alterations in 
the sarcoplasmic protein fractions detected by both CE and RP-HPLC were 
correlated to WBSF measurements. Overall, the data demonstrate that HDP 
has minimal effects on sarcoplasmic proteins and that aging-related changes 
in the water-soluble protein fractions of muscle may be useful as indirect 
indicators of beef tenderness (Bowker et al., 2012).
Microscopic examinations using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) 
of HDP meat displayed myofibrillar fragmentations in the region adjacent to 
the z-lines as well as z-line fragments attached to the A-band on both sides 
of the fractures (Zuckerman and Solomon, 1998; Figure 8.9). Also, increased 
intra-myofibrillar spaces with longitudinal gaps or splits in the myofibril 
lattice were observed (Zuckerman and Solomon, 1998). Jagged edges at the 
z-line and the thin filaments in HDP-treated meat have also been described 
by Claus (2002) (Figure 8.9). These scientists suggested that physical tearing 
rather than proteolysis was behind the tenderization.
Recently, Bolumar et al. (2014) conducted microscopic analysis on HDP-
treated meat by using confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM), and 
showed very clearly that HDP causes considerable disruptions of muscle fibers 
and tissue (Figure 8.10a through c, control vs. d through f, shock wave treated).
By using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), a larger endomysium 
space, the space between muscle fibers, could also clearly be observed in 
the HDP meat, especially at day 7 (Figure 8.11, white arrow). Furthermore, 
the appearance of additional “white networks” (Figure 8.11, within a circle) 
Jagged
edges
Myofibril
seperation
from z-lines
Physical
tearing
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8.9
TEM of shock wave-treated (a) beef and (b) chicken. (a) Early deboned Holstein beef after shock 
wave processing with TCS (separations at z-line) and (b) early deboned chicken after shock 
wave processing with explosives (physical tearing). TEM, transmission electron microscopy. 
(Photo courtesy of Professor Jim Claus, University of Wisconsin-Madison.)

279
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
was observed in HDP or shock wave-treated samples (Figure 8.11, compar-
ing images a through c [control] to images d through f [shock wave treated]). 
This observation may be related to the release of intracellular contents or 
most likely an alteration of the endomysium collagen fibril network. A wider 
endomysium space might be presumably due to a displacement within the 
muscle fibers at the collagen level. This is in agreement with Zuckerman et al. 
(2013) who, using SEM, reported that HDP treatment disrupted the integrity 
of the collagen fibril network of the endomysium in both nonaged and aged 
samples and that WBSF and connective tissue changes were greater in HDP 
samples in comparison to the control.
Zuckerman et al. (2013) examined the effect of HDP treatment on intra-
muscular connective tissue. In general, HDP did not cause extensive tear-
ing or perforation of the endomysial connective tissue sheaths surrounding 
individual muscle fibers. Deformations to the honeycomb structure of the 
endomysium, however, were observed in the shock wave-treated samples 
(Figure 8.12). A higher incidence of aggregated fragments of collagen fibrils 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
FIGURE 8.10
CLSM images from control and shock wave-treated beef longissimus thoracis steaks at days 1 
and 7 of storage under refrigerated conditions. (a) Control at day 1, (b) control at day 7, (c) con-
trol at day 7, (d) shock wave-treated at day 1, (e) shock wave-treated at day 7, and (f) shock wave-
treated at day 7. CLSM, confocal laser scanning microscopy. (Reprinted from Meat Science, 98, 
Bolumar et al., Effect of electrohydraulic shockwave treatment on tenderness, muscle cathep-
sin and peptidase activities and microstructure of beef loin steaks from Holstein young bulls, 
759–765. Copyright 2014, with permission from Elsevier.)

280
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
on the surface of the endomysial sheaths was observed in the shock wave-
treated samples (Figure 8.12). They suggested that these aggregates on the 
endomysium are likely parts of collagen fibrils separated from the connec-
tive tissue matrix, due to physical weakening of the collagen network. Based 
on the underlying assumption that physical disruptions to the microstruc-
ture of intramuscular connective tissue improve meat tenderness, these data 
suggested that shock wave or HDP meat tenderization is caused at least par-
tially by alterations to connective tissue in addition to their known impact on 
the myofibrillar component of muscle (Zuckerman et al., 2013).
Overall, HDP or shock wave treatment has been shown to induce disrup-
tive effects on the z-line, the muscle microstructure, and the connective tis-
sue (Zuckerman and Solomon, 1998; Bolumar et al., 2014; Zuckerman et al., 
2013). In addition, an enhanced maturation (i.e., a further reduction of WBSF 
at the same time of maturation) has been observed (Heinz et al., 2011) and 
evidenced by a faster degradation of the TnT protein and accumulation of 
the 30-kD protein band (Bowker et al., 2008a). Furthermore, the release of 
cathepsins from lysosomes by HDP or shock wave treatment has not been 
demonstrated so far, but if this were so, it could be a good target for the ben-
efit of the technology in order to enhance proteolysis driven by endogenous 
muscle endo-proteases during meat storage.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
×500 50μm
DIL
×500 50μm
DIL
×500 50μm
DIL
×500 50μm
DIL
×250 100μm DIL
×250 100μm DIL
(e)
(f)
FIGURE 8.11
SEM images from control and shock wave-treated beef Longissimus thoracis steaks at day 1 and 
7 of storage under refrigerated conditions. (a) Control at day 1, (b) control at day 7, (c) control 
at day 7, (d) shock wave-treated at day 1, (e) shock wave-treated at day 7, and (f) shock wave-
treated at day 7. Arrows point out the separation between muscle fibers (endomysium space), 
circles point out additional “white networks.” SEM, scanning electron microscopy. (Reprinted 
from Meat Science, 98, Bolumar et al., Effect of electrohydraulic shockwave treatment on ten-
derness, muscle cathepsin and peptidase activities and microstructure of beef loin steaks from 
Holstein young bulls, 759–765. Copyright 2014, with permission from Elsevier.)

281
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
8.4 HDP for Improving Meat Safety
Food safety is a must for meat processors. The meat industry has to deal with 
microbial contamination and growth of both spoilage and pathogenic bacte-
ria, which can jeopardize shelf life and cause foodborne illnesses. Thus, the 
industry needs to manage the biological risks and demands tools to control 
these microbial hazards. Traditionally, the meat industry has used and still 
uses chemical substances such as disinfectants and preservatives and heat 
treatments to control microbial growth. Yet interventions, such as hot water 
(80°C–96°C) carcass treatment to raise carcass surface temperatures, organic 
acid (lactic, acetic, and citric) carcass washes of surfaces to reduce the surface 
pH, steam pasteurization of carcass in a closed chamber, and steam vacuum, 
can be used as interventions to decontaminate fresh meat (Acuff, 2014). But 
nowadays, consumers demand nonchemical and mild processing treatments 
for superior nutritional preservation. These mild preservation technolo-
gies ideally should aim at energy saving and be environmentally friendly. 
Several examples of these mild preservation techniques with good potential 
in the meat industry are HPP, controlled instantaneous decompression (DIC), 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 8.12
SEM of intramuscular connective tissue prepared from beef musculus semimembranosus follow-
ing 14 days of aging posttreatment: (a and b) nontreated controls, (c and d) shock wave-treated 
samples. Scale bars indicate 50 μm (a, c) and 10 μm (b, d). SEM, scanning electron micrographs. 
(Reprinted from Meat Science, 95, Zuckerman et al., Microstructure alterations in beef intra-
muscular connective tissue caused by hydrodynamic pressure processing, 603–607. Copyright 
2013, with permission from Elsevier.)

282
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
oscillating magnetic fields (ohmic heating, dielectric heating, and micro-
waves), high-intensity pulsed light, x-rays, and electron beams (Hugas et al., 
2002). Some of these novel mild technologies have found application as a 
decontamination and pasteurization method but high costs, legal restrictions, 
consumer perceptions, and insufficient adaptation to the industrial environ-
ment have limited a wider use. HDP treatment can also result in biological 
inactivation, and as such, can be used as an additional hurdle to microbial 
growth. The exact mechanisms for the microbial inactivation of HDP are not 
well understood. Two physical effects must be behind the inactivation: (1) cav-
itation and (2) exposure to high-pressure conditions. Cavitation is the rapid 
and violent expansion and collision of microscopic cavities that generates 
high-energy density particles and microregions of very high temperatures (T) 
and pressures (P) which may be responsible for inactivation of bacteria (Patel 
et al., 2012). Also exposure to high pressure can lead to microbial inactivation. 
Protein denaturation is one of the key mechanisms for microbial inactivation 
in HPP and irreversible changes in proteins start at a comparative level to that 
required for inactivation of microorganisms (400–600 MPa) (Bolumar et al., 
2015). HDP pressure levels are around 100 MPa though localized higher pres-
sures may occur (Solomon et al., 2006, 2011). Pressures in the range of 100 MPa 
might cause sublethal injuries which can lead to death and delay of growth 
more than direct lethal damage/inactivation.
Zuckerman et al. (2002) claimed an efficient microbial inactivation (in log 
cfu/g) (5–7.5 log reduction) of different microorganisms suspended in a 
0.9% NaCl solution by a system based on pulsed high-current underwater 
discharges. A US patent also claims a microbial inactivation of 90% of sur-
face bacteria populations in meat (Long, 2001). This level of inactivation will 
greatly increase the shelf life of meat, which is of large economical impor-
tance. However, Williams-Campell and Solomon (2002) described a 1.5–2 log 
reduction in ground beef after HDP treatment, which increased to 4.5 log 
after 14 days of storage. And no differences were found in coliform bacte-
ria and aerobic plate counts of pork loins (Moeller et al., 1999). Overall, HDP 
treatment has been investigated as a microbial decontamination technique 
although contradictory reports coexist, especially when the application is 
used in real meat systems (Solomon et al., 2006). Table 8.2 summarizes the lit-
erature data found in relation to microbial decontamination of meat matrices.
HDP-treated meat products showed a significant reduction in the naturally 
occurring spoilage microbiota on stew-sized pieces of beef and pork, ground 
beef, and intact beef muscle (Schilling et al., 2003; Williams-Campbell and 
Solomon, 2002) though these reductions (in log cfu/g) were low (0.3 and 1–2 
log), respectively (Table 8.2). Williams-Campbell and Solomon (2002) inves-
tigated the use of HDP as a technology to reduce spoilage microorganisms 
found in fresh beef. HDP reduced bacteria (1–2 log cfu/g) in retail ground 
beef and beef roasts (stew-sized pieces of 30–40 g) on day 0 after HDP appli-
cation. In a shelf-life storage experiment, there was an immediate reduction 
(1.5 log) following HDP (day 0) and a 4.5-log difference between control 

283
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
TABLE 8.2
Effect of HDP on Bacteria Inactivation in Meat Matrixes
Bacteria
Matrix
Treatment
Inactivation 
Level (log cfu/g)
Comments
Reference
Aerobic plate 
counts
Ground beef and beef 
roasts (pieces of 30–40 g)
HDP (100 g binary 
explosive), steel shock 
wave container
1–2
There was an immediate reduction 
in the cfu (~1.5 log) and a difference 
after 14 days of storage (4.5 log)
Williams-Campbell 
and Solomon 
(2002)
Standard plate 
count at 35°C
L. lumborum
Explosives (100 g), 
container (98 L), steel 
plate (1.3 cm thick), 
distance (30.5 cm)
0.3
HDP improved tenderness of intact 
loins
Schilling et al. 
(2003)
Salmonella 
Typhimurium
Minced chicken (100g)
Explosives (50 g), 
container (98 L), steel 
plate (1.3 cm thick), 
distance (30.5 cm)
0.1–0.25
Minimal reduction
Patel et al. (2006)
Escherichia coli 
O157:H7
Ground beef (samples of 
60 g)
Explosives (100 g), 
container (54 L), steel 
plate (1.3 cm thick), 
distance (30.5 cm)
<1
Podolak et al. 
(2006)
Listeria 
monocytogenes and 
aerobic cells
Frankfurters
Explosives (100 g), 
container (54 L), steel 
plate (1.3 cm thick), 
distance (30.5 cm)
1–2
A synergetic effect combining nisin 
and HDP treatment allowed a 2 
log cfu/g reduction in L. 
monocytogenes after 28 days of 
storage
Patel et al. (2007)
L. monocytogenes 
and aerobic cells
Beef frankfurters
Explosives (100 g), 
container (54 L), steel 
plate (1.3 cm thick), 
distance (30.5 cm)
1–2
HDP was combined with 
antimicrobials such as sodium 
diacetate and pediocin
Patel et al. (2009)
E. coli O157:H7 S. 
Typhimurium, and 
L. monocytogenes
Beef cubes (2.54 cm)
Explosives (100 g), 
container (54 L), 
distance (30.5 cm)
0.5–1
Patel et al. (2012)

284
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
samples (9 log) and HDP-treated samples (4.5 log) after 14 days of storage. 
In this study, the authors concluded that it was possible to reduce spoilage 
microorganisms found in ground and stew meat pieces, which could extend 
the shelf life of meat products (Williams-Campbell and Solomon, 2002). 
The effect of HDP on the survival of Escherichia coli O157:H7 in ground beef 
was investigated by Podolak et al. (2006) (Table 8.2). The ground beef was 
inoculated with a six strain cocktail of E. coli O157:H7 at three different con-
centrations (103, l04, and l06 cfu/g). The initial concentrations of E. coli were 
1.29 × 103, 2.88 × 104, and 2.19 × l06 cfu/g. After HDP treatment, the popula-
tions were reduced (p < .05) to 9.12 × 102, 2.40 × 104, and 1.91 × 106 cfu/g, 
respectively. Although the reduction in E. coli populations due to HDP treat-
ment was statistically significant, the practicability of the reduction was 
marginal (1 log or even less reduction). Therefore, other hurdle parameters 
should be included along with the HDP treatment for more practical inac-
tivation of E. coli in ground beef (Podolak et al., 2006). In this regard, HDP 
has also been assayed in combination with antimicrobials. Populations of 
Listeria monocytogenes in beef frankfurters were significantly reduced by 
HPD when used in conjunction with nisin after 28 days of refrigerated stor-
age (Patel et al., 2007). Patel et al. (2006) reported that HDP treatment was 
unable to kill significant amounts of Salmonella in minced chicken (Table 8.2). 
In another work, HDP treatment significantly reduced (1 log cfu/g) L. mono-
cytogenes (Patel et al., 2009). The combination of pediocin and HDP process-
ing showed a synergistic effect with a 2-log reduction for L. monocytogenes 
in frankfurters compared to control samples (Patel et al., 2009). The penetra-
tion of surface-inoculated bacteria into the meat due to HDP treatment was 
reported to be around 200–300 μ in chicken breast and beef steaks (Lorca et 
al., 2002, 2003). This penetration into the meat does not carry a safety hazard 
to consumers provided it is cooked properly. A heat treatment when cook-
ing the meat will easily destruct the bacteria at this depth below the sur-
face. The effect of HDP on the inactivation of E. coli O157:H7, Salmonella 
Typhimurium, and L. monocytogenes attached to beef surface was recently 
evaluated by Patel et al. (2012) (Table 8.2). The HDP treatment significantly 
reduced E. coli O157:H7 (0.75 log cfu/g), S. Typhimurium (1.09 log cfu/g), 
and L. monocytogenes (0.55 log cfu/g) from beef surfaces (Figure 8.13). HDP-
induced injury, as determined by plating on nonselective media, revealed 
that ca. 0.5 log cfu/g of E. coli O157:H7 and S. Typhimurium cells were 
injured. Most cell injury occurred at the cell membrane level as observed 
by TEM (Figure 8.14; Patel et al., 2012).
HDP treatment has also been investigated to inactivate parasites in meat. 
Gamble et al. (1998) reported that the numbers of Trichinella spiralis recov-
ered from infested pork were significantly reduced by treatment with the 
“Hydrodyne Process” as compared with untreated. However, the infectivity 
of this parasite when the larvae from Hydrodyne-treated meat were inocu-
lated into mice was not eliminated. HDP treatment has also been assayed 
in relation to the inactivation of viruses. Sharma et al. (2008) compared the 

285
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
inactivation of foodborne viruses by HDP or HPP and found that both tech-
nologies significantly reduced foodborne viruses on pork sausages (1–3 log 
reduction), but complete inactivation was not possible to achieve using these 
pressure treatments.
Overall, HDP treatment could have some decontamination effect under 
the right settings. However, notable inactivation levels have not been clearly 
demonstrated in meat products so far with maximum inactivation level 
being 1–2 log reduction (Bolumar et al., 2013; Patel et al., 2012). Nevertheless, 
HDP treatment for microbial decontamination has been scarcely investi-
gated given the few groups with the available equipment to carry out experi-
mental work worldwide, and definitely deserves further scientific attention. 
Additional hurdles such as addition of bacteriocins (e.g., nisin) and/or 
organic acids (e.g., lactic acid) could be employed to achieve further reduc-
tion of pathogens present in meat surfaces. High pressure-induced injured 
cells can grow under favorable conditions and may regain their pathogenic 
potential, and therefore, the population of injured cells should be considered 
in devising terminal treatment for reducing pathogens on foods. New engi-
neering developments in shock wave equipment could deliver the required 
technical pressure conditions to achieve significant biological inactivation in 
the near future so providing an effective microbial decontamination method 
to the meat industry.
0
E. coil O157:H7
S. Typhimurium
L. monocytogenes
4
3
2
1
5
Control
HDP
FIGURE 8.13
Effect of HDP on survival of Escherichia coli O157:H7, Listeria monocytogenes, and Salmonella 
Typhimurium on beef cubes (log cfu/g). HDP, hydrodynamic pressure processing. (Reprinted 
from Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 14, Patel et al., Inactivation and injury 
of pathogens on intact beef treated with hydrodynamic pressure, 38–45. Copyright 2012, with 
permission from Elsevier.)

286
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
8.5 Cost Analysis of HDP Technology
A cost analysis considering cost of HDP technology and cost of the extra 
packaging required for the most recent continuous shock wave prototype 
developed at the DIL (Figures 8.5 and 8.6) is presented in Table 8.3.
8.5.1 Packaging
Currently, there is no packaging able to withstand the intensity of the shock 
waves generated during HDP treatment intended for meat tenderization. 
(a)
(b)
(c)
500 nm
500 nm
500 nm
500 nm
(d)
FIGURE 8.14
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of hydrodynamic pressure processing 
(HDP)-treated S. Typhimurium. All cells show pressure-induced injuries in the form of polar 
(a through c) or peripheral invagination of the cellular membrane. (a) Salmonella strongly 
attached to meat surfaces. Arrow indicates the actual site of physical binding of bacteria to 
muscular tissue. (Reprinted from Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 14, Patel 
et al., Inactivation and injury of pathogens on intact beef treated with hydrodynamic pressure, 
38–45. Copyright 2012, with permission from Elsevier.)

287
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
Some of the typical damages that occurred in the packaging as a conse-
quence of the power and harshness of the HDP treatment can be observed in 
Figure 8.15. Figure 8.15a shows a broken bag caused by the fact that the meat 
did not have enough expansion space within the bag, which led to enormous 
mechanical pressure on the sealing bonds. Furthermore, the commercial 
bags showed higher incidence of opened seals (Figure 8.15b). Other dam-
age included small pinholes (primarily started from the inside of the bags) 
(Figure 8.15c and e) and large holes caused by burning (Figure 8.15d and f). 
Also, large cracks were seen that damaged the entire bag. Research and 
development of an HDP-resistant packaging material is one of the key devel-
opments required to underpin the HDP technology to the industry. Efforts 
addressing the development of this type of packaging will require the 
involvement of packaging materials scientists and most likely commercial 
packaging companies that can provide up-to-date expertise adapted to the 
needs of the meat industry in terms of cost and compatibility with an indus-
trial food environment.
8.5.2 Equipment
The cost of the shock wave technology can be estimated by durable costs 
(i.e., machine depreciation) and operative costs (i.e., spare parts, energy and 
water consumption, and personnel cost). The prototype throughput can be 
estimated taking into account the speed of the belt, the number of shots that 
a meat cut receives, and the size and weight of the meat cut. Depending on 
the specific treatment (mainly number of pulses applied) and size of meat 
cut, the throughput (kg/h) will vary (see the following calculation example). 
The minimum distance that a shock wave can be applied with the shock 
wave unit built at DIL (Figures 8.5 and 8.6) is 30 mm. This would be the worst 
case scenario for the productivity of the shock wave unit and corresponds to 
TABLE 8.3
Cost Analysis of HDP or Shock Wave Technology for Meat Tenderization
Cost
Shock Wave Technologya
Extra 
Packaging
(€/kg)
Total
(€/kg)
Case 
Study
Throughput
(kg/h)
Amortization
(€/kg)
Spare 
Parts
(€/kg)
Operative 
Costs
(€/kg)
Subtotal
(€/kg)
1
500
0.160
0.024
0.041
0.225
0.172
0.397
2
1800
0.050
0.007
0.012
0.069
0.172
0.241
Average
1150
0.105
0.015
0.026
0.147
0.172
0.319
a The amortization costs for the shock wave technology are estimated assuming a one shift 
working scheme (8 h/d), 50% occupancy of the equipment time, and a 5-year period for pay-
back of investment.

288
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
the conditions employed in the testing of the prototype. If fewer shots are 
applied (e.g., every 60 or 90 mm) the productivity will become higher. The 
time required between shots is 2.5 seconds.
Throughput calculation example:
For a meat cut of 240 mm length and applying a shock wave every 30 mm 
(240 mm/30 mm = 8) a total of 8 pulses will be applied per meat cut.
(f)
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
(e)
FIGURE 8.15
Typical damages in the packaging material after HDP or shock wave treatment. (a) Breaking 
of the sealing due to the expansion of the meat, (b) details of an opened sealing, (c) pinholes 
(leak points) in the packaging (located immersing the bag under water-containing colorants), 
(d) pinholes as a consequence of burned plastic, and (e and f) microscopy images of a hole 
generated during HDP treatment. HDP, hydrodynamic pressure processing. Work performed 
during the European-funded research project, ShockMeat (2012–2013).

289
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
• For a small meat cut (e.g., beef eye of round) the result is ca. 3 kg × 180 
(meat cuts/h) = 540 kg.
• For a big meat cut (e.g., beef top side) the result is ca. 10 kg × 180 
(meat cuts/h) = 1800 kg.
Main spare parts to consider are insulators, electrodes, an insulator jacket, 
reflector, conductive sheet metals, and a high-voltage switch.
8.5.3 Quantifying Meat Benefits
Benefits on meat can be estimated based on improvements in tenderness and 
so price.
Miller et al. (2001) made a national consumer evaluation on strip loin steaks 
of known WBSF values, ranging from tough (>5.7 kg) to tender (<3.0 kg). In 
that study, they assessed the monetary value that consumers place on ten-
derness by determining the average price that a consumer would pay for 
a steak in four tenderness categories (toughest, tough, intermediate tender-
ness, and tender). The prices for these categories would be 12.30, 12.45, 12.94, 
and 13.53 (US $/kg) (Miller et al., 2001).
8.5.4  Overall Cost Analysis of HDP or Shock Wave 
Technology for the Meat Industry
The cost of the application of shock wave technology comprises equip-
ment costs (i.e., amortization of investment) and operating costs (i.e., spare 
parts, energy and water consumption, and personnel cost). The following 
throughputs of 540–1800 kg/h and a life span of five years have been taken 
as assumptions for the calculation of operative costs and payback of invest-
ment. The amortization cost is based on a one shift working scheme (8 h/d) 
and 50% occupancy of equipment time. With these assumptions, a total 
processing cost of 0.069–0.225 €/kg of meat processed is estimated for the 
respective throughputs and an average cost of 0.147 €/kg of meat is calcu-
lated (Table 8.3).
The cost in extra packaging is based on a consumption of 50,000 bags of 
the optimal material, a highly resistant packaging material, at the standard 
commercial cost in the market. An extra cost of around 0.172 €/kg of meat 
was estimated (Table 8.3). However, it must be noted that there is no pack-
aging material that is fully resistant to HDP or shock wave at the moment. 
Consequently, a reprocessing will have to be considered, which makes 
implementation more difficult in industrial practices.
The benefit for the meat can be estimated based on the assumption that an 
improvement in the tenderness perception of the meat with one point within 
a sensory scale (1–15) may increase the extra value of the meat. This increase 
of one point in tenderness appreciation in sensorial panel is realistic by using 
the continuous shock wave prototype developed at the DIL. The translation 

290
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
of the improved tenderness corresponding to one point in a sensory scale 
(1–15) can be estimated in (€/kg) for different beef meat cuts assuming that 
this will increase the value of the meat to a certain percentage depending on 
specific markets (1%–5% added value to price).
Overall, it can be concluded that with the current technological develop-
ment status of the shock wave technology, only applications in which qual-
ity/tenderness improvement will lead to higher benefits than 0.3 €/kg of 
meat would make the technology profitable. The shock wave technology 
could be easily integrated in the meat processing industry at the abattoirs 
after the onset of rigor mortis (i.e., boning room) or at the reception of meat 
processing plants (Figure 8.16). Toll processing is another possible option, 
where companies offer this service to the meat industry, similarly to what 
Chilling
Slaughterhouse
Meat processor
Slaughter
Rigor mortis onset
Shock wave treatment
Livestock production
Deboning
Vacuum packaging
Shockwave
Transport,
storage, and
maturation
Processing
Packaging
Distribution
Consumer
FIGURE 8.16
Meat processing layout with integrated shock wave unit intended for meat tenderization. 
(Reprinted from Meat Science, 95, Bolumar et al., New developments in shockwave technology 
intended for meat tenderization: Opportunities and challenges, 931–939. Copyright 2013, with 
permission from Elsevier.)

291
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
happens with other novel food processing technologies such as HPP, which 
also has a high initial investment cost, thereby facilitating the use of the tech-
nology by the industry.
8.6 Future Considerations
HDP or shock wave technology could be profitable for meat cuts of high 
commercial value (e.g., loin) or for revalorization of low-value cuts (e.g., 
brisket) and market niches of premium meats which could absorb the costs 
of the technology (~0.3 €/kg of meat). Other benefits of the use of HDP 
would be the attainment of consistent meat quality and improved con-
sumer satisfaction, both resulting in consumer confidence and branding. 
But these factors are marginal compared to the effect on the net cost €/
kg and a prerequisite before the meat industry truly decides to invest in 
shock wave technology. Other factors of importance to ensure success of 
the technology are the noise and vibration during operation, which can 
be avoided by placing the process in a different and isolated room. This is 
a common practice for some operations in the meat industry where noisy 
processes such as mechanical deboning of meat and rendering require 
physical separation to ensure a physical barrier/separation that prevents 
cross-contamination. Shock wave technology could be further developed 
to improve throughput and particularly, to create a better interaction 
between the equipment and the packaged product to minimize the amount 
of damaged packages, which is a requirement at the moment. Engineering 
developments seem to be the keystone for the transfer of the technology 
to the industry. As with many technologies, compliance with the indus-
try requirements in terms of cost and operability will be essential prior to 
investment and uptake.
8.7 Conclusion
HDP or shock wave technology represents a low-cost and noninvasive inter-
vention for meat tenderization with no negative impact on microbiological 
and chemical stability (drip loss, color, and flavor). However, commercial 
application is not yet available because of limitations of suitable packaging 
materials as well as the need for an efficient shock wave delivery process in 
a commercial environment. Should these be achieved, HDP would make it 
possible to obtain remarkable improvements in meat tenderness with a very 
short treatment time and low processing costs.

292
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Acknowledgments
Grant agreement number 2870340 (Development of Shock Wave Technology 
for Packed Meat) from the European Union’s Seventh Framework Program 
managed by REA (Research Executive Agency, http://ec.europa.eu/research 
/rea) (FP7/2007–2013) is acknowledged. Critical review of this manuscript by 
Bo-Anne Rohlik and Ron Tume is acknowledged.
References
Anderson, M. J., Lonergan, S. M., Fedler, C. A., Prusa, K. J., Binning, J. M. and Huff-
Lonergan, E. (2012). Profile of biochemical traits influencing tenderness of mus-
cles from the beef round. Meat Science, 91(3), 247–254.
Acuff, G. R. (2014). Microbial contamination, Decontamination of Fresh Meat. In C. 
Devine and M. Dikeman (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences, Volume 2 (Vol. 2, pp. 
276-279). London, UK: Elsevier Ltd.
Bajovic, B., Bolumar, T. and Heinz, V. (2012). Quality considerations with high pressure 
processing of fresh and value added meat products. Meat Science, 92(3), 280–289.
Barbosa-Canovas, G. V., Tapia, M. S. and Cano, P. (2004). Novel Food Processing 
Technologies. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis.
Berge, P., Ertbjerg, P., Larsen, L. M., Astruc, T., Vignon, X. and Møller, A. J. (2001). 
Tenderization of beef by lactic acid injected at different times post mortem. Meat 
Science, 57, 347–357.
Bolumar, T., Bindrich, U., Toepfl, S., Toldrá, F. and Heinz, V. (2014). Effect of electro-
hydraulic shockwave treatment on tenderness, muscle cathepsin and peptidase 
activities and microstructure of beef loin steaks from Holstein young bulls. Meat 
Science, 98, 759–765.
Bolumar, T., Enneking, M., Toepfl, S. and Heinz, V. (2013). New developments in 
shockwave technology intended for meat tenderization: Opportunities and 
challenges. A review. Meat Science, 95(4), 931–939.
Bolumar, T., Georget, E. and Mathys, A. (2015). High pressure processing (HPP) 
of foods and its combination with electron beam processing. In: Pillai, S. 
and Shayanfar, S. (eds.) Electron Beam Pasteurization and Complementary Food 
Processing Technologies. Cambridge: Woodhead Publishing, pp. 127–155.
Bolumar, T., Middendorf, D., Toepfl, S. and Heinz, V. (2016). Structural changes in 
foods caused by high-pressure processing. In: Balasubramaniam, V. M., Barbosa-
Canovas, G. and Lelieveld, H. (eds.) High Pressure Processing of Food—Principles, 
Technology and Applications. New York, Springer-Verlag, pp. 509–537.
Bowker, B. C., Callahan, J. A. and Solomon, M. B. (2010a). Effects of hydrodynamic 
pressure processing on the marination and meat quality of turkey breasts. 
Poultry Science, 89(8), 1744–1749.
Bowker, B. C., Eastridge, J. S., Paroczay, E. W., Callahan, J. A. and Solomon, M. B. 
(2010b). Aging/tenderization mechanisms. In: Toldrá, F. (ed.) Handbook of Meat 
Processing. Iowa, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 87–104.

293
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
Bowker, B. C., Fahrenholz, T. M., Paroczay, E. W., Eastridge, J. S. and Solomon, M. B. 
(2008a). Effect of hydrodynamic pressure processing and aging on the tenderness 
and myofibrillar proteins of beef strip loins. Journal of Muscle Foods, 19(1), 74–97.
Bowker, B. C., Fahrenholz, T. M., Paroczay, E. W. and Solomon, M. B. (2008b). Effect of 
hydrodynamic pressure processing and aging on sarcoplasmic proteins of beef 
strip loins. Journal of Muscle Foods, 19, 175–193.
Bowker, B. C., Fahrenholz, T. M., Sarnoski, P. J. and Solomon, M. B. (2012). Alterations 
in the sarcoplasmic protein fraction of beef muscle with postmortem aging and 
hydrodynamic pressure processing. Journal of Food Science, 77(6), C594–C602.
Bowker, B., Liu, M., Callahan, J. and Solomon, M. (2010b). Effect of hydrodynamic 
pressure processing on the processing and quality characteristics of moisture-
enhanced pork loins. Journal of Food Science, 75(4), S237–S244.
Bowker, B. C., Schaefer, R. B., Grapperhaus, M. J. and Solomon, M. B. (2011). 
Tenderization of beef loins using a high efficiency sparker. Innovative Food 
Science and Emerging Technologies, 12(2), 135–141.
Chan, J. T. Y., Omana, D. A. and Betti, M. (2011). Application of high pressure process-
ing to improve the functional properties of pale, soft, and exudative (PSE)-like 
turkey meat. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 12, 216–225.
Claus, J. R. (2002). Shock treatment—Shock waves are an effective tool for tenderizing 
meat. Meat and Poultry, 48(12), 61–63.
Claus, J. R., Schilling, J. K., Marriott, N. G., Duncan, S. E., Solomon, M. B. and Wang, 
H. (2001a). Hydrodynamic shockwave tenderization effects using a cylinder 
processor on early deboned broiler breasts. Meat Science, 58, 287–292.
Claus, J. R., Schilling, J. K., Marriott, N. G., Duncan, S. E., Solomon, M. B. and Wang, 
H. (2001b). Tenderization of chicken and turkey breasts with electrically pro-
duced hydrodynamic shockwaves. Meat Science, 58, 283–286.
Doona, C. J., Kustin, K. and Feeherry, F. E. (eds.) (2010). Case Studies in Novel Food Processing 
Technologies. Innovations in Processing, Packaging, and Predictive Modelling. Cambridge: 
Woodhead Publishing Series in Food Science, Technology and Nutrition.
Flynn, C., Cruz-Romero, M. C., Troy, D., Mullen, A. M. and Kerry, J. P. (2014). The 
application of high-pressure treatment in the reduction of salt levels in reduced-
phosphate breakfast sausage. Meat Science, 96, 1266–1274.
Gamble, H., Solomon, M. B. and Long, J. (1998). Effects of hydrodynamic pressure on 
the viability of Trichinella spiralis in pork. Journal of Food Protection, 61, 637–639.
Godfrey, C. S. (1970). Apparatus for tenderizing food. US Patent 3, 492, 688.
Grossi, A., Gkarane, V., Otte, J. A., Ertbjerg, P. and Orlien, V. (2012). High pressure 
treatment of brine enhanced pork affects endopeptidase activity, protein solu-
bility, and peptide formation. Food Chemistry, 134(3), 1556–1563.
Grunert, K. G., Bredahl, L. and Brunsø, K. (2004). Consumer perception of meat qual-
ity and implications for product development in the meat sector—A review. 
Meat Science, 66, 259–272.
Heinz, V., Töpfl, S., Schwägele, F. and Münch, S. (2011). AiF-15884 N: Anwendung 
elektrohydraulischer Stoßwellen zur Desintegration biologischer Gewebe 
am Beispiel der Zartmachung von Rindfleisch. In: Forschungskreis der 
Ernährungsindustrie e. V. (FEI), Bonn, Germany.
Hendrickx, M. E. G. and Knorr, D. (2002). Ultra High Pressure Treatments of Foods. Food 
Engineering Series. New York, NY, London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Homma, N., Ikeuchi, Y. and Suzuki, A. (1994). Effects of high pressure treatment on 
the proteolytic enzymes in meat. Meat Science, 38, 219–228.

294
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Hugas, M., Garriga, M. and Monfort, J. M. (2002). New mild technologies in meat 
processing: High pressure as a model technology. Meat Science, 62, 359–371.
Koohmaraie, M., Kent, M. P., Shackelford, S. D., Veiseth, E. and Wheeler, T. L. (2002). Meat 
tenderness and muscle growth: Is there any relationship? Meat Science, 62, 345–352.
Locke, B. R., Sato, M., Sunka, P., Hoffmann, M. R. and Chang, J.-S. (2006). 
Electrohydraulic discharge and non-thermal plasma for water treatment. 
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research, 45(3), 882–905.
Long, J. B. (1993). Tenderizing meat. US Patent 5,273,766.
Long, J. B. (1994). Apparatus for tenderizing meat. US Patent 5,328,403.
Long, J. B. (2000). Treatment of meat by capacitor discharge. US Patent 6,120,818.
Long, J. B. (2001). Method for killing bacteria in meat. US Patent 6,200,615.
Long, J. B. (2009). Tenderizing of meat. US Patent 7,485,331.
Lorca, T. A., Claus, J. R., Eifert, J. D., Marcy, J. E. and Sumner, S. S. (2003). Penetration 
of surface-inoculated bacteria as a result hydrodynamic shock wave treatment 
of beef steaks. Journal of Food Protection, 65, 616–620.
Lorca, T. A., Pierson, M. D., Claus, J. R., Eifert, J. D., Marcy, J. E. and Sumner, S. S. 
(2002). Penetration of surface-inoculated bacteria as a result of electrically-
generated hydrodynamic shock wave treatment of boneless skinless chicken 
breasts. Journal of Poultry Science, 82, 1205–1210.
Manabe, H., Takemoto, A., Maehara, H. et al. (2011). Efficient improved extraction of tomato 
saponin using shock waves. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 59(11), 1406–1408.
Mayer, D., Dorfmüller, C. and Lachat, M. (2009). Die extrakorporale Stoßwellentherapie 
als neue Methode zur Stimulation der Heilung komplexer Wunden: Eine 
Übersicht. Zeitschrift Fur Wundheilung, 14(1), 14–19.
Meek, K. I., Claus, J. R., Duncan, S. E. et al. (2000). Quality and sensory characteris-
tics of selected post-rigor, early deboned broiler breast meat tenderized using 
hydrodynamic shock waves. Poultry Science, 79, 126–136.
Mennecke, B. E., Townsend, A. M., Hayes, D. J. and Lonergan, S. M. (2007). A study 
of the factors that influence consumer attitudes toward beef products using the 
conjoint market analysis tool. Journal of Animal Science, 85, 2639–2659.
Miller, M. F, Carr, M., Ramsey, C. B., Crockett, K. L. and Hoover, L. C. (2001). Consumer 
thresholds for establishing the value of beef tenderness. Animal Science, 79, 3062–3068.
Miyafuji, Y., Shimojima, K., Tanaka, S. et al. (2011). Development of the pressure ves-
sel for manufacturing the rice-powder using the underwater shock wave. In 
ASME Conference Proceedings, Washington, DC, USA (44540), 53–56.
Moeller, S., Wulf, D., Meeker, D., Ndife, M., Sundararajan, N. and Solomon, M. B. (1999). 
Impact of the hydrodyne process on tenderness, microbial load, and sensory char-
acteristics of pork longissimus muscle. Journal of Animal Science, 77, 2119–2123.
Ohmori, T., Shigehisa, T., Taji, S. and Hayashi, R. (1992). Biochemical effects of high 
hydrostatic-pressure on the lysosome and proteases involved in it. Bioscience 
Biotechnology and Biochemistry, 58, 1285–1288.
Paparella, M. W. and Allen, M. (1970). Gaping oysters by shockwave energy. Chesapeake 
Science, 11(2), 116–119.
Patel, J. R., Bhagwat, A. A., Sanglay, G. C. and Solomon, M. B. (2006). Rapid detec-
tion of Salmonella from hydrodynamic pressure-treated poultry using molecular 
beacon real-time PCR. Food Microbiology, 23, 39–46.
Patel, J., MacArisin, D., Sanglay, G. and Murphy, C. (2012). Inactivation and injury of 
pathogens on intact beef treated with hydrodynamic pressure. Innovative Food 
Science and Emerging Technologies, 14, 38–45.

295
Hydrodynamic Pressure Processing to Improve Meat Quality and Safety
Patel, J. R., Sanglay, G. C., Sharma, M. and Solomon, M. B. (2007). Combining anti-
microbials and hydrodynamic pressure processing for control of Listeria 
Monocytogenes in frankfurters. Journal of Muscle Foods, 18, 1–18.
Patel, J. R., Sanglay, G. C. and Solomon, M. B. (2009). Control of Listeria monocytogenes 
on frankfurters with antimicrobials and hydrodynamic pressure processing. 
Journal of Muscle Foods, 20, 227–241.
Podolak, R., Solomon, M. B., Patel, J. R. and Liu, M. N. (2006). Effect of hydrodynamic 
pressure processing on the survival of Escherichia coli O157:H7 in ground beef. 
Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 7, 28–31.
Purchas, R. W. (2004). Tenderness measurement. In: Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences, vol. 
3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 452–459.
Purslow, P. P. (2005). Intramuscular connective tissue and its role in meat quality. Meat 
Science, 70, 435–447.
Purslow, P. (2014). New developments on the role of intramuscular connective tissue 
in meat toughness. Annual Review of Food Science and Technology, 5, 133–153.
Schaefer, R. B. (1998). Sparker source systems. US Patent 5,841,737.
Schilling, M. W., Claus, J. R., Marriot, N. G., Solomon, M. B., Eigel, W. N. and Wang, 
H. (2002). No effect of hydrodynamic shock wave on protein functionality of 
beef muscle. Journal of Food Science, 67, 335–340.
Schilling, M. W., Marriott, N. G., Wang, H. and Solomon, M. B. (2003). Characteristics 
of USDA utility cow beef subjected to blade tenderization and hydrodynamic 
shock-waves. Journal of Muscle Foods, 14, 131–142.
Sentandreu, M. A., Coulis, G. and Ouali, A. (2002). Role of muscle endopeptidases and 
their inhibitors in meat tenderness. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 13, 398–419.
Sharma, M., Shearer, A. E. H., Hoover, D. G., Liu, M. N., Solomon, M. B. and Kniel, K. 
E. (2008). Comparison of hydrostatic and hydrodynamic pressure to inactivate 
foodborne viruses. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 9, 418–422.
Shimojima, K., Miyafuji, Y., Tanaka, S. et al. (2011). Study of the suitable pressure 
vessel for the rice-powder manufacturing using the underwater shock wave. In 
ASME Conference Proceedings, Washington, DC, USA (44540), 49–52.
Sikes, A., Tornberg, E. and Tume, R. (2010). A proposed mechanism of tenderising 
post-rigor beef using high pressure-heat treatment. Meat Science, 84(3), 390–399.
Sikes, A. L. and Tume, R. K. (2014). Effect of processing temperature on tenderness, 
colour and yield of beef steaks subjected to high-hydrostatic pressure. Meat 
Science, 97(2), 244–248.
Simjian, L. G. (1957). Food tenderizer. US Patent 2,806,246.
Solomon, M. B., Carpenter, C. E., Snowder, G. D. and Cockett, N. E. (1998). Tenderizing 
callipyge lamb with the hydrodyne process and electrical stimulation. Journal of 
Muscle Foods, 9, 305–311.
Solomon, M. B., Liu, M. N., Patel, J. R., Bowker, B. C. and Sharma, M. (2006). 
Hydrodynamic pressure processing to improve meat quality and safety. In: 
Nollet, L. M. L. and Toldrá, F. (eds.) Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, pp. 219–244.
Solomon, M. B., Liu, M., Patel, J., Paroczay, E. and Eastridge, J. (2004). Tenderness 
improvement in fresh and frozen/thawed beef strip loins treated with hydrody-
namic pressure processing. Journal of Animal Science, 82, 18–22.
Solomon, M. B., Liu, M. N., Patel, J., Paroczay, E., Eastridge, J. and Coleman, S. W. 
(2008). Tenderness improvement in fresh or frozen/thawed beef steaks treated 
with hydrodynamic pressure processing. Journal of Muscle Foods, 19(1), 98–109.

296
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Solomon, M. B., Long, J. B. and Eastridge, J. S. (1997). The hydrodyne: A new process 
to improve beef tenderness. Journal of Animal Science, 75, 1534–1537.
Solomon, M. B., Sharma, M., and Patel, J. R. (2011). Hydrodynamic pressure processing 
of meat products. In: Zhang, H. Q., Barbosa-Canovas, G. V., Balasubramaniam, 
V.M., Dunne, C. P., Farkas, D. and Yuan, J. T.C. (eds.) Non-Thermal Processing 
Technologies for Food. Brisbane, Milton QLD 4064 Australia, Wiley Blackwell, IFT 
Press, pp. 98–108.
Souza, C. M., Boler, D. D., Clark, D. L. et al. (2011). The effects of high pressure pro-
cessing on pork quality, palatability, and further processed products. Meat 
Science, 87, 419–427.
Spanier, A. M., Berry, B. W. and Solomon, M. B. (2000). Variation in the tenderness of 
beef strip loins and improvement in tenderness by use of hydrodynamic pres-
sure processing (HDP). Journal of Muscle Foods, 11(3), 183–196.
Spanier, A. M. and Romanowski, R. (2000). A potential index for assessing the tenderness 
of hydrodynamic pressure (HDP)-treated beef strip loins. Meat Science, 56, 193–202.
Sullivan, G. and Calkins, C. R. (2010). Application of exogenous enzymes to beef mus-
cle of high and low-connective tissue. Meat Science, 85(4), 730–734.
Sun, X. D. and Holley, R. A. (2010). High hydrostatic pressure effects on the texture of 
meat and meat products. Journal of Food Science, 75(1), R17–R22.
Thompson, J. (2002). Managing meat tenderness. Meat Science, 62, 295–308.
Thompson, J. M., Perry, D., Daly, B., Gardner, G. E., Johnston, D. J. and Pethick, D. W. 
(2006). Genetic and environmental effects on the muscle structure response 
post-mortem. Meat Science, 74, 59–65.
Toepfl, S., Bolumar, T. and Heinz. V. (2013). Development of shockwave technol-
ogy for packed meat. European Funded Project, FP7 (2007–2013) Under Grant 
Agreement Number 287034.
Toepfl, S. and Heinz, V. (2009). New options for targeted product modification. 
Fleischwirtschaft International, 3, 11–13.
Troy, D. J. (1999). Enhancing the tenderness of beef. Final report. Project Armis No. 
3916. The National Food Centre. Research and training for the food industry. 
Research Report no 11.
Williams-Campbell, A. M. and Solomon, M. B. (2000). New non-thermal postharvest 
technology to improve food safety: Hydrodynamic pressure processing. In 
Proceedings of the International Society for Optical Engineering, 4206. Boston, MA, 
167–173.
Williams-Campbell, A. M. and Solomon, M. B. (2002). Reduction of spoilage microor-
ganisms in fresh beef using hydrodynamic pressure processing. Journal of Food 
Protection, 65(3), 571–574.
Yang, Y. (2011). Plasma discharge in water and its application for industrial cooling water 
treatment. PhD dissertation, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA.
Zuckerman, H., Bowker, B. C., Eastridge, J. S. and Solomon, M. B. (2013). Microstructure 
alterations in beef intramuscular connective tissue caused by hydrodynamic 
pressure processing. Meat Science, 95(3), 603–607.
Zuckerman, H., Krasik, Y. E. and Felsteiner, J. (2002). Inactivation of microorganisms 
using pulsed high-current underwater discharges. Innovative Food Science and 
Emerging Technologies, 3, 329–336.
Zuckerman, H. and Solomon, M. B. (1998). Ultrastructural changes in bovine lon-
gissimus muscle caused by Hydrodyne process. Journal of Muscle Foods, 9(4), 
419–426.

297
9
Emerging Technologies for the 
Meat Processing Industry
Kumari Shikha Ojha, Joseph P. Kerry, and Brijesh K. Tiwari
9.1 Introduction
Novel technologies, including high-pressure processing, pulsed electric field 
(PEF), oscillating magnetic fields (OMFs), light-based technologies, high-pres-
sure carbon oxide, ultrasound processing, and microwaves, are currently being 
developed, optimized, and tested on a variety of food products including meat 
and meat products. These technologies have shown commercial potential and 
some of these technologies (e.g., high-pressure processing, see also Chapter 7) 
have been employed at commercial scale for meat products. Emerging tech-
nologies have shown potential to overcome several challenges faced by the 
meat industry such as improving the process efficiency, new product develop-
ment, and extension of shelf life while improving the safety profile of meat 
products. One of the key challenges is related to decontamination of meat sur-
faces by using heat or chemical-based treatments, which can exert negative 
effects on meat quality. Low temperature treatment, which includes the appli-
cation of chemicals, for example, organic acids and chlorine, in a concentra-
tion between 1.5% and 2.5% have been reported to lower meat pH and reduce 
CONTENTS
9.1 
Introduction ................................................................................................297
9.2 
Emerging Technologies .............................................................................298
9.2.1 Ultrasound Technology ................................................................298
9.2.1.1 Decontamination of Meat ..............................................300
9.2.1.2 Meat Tenderization .........................................................301
9.2.1.3 Brining ..............................................................................302
9.2.3 Pulsed Electric Field ......................................................................303
9.2.4 Cold Plasma Technology ..............................................................304
9.2.5 Light-Based Technologies .............................................................308
9.3 
Conclusions ................................................................................................. 312
References ............................................................................................................. 313

298
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
both  pathogens and spoilage microorganisms by up to 1–3.5 log units. These 
chemicals are recommended to be applied either by spraying or dipping meat 
in water containing chemical disinfectants. These chemicals have been used 
outside the European Union (EU) for years and have a profound antimicro-
bial effect. Since these chemicals are not likely to be accepted in the EU, it is 
highly relevant to search for alternative techniques for meat decontamination. 
Further, decontamination of meat surfaces using chemicals often relies heav-
ily on potable water usage. The additional impetus of reducing water usage as 
well as chemical emissions has led to a focus on non-water-based or reduced 
water-usage-based decontamination technologies. Driven by the need to find 
more effective decontamination methods, and in light of increasing market and 
legislative pressures, in the face of highly publicized incidences of foodborne 
illness, the meat sector is increasingly interested in the development and imple-
mentation of new processing technologies. Some of the novel food processing 
technologies including high-pressure processing have paved a path toward 
commercialization whereas some novel processing techniques including light-
based technologies, ultrasound processing, PEF, and cold plasma are currently 
being evaluated for meat processing applications. The objective of this chapter 
is to demonstrate the application of these technologies for meat applications.
9.2 Emerging Technologies
9.2.1 Ultrasound Technology
Ultrasonic waves are sound waves having frequencies above the threshold 
of hearing for humans and typically divided into three regions of frequency, 
power ultrasound (20–100 kHz), high-frequency ultrasound (100 kHz–2 
MHz), and diagnostic ultrasound (>1 MHz). Ultrasound is an innovative and 
versatile technology that has its wide range of applications. High-frequency 
and diagnostic ultrasound is in use for meat carcass evaluation for several 
decades (Pathak et al., 2011). Ultrasound scanning technology is a noninva-
sive method to predict carcass characteristics that utilizes ultrasonic waves 
to generate ultrasonic images, which are employed for visualization of vari-
ous body parts, with real-time tomographic imaging feasible. Although com-
mercial applications of power ultrasound have been demonstrated in some 
industries (e.g., chemical, cosmetic, textile, polymer, and petrochemical), it 
has recently gained interest in the food industry including meat processing. 
Power ultrasound has been known to influence technological properties and 
quality of fresh and processed meat. However, limited research studies are 
available demonstrating the application of ultrasound for various unit opera-
tions in meat value chain. The application of ultrasound in meat processing 
to date includes surface decontamination, tenderization, brining, freezing, 
thawing, cooking, and cutting of meat (Alarcon-Rojo et al., 2015). Table 9.1 
demonstrates the applications of ultrasound for various meat processes.

299
Emerging Technologies for the Meat Processing Industry
TABLE 9.1
Applications of Ultrasound for Meat Processing
Meat
Condition
Effect of Ultrasound
Reference
Decontamination of meat
Chicken wing 
surface
2.5 W/cm−2, 40 
kHz, 3 or 6 min
Microorganism 
reduction
Higher reduction 
with higher time
Escherichia coli has 
been found to be 
more sensitive to 
ultrasound
Kordowska-Wiater 
and Stasiak (2011)
Fresh pork jowl
SonoSteam 
treatment, steam 
(130°C, 3.5–5 
atm) and 
ultrasound 30–40 
kHz for 0.5–2 s
Less skin and surface 
bacteria
Morild et al. (2011)
Chicken carcasses
SonoSteam 
treatment, a 
combination of 
steam at 
90°C–94°C and 
ultrasound at 
30–40 kHz 
through specially 
designed nozzles
Campylobacter and 
total count viable 
reduction
Musavian et al. (2014)
Bovine semitendino-
sus muscle
Ultrasonic 
frequency of 
40 kHz and an 
intensity of 
11 W/cm−2
Reduced growth of 
mesophilic, 
psychrophilic 
bacteria and total 
coliforms in beef 
stored at 4°C
Caraveo et al. (2015)
Tenderization of meat
Beef (semimembra-
nosus) 24 h 
postmortem and 
matured for 24, 48, 
72, or 96 h at 2°C
2 W/cm−2, 45 kHz, 
2 min
No effect on pH or 
color. Reduced 
hardness
Stadnik and 
Dolatowski (2011)
Hen breast meat
0, 1, 3, or 7 days 
at 4°C
24 kHz, 
12 W/cm−2, 
15 s period
Reduced shear force
No change in cooking 
loss
Xiong et al. (2012)
Chicken breast and 
soybean gels
20 kHz, 450 W for 
0, 3, 6, 9, and 12 
min (4 or 2 s 
pulses)
More viscoelastic gel, 
improved Water-and 
fat-binding 
capacities and 
textural properties. 
Homogeneous fine 
network microstruc-
tures
Zhao et al. (2014)
(Continued)

300
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
9.2.1.1 Decontamination of Meat
Power ultrasound has the ability to generate physical (micromechanical) and 
chemical effects resulting in the disruption of cellular structures. The bacteri-
cidal effect of ultrasound is largely attributed to intracellular cavitation, which 
can cause thinning of cell membranes, temperature increase, and production of 
free radicals (Butz and Tauscher, 2002; Chemat and Khan, 2011). It is proposed 
that in the compression and rarefaction cycles of ultrasound energy, fluctuat-
ing pressures induce formation and collapse of microscopic cavitation bubbles 
resulting in micromechanical shock waves. These shock waves can disrupt cel-
lular structural and functional components leading to cell lysis (Hoover, 2000). 
Free radicals, mainly hydroxyl radicals, are produced during the collapse of 
cavitation bubbles as a result of sonolysis of water. These radicals (e.g., OH−, 
H+<) through a series of reactions, produce hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and 
other reactive species. Cavitation, production of radicals, and microstreaming 
can cause thinning of the cell membrane and DNA damage leading to micro-
bial inactivation (Alarcon-Rojo et al., 2015; Earnshaw et al., 1995; Turantaş et 
al., 2015). The inactivation of various pathogenic and spoilage microorganisms 
TABLE 9.1 (Continued)
Applications of Ultrasound for Meat Processing
Meat
Condition
Effect of Ultrasound
Reference
Beef longissimus 
lumborum muscles
Ultrasonic probe 
(20 kHz) at 
power of 100 and 
300 W
Simultaneous 
application of both 
ultrasound and 
papain enzyme 
improved the 
tenderness of beef
Barekat and 
Soltanizadeh (2017)
Brining
Pork longissimus 
dorsi
40 kHz; 37.5 W/
dm−3
Higher salt and water 
diffusion
Cárcel et al. (2007)
Pork longissimus 
dorsi
2–4 W/cm−2, 20 
kHz
Higher salt diffusion. 
Diffusion coefficient 
increases with 
ultrasound intensity
Siró et al. (2009)
Pork longissimus 
thoracis and 
lumborum
0, 40, 56, 
72 W/cm−2, 
34–40 kHz, 2, 
4, 6 h
Reduction of salting 
time without 
changes in sensory 
attributes
McDonnell et al. 
(2014)
Bovine longissimus 
dorsi muscles
20 kHz ultrasonic 
probe at different 
power levels 
(150, 200, 250, 
and 300 W)
Ultrasound intensity 
could significantly 
improve the D values 
of NaCl and water
Space between 
myofibrils increased 
with increased 
ultrasound intensity
Kang et al. (2016)

301
Emerging Technologies for the Meat Processing Industry
including Escherichia coli, Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonella sp., and Bacillus sp. 
pertinent to meat products is extensively reported in the literature (Piyasena 
et al., 2003). However, most studies indicate lower antimicrobial efficacy of 
ultrasound depending upon the conditions employed. Thus, a combination 
of ultrasound with pressure (manosonication), ultrasound and heat (thermo-
sonication), ultrasound, heat, and pressure (manothermosonication), or the 
combination of ultrasound with other nonthermal approaches has often been 
recommended for improving efficacy (Pagán et al., 1999a,b). Kordowska-Wiater 
and Stasiak (2011) investigated the removal of gram-negative bacteria (Salmo-
nella anatum, E. coli, Proteus sp. and Pseudomonas fluorescens) from the surface of 
chicken skin after treatment with ultrasound (40 kHz and 2.5 W/cm−2 for 3 or 
6 min) in water and in aqueous 1% lactic acid. Sonication in water alone or in 
lactic acid for 3 min resulted in a 1.0 cfu/cm−2 reduction on the skin surface, 
but longer treatment (6 min) resulted in a reduction of over 1.0 cfu/cm−2 in the 
water samples and 1.5 log cfu/cm−2 in the lactic acid-treated samples. Ultra-
sound treatment in combination with lactic acid may be a suitable method for 
decontamination of the poultry skin. Herceg et al. (2013) studied the effect of 
high-intensity ultrasound on the inactivation of suspensions containing E. coli, 
Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella sp., L. monocytogenes, and Bacillus cereus treated 
with an ultrasound probe operating at 20 kHz and amplitudes of 60, 90, and 
120 μm for 3, 6, and 9 min at 20°C, 40°C, and 60°C. Increasing any of these 
three parameters improved the inactivation rates of bacteria in suspension. 
The results also showed increased inactivation after prolonged treatment 
time, especially in combination with high temperature and amplitude level. 
Ultrasound in combination with steam has shown potential for inactivation of 
pathogenic and spoilage microorganism. For instance, a study investigated the 
decontaminating effect of SonoSteam treatment (ultrasound + steam) on broiler 
carcasses under commercial processing conditions with a rate of 8500 carcasses 
per hour (Musavian et al., 2014). SonoSteam treatment achieved reductions of 
approximately 1.0 log for Campylobacter and 0.7 log for total viable counts with 
no significant changes in sensorial properties of chicken carcasses.
9.2.1.2 Meat Tenderization
As tenderness is one of the most important attributes of meat quality, research-
ers and meat processors have always been looking for efficient tenderization 
processes. One method of increasing meat tenderness and sensory attributes 
is by employing ultrasound. Although the application of ultrasonic techniques 
for meat tenderization was reported as early as the 1970s by Zayas and Orlova, 
the actual mechanism is still unclear and results are inconsistent in some cases. 
The tenderization effect of ultrasound is attributed to various mechanisms 
including physical disruption of muscle tissues through cavitation-induced 
effects such as high shear, pressure, and temperature; high proteolysis through 
the release of either cathepsins from lysosomes and/or Ca2+ from intracellular 

302
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
stores; and the activation of calpains by Ca2+ (Jayasooriya et al., 2004, 2007; 
Turantaş et al., 2015).
Several studies have focused on the effect of ultrasound on meat tenderiza-
tion showing positive and no significant effects on meat tenderization (Table 
9.1). For example, Dickens et al. (1991) determined the effect of ultrasound (40 
kHz, 15 min) on the texture and cooking loss of cooked broiler breast meat 
and observed that the ultrasound treatment did not affect cooking loss, but 
improved texture significantly. Dolatowski and Twarda (2004) reported that 
ultrasound treatment (45 kHz, 2 W/cm−2 or 25 kHz, 2 W/cm−2) during the 
rigor mortis period (up to 24 h postmortem) resulted in improved tender-
ness and higher water-holding capacity in the semimembranosus muscles. On 
contrary, Got et al. (1999) employed high-frequency (2.4 MHz) ultrasound to 
treat prerigor meat and observed an initial increase in firmness (compres-
sion force) of raw meat compared to untreated or postrigor sonicated meat. 
After 14 days of aging, this group observed no difference between untreated 
and prerigor or postrigor ultrasound-treated meat. Ultrasound in combi-
nation with other methods is also reported to be effective for improving 
marination, tenderness, and modifying the functional properties of meat 
and poultry products (Turantaş et al., 2015). For example, Xiong et al. (2012) 
reported that contribution of mechanical disruption by ultrasound (24 kHz 
for 4 min) and endogenous proteolytic enzymes can be a suitable method 
for improving tenderness and decreasing the cooking loss of chicken meat. 
Barekat and Soltanizadeh (2017) evaluated the effects of ultrasonic treatment 
alone, enzyme treatment, and simultaneous application of both ultrasound 
and papain on the tenderness and certain other physicochemical properties 
of Longissimus lumborum muscles. Results showed that the most proteolytic 
activity and the highest tenderness value were obtained when the combined 
treatment was applied at ultrasonic power of 100 W for 20 min. They also 
concluded that the combination of ultrasound radiation and papain treat-
ment could be employed for the production of tender beef pieces.
9.2.1.3 Brining
Low-frequency ultrasound in the range of 20–100 kHz is known to enhance 
several mass transfer processes, including brining and curing of meat. It is 
well recognized that ultrasound allows faster and uniform diffusion of brine 
solution into the meat tissues. Various physical and chemical phenomena 
including agitation, vibration, pressure, shock waves, shear forces, microjets, 
compression and rarefaction, acoustic streaming, cavitation, and radical for-
mation are responsible for the ultrasonic effect. The main driving force for 
enhancing salt diffusion is acoustic cavitation. It has been proved that power 
ultrasound treatment can directly increase the diffusion coefficient, which 
can shorten the curing time. Cárcel et al. (2003) immersed sliced pork in satu-
rated brine solution at 2°C for 45 min with different agitation. It was reported 
that the sodium chloride and water content in the pork samples were higher 

303
Emerging Technologies for the Meat Processing Industry
with than without ultrasound treatment. Siró et al. (2009) also revealed that 
ultrasonic brining significantly improved salt diffusion in meat, in compari-
son with static brining. McDonnell et al. (2014) reported that it took only 2 h 
to finish curing of pork ham, achieving 2.25% NaCl content, using ultrasound 
treatment while it needed about 4 h for the control treatment. Some authors 
pointed out that the mass transfer was not affected until intensity thresholds 
were reached. Cárcel et al. (2007) reported the thresholds as 39 and 51 W/
cm−2. But Siró et al. (2009) exhibited the mass transfer enhancement effect of 
ultrasound (20 kHz) at ultrasound intensity as low as 2–4 W/cm−2. They also 
reported an exponential increase of the diffusion coefficient with the ultra-
sound intensity. Recently, Kang et al. (2016) evaluated the effects of ultrasound 
intensity and salt concentration of brining for accelerating brine transfer into 
beef. The results of the diffusion coefficient study showed that ultrasound 
intensity could significantly improve the diffusion coefficient values of NaCl 
and water with best results at an ultrasound intensity of 20.96 W/cm−2.
9.2.3 Pulsed Electric Field
High-intensity PEF treatment is a nonthermal technology, which has dem-
onstrated the ability to inactivate microorganisms, decrease the activity of 
enzymes, and extend the shelf life of food products without significantly 
affecting the sensorial and nutritional attributes (Barba et al., 2015; Toepfl 
et al., 2014). This technology involves the application of short pulses (often 
<1 s) of high-intensity electric field (typically 20–80 kV/cm−1) at frequencies 
of up to 1000 Hz to foods placed between two electrodes in batch or con-
tinuous system (Mosqueda-Melgar et al., 2008). PEF technology has dem-
onstrated several promising applications and commercial interest for liquid 
foods; however, significant challenges have been encountered for solid foods 
including meat, hence it has no current commercial application in the meat 
industry to date. Although there are limited studies on the effect of PEF on 
meat, there are several possible concepts for the application of PEF in meat 
and meat products that focus on the permeabilization of cell membranes 
leading to microbial inactivation and disruption of the cell structure, which 
can be exploited for accelerating mass transfer (e.g., extraction, curing, and 
drying). Apart from these, PEF can induce changes in the structure and tex-
ture of meat, potentially improving its functional properties such as tender-
ness, color, and water-holding capacity hence aiding in the development of 
new products (Arroyo and Lyng, 2017; Faridnia et al., 2015).
Studies in recent years have shown that PEF treatment can enhance meat  
tenderness and quality attributes of beef muscles (Faridnia et al., 2015; 
Suwandy et al., 2015a,b). For example, Faridnia et al. (2014) reported that 
tenderness and color stability of beef longissimus thoracis muscles are not 
affected by PEF (0.2–0.6 kV/cm−1, 1–50 Hz, 20 μs) treatments and a subsequent 
vacuum aging. Faridnia et al. (2015) evaluated the effect of freezing as a pre-
treatment prior to PEF treatment (1.4 kV/cm−1, pulse width 20 μs, frequency 

304
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
50 Hz, and total specific energy 250 kJ/kg) on the quality traits of semitendi-
nosus beef muscle. They observed that the combined freezing–thawing and 
PEF resulted in improved tenderness indicated by reduced shear force, while 
no differences were found for the fresh PEF-treated samples. Ma et al. (2016) 
studied the effects of chilling and freezing prior to PEF treatment on the 
volatile profile and sensory attributes of different cooked lamb muscles (i.e., 
shoulder, rib, and loin). Lamb samples were treated at electric field strength 
of 1–1.4 kV/cm−1, specific energy of 88–109 kJ/kg−1, frequency of 90 Hz, pulse 
width of 20 μs and pulse number of 964. The results showed that prolonged 
storage time and frozen-thawed pretreatment led to significant increases in 
volatile compounds due to lipid and protein oxidation. PEF also resulted in 
significant changes of volatile compounds in different meat cuts. Tempo-
ral dominance of sensations showed that both storage and PEF treatment 
affected the temporal flavor of meaty and oxidized flavor attributes. Particu-
larly, a longer storage period was associated with oxidized flavor, while PEF-
treated samples were associated with browned, juicy, livery, and meaty flavor 
attributes. Effects of PEF and OMF combination technology on the extension 
of supercooled state within chicken breasts were investigated by Mok et al. 
(2017). They observed that the PEF + OMF supercooling was highly effective 
in the maintenance of original meat qualities without significant physical 
damages or chemical changes, which opens up the possibility of advanced 
designing of innovative food freezers for long-term preservation of “fresh-
like” foods at subzero temperature.
9.2.4 Cold Plasma Technology
Cold plasma technology (CPT) has shown promise as a decontamination 
tool on inert food-contact surfaces, foods, and abiotic surfaces (Klockow and 
Keener, 2009; Misra et al., 2011; Niemira, 2012). CPT has numerous potential 
applications for the food industry including the disinfection of food surfaces 
including meat, poultry, and fresh produce and dry ingredients (Fernandez 
et al., 2013; Noriega et al., 2011; Ziuzina et al., 2014). This technology has also 
been successfully applied for surface decontamination of packaging material 
and for improving functional properties of polymeric materials (Güleç et al., 
2006; Lee et al., 2015; Ozdemir et al., 1999; Pankaj et al., 2014). The antimicro-
bial efficacy of CPT is related to the plasma source, the power level, the gas 
mixture used in plasma generation, and duration of exposure. The inactiva-
tion effect of CPT on pathogenic and spoilage microbes pertinent to a range 
of foods has been demonstrated extensively. Cold plasma provides inacti-
vation effects through the generation of various reactive species which are 
lethal to microbial cells. Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species are the main 
species responsible for antimicrobial effects with strong oxidative damages 
to cellular components. One of the major mechanisms of action for CPT is 
the chemical effects observed through the formation of reactive gas species 
(ROS). Gas plasma offers a very effective route to surface disinfection and  

305
Emerging Technologies for the Meat Processing Industry
decontamination, benefiting from many of the highly reactive ROS such as 
OH radicals, singlet and triplet oxygen, and superoxide. Most of these reac-
tive species interact with water leading to the formation of OH– which are 
deleterious to the microbial cells by causing up to 90% of DNA damage and 
oxidation of cellular membranes and other cell components (Liao et al., 2017; 
Thirumdas et al., 2015). Most of these reactive (gas) species revert back to 
original (gas) form within minutes after treatment due to their short half-
life. There are two mechanisms responsible for microbial inactivation: (1) 
electrostatic disruption and (2) oxidation or damage of membrane or cellular 
components. In most of the cases, plasma treatment causes disintegration of 
microbial cells and induces pitting on microbial cells as shown in Figures 9.1 
and 9.2.
Plasma technologies offer a range of generation methods (e.g., dielectric 
barrier discharge, microwave plasma, pen-type plasma or plasma-treated 
H2O2
O2•–
O2
O2
NO2  +
decomposes
Reactive and
harmful
Endogenous
sources
Cytosol
Exogenous
sources
Cytoplasm
membrane
Membrane lipid
and protein
Cell wall
Nucleus
ONOO•
HO2•
H2O
NO•
H3O–
DNA
Charged particles
Protein
H2O–
e–
e–
e–
H2O
H2O+
H2O
H•
H+
•OH
2H+
FIGURE 9.1
Dissociation of water molecule into reactive species and microbial inactivation mechanisms of 
cold plasma technology in biological and physical aspects.
(a)
(b)
(c)
6 μm
1 μm
6 μm
1 μm
6 μm
1 μm
FIGURE 9.2
Scanning electron microscopic pictures of Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 12600 on the beef jerky. 
(a) Before plasma treatment. (b) After plasma treatment for 5 min. (c) After heat treatment to 
70°C for 5 min. (From Kim, J.-S. et al., Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 22, 
124–130, 2014.)

306
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
water) and method of product exposure (e.g., in-package, surface treatment), 
which can be applied to a range of meat products. Decontamination of fresh 
pork using microwave plasma (2.45 GHz, 1.2 kW) has shown to maintain 
microbial load in the range of 2–3 log cfu/g during storage at 5ºC for 20 days 
with some changes in color (Fröhling et al., 2012). Similar microbial load 
reductions for E. coli and L. monocytogenes have been reported for dielectric 
barrier plasma treatment of pork loin with input gases of He alone and He + 
O2 (Kim et al., 2013). Cold plasma driven by radio frequency using argon as 
a feed gas has shown a significant reduction of 3–4 log cfu/g in S. aureus on 
the surface of beef jerky after 10 min of treatment time whereas similar log 
reductions were observed after 2 min on the surface of polystyrene with no 
significant change observed in the fatty acid composition, color, and shear 
force of the beef jerky samples (Kim et al., 2014). Table 9.2 shows some recent 
examples of plasma-treated meat products demonstrating application of CPT 
for the meat industry.
One of the key advantages of the cold plasma technique compared to oth-
ers is the fact that it can cause microbial inactivation within a package. The 
effect of in-pack plasma in conjunction with modified atmospheric packag-
ing (MAP) used for common meat products on the inactivation of E. coli, 
L. monocytogenes, and S. aureus associated with meat products was investi-
gated by Han et al. (2016). They observed a maximum reduction of 1.5 log 
using a high-oxygen atmosphere, while using air and high nitrogen atmo-
spheres yielded lower antimicrobial efficacy. In-package decontamination of 
ready-to-eat meat products sealed in linear-low-density polyethylene bags 
with 30% O2 was reported to reduce microbial load in the range of 0.8 ± 
0.4 to 1.6 ± 0.5 log cfu/g depending on power and treatment time with sig-
nificant increase in thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) and loss 
of redness value by 70% after a 14-day storage period (Rød et al., 2012). A 
study carried out by Wang et al. (2016) showed that no significant differences 
were observed in mesophiles, psychrophiles, and pseudomonas counts for 
plasma-treated (80 kV for 180 s) chicken fillets packed in food trays contain-
ing air and control, whereas a significant reduction in spoilage microbes 
were observed for plasma-treated chicken fillets packed in modified atmo-
sphere (MA) gas (O2:CO2:N2 = 65:30:5).
Studies have shown that the cold plasma technique can be employed for 
decontamination of meat surfaces, which poses significant food safety chal-
lenges. Numerous reactive chemical species formed during plasma depend-
ing on the gas composition. These short-lived reactive species not only 
have antimicrobial effects but may also cause oxidation of macromolecules 
leading to alteration of sensory and nutritional properties. CPT has shown 
to cause lipid oxidation in plasma-treated bresaola (Rød et al., 2012), raw 
pork, and beef (Jayasena et al., 2015). Generally, high plasma power, treat-
ment time, storage conditions posttreatments, and lipid content of meat are 
some key factors which govern the rate of lipid oxidation in meat products. 
Oxidation of lipids is mainly attributed to the formation of highly reactive  

307
Emerging Technologies for the Meat Processing Industry
TABLE 9.2
Application of Cold Plasma Technology for Meat Processing
Application
Processing Conditions
  Salient Findings
References
Microbial 
inactivation 
of beef jerky
Dielectric barrier 
discharge using a 
bipolar square 
waveform voltage at 
15 kHz; ambient air; 
treatment 
time: 0–10 min
2–3 log cfu/g 
reduction; no 
significant changes in 
the metmyoglobin 
content, shear force, 
and myofibrillar 
fragmentation index; 
some changes in 
sensorial properties of 
plasma-treated beef 
jerky samples
Yong et al. (2017)
Shelf life of 
chicken fillets
Plasma treatment (80 kV 
for 3 min) in air or 
modified atmosphere 
gas 
(O2:CO2:N2 = 65:30:5) 
and stored at 4°C after 
treatment
Improved microbiologi-
cal shelf life of 
plasma-treated 
samples in modified 
atmosphere
No significant 
differences in the 
surface L* value 
regardless of the 
treatment
Wang et al. (2016)
Nitrate 
reduction in 
emulsion-
type sausages
Plasma-treated water
No significant 
differences in total 
aerobic count, color, 
peroxide value, and 
sensory qualities 
between control 
(sodium nitrate) and 
plasma-treated water 
for the manufacture of 
emulsion-type 
sausage
Jung et al. (2015)
Pork loins
Dielectric barrier 
discharge plasma 
(3 kV, 30 kHz bipolar 
square wave) with 
input gases He and 
He + O2
Treatment time up to 
10 min
He + O2 showing 
higher efficiency of 
microbial reduction 
when compared to He 
alone
Higher inactivation 
with longer treatment 
time for Listeria 
monocytogenes and 
Escherichia coli; higher 
TBARS values for 
He + O2; significant 
differences in sensory 
quality
Kim et al. (2013)
TBARS, thiobarbituric acid reactive substances.

308
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
oxidative species formed during plasma treatment. CPT has shown that the 
use of nitrates can be avoided by the application of plasma-treated water 
in the manufacture of emulsion-type sausages cured with plasma-treated 
water. Sausages prepared using plasma-treated water as a nitrite source in 
curing process or synthetic sodium nitrite at a concentration of nitrite ion 
70 mg/kg did not show any noticeable effects on the total aerobic bacterial 
counts, color, and peroxide values of sausages compared with those with 
sodium nitrite throughout 28 days of storage at 4°C. Further, sausage with 
added plasma-treated water had lower concentrations of residual nitrite 
compared to sodium nitrite during the storage period (Jung et al., 2015). 
Mutagenicity using the Ames test and immune toxicity studies with 8-week-
old female mice of emulsion-type sausage cured with plasma-treated water 
showed negative results thus demonstrating that the plasma-treated water 
can be a suitable replacement for sodium nitrite for meat products (Kim et 
al., 2016).
Studies have shown that plasma technologies can improve microbial 
safety profile of meat and can extend microbiological shelf life of meat 
products. However, higher power and treatment times required to enhance 
microbial load reduction in meat products may cause undesirable changes 
in nutritional and eating quality of meat. These undesirable changes are 
mainly associated with lipid oxidation, changes in color, and development of 
odor. Limited studies have demonstrated the effect of plasma on nutritional 
and sensorial quality of plasma-treated meat products. Further studies are 
required to establish the commercial viability of CPT for surface decontami-
nation or meat product applications.
9.2.5 Light-Based Technologies
Light-based technologies are reported and described with several synonyms 
including pulsed light (PL), high-intensity pulsed light (HIPL), intense light 
pulse (ILP), pulsed white light (PWL), and pulsed ultraviolet light (P-UV). In 
some cases, these are also described and reported based on the wavelength 
employed within the electromagnetic spectrum. Apart from physicochemi-
cal properties of the food, the efficacy of light-based technologies strongly 
depends on various factors including wavelength, pulsing, treatment dura-
tion, and energy (fluence, J/cm−2) as shown in Figure 9.3 (Heinrich et al., 2016). 
Within the food industry, ultraviolet (UV) light wavelengths in the range of 
10–400 nm have been shown effective against various pathogenic and spoilage 
microorganisms pertinent to food. UV light can be classified in three differ-
ent regions depending on the wavelength or penetration power: UV-A, UV-B, 
and UV-C range from 315–400 nm, 280–315 nm, and 200–280 nm, respectively. 
Among these classifications, UV-C is very effective for inactivation of various 
pathogenic and spoilage microorganisms. PL (combined visible and UV pho-
tons at energies up to 50 J/cm−2) has a broad spectrum of wavelength in the 
range of 170–1000 nm. Compared to UV light, PL has higher intensity. Infrared 

309
Emerging Technologies for the Meat Processing Industry
radiations have wavelengths in range of 750 nm to 1 mm, which can be classi-
fied in three spectral regions based on wavelength, namely near infrared (NIR, 
0.75–1.4 μm), mid-infrared (MIR, 1.4–3.0 μm), and far-infrared (FIR, 3–1000 μm), 
respectively.
Light-based technologies including UV light, PL, and infrared irradiations 
are nonthermal with mild thermal character. These techniques find applica-
tions in meat processing for improving the safety profile of meat and ready-
to-eat meat products. Light-based technologies are of particular interest for 
decontamination of meat products and surfaces as they do not require potable 
water to achieve desired microbial safety. One of the key advantages of light-
based technologies is that they can be easily applied to the processing line 
after thermal treatment, for example, after slicing of cooked ham where post-
cooking contamination can be eliminated prior to packaging. Compared to 
other novel technologies, the application of light-based technologies seems to 
be legally placed in better position at least in the United States because of its 
approval in the production, processing, and handling of food and food-contact 
surfaces for the control of surface microorganisms, provided that the treat-
ment uses a xenon lamp with emission wavelengths between 200 and 1000 
nm, with a pulse width not exceeding 2 ms, and the cumulative level of treat-
ment does not exceed 12 J/cm−2 (21 CFR 179.41, issued by the Food and Drug 
Administration, US FDA, 2005) (Rajkovic et al., 2010a). Whereas, in the EU, 
Food matrix
Opacity or
transparency
Surface characteristics
and topography
Composition
Microbial load
Type of
microorganisms
Intrinsic conditions
Growth parameters
Treatment
conditions
Wavelength and dose
Extrinsic control
parameters
Geometry and setup
FIGURE 9.3
Various factors affecting efficacy of light-based technologies. Light-based technolo-
gies have been reported for surface decontamination of fresh-cut meat surfaces as well as  
ready-to-eatmeat products (see Table 9.3).

310
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
according to EC 258/97, novel technologies require evidence to prove that new 
technologies do not alter nutritional composition of treated foods. Research 
carried out to date shows minimal or no changes in nutritional composition of 
food treated with light-based technologies.
UV light in the range of 200–280 nm (UV-C) has been used primarily for 
decontamination of food surfaces and causes microbial inactivation that 
is mainly due to photochemical, photothermal, or photophysical effects, 
which include chemical modification of proteins and DNA. The formation 
of 6,4-photoproducts and cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers in their DNA, 
alteration of cellular components, and preventing cells from replicating are 
key mechanisms associated with microbial inactivation (Anderson et al., 
2000; Krisko and Radman, 2010; Sommers et al., 2017). UV-C light has been 
tested to improve the microbial safety and quality of chicken meat (Sommers  
et al., 2017), frog meat (Silva et al., 2015), sliced fermented salami (Rajkovic 
et al., 2017), and ready-to-eat cured meat products (Ganan et al., 2013) 
against pathogenic microorganisms including L. monocytogenes, Salmonella 
Typhimurium, and S. aureus. Significant reductions of up to 1.5 and 1.8 log cfu/
cm−2 for L. monocytogenes and S. Typhimurium with a fluence of 11.9 J/cm−2 can 
be obtained for ready-to-eat meat products (Ganan et al., 2013). A systematic 
review was carried out on the sensory quality of various types of meat and 
meat products treated by light-based technologies, including PL, PWL, and 
pulsed UV light (Rajkovic et al., 2010b). They concluded that sensory quality 
strongly depends on animal species, type of meat product, and dose applied. 
Odor followed color is one of the most significant sensory parameters that 
are affected by light-based technologies. Light-based technologies have less 
impact on sensory quality of dry-cured meat compared to cooked meat 
products while fermented meat products are the least influenced.
TABLE 9.3
Application of Light-Based Technologies for Meat Processing
Light-Based 
Technologies
Application
Conditions
Salient Findings
Reference
PL
Fermented 
salami 
slices
Fluence of 
3–15 J/cm−2
Treatment 
followed by 
MAP 80% 
CO2/20% N2
Listeria monocytogenes, 
Escherichia coli 
0157:H7, Salmonella 
Typhimurium, and 
Staphylococcus aureus 
for 2.24, 2.29, 2.25, and 
2.12 log cfu/g on the 
surface of dry 
fermented salami
No significant increase 
in lipid oxidation 
except for samples 
treated at 15 J/cm−2
Rajkovic et al. 
(2017)
(Continued)

311
Emerging Technologies for the Meat Processing Industry
TABLE 9.3 (Continued)
Application of Light-Based Technologies for Meat Processing
Light-Based 
Technologies
Application
Conditions
Salient Findings
Reference
PL treatment 
(30% UV 
light [12% 
UV-C, 10% 
UV-B, and 
8% UV-A], 
30% 
infrared 
radiation, 
and 40% 
visible 
light)
Ready-to-
eat 
dry-cured 
meat 
products 
(salchichón 
and loin
Fluence rate of 
0.7, 2.1, 4.2, 
8.4, and 11.9 
J/cm−2
Maximum log 
reductions between 
1.5 and 1.8 cfu/cm−2 
obtained for both 
microorganisms at 
fluence rate of 11.9 J/
cm−2
No significant changes 
in sensorial properties
Ganan et al. 
(2013)
UV-C 
intensities 
(0.65, 1.04, 
and 
1.68 mW/s/
cm−2)
Bullfrog 
back meat
Packed 
bullfrog’s back 
meat was then 
exposed to 
low 
(0.65 mW/s/
cm−2), 
medium (1.04  
mW/s/cm−2), 
and high 
(1.68 mW/s/
cm−2) UV-C 
intensities 
over different 
time intervals 
(60, 100, and 
140 s)
A reduction of 3 log 
cfu/g for all treat-
ments compared to 
control
Silva et al. 
(2015)
Pilot-scale 
pulsed UV 
light system 
with two 
pairs of 
pulsed UV 
lamps
Whole 
chicken
0.25 J/cm−2 per 
pulse; 30, 45, 
60, 90, 120, 
and 180 s; 
distance: 5 
cm; 3 Hz
0.87–1.43 log (E. coli)
Temperature increase 
up to 44.1°C; 
discolorations at high 
energy doses
Keklik et al. 
(2011)
PL (200–1100 
nm)
Pork
3, 10, or 30 J/
cm−2; distance 
3 cm; 1 
Hz/4°C; 15 
days
0.96 log (raw pork) and 
0.99 log (roast pork)
Temperature increase 
by 11°C–12°C, 
dose-dependent color 
changes of pork; 
dose-dependent lipid 
peroxidation of 
salmon and pork at 
high fluencies
Nicorescu et al. 
(2014)
(Continued)

312
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
9.3 Conclusions
Various new technologies have been advocated for potential application 
across the meat production chain for food safety intervention and meat 
product development. Various emerging technologies discussed in this 
chapter demonstrates the potential to replace, at least partly, the traditional 
embraced techniques for meat processing and preservation, as the industry 
seeks to become more environmentally and economically sustainable. Apart 
from decontamination, novel technologies can also play an important role in 
various operations including drying, cooking, curing, freezing, and packag-
ing with an aim to improve the process efficiency, quality, and nutritional 
profile of meat products.
TABLE 9.3 (Continued)
Application of Light-Based Technologies for Meat Processing
Light-Based 
Technologies
Application
Conditions
Salient Findings
Reference
ILPs in range 
of UV to IR
Beef/pork, 
chicken/
turkey and 
deer/
rabbit/
kangaroo
1 and 5 pulses; 
3.4 J/cm−2 per 
pulse; 0.5 Hz; 
distance: 6 
and 10 cm; 
discharge 
voltage: 3 kV
Dose and type of 
meat-dependent 
sensory changes; 
impact on odor of all 
meat; significant 
sensory deviation of 
turkey; color 
unaffected in chicken 
and rabbit; dose-
dependent discolor-
ation of pork and 
turkey meat
Tomašević 
(2015)
PL treatment 
(30% UV 
light [12% 
UV-C, 10% 
UV-B, and 
8% UV-A], 
30% 
infrared 
radiation, 
and 40% 
visible 
light)
Cooked 
ham
Bologna
0.7, 2.1, 4.2, 8.4 
J/cm−2; 
through PA/
PE/VA 
plastic bags/
aerobic and 
vacuum 
conditions, 
4°C, up to 54 
days
L. monocytogenes
0.75–1.78 log (cooked 
ham) 0.41–1.11 log 
(bologna)
Low levels of lipid 
oxidation and slight 
discoloration directly 
after PL exposure; no 
impact on sensory 
attributes of cooked 
ham, negative impact 
on sensory properties 
of bologna at high 
fluencies, shelf-life 
extension of cooked 
ham by 30 days under 
vacuum packaging
Hierro et al. 
(2011)
MAP, modified atmospheric packaging; PL, pulsed light; UV, ultraviolet.

313
Emerging Technologies for the Meat Processing Industry
This chapter identifies a group of selected technologies that have shown sig-
nificant potential for improving shelf life and technological properties of meat 
that has emerged during the past few years. These technologies represent a 
rapid, efficient, and reliable alternative to improve the quality of meat, but it also 
has the potential to develop new products with a unique functionality. Finally, 
it is worth noting that while many innovative food processing techniques have 
shown good potential for improving the nutritive quality of processed meat, a 
significant proportion has not been scaled up for new food applications.
The exact mechanisms of emerging technologies discussed in this chapter 
for meat give only a limited amount of information. There are numerous, 
complex, and perplexing mechanisms that are proposed. A better under-
standing of the complex physicochemical mechanisms of action and their 
effects on the technological and functional properties of meat products 
would also contribute to reinforce the commercial viability of these tech-
nologies for the meat industry.
References
Alarcon-Rojo, A., Janacua, H., Rodriguez, J., Paniwnyk, L. and Mason, T. (2015). 
Power ultrasound in meat processing. Meat Science, 107, 86–93.
Anderson, J. G., Rowan, N. J., MacGregor, S. J., Fouracre, R. A. and Farish, O. (2000). 
Inactivation of food-borne enteropathogenic bacteria and spoilage fungi using 
pulsed-light. IEEE Transactions on Plasma Science, 28(1), 83–88.
Arroyo, C. and Lyng, J. G. (2017). Electroprocessing of meat and meat products. In: 
Cummins, E. J. and Lyng, J. G. (eds.) Emerging Technologies in Meat Processing: 
Production, Processing and Technology. Wiley Blackwell, pp. 103–130.
Barba, F. J., Parniakov, O., Pereira, S. A. et al. (2015). Current applications and new 
opportunities for the use of pulsed electric fields in food science and industry. 
Food Research International, 77, 773–798.
Barekat, S. and Soltanizadeh, N. (2017). Improvement of meat tenderness by simulta-
neous application of high-intensity ultrasonic radiation and papain treatment. 
Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 39, 223–229.
Butz, P. and Tauscher, B. (2002). Emerging technologies: Chemical aspects. Food 
Research International, 35(2), 279–284.
Caraveo, O., Alarcon-Rojo, A. D., Renteria, A., Santellano, E. and Paniwnyk, L. (2015). 
Physicochemical and microbiological characteristics of beef treated with high-
intensity ultrasound and stored at 4°C. Journal of the Science of Food and Agricul-
ture, 95(12), 2487–2493.
Cárcel, J., Benedito, J., Bon, J. and Mulet, A. (2007). High intensity ultrasound effects 
on meat brining. Meat Science, 76(4), 611–619.
Cárcel, J., Benedito, J., Mulet, A. and Riera, E. (2003). Mass transfer effects during 
meat ultrasonic brining. In Proceedings of World Congress on Ultrasonics WCU. 
Paris, France, 431–434.
Chemat, F. and Khan, M. K. (2011). Applications of ultrasound in food technology: Pro-
cessing, preservation and extraction. Ultrasonics Sonochemistry, 18(4), 813–835.

314
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Dickens, J., Lyon, C. and Wilson, R. (1991). Effect of ultrasonic radiation on some 
physical characteristics of broiler breast muscle and cooked meat. Poultry Sci-
ence, 70(2), 389–396.
Dolatowski, Z. J. and Twarda, J. (2004). Einfluss von Ultraschall auf das Wasserbind-
ungsvermögen von Rindfleisch. Fleischwirtschaft, 84(12), 95–99.
Earnshaw, R., Appleyard, J. and Hurst, R. (1995). Understanding physical inactiva-
tion processes: Combined preservation opportunities using heat, ultrasound 
and pressure. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 28(2), 197–219.
Faridnia, F., Bekhit, A. E. D. A., Niven, B. and Oey, I. (2014). Impact of pulsed electric 
fields and post-mortem vacuum ageing on beef longissimus thoracis muscles. 
International Journal of Food Science and Technology, 49(11), 2339–2347.
Faridnia, F., Ma, Q. L., Bremer, P. J., Burritt, D. J., Hamid, N. and Oey, I. (2015). Effect 
of freezing as pre-treatment prior to pulsed electric field processing on quality 
traits of beef muscles. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 29, 31–40.
Fernandez, A., Noriega, E. and Thompson, A. (2013). Inactivation of Salmonella 
enterica serovar Typhimurium on fresh produce by cold atmospheric gas plasma 
technology. Food Microbiology, 33(1), 24–29.
Fröhling, A., Durek, J., Schnabel, U., Ehlbeck, J., Bolling, J. and Schlüter, O. (2012). Indi-
rect plasma treatment of fresh pork: Decontamination efficiency and effects on 
quality attributes. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 16, 381–390.
Ganan, M., Hierro, E., Hospital, X. F., Barroso, E. and Fernández, M. (2013). Use of 
pulsed light to increase the safety of ready-to-eat cured meat products. Food 
Control, 32(2), 512–517.
Got, F., Culioli, J., Berge, P. et al. (1999). Effects of high-intensity high-frequency ultra-
sound on ageing rate, ultrastructure and some physico-chemical properties of 
beef. Meat Science, 51(1), 35–42.
Güleç, H. A., SarIoglu, K. and Mutlu, M. (2006). Modification of food contacting sur-
faces by plasma polymerisation technique. Part I: Determination of hydrophilic-
ity, hydrophobicity and surface free energy by contact angle method. Journal of 
Food Engineering, 75(2), 187–195.
Han, L., Ziuzina, D., Heslin, C. et al. (2016). Controlling microbial safety challenges of 
meat using high voltage atmospheric cold plasma. Frontiers in Microbiology, 7, 977.
Heinrich, V., Zunabovic, M., Varzakas, T., Bergmair, J. and Kneifel, W. (2016). Pulsed 
light treatment of different food types with a special focus on meat: A critical 
review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 56(4), 591–613.
Herceg, Z., Markov, K., Sobota Šalamon, B., Režek Jambrak, A., Vukušić, T. and 
Kaliterna, J. (2013). Effect of high intensity ultrasound treatment on the growth 
of food spoilage bacteria. Food Technology and Biotechnology, 51(3), 352–359.
Hierro, E., Barroso, E., De la Hoz, L., Ordóñez, J. A., Manzano, S. and Fernández, M. 
(2011). Efficacy of pulsed light for shelf-life extension and inactivation of Listeria 
monocytogenes on ready-to-eat cooked meat products. Innovative Food Science and 
Emerging Technologies, 12(3), 275–281.
Hoover, D. G. (2000). Ultrasound. Journal of Food Science, 65(s8), 93–95.
Jayasena, D. D., Kim, H. J., Yong, H. I. et al. (2015). Flexible thin-layer dielectric bar-
rier discharge plasma treatment of pork butt and beef loin: Effects on pathogen 
inactivation and meat-quality attributes. Food Microbiology, 46, 51–57.
Jayasooriya, S., Bhandari, B., Torley, P. and D’arcy, B. (2004). Effect of high power 
ultrasound waves on properties of meat: A review. International Journal of Food 
Properties, 7(2), 301–319.

315
Emerging Technologies for the Meat Processing Industry
Jayasooriya, S. D., Torley, P., D’arcy, B. R. and Bhandari, B. R. (2007). Effect of high 
power ultrasound and ageing on the physical properties of bovine Semitendi-
nosus and Longissimus muscles. Meat Science, 75(4), 628–639.
Jung, S., Kim, H. J., Park, S. et al. (2015). The use of atmospheric pressure plasma-treated 
water as a source of nitrite for emulsion-type sausage. Meat Science, 108, 132–137.
Kang, D.-C., Wang, A.-R., Zhou, G.-H., Zhang, W.-G., Xu, S.-M. and Guo, G.-P. (2016). 
Power ultrasonic on mass transport of beef: Effects of ultrasound intensity and 
NaCl concentration. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 35, 36–44.
Keklik, N., Demirci, A. and Bock, R. (2011). Surface decontamination of whole chicken 
carcasses using a pilot-scale pulsed UV light system. Transact ASABE, 54, 993–
1000.
Kim, J.-S., Lee, E.-J., Choi, E. H. and Kim, Y.-J. (2014). Inactivation of Staphylococcus 
aureus on the beef jerky by radio-frequency atmospheric pressure plasma dis-
charge treatment. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 22, 124–130.
Kim, H. J., Sung, N. Y., Yong, H. I. et al. (2016). Mutagenicity and immune toxicity of 
emulsion-type sausage cured with plasma-treated water. Korean Journal for Food 
Science of Animal Resources, 36(4), 494–498.
Kim, H.-J., Yong, H. I., Park, S., Choe, W. and Jo, C. (2013). Effects of dielectric bar-
rier discharge plasma on pathogen inactivation and the physicochemical and 
sensory characteristics of pork loin. Current Applied Physics, 13(7), 1420–1425.
Klockow, P. A. and Keener, K. M. (2009). Safety and quality assessment of packaged 
spinach treated with a novel ozone-generation system. LWT-Food Science and 
Technology, 42(6), 1047–1053.
Kordowska-Wiater, M. and Stasiak, D. M. (2011). Effect of ultrasound on survival of 
gram-negative bacteria on chicken skin surface. Bull Vet Inst Pulawy, 55, 207–210.
Krisko, A. and Radman, M. (2010). Protein damage and death by radiation in Esch-
erichia coli and Deinococcus radiodurans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, 107(32), 14373–14377.
Lee, T., Puligundla, P. and Mok, C. (2015). Inactivation of foodborne pathogens on the 
surfaces of different packaging materials using low-pressure air plasma. Food 
Control, 51, 149–155.
Liao, X., Liu, D., Xiang, Q. et al. (2017). Inactivation mechanisms of non-thermal 
plasma on microbes: A review. Food Control, 75, 83–91.
Ma, Q., Hamid, N., Oey, I. et al. (2016). Effect of chilled and freezing pre-treatments 
prior to pulsed electric field processing on volatile profile and sensory attributes 
of cooked lamb meats. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 37(Part 
C), 359–374.
McDonnell, C. K., Lyng, J. G., Arimi, J. M. and Allen, P. (2014). The acceleration of 
pork curing by power ultrasound: A pilot-scale production. Innovative Food Sci-
ence and Emerging Technologies, 26, 191–198.
Misra, N., Tiwari, B., Raghavarao, K. and Cullen, P. J. (2011). Nonthermal plasma 
inactivation of food-borne pathogens. Food Engineering Reviews, 3(3–4), 159–170.
Mok, J. H., Her, J. -Y., Kang, T., Hoptowit, R. and Jun, S. (2017). Effects of pulsed elec-
tric field (PEF) and oscillating magnetic field (OMF) combination technology 
on the extension of supercooling for chicken breasts. Journal of Food Engineering, 
196, 27–35.
Morild, R. K., Christiansen, P., Sørensen, A. H., Nonboe, U. and Aabo, S. (2011). Inac-
tivation of pathogens on pork by steam-ultrasound treatment. Journal of Food 
Protection, 74(5), 769–775.

316
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Mosqueda-Melgar, J., Elez-Martinez, P., Raybaudi-Massilia, R. M., and Martin-Belloso, 
O. (2008). Effects of pulsed electric fields on pathogenic microorganisms of 
major concern in fluid foods: A review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutri-
tion, 48(8), 747–759.
Musavian, H. S., Krebs, N. H., Nonboe, U., Corry, J. E. and Purnell, G. (2014). Com-
bined steam and ultrasound treatment of broilers at slaughter: A promising 
intervention to significantly reduce numbers of naturally occurring campylo-
bacters on carcasses. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 176, 23–28.
Nicorescu, I., Nguyen, B., Chevalier, S. and Orange, N. (2014). Effects of pulsed light 
on the organoleptic properties and shelf-life extension of pork and salmon. Food 
Control, 44, 138–145.
Niemira, B. A. (2012). Cold plasma decontamination of foods. Annual Review of Food 
Science and Technology, 3, 125–142.
Noriega, E., Shama, G., Laca, A., Díaz, M. and Kong, M. G. (2011). Cold atmospheric 
gas plasma disinfection of chicken meat and chicken skin contaminated with 
Listeria innocua. Food Microbiology, 28(7), 1293–1300.
Ozdemir, M., Yurteri, C. U. and Sadikoglu, H. (1999). Physical polymer surface modi-
fication methods and applications in food packaging polymers. Critical Reviews 
in Food Science and Nutrition, 39(5), 457–477.
Pagán, R., Manas, P., Alvarez, I. and Condón, S. (1999a). Resistance of Listeria mono-
cytogenes to ultrasonic waves under pressure at sublethal (manosonication) and 
lethal (manothermosonication) temperatures. Food Microbiology, 16(2), 139–148.
Pagán, R., Manas, P., Raso, J. and Condón, S. (1999b). Bacterial resistance to ultrasonic 
waves under pressure at nonlethal (manosonication) and lethal (manothermo-
sonication) temperatures. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 65(1), 297–300.
Pankaj, S. K., Bueno-Ferrer, C., Misra, N. et al. (2014). Applications of cold plasma 
technology in food packaging. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 35(1), 5–17.
Pathak, V., Singh, V. and Sanjay, Y. (2011). Ultrasound as a modern tool for carcass 
evaluation and meat processing: A review. International Journal of Meat Science, 
1(2), 83–92.
Piyasena, P., Mohareb, E. and McKellar, R. (2003). Inactivation of microbes using 
ultrasound: A review. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 87(3), 207–216.
Rajkovic, A., Smigic, N. and Devlieghere, F. (2010a). Contemporary strategies in com-
bating microbial contamination in food chain. International Journal of Food Micro-
biology, 141(Supplement 1), S29–S42.
Rajkovic, A., Tomasevic, I., De Meulenaer, B. and Devlieghere, F. (2017). The effect of 
pulsed UV light on Escherichia coli O157:H7, Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonella 
Typhimurium, Staphylococcus aureus, and staphylococcal enterotoxin A on sliced 
fermented salami and its chemical quality. Food Control, 73(Part B), 829–837.
Rajkovic, A., Tomasevic, I., Smigic, N., Uyttendaele, M., Radovanovic, R. and Dev-
lieghere, F. (2010b). Pulsed UV light as an intervention strategy against Listeria 
monocytogenes and Escherichia coli O157:H7 on the surface of a meat slicing knife. 
Journal of Food Engineering, 100(3), 446–451.
Rød, S. K., Hansen, F., Leipold, F. and Knøchel, S. (2012). Cold atmospheric pres-
sure plasma treatment of ready-to-eat meat: Inactivation of Listeria innocua and 
changes in product quality. Food Microbiology, 30(1), 233–238.
Silva, H., Costa, M., Frasao, B. et al. (2015). Efficacy of ultraviolet-C light to eliminate 
Staphylococcus aureus on precooked shredded bullfrog back meat. Journal of Food 
Safety, 35(3), 318–323.

317
Emerging Technologies for the Meat Processing Industry
Siró, I., Vén, C., Balla, C., Jónás, G., Zeke, I. and Friedrich, L. (2009). Application of 
an ultrasonic assisted curing technique for improving the diffusion of sodium 
chloride in porcine meat. Journal of Food Engineering, 91(2), 353–362.
Sommers, C., Sheen, S., Scullen, O. J. and Mackay, W. (2017). Inactivation of Staphylo-
coccus saprophyticus in chicken meat and purge using thermal processing, high 
pressure processing, gamma radiation, and ultraviolet light (254 nm). Food Con-
trol, 75, 78–82.
Stadnik, J. and Dolatowski, Z. J. (2011). Influence of sonication on Warner-Bratzler 
shear force, colour and myoglobin of beef (m. semimembranosus). European 
Food Research and Technology, 233(4), 553.
Suwandy, V., Carne, A., van de Ven, R., Bekhit, A. E.-D. A. and Hopkins, D. L. (2015a). 
Effect of pulsed electric field on the proteolysis of cold boned beef M. Longis-
simus lumborum and M. Semimembranosus. Meat Science, 100, 222–226.
Suwandy, V., Carne, A., van de Ven, R., Bekhit, A. E.-D. A. and Hopkins, D. L. (2015b). 
Effect of pulsed electric field treatment on hot-boned muscles of different poten-
tial tenderness. Meat Science, 105, 25–31.
Thirumdas, R., Sarangapani, C. and Annapure, U. S. (2015). Cold plasma: A novel 
non-thermal technology for food processing. Food Biophysics, 10(1), 1–11.
Toepfl, S., Siemer, C., Saldaña-Navarro, G. and Heinz, V. (2014). Overview of pulsed 
electric fields processing for food. In: Sun, D.-W. (ed.) Emerging Technologies for 
Food Processing (2nd Ed). San Diego, CA: Academic Press, pp. 93–114.
Tomašević, I. (2015). The effect of intense light pulses on the sensory quality and 
instrumental color of meat from different animal breeds. Biotechnology in Animal 
Husbandry, 31(2), 273–281.
Turantaş, F., Kılıç, G. B. and Kılıç, B. (2015). Ultrasound in the meat industry: General 
applications and decontamination efficiency. International Journal of Food Micro-
biology, 198, 59–69.
Wang, J. M., Zhuang, H., Hinton, A. and Zhang, J. H. (2016). Influence of in-package 
cold plasma treatment on microbiological shelf life and appearance of fresh 
chicken breast fillets. Food Microbiology, 60, 142–146.
Xiong, G., Zhang, L., Zhang, W. and Wu, J. (2012). Influence of ultrasound and proteo-
lytic enzyme inhibitors on muscle degradation, tenderness, and cooking loss of 
hens during aging. Czech Journal of Food Sciences, 30(3), 195–205.
Yong, H. I., Lee, H., Park, S. et al. (2017). Flexible thin-layer plasma inactivation of 
bacteria and mold survival in beef jerky packaging and its effects on the meat’s 
physicochemical properties. Meat Science, 123, 151–156.
Zayas, J. and Orlova, T. (1970). The application of ultrasonic vibrations for tenderisa-
tion of meat. Izvestia vysshykh unhebnykh zavedeniy, 4, 54–56.
Zhao, Y.-Y., Wang, P., Zou, Y.-F. et al. (2014). Effect of pre-emulsification of plant lipid 
treated by pulsed ultrasound on the functional properties of chicken breast 
myofibrillar protein composite gel. Food Research International, 58, 98–104.
Ziuzina, D., Patil, S., Cullen, P. J., Keener, K. and Bourke, P. (2014). Atmospheric cold 
plasma inactivation of Escherichia coli, Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium 
and Listeria monocytogenes inoculated on fresh produce. Food Microbiology, 42, 
109–116.


319
10
Reduction of Contaminant Content 
in Processed Meats
Peter Šimko
CONTENTS
10.1 Introduction ................................................................................................320
10.2 Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons .........................................................320
10.2.1 Characterization of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons..........320
10.2.2 Formation of PAHs during Meat Processing ............................. 321
10.2.2.1 Smoking ............................................................................ 321
10.2.2.2 Grilling ............................................................................. 324
10.2.3 Effect of PAHs on Living Organisms ..........................................325
10.2.4 Legislative Aspects and International Normalization 
of PAHs in Smoked Meat and Liquid Smoke 
 
Flavors .............................................................................................326
10.2.5 Occurrence of PAHs in Smoked Meats .......................................328
10.2.6 Reduction of PAH Concentrations in LSFs ................................329
10.2.6.1 Characterization of Physicochemical Processes 
Taking Place between Liquid Media and LDPE .........335
10.2.7 Reduction of PAH Content in Processed Meats ........................339
10.2.7.1 Reduction of PAH Content during Smoking ..............339
10.2.7.2 Reduction of PAH Content by Their 
Photodecomposition .......................................................340
10.2.7.3 Reduction of PAH Content by Cooking of Smoked 
Sausages ............................................................................342
10.2.7.4 Reduction of PAH Content in Roasted Duck by 
Packaging into LDPE ......................................................344
10.2.7.5 Reduction of PAH Content in Smoked Sausages 
by Packaging into LDPE .................................................344
10.3 General Conclusions ..................................................................................348
Acknowledgment ................................................................................................349
References .............................................................................................................349

320
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
10.1 Introduction
Meat is an important source for protein including essential amino acids, 
fat, minerals, vitamins, and other functional nutrients (Biesalski, 2005), and 
therefore it has been consumed by man to ensure his fundamental nutri-
tional needs, which—finally—has led to the development of modern man-
kind. There is no doubt that the occasional surplus of meat obtained from 
hunted animals had become in the past a base for development of simple 
preservation procedures (such as drying, smoking, salting, fermentation, 
etc.), which made it possible for mankind to survive unfavorable times.
Although up-to-date meat processing procedures are based on current 
scientific and professional knowledge, the contamination of processed meat 
products is still a serious problem due to the fact that some compounds, espe-
cially those highly harmful to human health, are being formed permanently 
in the meat matrix during its processing. Therefore, there is a strong interest 
to find prevention procedures which could lead to minimization of contami-
nant formation during meat processing and storage, or look for and apply 
procedures to eliminate formed contaminants from final products, respec-
tively. Thus, this chapter deals with modern procedures which decrease con-
taminant content in processed meats to ensure that human exposure to these 
compounds is as low as possible.
10.2 Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
10.2.1 Characterization of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are organic compounds contain-
ing only hydrogen and carbon elements in a molecule, consisting of two or 
more condensed aromatic rings linked together, either cataannellated (lin-
early or angularly) or pericondensed. Catacondensed PAHs are alternant 
systems containing only six-membered rings and closed shell systems, with 
all bonding orbitals occupied by two electrons. The entire group of cata-
condensed PAHs can be further divided into branched and nonbranched 
systems. Branched systems are thermodynamically more stable and chemi-
cally less reactive than nonbranched systems of the same size. Conversely, 
pericondensed PAHs are either closed shell systems or neutral free orbitals, 
in which at least one electron is in a nonbonding orbital. Free radicals of this 
type are stable only if the systems have an odd number of carbon atoms. 
In addition, pericondensed PAHs can be further divided into alternant and 
nonalternant, depending on the presence of five- or six-membered rings in 
the molecule (Guillén, 1994). PAHs have a strong lipophilic character and 
therefore they have a tendency to migrate into adipose tissue or nonpolar 

321
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
parts of meat products (Šimko et al., 1993). In general, the stability of PAHs 
depends on environmental conditions and they are, in general, relatively 
stable in the dark. However, light catalyzes their decomposition by oxida-
tion reactions, which happens especially in ultraviolet (UV) light condi-
tions; therefore photodecomposition is a main route of PAH degradation 
in the environment (Skláršová et al., 2012), when numerous intermediate 
oxy- and hydroxy compounds are being formed (Bednáriková et al., 2011).
10.2.2 Formation of PAHs during Meat Processing
10.2.2.1 Smoking
In general, smoke is a polydisperse mixture of liquid and solid components 
with a diameter of 0.08–0.15 μm in gaseous phase of air, carbon oxide, carbon 
dioxide, water vapor, methane, and other gases. Smoke has a variable com-
position that depends on various conditions such as procedure and tempera-
ture of smoke generation, origin and composition of wood, water content in 
wood, etc. (Sikorski, 2004). So far, up to 1100 various chemical compounds 
have been identified and published in literature (Wilms, 2000). The smok-
ing treatment itself is based on successive deposition of compounds such as 
phenol derivatives, carbonyls, organic acids, and their esters, lactones, pyr-
azines, pyrols, and furan derivatives on the food surface with their subse-
quent migration into the food bulk (Maga, 1987). Smoke is generated during 
thermal combustion of wood, consisting roughly of 50% cellulose, 25% hemi-
cellulose, and 25% lignin, with limited access to oxygen. The thermal com-
bustion of these wood components proceeds at 180°C–300°C, 260°C–350°C, 
and 300°C–500°C, respectively. However, the decomposition of the wood (as 
a whole) proceeds also at temperatures reaching up to 900°C and in large 
excess of oxygen even at 1200°C. The smoke produced at 650°C–700°C is 
richest in components able to impart desirable organoleptic properties to the 
treated products. The temperature of generation of smoke can be decreased 
by increasing the humidity of woods (Tóth, and Potthast, 1984; Šimko, 2005).
Apart from the compounds mentioned above, many other compounds are 
also formed during smoke generation. One of the most important groups 
which is harmful to human health is PAHs. These are being formed during 
the thermal decomposition of wood, especially with limited access of oxygen 
in the range of 500°C–900°C (Bartle, 1991).
A mechanism of PAH formation based on reactions with stable and radi-
cal species, including single-ring aromatics, other PAHs, and acetylene, fol-
lowed by the nucleation or inception of small soot particles with subsequent 
soot growth by coagulation and mass addition from gas phase species, and 
carbonization of the particulate materials, is generally accepted (Richter and 
Howard, 2000). A rough scheme of PAH formation during thermal combus-
tion of organic matter is shown in Figure 10.1. During the formation of sin-
gle aromatic rings, propargyl (C3H3) and cyclopentadienyl (C5H5) radicals 

322
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
play a significant role, as follows from Figures 10.2 and 10.3 (McEnally et al., 
2006). The temperature of smoke generation plays a decisive role because 
the amount of PAHs contained in smoke increases linearly with the tem-
perature of smoke generation in the range of 400°C–1000°C (Tóth, and Blaas, 
1972). Apart from the formation itself, the temperature also affects struc-
ture and number of PAH homologues. For example, the number of PAHs 
presented in smoked fish can reach the value of 100 various compounds 
(Grimmer and Böhnke, 1975).
To achieve a rich deep-brown coloring on the surface and very strong 
aroma profile formation of smoked meat products, the time of smoking is 
considerably prolonged (Šimko, 2011). Such products are frequently termed 
as “black-smoked” or “farmhouse smoked,” respectively. However, these 
products also have higher contents of PAHs (Šimko et al., 1991; Roda et al., 
1999; Wilms, 2000). “Wild” or direct smoking under uncontrolled techno-
logical conditions, or at nonexisting legislative measures, which is typical, 
Molecular zone
0.5 nm
H2O
H2
O2
CO2
CO
Fuel and oxidizer (premixed)
Reaction time
50 nm
Coagulation
Surface growth and
coagulation
Particle inception
Particle zone
FIGURE 10.1
Simplified scheme of PAH formation during thermal combustion of organic matter. (Reprinted 
from Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 26, Richter, H. and Howard, J. B., Formation of polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons and their growth to soot—A review of chemical reaction pathways, 
565–608. Copyright 2000 with permission from Elsevier.)

323
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
especially, for households and developing countries, leads to enormous PAH 
contents in smoked foods (Afolabi et al., 1983; Alonge, 1987, 1988; Wretling 
et al., 2010; Fasano et al., 2016).
(n-C4H5)
(Acetylene)
(Propargyl)
(Propargyl)
+
+
H
C
H
C
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
C
C
C
H
H
H
C
C
C
(n-C4H3)
(Acetylene)
(Phenyl)
+
*
*
H
C
H
C
H
H
H
C
C
C
C
(Benzene)
(Benzene)
+ H
*
*
*
FIGURE 10.2
Schematic diagrams of three important reactions that form single-ring aromatic hydrocarbons 
from aliphatic hydrocarbons. (Reprinted from Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, 32, 
McEnally, C. S. et al., Studies of aromatic hydrocarbon formation mechanisms in flames: Prog-
ress towards closing the fuel gap, 247–294. Copyright 2006 with permission from Elsevier.)
+
(Cyclopentadienyl)
(Cyclopentadienyl)
(Naphthalene)
H
C
H
C
+
*
*
*
*
H
C
C
(2-Ethynylphenyl)
(Acetylene)
(Naphthyl)
+ 2H
+
+
H
H
C
(Benzyl)
(Propargyl)
(Naphthalene)
H
2H
H
C
C
H
C
*
*
FIGURE 10.3
Schematic diagrams of three important reactions that form two-ring aromatic hydrocarbons 
from single-ring aromatic and aliphatic hydrocarbons. (Reprinted from Progress in Energy 
and Combustion Science, 32, McEnally, C. S. et al., Studies of aromatic hydrocarbon formation 
mechanisms in flames: Progress towards closing the fuel gap, 247–294. Copyright 2006 with 
permission from Elsevier.)

324
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
A relatively new alternative to traditional smoking is aromatization 
of foods by liquid smoke flavorings (LSFs). It was in the late 1800s when 
Kansas pharmacist Ernest H. Wright developed and patented a liquid 
smoke flavor prepared from smoke condensate. More recently, the devel-
opment of aqueous smoke condensates, also known as “liquid smoke,” has 
resulted in the widespread use of LSFs in many food products to reach the 
same smoke organoleptic profiles. Today, LSFs are being added to a great 
variety of products including all forms of meat products (Emmerson, 2011). 
A main advantage of LSF application lies in the fact that LSFs contaminate 
meat products far less in comparison to meat products aromatized by tra-
ditional procedures because PAHs are removed effectively from smoke 
condensates during LSF production and therefore real contamination is 
frequently bellow detection limits (Šimko et al., 1992).
10.2.2.2 Grilling
A formation of PAHs during charcoal broiling of beef steaks was 
observed for the first time by Lijinsky and Shubik (1964) when average 
benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) content was found at the level of 8 μg/kg. Later, 
Lijinsky and Ross (1967) revealed that PAHs could be formed during 
the pyrolysis of the fat that drips down on the hot coals. Larsson et al. 
(1983) grilled frankfurters over various heat sources such as log fire, log 
fire embers, cone fire, charcoal fire, electric oven, and frying pan. They 
found that grilling over log fire resulted in extremely high PAH levels, 
up to 212 μg/kg BaP. When the grilling was carried out over the embers, 
the average level of BaP was only 7.7 μg/kg. Relatively high PAHs levels 
(an average of 17.6 μg of BaP μg/kg) were found in frankfurters grilled 
over smoldering spruce or pine cones. The BaP levels in charcoal-grilled 
frankfurters did not exceed 1 μg/kg, whereas charcoal-grilled whole 
meat samples contained 2.3–6.1 μg/kg probably due to the fact that the 
fat in frankfurters is not “free, but locked” in an oil/water type of emul-
sion system, and therefore release of fat in comparison to muscle meat is 
less possible (Šimko and Knežo, 1992). The lowest formation of PAH was 
observed during application of electric oven and frying pan. Application 
of indirect sources of heat as an effective tool for minimization of PAH 
content has also been confirmed by Farhadian et al. (2011) using two dif-
ferent types of treatments, preheating (steam and microwave) and wrap-
ping (aluminum and banana leaf) of the meat samples prior to charcoal 
grilling. Apart from fat, there are also other precursors of PAHs such as 
ergosterol (Cai et al., 2008) and steroid hormones (androsterone, choles-
terol, estrone, and estradiol) which are prone to decompose in the thermal 
range 300°C–900°C and provide substantial amounts of PAHs (Christy et 
al., 2011). A possible method of PAH formation from cholesterol is shown 
in Figure 10.4.

325
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
10.2.3 Effect of PAHs on Living Organisms
The fact that chemicals could cause cancer arose from the observations 
of Percival Pott of St. Bartholomew’s Hospital in London in 1775 when he 
had noted high incidence of cancer of the scrotum among chimney sweep-
ers who often had to climb up inside chimneys to sweep the soot down. 
Although he deduced correctly that the soot was responsible for the can-
cer, in this time, it was not possible to find out the compounds responsible 
for such serious tissue damage. In 1920, Japanese workers discovered that 
painting extracts of soot onto the skin of mice caused tumors of the skin. In 
1929, the first pure chemical carcinogenic compound—dibenzo[a,h]pyrene 
(DBa,hP)—was isolated from soot extracts at Chester Beatty Research 
Institute by Kennaway. In 1953, Doll, on the basis of wide epidemiological 
and statistical analysis, proved that cigarette smoking was a prime cause 
of lung cancer. Careful analysis of the smoke and tar obtained from ciga-
rettes showed that it contained many carcinogenic PAHs from which BaP 
was assessed as the most dangerous compound (Šimko, 2002). According 
to current knowledge, some PAHs are able to interact in organisms with 
enzymes (such as aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylases) to form PAH dihydro-
diol derivates. These reactive products (so-called “bay region” dihydro-
diol epoxides) are believed to be the ultimate carcinogens that are able 
to form covalently bounded adducts with proteins and nucleic acids. In 
general, DNA adducts are thought to initiate cell mutation which results 
HO
H
C
C H
Cholesterol
Cholesta-3,5-diene
4-Methyl fluorence
Phenanthrene
2-Methyl phenanthrene
FIGURE 10.4
The pathways of formation from cholesterol to phenanthrene, methylphenanthrene, fluorine, 
and methylfluorene. (Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 124, Christy, A. A. et al., Pyrolytic forma-
tion of polyaromatic hydrocarbons from steroid hormones, 1466–1472. Copyright 2011 with 
permission from Elsevier.)

326
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
in malignancy (Bartle, 1991). The direct mutagenic potential of 14 PAHs 
and PAH-containing fractions isolated from smoked and charcoal broiled 
samples was studied toward strains TA 98 and TA 100 using the Ames 
test. The most potential mutagenicity was observed on PAH fractions iso-
lated from smoked fish, treated before smoking with nitrites in an acid 
solution (Kangsadalampai et al., 1997). While various compounds have dif-
ferent carcinogenic effects to living organisms, there have been attempts 
to express objectively the real risk of PAH exposition using so called toxic 
equivalency factors (Nisbet and La Goy, 1992). On the basis of data from 
more than 800 epidemiological studies that investigated the association of 
cancer with consumption of red meat or processed meat (processed means 
cured, fermented, and smoked), in many countries from several continents, 
with diverse ethnicities and diets, it was stated that consumption of 50 g 
processed meat per day can increase risk of colorectal cancer incidence by 
18%. Therefore, the Working Group of International Agency for Research 
on Cancer (IARC) classified processed meat as “carcinogenic to humans” 
and added it to group 1, which includes dangerous compounds such as 
aflatoxins, benzene, asbestos, vinyl chloride, etc. (Bouvard et al., 2015).
10.2.4  Legislative Aspects and International Normalization of 
PAHs in Smoked Meat and Liquid Smoke Flavors
With regard to the information regarding the harmful effects of PAHs on 
living organisms, some European countries (e.g., Germany, Slovak Repub-
lic, Czech Republic) have enacted maximum limits of these compounds 
in smoked meat products at different levels in the past. To simplify such 
problems associated with the variability of PAH occurrence, BaP had been 
accepted, in general, as the indicator of total PAH presence in smoked foods, 
even in spite of the fact that BaP constitutes only between 1% and 20% of 
the total carcinogenic PAHs (Andelman and Suess, 1970). To unify approach 
to assessment of PAHs in food products in the European Union (EC,2002), 
the European Commission (EC) adopted the limitation of BaP content at 
a level of 5 μg/kg in smoked meats, smoked meat products, muscle meat 
of smoked fish, and smoked fishery products (Commission Regulation, 
1881/2006/EC). Apart from this, the EC has also adopted either Directive 
2005/10/EC laying down the sampling methods and the methods of analy-
sis for the official control of BaP levels in foodstuffs (Commission Directive, 
2005/10/EC), or Recommendation 2005/108/EC on the further investigation 
into the levels of PAHs in certain foods such as benzo[a]anthracene (BaA), 
benzo[b]fluoranthene (BbF), benzo[j]fluoranthene (BjF), benzo[k]fluoranthene 
(BkF), benzo[g,h,i]perylene (Bg,h,iP), chrysene (Chr), BaP, cyclopenta[c,d]
pyrene (Cc,dP), DahA, dibenzo[a,e]pyrene (DBa,eP), DBa,hP, dibenzo[a,i]
pyrene (DBa,iP), dibenzo[a,l]pyrene (DBa,lP), indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene (IcdP), 
and 5-methylchrysene (Commission Recommendation, 2005/108/EC). More-
over, the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) has 

327
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
defined another compound benzo[c]fluorene (BcF), which should also be 
monitored with regard to its effects to living organisms (Report of the Joint 
FAO/WHO Expert Commission on Food Additives, 2005). Structural formu-
las of these compounds are shown in Table 10.1. Later, Commission Direc-
tive 2005/10/EC was replaced by Commission Regulation (EC) No 333/2007 
and this document has been amended by Commission Regulation (EC) No 
836/2011 (Suranová et al., 2015).
On the basis of a comprehensive survey of PAH presence in foods, the 
European Food Safety Authority (2008) proposed—apart from BaP—also 
to include other reference compounds, such as BaA, Chr, and BbF. Conse-
quently, either maximum content of BaP or a sum of all four compounds 
called “PAH4” were established by the European Commission’s Regulation 
No. 835/2011a, b for smoked, heat-treated meat and meat products. Limits 
relating to processed meat are shown in Table 10.2.
Concerning LSFs, the EC has adopted Regulation 2065/2003 relating to 
the production of smoke flavorings intended to be used for food flavoring 
(Commission Regulation, 2065/2003/EC). This regulation has limited the 
maximum acceptable concentrations of BaP at 10 μg/kg and BaA at 20 μg/kg 
in LSFs. Following in this course, the EC recently established the EU list of 
TABLE 10.1
Structural Formulas of PAHs Listed in the Recommendation of EC No. 2005/108/
EC and Benzo[c]Fluorene set by JECFA
Benzo[a]pyrene
Benzo[a]anthracene
Chrysene
Benzo[b]fluoranthene
Dibenzo[a,l]pyrene
Benzo[k]fluoran-
thene
Benzo[g,h,i]peryléne
Cyklopenta[c,d]
pyréne
Dibenzo[a,h]
antracéne
Dibenzo[a,e]pyrene
Dibenzo[a,h]pyrene
Dibenzo[a,i]pyrene
Benzo[j]fluoranthene
Indeno[1,2,3-cd] 
fluoranthene
CH3
5-methylchrysene
Benzo[c]fluorene

328
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
authorized smoke flavoring primary products for use as such in or on foods 
and/or for the production of derived smoke flavorings (Commission Imple-
menting Regulation, 1321/2013). Finally, directive 88/388/EEC has limited 
the maximum residual levels of BaP at 0.03 μg/kg in foodstuffs flavored by 
LSF (Commission Directive, 88/388/EC).
For international trade purposes, the Joint Expert Committee for Food 
Additives and Contaminants of the FAO and WHO has adopted a specifica-
tion that  tolerates the concentration in liquid smoke flavors at the levels of 10 
μg/kg for BaP and 20 μg/kg for BaA, respectively (Report of the Joint FAO/
WHO Expert Commission, 1987).
10.2.5 Occurrence of PAHs in Smoked Meats
In general, smoked meat products are believed to be the food products 
with the highest content of PAHs, especially in cases of production via tra-
ditional procedures, when a food is put near the fireplace for several days 
and directly exposed (Djinovic et al., 2008; Lorenzo et al., 2010; Škaljac 
TABLE 10.2
Maximum Allowed Levels of PAHs, Set by Commission Regulation (EU) No. 835/2011 
for Meat Products
Maximum Levels (μg/kg)
Foodstuffs
Benzo[a]pyrene
Sum of benzo[a]pyrene, 
benzo[a]anthracene, benzo[b]
fluoranthene, and chrysenea
(ΣPAH4)
Smoked meat and meat products
2.0
12.0
Muscle meat of smoked fish and smoked 
fishery products. The maximum level for 
smoked crustaceans applies to muscle 
meat from appendages and abdomen. In 
case of smoked crabs and crab-like 
crustaceans (Brachyura and Anomura), it 
applies to muscle meat from appendages.
2.0
12.0
Smoked sprats and canned smoked spratsb 
(Sprattus sprattus); bivalve molluscs 
(fresh, chilled, or frozen); and heat-
treated meat and meat productsc sold to 
the final consumer
5.0
30.0
Bivalve molluscs (smoked)
6.0
35.0
a Lower bound concentrations are calculated on the assumption that all the values of the four 
substances below the limit of quantification are zero.
b For the canned product the analysis shall be carried out on the whole content of the can.
c Meat and meat products that have undergone a heat treatment potentially resulting in forma-
tion of PAH, that is, only grilling and barbecuing.

329
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
et al., 2014; Zelinkova and Wenzl, 2015). This fact documents data sum-
marized in Table 10.3 showing some findings of PAH4 content in meat 
products smoked under “intensive” conditions (Purcaro et al., 2013). As 
follows from Table 10.3, some data are really alarming and confirm clearly 
the relationship between the direct way of hot smoking and PAH4 content 
in smoked products as well as an urgent need to find new effective proce-
dures for lowering of PAH content in these food products.
10.2.6 Reduction of PAH Concentrations in LSFs
As mentioned above, LSFs have far lower PAH concentrations and therefore 
contamination of aromatized meat products could be negligible due to 
the fact that real PAH contents are well under legislative limits. However, 
any presence of hazardous/carcinogenic compounds in foods and food 
additives should never be acceptable while there are available procedures 
which are able even to remove traces of PAHs. From this point of view, 
production of LSFs “free of PAHs” is really an attractive challenge for chemi-
cal and food scientists to protect humans entirely against exposure to these 
compounds.
The first study dealing with the possibility of elimination of PAHs from 
LSFs was carried out by Šimko and Bruncková (1993). In their experiments, 
liquid smoke flavor was spiked with six PAH compounds, pyrene (Py), BaA, 
dibenzo[a,c]anthracene (DBa,cA), benzo[e]pyrene (BeP), BaP, and dibenzo[a,h]
anthracene DBa,hA at a level of total concentration 45.6 μg/kg and filled 
into receptacles made of low-density polyethylene (LDPE). As follows from 
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) records of LDPE and LSF 
immediately after spiking (Figure 10.5), LDPE was free of PAHs. However, 
after 14 days of the experiment, PAHs in LSF were “lost” and, on the con-
trary, they were found in LDPE (Figure 10.6). This process was very effec-
tive, because during the experiment total concentrations of PAHs in LSFs 
dropped by two orders (Figure 10.7) and reached values of 0.73 μg/kg, which 
was practically under limits of detection. Authors concluded that the elimi-
nation was brought about by sorption of PAHs on the LDPE surface due to 
their similar, nonpolar character. Later, Šimko et al. (1994) tried to reveal the 
mechanism of this process, and therefore they allowed interaction of PAHs 
contained in LSFs with LDPE receptacles of cylindrical shapes. Because they 
observed the same courses of PAH elimination, they made an assumption 
that this process could be dominantly directed by diffusion.
As the LSFs were not mixed during the experiment, it was a given assump-
tion that the factor limiting the rate of PAH removal from LSFs is the diffu-
sion in the liquid media. Therefore, the authors applied Fick’s laws dealing 
with transportation of mass in a media using the relationship derived for 
diffusion in a cylinder by Cranck (1976):

330
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 10.3
Some Findings of PAH Occurrence in Smoked Meat Products
Sample/Number of Samples
Content (μg/kg)
Source
BaA
Chr
BbF
BaP
ΣPAH4
Min.
Max.
Min.
Max.
Min.
Max.
Min.
Max.
Min.
Max.
Min.
Smoked ham/16
smoked directly
<0.3
76.5
<0.3
71.4a
<0.3
23.9
<0.3
36.9
<0.3
208.7
Wretling et al. 
(2010)
Smoked bacon/5
smoked directly
1.9
28.9
1.5
33.4a
0.3
10.2
0.4
15.9
<0.3
88.4
Smoked elk and reindeer meat/1
smoked directly
11.7
13.0a
4.5
6.6
35.8
Smoked meat/3
1.51
2.37
1.56
1.64
0.07
0.15
0.36
0.63
3.5
4.79
Roseiro et al. 
(2012)
Smoked blood sausages/3
0.88
3.28
0.61
4.94
0.03
0.23
0.32
0.39
1.84
8.84
Smoked frankfurter-type sausages/10
0.82
1.69
0.74
1.57a
0.27
0.61
0.32
0.80
2.06
4.67
Hitzel et al. (2013)
Smoked mini-salamis/9
0.91
2.06
0.93
1.79a
0.27
0.62
0.23
0.60
2.34
5.07
Smoked pork breast/18
0.06
9.60
0.10
11.24
<0.05
4.28
<0.05
2.99
0.16
28.10
Rozentale et al. 
(2015)
Smoked pork/14
0.05
10.60
0.10
11.07
<0.05
4.60
<0.05
6.03
0.15
27.25
Smoked pork speck/10
0.13
12.23
0.25
14.50
0.11
4.29
<0.05
3.62
0.48
34.65
Smoked sausages/21
0.08
14.21
0.13
11.19
<0.05
4.09
<0.05
4.17
0.22
33.66
Crackers or small sausages/10
0.19
13.13
0.26
12.79
0.13
4.03
0.05
4.63
0.63
34.58
Spanish smoked meat product 
“chorizo”/12
ND
ND
ND
0.9
3.21
0.9
3.21
Ledesma et al. 
(2015)
Smoked garlic pork sausages 
“chorizo”/8 smoked directly
11
522
21
649
3.2
178
3.1
98
38.3
1387.3
Fasano et al. (2016)
Source: Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 201, Semanová, J. et al., Elimination of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from smoked sausages by migration 
into polyethylene packaging, 1–6. Copyright 2016 with permission from Elsevier.
a The sum of Chr and triphenylene.
ND, not determined.

331
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
 
∑
=
−
α
−α
∞
=
∞
1
4
exp[
],
1
2
2
2
n
n
a
D
t
t
n
n
n
  
(10.1)
where nt is the amount of diffused substance, which left the LSF as a con-
sequence of the diffusion into the LDPE at time t, and n∞ is the amount of 
substance, which corresponds to infinite time. D is the diffusion coefficient, 
a is the radius of the cylinder, and α n are the roots of the equation:
 
α
=
( .
)
0
0J a
n
  
(10.2)
where J0 is the zero-order first-class Bessel function.
However, in the experiment, the amount of substance sorbed into the 
LDPE was not measured, but rather the amount left in the cylindrical liquid  
Fluorescence
S
S
1
2
3
6
5
4
0
10
(a)
(b)
20
0
Time (min)
10
20
FIGURE 10.5
Chromatograms of PAH analysis in LDPE (a) and LSFs (b) before storage experiment. 1, 
Pyrene; 2, benzo[a]anthracene (BaA); 3, dibenzo[a,c]anthracene (DB(a,c)A); 4, benzo[e]pyrene 
(BeP); 5, benzo[a]pyrene (BaP); 6, dibenzo[a,h]pyrene (DB(a,h)A). (Reprinted from Šimko, P. 
and Bruncková, B. Lowering of concentration of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in a liquid 
smoke flavour by sorption into polyethylene packaging. Food Additives and Contaminants, 10, 
(1993):257–263. With permission. Copyright Taylor and Francis © 1993.)

332
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
bulk—LSF. Therefore, after recalculation of the amount of substance, the 
concentration, Equation 10.1, could be modified to
 
∑
=
α
−α
=
∞
4 exp[
],
0
1
2
2
2
c
c
a
D
t
t
n
n
n
  
(10.3)
where c0 and ct are concentrations at time t = 0 and t.
Diffusion coefficients of PAHs (Table 10.4) were obtained by the nonlin-
ear least squares method by minimizing the sum of squares of differences 
between the concentrations of PAHs measured experimentally (A rows of 
Table 10.5) and those calculated by Equation 10.3 (B rows of Table 10.5). The 
Fluorescence
S
S
12
3
6
4
0
10
(a)
(b)
20
0
Time (min)
10
20
5
FIGURE 10.6
Chromatograms of PAH analysis in LDPE (a) and LSFs (b) after storage experiment. 1, Py; 2, 
BaA; 3, DB(a,c)A; 4,BeP; 5, BaP; 6, DB(a,h)A. The chromatogram in (b) was obtained at two times 
more detector sensitivity that that in (a). (Reprinted from Šimko, P. and Bruncková, B. Lower-
ing of concentration of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in a liquid smoke flavour by sorption 
into polyethylene packaging. Food Additives and Contaminants, 10, (1993): 257–263. With permis-
sion. Copyright Taylor and Francis © 1993.)

333
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
minimization was carried out by the simplex method (Nelder and Mead, 
1965). Minimized parameters were c0 and D. The parameter c0 was mini-
mized because the error of determination of this concentration in trace 
analysis is usually relatively high, and might affect all values of concen-
trations calculated. In calculations, the first 20 terms of Equation 10.3 were 
taken into account. The values α n were taken from tables (Abramowitz and 
Stegun, 1964). The agreement between experimental and calculated values 
of PAH concentrations was very good as can be seen from Table 10.5 when 
TABLE 10.4
Values of Diffusion Coefficients Calculated by 
Equation 10.3 for Individual and Sum of PAHs in LSFs
Compound
Values of Diffusion Coefficients
D × 102 (m2/h)
Py
8.7
BaA
4.6
DB(a,c)A
7.4
BeP
5.8
BaP
7.2
DB(a,h)A
7.6
Total
6.3
Source: Reprinted with permission from Food Chemistry, 50, 
Šimko, P. et al., Kinetics of polycyclic aromatic hydro-
carbons sorption from liquid smoke flavor into low 
density polyethylene packaging, 65–68. Copyright 
1994 with permission from Elsevier.
–10
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
Time (days)
Concentration of PAHs (μg/kg)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
FIGURE 10.7
Reduction of PAH concentration in LSFs stored in LDPE receptacles during 14 days of storage. 
(Reprinted from Šimko, P. and Bruncková, B. Lowering of concentration of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons in a liquid smoke flavour by sorption into polyethylene packaging. Food Additives 
and Contaminants, 10, (1993): 257–263. With permission. Copyright Taylor and Francis © 1993).

334
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 10.6
Values of Diffusion Coefficients Calculated by Equation 10.3 for Individual and 
Sum of PAHs in LSFs
Time of Experiment (h)
Total Amount of PAHs (ng) in
LSF
LDPE
0
1274.7
ND
27
295.3
884.1
68
88.6
1067.4
92
53.6
1055.7
98
49.6
1114.8
116
43.5
1095.7
121.5
27.4
1122.6
141
23.3
1138.8
145.5
18.5
1163.8
164
ND
1187.3
Source: Reprinted from Šimko P. et al. Kinetics of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons sorption 
from liquid smoke flavour into low density polyethylene packaging. Food Chemistry, 50, 
(1994):65–68. With permission. Copyright Elsevier © 1994.
ND, not detectable.
TABLE 10.5
Changes in Concentrations of PAHs (μg/kg) in LSFs Followed during the Experi-
ment
Com-
pound
Time of Storage (h)
0
27
68
92
98
116
121.5
141
145.5
164
σ
Py
A
14.8
2.45
0.65
0.58
0.50
0.50
0.29
0.29
0.25
ND
0.33
B
14.7
2.70
0.36
0.11
0.08
0.03
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.00
BaA
A
26.8
8.23
3.40
1.54
1.79
1.43
1.03
0.99
0.75
ND
0.47
B
26.5
9.12
3.09
1.64
1.41
0.88
0.74
0.46
0.41
0.24
DB(a,c)A
A
17.8
3.55
0.78
0.67
0.47
0.43
0.25
0.16
0.13
ND
0.25
B
17.8
3.80
0.64
0.23
0.17
0.08
0.06
0.03
0.02
0.01
BeP
A
11.0
3.25
0.63
0.42
0.30
0.30
0.13
0.08
0.07
ND
0.09
B
11.0
3.16
0.82
0.38
0.31
0.17
0.14
0.08
0.07
0.04
BaP
A
10.2
2.25
0.44
0.32
0.26
0.21
0.16
0.08
0.07
ND
0.10
B
10.1
2.34
0.44
0.17
0.13
0.06
0.05
0.02
0.02
0.01
DB(a,h)A
A
10.7
2.20
0.43
0.31
0.24
0.23
0.10
0.06
0.06
ND
0.10
B
10.6
2.29
0.39
0.14
0.11
0.05
0.04
0.02
0.01
0.01
Total
A
91.1
21.9
6.33
3.83
3.54
3.11
1.96
1.67
1.32
ND
1.43
B
90.7
24.0
5.56
2.37
1.91
1.03
0.80
0.41
0.35
0.18
Source: Reprinted with permission from Food Chemistry, 50, Šimko, P. et al., Kinetics of poly-
cyclic aromatic hydrocarbons sorption from liquid smoke flavor into low density 
polyethylene packaging, 65–68. Copyright 1994 with permission from Elsevier.
ND, not detectable.
A Rows, experimentally obtained data; B Rows, values obtained by Equation 10.3.

335
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
comparing rows A and B for the same compound, and it was also demon-
strated by the low values of standard deviations (σ) in the right-hand column 
of Table 10.5. By numerical solution of Equation 10.3 for known values of the 
diffusion coefficients D and given initial concentration c0, it is possible to cal-
culate the time at which PAH concentration decreases to a required value ct. 
This means that, by Equation 10.3, it is possible to predict the time necessary 
for lowering PAH concentrations to an acceptable level. For example, if initial 
concentration c0 is equal to 10.2 μg of BaP/kg of LSF, it can be calculated that 
the acceptable concentration, ct = 9.90 μg/kg, accepted by JECFA (Report of 
the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Commission on Food Additives, 1987) would be 
reached within 51 minutes of the experiment. The evidence about sorption 
processes of PAHs onto LDPE is shown in Table 10.6, where the total amount 
of PAHs in both LSF and LDPE is compared. As follows from this table, the 
amount of PAHs “lost” in LSF during the experiment was possible to recover 
later from the LDPE.
10.2.6.1  Characterization of Physicochemical Processes 
Taking Place between Liquid Media and LDPE
By the theory of physical chemistry, the sorption of nonelectrolytes at the 
solid–solution interface may be viewed in terms of two somewhat differ-
ent physical pictures. The first is that adsorption is essentially confined to a 
monolayer next to the solid surface, with the implication that succeeding lay-
ers are virtually normal bulk solution. The second picture is that of an inter-
facial layer or region, multimolecular in depth, over which a more slowly 
decaying interaction potential with the solid is present. From this point of 
view, adsorption from solution corresponds to a partition between a bulk 
and an interfacial phase (Adamson, 1990). To find definitively the mecha-
nism of PAH removal from liquid media, water was spiked with three dif-
ferent PAHs and filled into a diffusion cell made of stainless steel. One of 
the walls was replaced by an LDPE sheet made up of five layers of LDPE 
films. The depth of PAH migration into this sheet was followed for 143 hours, 
using high-performance liquid chromatography with selective fluorimetric 
detection after extraction of PAHs from individual peeled-off films. As can 
be seen from Table 10.7, the PAH concentrations in water started to decrease 
immediately after beginning the experiment.
As follows from Table 10.8, the presence of PAHs in the first layer of the 
PE sheet was possible to determine already after 0.75 hours. With extension 
of the experiment time, the presence of PAHs was determined also in fur-
ther layers, and after 69 hours, PAHs were determined in all layers of the PE 
sheet. The total view of the dependence of PAH migration into bulk polymer 
upon time is shown in Figure 10.8.
The solution of the second Fick’s law for the diffusion of PAHs in poly-
mer placed in the diffusion cell (Cranck, 1976; Moisan, 1985) gives the next 
equation:

336
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 10.7
Decrease in PAH Concentration (μg/kg) in Water at Various Time Intervals
Time (h)
Fl
Py
BaP
0.00
1350
537
191
0.75
1348
536
190
1.50
1344
534
190
2.50
1337
531
189
3.00
1324
525
188
69.0
1153
455
169
143.0
1054
417
165
Source: Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 64, Šimko, P. et al., Removal of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons from water by migration into polyethylene, 157–161. Copyright 1999 
with permission from Elsevier.
TABLE 10.8
Concentration of PAHs (μg/kg) in Individual Layers of PE Sheet at Various Time 
Intervals
Time (hr)
Compound
Layer No. 1
Layer No. 2 Layer No. 3 Layer No. 4 Layer No. 5
0.00
Fl
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
Py
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
BaP
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
0.75
Fl
523
ND
ND
ND
ND
Py
244
ND
ND
ND
ND
BaP
86
ND
ND
ND
ND
Fl
647
43
ND
ND
ND
1.50
Py
268
25
ND
ND
ND
BaP
98
11
ND
ND
ND
Fl
894
57
39
ND
ND
2.50
Py
395
26
15
ND
ND
BaP
146
6
3
ND
ND
3.00
Fl
1087
101
77
62
ND
Py
458
42
22
14
ND
BaP
193
16
10
7
ND
69.00
Fl
6614
1861
319
86
57
Py
2275
632
122
31
22
BaP
1242
129
27
17
5
143.00
Fl
7709
2154
1493
459
182
Py
4009
1060
626
142
79
BaP
2083
376
109
42
27
Source: Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 64, Šimko, P. et al., Removal of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons from water by migration into polyethylene, 157–161. Copyright 1999 
with permission from Elsevier.
ND, not detectable.

337
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
 
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
.erfc 2
c
S
x
Dt
  
(10.4)
where c is the concentration of PAHs in the polymer at time t and at the distance 
x, D is the diffusion coefficient, and S is the solubility of PAHs in the polymer. 
The amount of diffusant in the region x–h to x is given by Equation 10.5:
 
∫
=
−
( , )d
Q
A
c x t
x
x h
x
  
(10.5)
where A is the area and h is the thickness of the polymer layer. It can be 
derived from Equations 10.4 and 10.5 that the amount of PAHs in the nth 
polymer layer expressed as a weight of PAHs per weight of polymer, w, is
 
∫
=
⎛
⎝⎜
⎞
⎠⎟
−
erfc 2
d
1
w
S
hn
Dt
n
n
n
  
(10.6)
where n is the number of the layer.
Time of experiment (h)
Amount of PAH (μg)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
0.00
0.75
1.50
2.50
3.00
69.00
143.00
FIGURE 10.8
Amounts of PAHs in liquid media before the experiment—
, amounts of PAHs in liquid 
media during the experiment—
, and amounts of PAHs in LDPE during the experiment—
. 
(Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 64, P. et al., Removal of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from 
water by migration into polyethylene, 157–161. Copyright 1999 with permission from Elsevier.)

338
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Therefore, the experimental data have been treated using Equation 10.6. The 
solubilities of individual PAHs in LDPE and the related diffusion coefficients 
have been obtained from the comparison of the theoretical values given by 
Equation 10.6 and the experimental values listed in Table 10.9 using the non-
linear least-squares method. The minimization of the sum of squares between 
theoretical and experimental values has been done by the simplex method. 
Integration in Equation 10.6 has been performed using the Simpson formula. 
For example, the courses of experimentally obtained and calculated values are 
shown in Figures 10.9 and 10.10 for 69 or 143 hours of experiment, respectively. 
The relationships between measured and calculated values are fairly good. 
As can be seen from the values of standard deviations in Table 10.9, the agree-
ment between experimental and calculated values is fairly good. The solubili-
ties and diffusion coefficients decrease in the order Fluoranthene (Fl)>Py>BaP, 
TABLE 10.9
Solubilities and Diffusion Coefficients of Individual PAHs in LDPE and the 
Standard Deviation of Calculated Values
Compound
S (μg/kg)
D × 1010 (cm2/s)
σ (μg/kg)
Fl
10,430
7.05
310
Py
5030
5.47
190
BaP
3360
2.53
80
Source: Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 64, Šimko, P. et al., Removal of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons from water by migration into polyethylene, 157–161. Copyright 1999 
with permission from Elsevier.
0
1
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Layers
Fl
Py
BaP
2
3
5
4
Concentration of PAHs (μg/kg)
FIGURE 10.9
Dependence of PAHs concentration on the depth of migration in 69 hours of the experiment. 
- - - measured values, — calculated values. (Reprinted with permission from Food Chemistry, 
64, Šimko, P. et al., Removal of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from water by migration into 
polyethylene, 157–161. Copyright 1999 with permission from Elsevier.)

339
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
which is due to the increasing molar mass of the compounds. These calculated 
values of diffusion coefficients are more precise as the same values were only 
estimated for the same material in the previous work (Šimko et al., 1995).
On the basis of the results obtained, it can be concluded that PAHs after 
leaving the liquid media are primarily adsorbed on the polyethylene surface, 
with following migration into the bulk polymer, while the transportation of 
PAHs through the LDPE bulk can be described satisfactorily by Fickian laws 
of diffusion. This finding has also explained why this process is so effec-
tive—it is due to the existence of a permanently unbalanced state between 
PAH concentrations in the liquid and solid phase, where PAHs migrate con-
tinuously into the LDPE bulk; therefore the unbalanced state on the interfa-
cial phase is permanently renewing. It is clear that this process will stop after 
a balance state between both phases are reached. Later, these findings were 
confirmed also by Guillén et al. (2000), when they observed reduction of PAH 
concentration in LSFs stored in LDPE flasks.
10.2.7 Reduction of PAH Content in Processed Meats
In principal, reduction of PAH content in smoked meat products can be real-
ized at any production stage of these products. To keep formal categorization of 
reduction procedures, they could be applied during smoking, immediately after 
smoking, and by additional treatment or packaging into LDPE, respectively.
10.2.7.1 Reduction of PAH Content during Smoking
In general, PAH content in smoked meat products is directly proportional 
to smoking time (Djinovic et al., 2008; Ledesma et al., 2014) and the selec-
0
5
4
3
2
1
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
Concentration of PAHs (μg/kg)
Layers
BaP
Py
Fl
FIGURE 10.10
Dependence of PAH concentration on the depth of migration in 143 hours of the experiment. 
- - - measured values, — calculated values. (Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 64, Šimko, P. et al., 
Removal of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from water by migration into polyethylene, 
157–161. Copyright 1999 with permission from Elsevier.)

340
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
tion of the mode also has considerable influence on the contents of PAHs, 
especially in hot smoked meat products. Therefore, the highest PAH con-
tents were detected in sausages smoked with smoldering (intensive) smoke 
(Wretling et al., 2010; Pöhlmann et al., 2013a). So, shortening of smoking time 
and lowering of temperature of smoke generation have considerable effects 
on the final PAH content. Also, the use of synthetic casings instead of natu-
ral ones prevents the penetration of PAHs inside meat products smoked by 
any method due to the diameters of casing pores and molecules of PAHs 
(Ledesma et al., 2015, 2016). For example, the selection of a cellulose-peelable 
casing is an effective tool for reducing the PAH content in hot smoked sau-
sages as a high percentage of the PAHs (BaP—77%; PAH4—61%) remains 
in the peelable casing and does not migrate to the inside of meat products 
(Pöhlmann et al., 2013b).
10.2.7.2 Reduction of PAH Content by Their Photodecomposition
To obtain data regarding possible effects of light on BaP content in hot 
smoked meat products, an Atlantic herring (Clupea harengus) was treated 
with hot smoke at a temperature of 82°C in a plant smoke house for 
50 minutes (Šimko, 1991). After finishing the smoking, BaP content was 
determined immediately. Next, the samples were hung in the laboratory at 
unlimited access to oxygen and daylight at 18°C, and the BaP content was 
determined after 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 7 days of exposition. During this time, the 
BaP content was lowered from 0.58 to 0.12 μg/kg, as follows from Figure 
10.11. Simultaneously, BaP methanolic solution was transferred into far UV 
silica cells and, after evaporation of the solvent, BaP at an amount of 1 μg 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Time (days)
Concentration of BaP (μg/kg)
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
FIGURE 10.11
Dependence of BaP content upon time in smoked fish. (Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 40, 
Šimko, P. Changes of benzo(a)pyrene contents in smoked fish during storage, 293–300. Copy-
right 1991 with permission from Elsevier.)

341
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
was exposed to the same conditions as used for the smoked fish. The con-
tents of the cells were analyzed for amount of BaP at the same time intervals. 
As found, BaP content was affected by light, especially at the initial time of 
exposition, when all BaP molecules were localized just on the fish surface. 
But, the process of BaP light decomposition was not the only physicochemi-
cal process to take place in the fish. On analyzing surface (skin) and inter-
nal layers (meat) at the beginning and at the end of the experiment, it was 
found that a part of BaP molecules diffused into the fish bulk. So, while 
BaP content in fish skin decreased from 10.6 to 1.3 μg/kg, BaP in the bulk 
increased from 0 to 0.1 μg/kg. It was found that BaP degradation in silica 
cells could be described, in general, by a reaction of zero order, which is 
typical for photolytic degradations; this means that the amount of decom-
posed BaP was proportionally equal to the time of light exposition. On the 
other hand, the diffusion inside of fish bulk brought about the protection 
of BaP against environmental (decomposition) factors and the stabilization 
of its residual content in the fish. This course is typical for a reaction of first 
order, and it is clear that two different physicochemical processes took place 
there—light decomposition and diffusion—independently of each other. It 
is clear that extent of BaP content decrease can be affected by the intensity 
of light, and finally, also by antioxidant activity of phenol derivatives and 
other antioxidants present in the food matrix. Evidence about decompo-
sition effects on PAHs was given by Skláršová et al. (2012), who studied 
decomposition of BaP at two different light wavelengths, 254 and 365 nm, 
in a nonpolar medium at concentrations of 50, 100, and 150 μg/L. At chosen 
time intervals, BaP concentration was measured by HPLC using fluores-
cence detection. Comparing rate constants k and half-lives τ 1/2, it was found 
that decomposition at 365 nm was 15.3 times faster in comparison with 
the decomposition at 254 nm. The decompositions obeyed the first-order 
kinetics. Addition of food antioxidants, 2,6-di-tert-butyl-4-methylphenol 
(BHT) and o-methoxyphenol (guaiacol), had considerable effect as both 
accelerated the rate of BaP decomposition—BHT by 1.17 times and guaia-
col almost 1.45 times, which is really surprising. While these compounds 
are currently present in smoke, this observation could explain accelerated 
photodecomposition of PAHs localized on the surface of processed meats. 
These findings may represent a basis for a new approach to decrease PAH 
content in foods, where their presence is inevitable due to the applied pro-
duction technology (Ledesma et al., 2016). To derive the kinetic equation 
and eliminate errors associated with nonisothermal heating procedures, 
BaP dissolved in glyceryl trioctanoate was heated in a glass reaction vessel 
within the temperature range 297.95–361.85 K with a heating rate of 1 K/
min and simultaneously exposed to UV light at wavelength λ = 365 nm at 
radiation power 20 mW/cm2. During the experiment, the BaP concentration 
decreased from 62.2 to 19.8 μg/L. From experimental results, the param-
eters characterizing the nonisothermal kinetics of the BaP photooxidation 
equation have been obtained (Equation 10.7):

342
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
 
=
−
ϑ
β
+
⎡
⎣⎢
⎤
⎦⎥
+
exp
(
1)
o
r
1
c
c
aT
m
m
  
(10.7)
where Tr is a reference temperature, co and c are the concentrations of BaP in 
the vessel at the temperatures To and T, ϑ is reduced temperature, and a and 
m are adjustable parameters. The parameters were tested at two isothermal 
conditions (290.16 and 323.26 K) to verify the suitability of the derived param-
eters. Comparing calculated and measured data of half-lives of BaP decrease 
at mentioned temperatures, it was found that calculated half-lives are in 
good accordance with those experimentally obtained values, where relative 
standard deviations at 290.16 K were 17.0% and 5.4% at 323.26 K, respectively. 
The kinetic parameters enable the calculation of the rate constant for any 
temperature in the isothermal regime and make possible modeling, in gen-
eral, the kinetics of PAH photooxidation without a deeper insight into their 
mechanisms.
10.2.7.3  Reduction of PAH Content by Cooking  
of Smoked Sausages
Sausages belong to a group of typical meat products consumed in consid-
erable quantities over the world. They are commonly made from pork—
boneless hams, shoulders, and slab bacon. The proper amounts of each 
are cut and ground through a 7 mm plate of a meat grinder. The mixture 
is then combined with seasoning ingredients (NaCl, black and red pep-
per, garlic, etc.), and stuffed into natural casings. The linked sausages are 
smoked using hot smoke for seven hours. The sausages are consumed 
directly, or after cooking in boiling water. To follow the effect of cooking 
on BaP in sausages, a sausage was analyzed for BaP content, fat content, 
and dry weight prior to cooking (Šimko et al., 1993). The BaP content was 
determined not only in whole sausages, but also in sausages in casing and 
peel-off film, separately; also BaP content in the cooked-out fat remain-
ing in water after cooking was determined. The sausage was cooked in 
water at the boiling point, taken off at set time intervals, and analyzed. 
As follows from the experiment, cooking of sausage could be an effective 
tool for lowering BaP content, because the BaP content was lowered from 
4.8 μg/kg to a final value of 1.9 μg/kg. The maximum drop in BaP con-
tent was observed during the first 20 minutes of cooking, after which it 
remained at a constant level. The decrease of BaP content during cooking 
was directly proportional to the amount of cooked-out fat released from 
sausages during cooking. Global changes of BaP and fat on time of cooking 
are shown in Figure 10.12. Although the BaP content found in the sausage 
casing corresponded to a level of 86 μg/kg, in real terms this represented 
only 21% of the total BaP content in the sausage; this means that 78% of the 

343
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
total amount of BaP had diffused into the sausage bulk before cooking. 
Evidence about diffusion of BaP and its high affinity to nonpolar parts, 
that is, its nonhomogenous distribution in the sausage, was also proven by 
determination of BaP content in cooked-out fat, when BaP content at the 
level of 7.7 μg/kg was determined. To the contrary, with regard to the find-
ing that BaP content can be influenced by cooking, frankfurters were also 
treated by cooking and BaP and fat content was monitored. In comparison 
to the sausages, it was found that BaP in frankfurters was not affected by 
cooking at all. Comparing data and production technologies, it was found 
that although sausages and frankfurters are visually quite similar, they 
are very different due to their methods of production. While production of 
sausages was finished immediately after smoking, the frankfurters were 
still cooked in water steam. For this reason, the BaP content did not change 
in the frankfurters during additional cooking, because the “free” fat had 
already been removed from them during their technological production. 
So, while sausages represented a “crude” mixture of ground pork meat and 
bacon, frankfurters represented the typical fine cut homogeneous emulsi-
fied system, where the “residual” fat was “locked” in three-dimensional 
structures of denaturated proteins and therefore immobilized. Because the 
fat content had been stabilized already in the frankfurters during produc-
tion, it was not further changed considerably during cooking. Then, with 
regard to the high affinity of BaP to nonpolar parts, its content was also not 
100.0
80.0
60.0
40.0
20.0
1.2
24.0
28.0
32.0
36.0
40.0
Fat (x)
BaP (μg/kg)
2.8
3.6
4.3
5.0
Time (min)
FIGURE 10.12
Three-dimensional diagram of the dependence of BaP content on the fat content and the time 
of cooking. (Reprinted from Meat Science, 34, Šimko, P. Influence of cooking on benzo[a]pyrene 
content in smoked sausages, 301–309. Copyright 1993 with permission from Elsevier.)

344
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
influenced by additional cooking and it remained at a constant level (Šimko 
and Knežo, 1992).
10.2.7.4  Reduction of PAH Content in Roasted  
Duck by Packaging into LDPE
Chen and Chen (2005) roasted whole duck samples at 225°C for 60 minutes, 
and skin samples were peeled off, analyzed for BaA, BbF, and BaP contents, 
and then packed in LDPE pouches under vacuum to ensure as much as pos-
sible contact of the skin with LDPE. After 24 hours storage at ambient temper-
ature, BaA, BbF, and BaP contents were determined again and compared with 
the original content. As the authors found, all three contents were changed, 
and the most effective reduction was observed for BaP, as original content 
was reduced by 73% (from 3.5 to 0.9 μg/kg), while BbF was reduced by 54% 
(from 3.69 to 1.69 μg/kg), and BaA by 8% (from 143 to 130 μg/kg), respectively. 
As the authors concluded, this reduction was brought about by migration of 
PAHs from meat into the LDPE package and this process of elimination is 
believed to be a very promising method for elevation of food safety.
10.2.7.5  Reduction of PAH Content in Smoked 
Sausages by Packaging into LDPE
Smoked sausages were divided into two groups—the first group was packed 
immediately after smoking into the LDPE using vacuum packaging technol-
ogy, while the second one was packed 12 hours after finishing the smoking. 
Also, unpacked sausages were left at the same conditions for comparison 
purposes. All samples were protected against daylight to prevent light 
decomposition of PAHs and stored at 15°C. Sausages were sampled at 0, 15, 
30, 45, 60, 90, 120, 150, and 180 minutes. As follows from the experimental 
data in Table 10.10 (A columns, in time = 0), sausages contained relatively 
high PAH4. However, this content is in close accordance with the findings of 
other studies (shown in Table 10.3) and it is clear that it is brought about by 
the mode of smoking, because values of PAH4 content in nonsmoked sau-
sages were under the limit of detection. As follows from the A columns in 
Table 10.10, PAH4 content started to decrease immediately after packaging 
into the LDPE. Because this decrease reached an equilibrium state in which 
PAH4 content in infinite time (c∞ ) was not equal to zero, this decrease can 
be described by kinetic Equation 10.8 derived for cylindrical shape of a food 
product by Šimko et al. (2004):
 
∑
=
+
−
α
−
α
∞
∞
=
∞
(
)
4 exp[
]
0
1
2
2
2
c
c
c
c
a
D
t
t
n
n
n   
(10.8)
where c0, ct , and c∞ are the initial concentration, concentration at time t, and 
equilibrium concentration, a is the radius of the cylinder, α n were taken from 

345
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
tables (Abramowitz and Stegun, 1964), D is the diffusion coefficient, and t is 
the time of LDPE–sausage interaction.
Values of diffusion coefficients were calculated by the nonlinear least 
squares method by minimizing the sum of squares in differences between 
the PAH4 content measured experimentally and those calculated by Equa-
tion 10.8. The minimization was carried out by the simplex method (Nelder 
and Mead, 1965). Minimized parameters were c∞ , c0 - c∞ , and D, and these 
values are shown in Table 10.11. In calculations, the first 20 terms of Equation 
10.8 were taken into account. Experimental data were used for calculation 
of D and successively D values were used for calculation for PAH4 content. 
For comparison purposes, ct was calculated at the same time as the experi-
mental data. The agreement between experimental and calculated values is 
fairly good as follows from Table 10.9—columns A and B—which confirms 
diffusion of PAH4 from smoked sausages into LDPE bulk as a dominant 
physicochemical migration process of mass transfer between these media. A 
measure of the distribution of PAH4 between LDPE and smoked sausages is 
the distribution coefficient β calculated for a time of experiment equal to 180 
minutes, given by the ratio (Equation 10.9)
 
β =
−
∞
∞
0c
c
c
  
(10.9)
In general, the higher is the value of β, the greater is the part of PAH4 elimi-
nated from smoked sausages and adsorbed onto LDPE. The values of β are 
TABLE 10.10
Changes in PAH4 Content in Smoked Sausage during Storage in LDPE Packaging
BaA
Chr
BbF
BaP
Time
A
(μg/
kg)
EMU
(%)
B
(μg/
kg)
A
(μg/
kg)
EMU
(%)
B
(μg/
kg)
A
(μg/
kg)
EMU
(%)
B
(μg/
kg)
A
(μg/
kg)
EMU
(%)
B
(μg/
kg)
0
11.5
8.1
11.4
9.4
6.9
9.1
5.3
4.9
5.3
3.9
7.9
3.9
15
4.3
7.5
5.3
4.7
9.8
5.9
1.7
6.9
1.7
1.4
7.6
1.5
30
4.2
13.1
3.91
5.4
7.2
4.9
2.4
5.2
1.7
1.4
9.2
1.3
45
4.2
8.2
3.4
4.8
12.1
4.2
1.9
8.8
1.7
1.7
8.8
1.3
60
5.2
8.2
3.2
3.4
12.2
3.7
1.8
8.9
1.7
1.5
6.6
1.3
90
3.3
10.9
3.1
3.1
9.9
2.9
2.5
12.9
1.7
1.4
9.9
1.3
120
2.1
8.9
3.1
2.9
11.5
2.5
1.4
10.0
1.7
0.9
11.2
1.3
150
2.8
7.5
3.1
2.2
11.5
2.3
1.4
11.0
1.7
1.0
12.1
1.3
180
2.1
12.9
3.1
1.9
15.7
2.1
0.6
14.0
1.7
1.1
12.8
1.3
Source: Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 201, Semanová, J. et al., Elimination of polycyclic aro-
matic hydrocarbons from smoked sausages by migration into polyethylene packaging, 
1–6. Copyright 2016 with permission from Elsevier.
A columns, measured values; EMU, expanded measurement uncertainty (k = 2) of measured 
values listed in A columns; B columns, values calculated using Equation 10.8.

346
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
also listed in Table 10.11. As follows from these values, PAH4 was extensively 
adsorbed onto LDPE and these values are, for example, higher by one order 
in comparison to β values for polyethylene terephtalate (PET) packaging 
(Šimko et al., 2004) which proves better suitability of LDPE for PAH elimina-
tion purposes in comparison to PET. Experimental data listed in Table 10.10 
show that this procedure is a very effective tool for PAH4 elimination, when 
the total PAH4 content was lowered by 81%, while reduction of individual 
compound content varied between 72% and 89%. A measure of diffusion is 
given—apart from other factors—also by D values for given media. As fol-
lows from Table 10.12, there is a great difference in D values for BaP between 
liquid media (LSFs) and solid media (LDPE). As follows from the table, dif-
fusion of PAH4 in smoked sausages has migration properties closer to liquid 
than to solid media, and therefore the process of PAH4 elimination will be 
very effective. Moreover, this phenomenon could be expected also in other 
similar food matrices such as bacon, salami, etc. Another important finding 
is that the values of D are transferable to other geometry of smoked products, 
and therefore they could be used for variously shaped smoked meat prod-
ucts. The advantage of application of the kinetic equation (Equation 10.8) is 
based on the fact that by numerical solution of the equation for known values 
of D and given co , it is possible to calculate the time at which PAH4 and/or 
individual compound content decreases to a required value ct set by legisla-
tion. For example, in this experiment, the legislative limit (set by Commis-
sion Regulation No. 835/2011) of 12 μg/kg for PAH4 was reached in 28.57 
minutes, and acceptable content of 11.9 μg/kg in 29.32 minutes, as also fol-
lows from Figure 10.13. Similarly, the legislative limit of 2 μg/kg for BaP was 
reached in 10.41 minutes, and acceptable content of 1.9 μg/kg in 11.20 min-
utes. All these changes are in sharp contrast to nonpacked smoked sausages, 
since the PAH4 content in them remained at a constant level during the 
whole experiment, as shown in Figure 10.13 by (▲) points (Semanová et al., 
2016). A time gap also has a substantial effect on the measure of PAH content 
TABLE 10.11
Values of Minimized Parameters and Diffusion and Distribution Coefficients
Compound
c∞
c0– c∞
Diffusion 
Coefficients
D
(cm2/h)
Distribution 
Coefficients
β 180
BaA
3.1
8.2
2.5 × 10−2
2.6
Chr
1.9
7.1
6.8 × 10−3
3.7
BbF
1.7
3.6
6.4 × 10−1
2.1
BaP
1.3
2.6
6.1 × 10−2
2.0
Source: Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 201, Semanová, J. et al., Elimination of polycyclic aro-
matic hydrocarbons from smoked sausages by migration into polyethylene packag-
ing, 1–6. Copyright 2016 with permission from Elsevier.

347
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
reduction between finishing the smoking and the package operation itself. 
As follows from Table 10.13, there is a great difference between distribution 
coefficients measured in sausages packed immediately after smoking, and 
after a 12-hour delay. This fact could be brought about by migration of PAHs 
into meat product bulk and therefore extension of the method of migration, 
TABLE 10.12
Values of Diffusion Coefficients for BaP in Various Media
Medium
D
(cm2/h)
Liquid smoke flavor (Simko et al. 1994)
7.2 × 102
Low-density polyethylene (Simko et al. 1999)
6.9 × 10−14
Smoked sausage
6.1 × 10−2
Sources: Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 201, Semanová, J. et al., Elimination of 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from smoked sausages by migration 
into polyethylene packaging, 1–6. Copyright 2016 with permission 
from Elsevier. Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 50, Šimko, P. et al., Kinet-
ics of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons sorption from liquid smoke 
flavor into low density polyethylene packaging, 65–68. Copyright 1994 
with permission from Elsevier. Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 64, 
Šimko, P. et al., Removal of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from 
water by migration into polyethylene, 157–161. Copyright 1999 with 
permission from Elsevier.
0
0
50
100
150
200
Time (min)
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
PAH4 content (μg/kg)
FIGURE 10.13
Total changes in PAH4 content in nonpacked smoked sausages (▲) and smoked sausages 
packed into polyethylene (■). Legislative limit PAH4 content equal to 12 μg/kg is marked 
by dashed line, dependence of PAH4 content upon time calculated by kinetic Equation 10.8 is 
marked by the black curve. Variability of experimental data is marked by error bars. (Reprinted 
from Food Chemistry, 201, Semanová, J. et al., Elimination of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
from smoked sausages by migration into polyethylene packaging, 1–6. Copyright 2016 with 
permission from Elsevier.)

348
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
which affects, of course, the time of PAH content reduction. Also, incorpora-
tion of PAHs into liphophilic structures under the surface of meat products 
could bring about their immobilization, which would affect global measure 
of PAH removal from these foods.
10.3 General Conclusions
On the basis of the data and information mentioned above, the following 
partial conclusions could be postulated:
1. PAHs are permanent contaminants formed during thermal decom-
position of organic matter such as wood, cholesterol, or other food 
components.
2. PAHs have substantial carcinogenic effects on living organisms, and 
therefore their content is limited by EU legislation.
3. PAH content may be limited by technological procedures such as 
duration of thermal or smoke treatment, temperature of smoke gen-
eration, application of packaging materials protecting migration 
of PAHs from surface into meat bulk, and photodecomposition of 
PAHs deposited on the surface of meat products.
4. Apart from the mentioned procedures, PAHs can be also eliminated 
by migration into a suitable plastic package.
5. Migration of PAHs into a plastic package—dominantly LDPE—is 
driven by nonequal chemical potentials in package/meat systems, 
expressed by PAH contents, or concentrations, respectively.
TABLE 10.13
Values of Distribution Coefficients Measured in 120 Minutes of 
Storage Experiment in Sausages Packed into LDPE Immediately (β 0) 
and after 12-Hour Delay before Packaging (β 12)
Compound
Distribution Coefficients
β 0
Distribution Coefficients
β 12
BaA
2.65
2.62
Chr
2.30
0.56
BbF
2.82
2.68
BaP
3.24
2.89
Average
2.75
1.85
Source: Data ß0 are  reprinted from Food Chemistry, 201, Semanova, L. et al., 
Elimination of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from smoked sau-
sages by migration into polyethylene packaging, 1 – 6, Copyright 
(2016) with permission from Elsevier.
Data ß12 are so far unpublished data..

349
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
6. From the point of view of physical chemistry, the elimination is a 
combined process composed of adsorption (as the prime process) 
followed by diffusion (as the second process).
7. The process of PAH migration into LDPE is most effective when 
smoking has just finished. A time delay before packaging would 
bring about a decrease of the process due to migration of PAHs into 
meat products’ bulk and their eventual incorporation and immobili-
zation in liphophilic structures.
8. Combination of both these processes offers the unique possibility to 
eliminate these compounds from the food matrix and elevate food 
safety in foods, where another process of elimination is impossible, 
or banned by legislation.
Acknowledgment
This contribution is the result of a project funded by the Slovak Scientific 
Grant Agency VEGA No. 1/0487/16.
References
Abramowitz, M. and Stegun, I. A. (1964). Handbook of Mathematical Functions. 
Washington, DC: National Bureau of Standards.
Adamson, A. W. (1990). Physical Chemistry of Surfaces. New York, NY: John Wiley & 
Sons.
Afolabi, A. O., Adesulu, E. A. and Oke, O. L. (1983). Polynuclear aromatic hydrocar-
bons in some Nigerian preserved freshwater fish species. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry, 31, 1083–1090.
Alonge, D. O. (1988). Carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) deter-
mined in Nigerian kundi (smoke-dried meat). Journal of the Science of Food and 
Agriculture, 43, 167–172.
Alonge, D. O. (1987). Factors affecting the quality of smoke-dried meats in Nigeria. 
Acta Aliment, 16, 263–270.
Andelman, J. B. and Suess, M. J. (1970). PAH in the water environment. Bulletin WHO, 
43, 479–508.
Bartle, K. D. (1991). Analysis and occurrence of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in 
food. In: Creaser, C. and Purchase, R. (eds.) Food Contaminants, Sources and Sur-
veillance. Cambridge: The Royal Society of Chemistry, 41–60.
Bednáriková, A., Skláršová, B., Kolek, E. and Šimko, P. (2011). New rapid HPLC 
method for separation and determination of benzo[a]pyrene hydroxyderiva-
tives. Polycyclic Aromatic Compounds, 31, 350–369.
Biesalski, H. K. (2005). Meat as a component of a healthy diet—Are there any risks or 
benefits if meat is avoided in the diet? Meat Science, 70, 509–524.
Bouvard, V., Loomis, D., Guyton, K. Z. et al. (2015). Carcinogenicity of consumption of 
red and processed meat. The Lancet Oncology. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00444-1.

350
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Cai, J., Wang, S. and Su, Q. (2008). Analysis of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
formed during off-line pyrolysis of ergosterol by GC–MS–SIM. Chromatographia, 
68, 357–363.
Cranck, J. (1976). The Mathematics of Diffusion. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 69–81.
Emmerson, E. P. (2011). Improving the sensory and nutritional quality of smoked 
meat products. In: Kerry, J. P. and Kerry, J. F. (eds.) Processed meats: Improving 
Safety, Nutrition and Quality. Cambridge: Woodhead Publishing, pp. 527–545.
Cai, J., Wang, S. and Su, Q. (2008). Analysis of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
formed during off-line pyrolysis of ergosterol by GC–MS–SIM. Chromatographia, 
68, 357–363.
Chen, J. and Chen, S. (2005). Removal of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons by low 
density polyethylene from liquid model and roasted meat. Food Chemistry, 90, 
461–469.
Christy, A. A., Lian, M. I. and Francis, G. W. (2011). Pyrolytic formation of polyaro-
matic hydrocarbons from steroid hormones. Food Chemistry, 124, 1466–1472.
Commission Directive 88/388/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member 
States relating to flavorings for use in foodstuffs and to source materials for their 
production. Official Journal of the European Union, L0388, 1991:1–10. Available 
at 
http://ec.europa.eu/food/fs/sfp/addit_flavor/flav09_en.pdf 
(accessed 
5 February 2016).
Commission Directive 2005/10/EC laying down the sampling methods and the meth-
ods of analysis for the official control of the levels of benzo(a)pyrene in foodstuffs. 
Official Journal of the European Union, L34, 2 February 2005:15–20. Available at 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A32005R0208 
(accessed 5 February 2016).
Commission Recommendation 2005/108/EC of February 4, 2005 on the further inves-
tigation into the levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in certain foods. 
Official Journal of the European Union, L34, 8 February 2003:43–45. Available at 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2005:034:0043:
0045:EN:PDF (accessed 5 February 2016).
Commission Regulation (EC) 1881/2006/EC setting maximum levels for certain con-
taminants in foodstuffs. Official Journal of the European Union, L364, 20 December 
2006:5–24. Available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/ LexUriServ.do?
uri=OJ:L:2006:364:0005:0024:EN:PDF (accessed 5 February 2016).
Commission Regulation (EC) No 333/2007 laying down the methods of sampling 
and analysis for the official control of the levels of lead, cadmium, mercury, 
inorganic tin, 3-MCPD and benzo(a)pyrene in foodstuffs. Official Journal of the 
European Union, L88, 29 March 2007:29–38. Available at http://eur-lex.europa.
eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2007:088:0029:0038:EN:PDF (accessed 
5 February 2016).
Commission Regulation (EC) 835/2011a amending Regulation (EC) No 1881/2006 
as regards maximum levels for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in foodstuffs. 
Official Journal of the European Union, L215, 19 August 2011:4–8. Available at 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:215:0004:
0008:EN:PDF (accessed 5 February 2016).
Commission Regulation EC No 836/2011b amending Regulation (EC) No 333/2007 
laying down the methods of sampling and analysis for the official control of the 
levels of lead, cadmium, mercury, inorganic tin, 3-MCPD and benzo(a)pyrene in 

351
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
foodstuffs. Official Journal of the European Union, L215, 20 August 2011:9–16. Avail-
able at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011: 
215:0009:0016:EN:PDF (accessed 5 February 2016).
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 1321/2013 of 10 December 2013 
establishing the Union list of authorised smoke flavouring primary prod-
ucts for use as such in or on foods and/or for the production of derived 
smoke flavourings. Available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uriĽOJ:L:2013:333:TOC. (accessed 5 February 2016).
Djinovic, J., Popovic, A. and Jira, W. (2008). Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) 
in different types of smoked meat products from Serbia. Meat Science, 80, 449–456.
European Commission, Health and Consumer Protection Directorate—General, Sci-
entific Committee on Food. (2002). Opinion of the Scientific Committee on Food 
on the risk to human health of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in food. SCF/
CS/CNTM/PAH/29 Final.
European Food Safety Authority. (2008). Scientific opinion of the panel on contami-
nants in the food chain on a request from the European Commission on polycy-
clic aromatic hydrocarbons in food. EFSA Journal, 724, 1–114.
Farhadian, A., Jinap, S. Hanifah, H. N. and Zaidul, I. S. (2011). Effects of meat pre-
heating and wrapping on the levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in 
charcoal-grilled meat. Food Chemistry, 124, 141–146.
Fasano, E., Yebra-Pimentel, I., Martínez-Carballo, E. and Simal-Gandara, J. (2016). 
Profiling, distribution and levels of carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocar-
bons in traditional smoked plant and animal foods. Food Control, 59, 581–90.
Grimmer, G. and Böhnke, H. (1975). Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon profile analysis 
of high protein foods, oils and fats by gas chromatography. Journal Association of 
Official Analytical Chemists, 58, 725–733.
Hitzel, A., Pöhlmann, M., Schwägele, F., Speer, K. and Jira, W. (2013). Polycyclic aro-
matic hydrocarbons (PAH) and phenolic substances in meat products smoked 
with different types of wood and smoking spices. Food Chemistry, 139, 955–62.
Guillén, M. D. (1994). Polycyclic aromatic compounds: Extraction and determination 
in food. Food Additives and Contaminants, 11, 669–684.
Guillén, M. D., Sopelana, P. and Partearroyo, M. A. (2000). Polycyclic aromatic hydro-
carbons in liquid smoke flavorings obtained from different types of wood. Effect 
of storage in polyethylene flasks on their concentrations. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry, 48, 5083–5087.
Kangsadalampai, K., Butryee, C. and Manoonphol, K. (1997). Direct mutagenicity of 
the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon-containing fraction of smoked and char-
coal-broiled foods treated with nitrite in acid solution. Food Chemical Toxicology, 
35, 213–218.
Larsson, B. K., Sahlberg, G. P., Eriksson, A. T. and Busk, L. A. (1983). Polycyclic  aromatic 
hydrocarbons in grilled food. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 31, 
867–873.
Ledesma, E., Rendueles, M. and Díaz, M. (2014). Benzo(a)pyrene penetration on a 
smoked meat product during smoking time. Food Additives and Contaminants, 
Part A, 1, 1688–1698.
Ledesma, E., Rendueles, M. and Díaz, M. (2015). Spanish smoked meat products: 
Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) contamination and moisture. Journal of Food Composition 
and Analysis, 37, 87–94.

352
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Ledesma, E., Rendueles, M. and Díaz, M. (2016). Contamination of meat products 
during smoking by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: Processes and preven-
tion. Food Control, 60, 64–87.
Lijinsky, W. and Shubik, P. (1964). Benzo[a]pyrene and other polynuclear hydrocar-
bons in charcoal-broiled meat. Science, 88, 145–153.
Lijinsky, W. and Ross, A. E. (1967). Production of carcinogenic polynuclear hydrocar-
bons in the cooking of food. Food and Cosmetics Toxicology, 5, 343–347.
Lorenzo, J. M., Purriños, L., Fontán, M. C. G. and Franco, D. (2010). Polycyclic aro-
matic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in two Spanish traditional smoked sausage variet-
ies: “Androlla” and “Botillo”. Meat Science, 86, 660–664.
Maga, J. A. (1987). The flavor chemistry of wood smoke. Food Reviews International, 3, 
139–183.
McEnally, C. S., Pfefferle, L. D., Atakan, B. and Kohse-Höinghaus, K. (2006). Studies 
of aromatic hydrocarbon formation mechanisms in flames: Progress towards 
closing the fuel gap. Progress in Energy and Combustion Science, 32, 247–294.
Moisan, J. Y. (1985). Effects of oxygen permeation and stabiliser migration on polymer 
degradation. In: Comyn J. (ed.) Polymer Permeability. Oxford: Elsevier.
Nelder, J. A. and Mead, R. A. (1965). A simplex method for function minimization. The 
Computer Journal, 7, 308–313.
Nisbet, I. C. T. and La Goy, P. K. (1992). Toxic equivalency factors (TEFS) for polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons. Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology, 16, 290–300.
Pöhlmann, M., Hitzel, A., Schwägele, F., Speer, K. and Jira, W. (2013a). Polycyclic aro-
matic hydrocarbons (PAH) and phenolic substances in smoked Frankfurter-type 
sausages depending on type of casing and fat content. Food Control, 31, 136–144.
Pöhlmann, M., Hitzel, A., Schwägele, F., Speer, K. and Jira, W. (2013b). Influence of 
different smoke generation methods on the contents of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAH) and phenolic substances in Frankfurter-type sausages. 
Food Control, 34, 347–355.
Purcaro, G., Moret, S. and Conte, L. S. (2013). Overview on polycyclic aromatic hydro-
carbons: Occurrence, legislation and innovative determination in foods. Talanta, 
105, 292–305.
Regulation (EC) 2065/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council on smoke 
flavourings used or intended for use in or on foods. Official Journal of the Euro-
pean Union, L309, 26 November 2003:1–8. Available at http://eur-lex.europa.
eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2003:309:0001:0008:EN:PDF (accessed 
on 5 February 2016).
Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Commission on Food Additives. 1987. 31:20–
22. [Online]. Available at http://whqlibdoc.who.int/trs/WHO_TRS_759.pdf 
(accessed 2 February 2016).
Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Commission on Food Additives. 2005. 
JECFA/64/SC: 32–38. [Online]. Available at ftp://ftp.fao.org/es/esn/jecfa/
jecfa64_summary.pdf (accessed 2 February 2016).
Richter, H. and Howard, J. B. (2000). Formation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
and their growth to soot—A review of chemical reaction pathways. Progress in 
Energy and Combustion Science, 26, 565–608.
Roseiro, L. C., Gomes, A., Patarata, L. and Santos, C. (2012). Comparative survey of 
PAHs incidence in Portuguese traditional meat and blood sausages. Food and 
Chemical Toxicology, 50, 1891–96.

353
Reduction of Contaminant Content in Processed Meats
Roda, A., Simoni, P., Ferri, E., et al. (1999). Determination of PAHs in various smoked 
meat products and different samples by enzyme immunoassay. Journal of the 
Science of Food and Agriculture, 79, 58–62.
Rozentale, I., Stumpe-Viksna, I., Začs, D., Siksna, I., Melngaile, A. and Bartkevičs, 
V. (2015). Assessment of dietary exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
from smoked meat products produced in Latvia. Food Control, 54, 16–22.
Semanová, J., Skláršová, B., Šimon, P. and Šimko, P. (2016). Elimination of polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons from smoked sausages by migration into polyethylene 
packaging. Food Chemistry, 201, 1–6.
Sikorski, Z. E. (2004). Traditional smoking. In: Jensen, W. K, Devine, C. and Dikeman 
M. (eds.) Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences, London, Elsevier, pp. 1265–1272.
Skláršová, B., Šimon, P., Kolek, E., Šimko, P. and Bednáriková, A. (2012). Non-
isothermal kinetics of benzo[a]pyrene photooxidation in glyceryl trioctanoate. 
Polycyclic Aromatic Compounds, 32, 580–588.
Suranová, M., Semanová, J., Skláršová, B. and Šimko, P. (2015). Application of accel-
erated solvent extraction for simultaneous isolation and pre-cleaning up pro-
cedure during determination of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in smoked 
meat products. Food Analytical Methods, 8, 1014–1020.
Šimko, P. (1991). Changes of benzo(a)pyrene contents in smoked fish during storage. 
Food Chemistry, 40, 293–300.
Šimko, P., Petrík, J. and Karovičová, J. (1992). Determination of benzo(a)pyrene in liq-
uid smoke preparations by high pressure liquid chromatography and confirma-
tion by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Acta Alimentaria, 21, 107–114.
Šimko, P. and Knežo, J. (1992). Influence of cooking on benzo(a)pyrene content in 
frankfurters. Nahrung, 36, 208–209.
Šimko, P., Gergely, Š., Karovičová, J., Drdák, M. and Knežo, J. (1993). Influence 
of cooking on benzo[a]pyrene content in smoked sausages. Meat Science, 34, 
301–309.
Šimko, P. (2011). Heat and processing generated contaminants in processed meats. In: 
Kerry, J. P. and Kerry, J. F. (eds.) Processed Meats: Improving Safety, Nutrition and 
Quality. Cambridge: Woodhead Publishing, pp. 478–507.
Šimko, P., Gombita, M. and Karovičová, J. (1991). Determination and occurrence of 
benzo[a]pyrene in smoked meat products. Nahrung, 35, 103–104.
Šimko, P. and Bruncková, B. (1993). Lowering of concentration of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons in a liquid smoke flavour by sorption into polyethylene packag-
ing. Food Additives and Contaminants, 10, 257–263.
Šimko, P., Šimon, P., Khunová, V., Karovičová, J. and Drdák, M. (1994). Kinetics of 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons sorption from liquid smoke flavour into low 
density polyethylene packaging. Food Chemistry, 50, 65–68.
Šimko, P., Khunová, V., Šimon, P. and Hrubá, M. (1995). Kinetics of sunflower oil con-
tamination with polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from contaminated recycled 
low density polyethylene film. International Journal of Food Science and Technol-
ogy, 30, 807–812.
Šimko, P., Šimon, P. and Khunová, V. (1999). Removal of polycyclic aromatic hydro-
carbons from water by migration into polyethylene. Food Chemistry, 64, 157–61.
Šimko, P. (2002). Determination of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in smoked meat 
products and smoke flavouring food additives. Journal of Chromatography B, 77, 
3–18.

354
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Šimko, P., Šimon, P. and Belajová, E. (2004). Lowering of concentration of polycy-
clic aromatic hydrocarbons in liquid media by sorption into polyethylene tere-
phthalate—A model study. European Food Research and Technology, 219, 273–276.
Šimko, P. (2005). Factors affecting elimination of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in 
smoked meat foods and liquid smoke flavorings. Molecular Nutrition and Food 
Research, 49, 637–647.
Škaljac, S., Petrović, L., Tasić, T. et al. (2014). Influence of smoking in traditional and 
industrial conditions on polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons content in dry fer-
mented sausages (Petrovská klobása) from Serbia. Food Control, 40, 12–18.
Tóth, L. and Blaas, W. (1972). Einfluss der Räeuchertechnologie auf den Gehalt von 
geraeucherten Fleischwaren an cancerogenen Kohlenwasserstoffen. II. Einfluss 
der Glimmtemperatur des Holzes sowie der Kuehlung, Waesche und Filtration 
des Räeucherrauches. Fleischwirtschaft, 52, 1419–1422.
Tóth, L. and Potthast, K. (1984). Chemical aspects of the smoking of meat and meat 
products, In: Chichester, C. O., Mrak, E. M. K. and Schweigert, B. S. (eds.) 
Advances in Food Research. New York, NY: Academic Press, pp. 87–158.
Wilms, M. (2000). The developing of modern smokehouses—Ecological and economi-
cal aspects. Fleischwirtsch Int, 80, 4–5.
Wretling, A., Eriksson, A., Eskhult, G. A. and Larsson, B. (2010). Polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs) in Swedish smoked meat and fish. Journal of Food Composi-
tion and Analysis, 23, 264–72.
Zelinkova, Z. and Wenzl, T. (2015). The occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs in food—A review. 
Polycyclic Aromatic Compounds, 35, 248–84.

355
11
Nutrigenomics in Food-Producing Animals
Werner G. Bergen
11.1 Introduction
It has been well established that foodstuffs contain three classes of macromole-
cules (carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins) which supply energy (carbohydrates 
and lipids) and protein building blocks for animals to function and maintain 
themselves. As our knowledge of the effect of many individual compounds/
nutrients in foodstuffs increased (this statement does not include vitamins), 
it was recognized that there were other possible contributions of such com-
pounds on specific aspects of regulation of metabolism. Thus, beyond func-
tion in cellular components (as plasma membranes, enzymes, glycogen, etc.), 
some of these compounds appeared to have “bioactive/pathway controlling 
properties” which may be used in a nutraceutical sense to combat health 
issues as well as promote animal production and the quality and character-
istics of muscle foods. Many of these bioactive nutrients interact/bind with 
transcription factors (TFs) to regulate major metabolic pathways to regulate 
metabolism at the transcriptomic/functional genomics level; this is referred 
to as nutrigenomics. These potential, other putative functions of food compo-
CONTENTS
11.1  Introduction ..............................................................................................355
11.2   Application of Genomics to Current Issues in Animal Agriculture ...356
11.3  Reductionism to Global Gene Expression—Overview ......................357
11.4   Global and Targeting Differential Gene Expression Studies in 
Farm Animals ............................................................................................................... 358
11.5  Experimental Approaches to Nutrigenomics Research .....................360
11.6  Long-Chain Fatty Acids as Nutrigenomic Effectors ...........................360
11.7  Conjugated Linoleic Acids as Regulators of Fatty Acid Synthesis ... 361
11.8   The Role of High-Energy Diets in Promoting IMF Deposition in 
Finishing Cattle ........................................................................................................... .. 364
11.9 Glucose versus Acetate as Precursors for IMF .....................................364
11.10 Conclusions and Future Trends .............................................................366
References .............................................................................................................366

356
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
nents have created great excitement particularly in the realm of human nutri-
tion and health. There may also be opportunities for regulatory manipulations 
by dietary components during animal production. In this chapter, issues of 
nutrigenomics in animal nutrition and production will be explored. Two dif-
ferent/divided concepts have been formulated when relating dietary nutrients 
content to animal metabolism. These two aspects of nutrient/gene function 
relationships have been coined nutrigenetics, the concept that a given nutri-
tion regime has been formulated to satisfy all nutrients requirement based 
on genetic potential, and nutrigenomics, the concept that a feed component  
may affect physiological function by altering gene expression either directly or 
indirectly in animals (Joffe and Houghton, 2016).
11.2  Application of Genomics to Current 
Issues in Animal Agriculture
Improving the efficiency of animal production and optimizing the quality 
of the animal products have been a long-term goal of the livestock industry. 
To varying degrees, the definitions of quality of muscle foods have differed 
over the years. In the past, animal fat was considered a positive attribute of 
meat products, but today a lean product with just enough fat to optimize fla-
vor and the eating experience is preferred. Such goals have been actualized 
with various production and animal selection practices. What stands out is that 
contemporary meat animals (at least in North America) can be characterized 
as lean and heavier muscled while carrying much less fat than their predeces-
sors. In the last 50 plus years, serious efforts have been made to select for lean 
animals by traditional means, which resulted in today’s animals. These genetic 
selections based on body composition changes have implications in nutrition, 
management, and harvesting techniques for these animals, and the further 
handling of the animal products. While there has been considerable success 
in increasing lean (protein) gains with much lower whole-body depot fat gains 
(subcutaneous and visceral fat) in animal production, such emphasis on lean-
ness also has a negative effect on the small adipose depots within skeletal mus-
cle (intramuscular fat [IMF]). These fat depots are associated with organoleptic 
properties of the muscle foods. In addition, tenderness is a highly valued prop-
erty of meat (especially beef). Thus, currently animal production procedures 
are geared toward maximizing lean (protein) gains, counterbalanced by nutri-
tional regimes that will also encourage more depot fat and IMF deposition.
There is interest by some producers (consumers) to make available 
increased amounts of so-called “healthy” meat products, in particular grass-
fed beef (Ruminants). Grass is a relatively low source of dietary energy and 
animals will not develop IMF except when animals are fed for a long time 
period. Such a long time span greatly lowers production efficiency (high 

357
Nutrigenomics in Food-Producing Animals
maintenance energy input) and greatly increases the carbon footprint of 
such practices. Animals selected for high efficiency of production often do 
not get adequate dietary energy in such a feeding system and their genetic 
potential (nutrigenetics) for lean growth is not met. In many cases, tenderness 
and organoleptic properties are undesirable in muscle foods arising from 
such production regimes. Clearly, the so-called health benefits are difficult 
to discern other than that grass-fed beef is a low-fat food product. To date, 
no one has identified any major change in carcass components that may be 
construed to provide “additional” health benefits. To date, gene expression 
works with pasture finished beef have not uncovered putative enzymatic 
pathways, TFs, or compositional factors that would increase the health value 
of such products (Burnett, 2014).
Questions about molecular regulation of IMF deposition (marbling), fat 
deposition in general, lean growth, overall energetic efficiency, and beneficial 
factors in animal products are all amenable to targeted or genome-wide gene 
expression/association studies (Williams et al., 2016). Such data, however, are 
descriptive; further application-type research based on such nutrigenomics 
data must be done to actualize any benefits. A number of excellent reviews 
about the role of nutrigenomics in animal production and animal products 
development have recently been published (Bionaz et al., 2015; Loor et al., 
2015; Picard et al., 2015). In addition, some selected publications emphasizing 
other functional genomics techniques related to food animals are Graung-
nard et al. (2009), Graungnard et al. (2010), Komolka et al. (2014), Loor et al. 
(2013), Guo et al. (2014), Lancaster et al. (2014), Roberts et al. (2015), and Loor 
et al. (2015). This literature has been steadily growing over the last decade.
11.3 Reductionism to Global Gene Expression—Overview
The hallmark of much of biochemistry and physiology research has been 
and still is reductionism. Here, a biological process has been observed and 
then a causative delineation is accomplished by isolating organs, then tissue 
slices, perfusions, cells, and then cell fractionation into nuclei, mitochondria, 
endoplasmic reticulum, and cytosol. Activities of relevant enzymes are mea-
sured in the various fractions and these data were interpreted by relating to 
whole cells, organs, and whole body function. To attempt a more metabolic 
interactive holistic approach, reductionist data are utilized in so-called mod-
eling systems concerning animal nutrition and metabolism for interpreta-
tion and application (Baldwin et al., 1987; France et al., 1987; Johnson et al., 
2012; Tedeschi et al., 2013).
Contemporary experimental approaches utilize high-throughput tech-
nologies in studying genomes (DNA sequences, single-nucleotide poly-
morphism [SNP]), genome function or transcriptomics (messenger RNA 

358
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
[mRNA]), protein synthesis, folding, and function or proteomics along with 
assessments of metabolic profiles in body and tissue fluids or metabolomics. 
When focusing strictly on lipid metabolites, this is often referred to as lipi-
domics. All these procedures can lead to a tremendous accumulation of raw 
data which have to be calculated, sorted, and adjusted for inherent method-
ological errors, statistical evaluation, and finally pathway-network analyses. 
The results can then be matched to biological processes and interpreted in 
line with the experimental design and hypotheses. Traditional reductionist-
based life science researchers have had little difficulty engaging in modern 
analytical procedures and equipment. What is often lacking is the ability to 
boil down the plethora of data into useful terms; this requires the application 
of bioinformatics. Hence, omics research teams typically include biofor-
maticists. While totally comprehensive analysis of the genome, functional 
genome, proteome, and metabolome for a given situation in animal produc-
tion is very useful, nevertheless the work is also very expensive.
All too often people have confidence in equipment, but the proper initial 
isolation of biological substances (particularly nucleic acids) and purity are an 
overwhelmingly important starting point for many “omic” studies. The most 
elaborate downstream equipment and capacity cannot obtain useful data 
with poor-quality samples. Unfortunately, some researchers unwittingly fail 
to recognize this pitfall.
11.4  Global and Targeting Differential Gene 
Expression Studies in Farm Animals
The scope of functional genomic assessments has included organs such as 
liver, skeletal muscle, adipose tissue, mammary tissue, connective tissue and 
blood, heart, cancer tissue, and gut epithelium along with the whole tract 
microbiome. In the food animal production area (but not disease related), 
principal tissues have been muscle, adipose of various depots, liver, gastro-
intestinal tract epithelium, and the gut microbiome. Much of the work with 
the gut microbiome has centered on metagenomics of organism diversity 
ranging from archaea, bacteroides, and firmicutes to prevotella (Kim et al., 
2014; McCann et al., 2014) but this will not be considered in this chapter.
Early work in differential gene expression (DE) utilized complemen-
tary DNA (cDNA) probes and Northern analysis of mRNA. In the bio-
medical field, where the focus was rodent biology, an huge inventory of 
such probes were developed as the GenBank sequence data for individ-
ual genes started to grow; however, many of these rodent-based probes 
could not be used without further development as probes for homologous 
genes in cattle or pigs. This development process was aided immensely as 
GenBank submissions increased for cattle, pigs, and other farm animals. 

359
Nutrigenomics in Food-Producing Animals
In contemporary times, animal species involved with food production have 
been sequenced to various degrees of completeness; however, sequence 
data on many promoters and structural genes are generally available. In 
early, gene expression work only a limited number of genes were sub-
jected to DE analysis (Reiter et al., 2007; Halsey et al., 2011), but as real-time 
(quantitative) reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
evolved as a main tool for DE, the number of target genes studied in single 
experiments has greatly expanded (Graugnard et al., 2010; Key et al., 2013; 
Perkins et al., 2014a,b).
When assessing DE for a set of target genes representing different metabolic 
pathways (such as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha [PPARα] 
for fatty acid catabolism and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
gamma [PPARγ] for adipogenesis) (Reiter et al., 2007) was done using North-
erns or PCR, biological interpretation of results could be readily based on 
basic understanding of biochemical pathways and accumulated DE data for 
such genes. The application of microarrays and more recently RNA deep 
sequencing has enabled researchers to simultaneously assess DE for thou-
sands of genes within a given sample. Except for noting how many genes 
were up- or downregulated and checking on DE of specific individual genes, 
a full assessment of such results can only be completed using bioinformatics 
computer programs and tools (e.g., Ayuso et al., 2015) including Ingenuity 
Pathway Analysis (IPA), enriched gene ontology (GO)-terms analysis, struc-
tural variant analysis, and regulatory TFs analysis. Before any statistical and 
system biology analyses can be made, however, genes must be evaluated 
according to a minimum mean group expression threshold, a set level of 
fold-change DE (such as 1.5, 2, or greater), and an application of appropriate 
false discovery rates values. The application of these statistical concepts and 
pathway analysis of data will not be further discussed here. These interpre-
tive workups of the massive data can then be assessed as networks from 
IPA and enriched biological function related to an overall criterion, such 
as structural genes, within pathway genes (glycolysis, fat lipolysis), and so 
forth. In addition, a new wrinkle has emerged in that gene expression can be 
attenuated at the posttranscriptional level by gene silencing. This is achieved 
by mRNA degradation or interference at the translation level by microRNA. 
Present in the genome are DNA sequences for specific microRNA which 
regulate expression of a given gene (Roberts 2015b; Svoboda et al., 2016). 
Thus, differential microRNA analysis adds an additional dimension to the 
interpretation of deep RNA sequencing analyses. Unfortunately, pathway 
analysis may predict differential expression of genes for a given pathway 
based on up- or downregulation of a given gene. Ultimately, the function of 
a pathway is dependent, however, on the pathway’s rate-limiting enzyme, 
thermodynamic considerations, and substrate concentration. Thus, a down-
stream gene may demonstrate wide DE fluctuations with various treatments 
but it may be unlikely that this will have any effect on the biochemical func-
tion of a pathway.

360
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
11.5 Experimental Approaches to Nutrigenomics Research
Experimental approaches in vivo can vary depending on the hypotheses 
to be assessed. The most frequent experimental treatments would be a 
DE response study to some food source, specific nutrients/molecules, and 
varying intakes of a given diet. Such experiments can be completed in a fairly 
short term and samples taken for appropriate “omics” analyses. While often 
not complicated from the actual execution standpoint, time course studies 
(e.g., neonatal, nursing, and growth finishing phases) with agricultural ani-
mals that require slaughter need extensive animal resources for the overall 
validly and analysis, and such studies are therefore expensive. Other studies 
will track genetic progress at the genome level for some trait over genera-
tions as, for example, selection for residual feed intake, marbling propen-
sity, rate of growth, protein deposition, and fattening. These types of studies 
require the maintenance of large herds or flocks through many generations. 
Finally, cell culture studies may also be useful for DE work with a whole host 
of potential treatments and incubation protocols.
Functional genomics and transcriptomic research laboratory protocols 
require optimal sampling procedures and the isolation of high-quality RNA. 
When conducting genome-wide association studies, genotyping and SNP 
analysis of good quality DNA is also required. Unfortunately, RNA is much 
less robust than DNA and always subject to possible degradation during 
isolation from tissues and cell cultures.
11.6 Long-Chain Fatty Acids as Nutrigenomic Effectors
Long-chain fatty acids are highly hydrophobic molecules involved in numer-
ous structural and dynamic cell functions, including serving as a highly 
concentrated form of metabolic energy, cell membrane composition and 
fluidity, functioning as regulatory ligands, and controlling gene expression 
(Jump et al., 2013, 2015). It is the latter area where dietary long-chain fatty 
acids may display nutrigenomic properties. In particular, highly unsatu-
rated omega-3 fatty acids (HUFAs) have been shown to attenuate hepatic 
gene transcription and lipogenesis. A number of TFs are involved in this 
role of transcriptional regulation by polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) in 
the liver including SREBP-1c, PPARγ, and PPARα. HUFAs/PUFAs may affect 
transcription directly by binding to TFs or indirectly via binding to other 
TFs and coactivators (e.g., Ou et al., 2001; DeBose-Boyd et al., 2001; Jump 
et al., 2013; Teran-Garcia et al., 2002). In humans, development of nonalco-
holic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) 
parallels with the development of obesity and type 2 diabetes. Hence, ώ-3 

361
Nutrigenomics in Food-Producing Animals
HUFAs (eicosapentaenoic acid [EPA] 20:5 ώ 3; docosahexaenoic acid [DHA] 
22:6 ώ-3) have been tested to specifically ameliorate pathologic lipid accu-
mulation in mouse fatty liver models. Dietary DHA showed a much stron-
ger response in  attenuating liver lipid accumulation than EPA (Jump et al., 
2013). Other similar studies have had similar results and emerging transla-
tion issues into human medicine include how much HUFA must be admin-
istered to be effective in combatting NAFLD. A proposed mechanism of 
phytochemical (botanicals; ώ-3 PUFA) related nutrigenomics effects in ani-
mals can be found elsewhere (Luo et al., 2016).
In pigs and cattle, the primary sites of lipogenesis are the adipose tis-
sues (Bergen and Mersmann, 2005). To evaluate nutrigenomics effects on de 
novo fatty acid synthesis by PUFA/HUFA in pigs, studies were conducted 
to monitor effects of long-chain PUFA on de novo fatty acid synthesis in 
porcine adipose tissues. Preliminary studies in my laboratory showed that 
in porcine adipose, as in rodent liver, ώ-3 HUFA (from fish oil) and to some 
extent ώ-6 PUFA will lower expression of some genes involved in de novo 
fatty acid synthesis. Once again, the issue of optimal dosage is an important 
factor in translational application of this work. Flaxseed (linseed oil) and 
canola oil are sources of 18-carbon ώ-3 fatty acids (linolenic acid). Over the 
years, some work has been done with these ώ-3 PUFA sources to evaluate 
their influence on fat deposition and marbling characteristics in pigs. The 
hypothesis was that ώ-3 PUFAs will depress overall body fat accretion, but 
these PUFAs as dietary fatty acids will also be channeled to IMF. This would 
presumably result in leaner pork with increased ώ-3 fatty acid content. On 
balance, to date such experiments have not yet demonstrated that feeding of 
ώ-3 fatty acids attenuate fat synthesis and change the fatty acid profile in IMF 
of pigs. Application of this possible nutrigenomic effect of plant ώ-3 fatty acid 
sources to attenuate fat deposition and possibly enhance marbling in com-
mercial pork production is minimal.
11.7  Conjugated Linoleic Acids as Regulators 
of Fatty Acid Synthesis
As far back as the 1800s, a relationship between high-grain diets and butter 
fat production in lactating was observed. In the last third of the twentieth 
century, it was noted that there may be a molecule(s) of lipid nature in rumi-
nant animal products (meat, milk, and cheese) that would have antiobesity 
and cardioprotective effects in animals (Wang and Jones, 2004; Shen and 
McIntosh, 2016). A team of workers led by Professor M. W. Pariza (University 
of Wisconsin-Madison, WI) identified these lipid molecules as conjugated 
linoleic acids (CLAs) (Ha et al., 1987; Pariza et al., 2001). CLAs are a group 
of unsaturated positional and geometric isomers of linoleic acids (cis, cis 

362
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
nonconjugated 18:2) that initially were touted to be a novel nutrigenomic 
molecule useful for the treatment of obesity and associated maladies. Since 
beef and dairy products were a source of CLA, strategies were implemented 
to advance consumption of these food products based on the presence of 
bioactive components. Further research was initiated to somehow increase 
CLA concentrations in ruminant animal products and it was speculated that 
bison provided muscle foods with higher CLA content than beef. After a 
number of clinical intervention trials, it was soon noted that potential daily 
consumption of endogenous CLA from beef or milk products (100–200 mg) 
was too low to have desired antiobesity effects. About 3 g daily of CLA as a 
50–50 mixture of c9, t11 and t10, c12 CLA (active isomer) is usually needed 
for notable antiobesity effects in humans. Highly concentrated CLA supple-
ments are now available for human use but their overall effectiveness is 
still not fully clear. From a mechanistic perspective, the t10, c12 CLA isomer 
reduces adiposity by enhancing lipolysis, fat oxidation, and depressing de 
novo fatty acid synthesis (Shen and McIntosh, 2016).
Milk fat depression (MFD) was a generally recognized issue when lactating 
cows are fed diets high in readily fermentable carbohydrates. While initially 
workers tried to relate MFD to shifts in the acetate/propionate molar ratio 
in rumen fermentation, the role of biohydrogenation of PUFA (linoleic acid) 
from high-energy feeds was later related to MFD. Then it was observed that 
18:2 hydrogenation resulted in incomplete saturation of all 18:2. Thus, rumen 
trans-linoleic acid conjugated intermediates of c9, t11 and t10, c12 arose which 
could be further reduced to trans 11 C 18:1 and trans 10 C 18:1, both of which 
can be reduced to stearic acid. All these intermediates were found in milk 
and adipose fat of ruminants. The 18:1 trans-fatty acids could also be recon-
verted to c9 t11 and t10 18:1 CLA by tissue stearoyl-CoA desaturase. In any 
case, it has now been well established that t10 c12 is the active CLA in MFD 
(inhibition of mammary de novo fatty acid synthesis), decreasing adipose 
de novo fatty acid synthesis in nonruminants and nonlactating cows, but 
increasing de novo fatty acid synthesis in adipose of lactating cows fed an 
MFD diet (Bauman and Griinari, 2003; Bauman et al., 2011).
The potential of CLA in enhancing the quality and composition of nonru-
minant food animals has been studied over the last 25 years. It was shown 
when fed to pigs, CLA reduced back fat, increased marbling scores, and 
increased IMF by increasing IMF adipocyte size rather than number (Barnes 
et al., 2012). Administration of CLA to steers or bovine adipocytes in culture 
lowered adipose lipid deposition (Smith et al., 2009). Interestingly in lactating 
dairy cows, t10, c12 CLA inhibits mammary de novo lipogenesis but adipose 
tissue lipogenesis is actually increased (Thomas and Moore, 1953; Harvatine 
et al., 2009; Bauman et al., 2011; Bergen, 2009).
As indicated above, many bioactive molecules bind to TFs, which can then 
turn on/off given metabolic pathways through activating transcription of 
the TF target genes. Workers have strategically explored the nutrigenomics 
potential of molecules in animal production by targeting functionally 

363
Nutrigenomics in Food-Producing Animals
related TF as related to animal production. The current ongoing discovery 
research in gene expression responses to multiple variables in animal pro-
duction systems (related to nutrient intake, environmental constraints, man-
agement, and husbandry procedures) has identified some key TFs that could 
affect efficiency of animal foods production and quality. Research indicated 
that nutrigenomics-based DE findings in this regard tend to revolve around 
fat synthesis and oxidation with TF such as PPARα, PPARγ, SREBP-1c, and 
PPCoactivator 1 α (PGC1α) mostly implicated in adipose and muscle tissues 
(Wahli and Michalik, 2012). The involvement of TF regulating protein syn-
thesis has been much more difficult to identify as this metabolic process is to 
a large extent under translational or posttranscriptional control. Thus, prog-
ress in finding other nutrigenomic molecules that will affect muscle protein 
synthesis and degradation has been slow. The issue is that such molecules 
(often amino acids, cAMP-stimulating agents, or beta-adrenergic agonists) 
either involve substrate level of amino acids effects or interactions with 
receptors which could affect both transcription and translation, respectively. 
These molecules in this context could at best be called “quasi-nutrigenomic”; 
however, they may affect gene expression. The beta-adrenergic agonists 
attenuate lipogenesis primarily via transcriptomic regulation while enhanc-
ing lipolysis and fatty acid oxidation via regulation of both gene expression 
and posttranscriptional processes. Other work has also shown that beta-
agonists enhance myofibrillar synthesis (increase in alpha actin and myosin 
mRNA) and attenuate muscle protein degradation in beef cattle and pigs 
(Skjaerlund et al., 1993) by pre- and posttranslational regulation. Unfortu-
nately, more often than not the extent of marbling is also lowered by beta 
agonists thereby affecting the organoleptic properties of beef and pork. The 
amino acid leucine has a nutrigenomics-like effect on translation processes 
(Columbus et al., 2013). Leucine stimulates the target of rapamycin (mTOR) 
system whereby initiation factors and their binding proteins (eIF2 and eIf4 
family) are activated to support enhanced protein synthesis; however, these 
actions are not mediated via DE. Numerous studies have shown that leucine 
administration will increase myofibrillar protein synthesis under conditions 
where increased translation can occur (Columbus et al., 2013). Extra leucine 
appears to have a beneficial effect in neonates, but broad application of this 
concept to increasing animal protein production has been limited.
A relatively new paradigm in digestive physiology is that the digested 
nutrients (amino acids, sugars, and fatty acids) may have direct effects on the 
overall integrity of the mucosal epithelial cells. Work first with the rumen 
microbiome and then the lower gut microbiome showed that the anaerobic 
fermentations of feed and undigested foods, respectively, may produce bio-
active molecules that may be critical for the well-being of gut epithelial cells. 
For example, the short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) butyrate arising from colonic 
fermentation has been implicated in the attenuation of colonic cell cancer. 
Colon cancer is characterized by rapid proliferation of colonocytes; this 
proliferation may be modified by butyric acid. Since the extent of butyrate 

364
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
production can be influenced by undigested food/prebiotics there has been 
great interest in understanding a putative role of butyric acid on colon cancer 
and health. Similarly, the pregastric fermentation in the rumen produces 
butyric acid (and other molecules) and the butyrate may possess beneficial 
effects on the rumen epithelium (Minuti et al., 2015). Ruminal biohydroge-
nation of PUFAs and CLAs has already been described previously in this 
chapter. To what degree nutrigenomic-like actions of gastrointestinal micro-
biome fermentations will effect animal production is not clear, but this area 
is receiving increased research attention.
11.8  The Role of High-Energy Diets in Promoting 
IMF Deposition in Finishing Cattle
Beef cattle consuming relatively low-net-energy feeds such as most grasses 
and forages during the finishing phase show a slow expression of finish 
and marbling; animals must be fed for extended periods to achieve fin-
ish and adequate marbling on such dietary regimes. To this end, after the 
growing and often backgrounding phase, feeder cattle are placed on high-
energy, readily fermentable carbohydrate diets (such as starch in corn) and 
a desirable finish and acceptable marbling in beef is achieved after a few 
months of consuming the finishing diet. It has been shown that fat depo-
sition becomes the principal anabolic process once animals have reached 
their lean carcass peak. This switch in priority of energy nutrient utili-
zation (or nutrient partitioning) to continue fat deposition as lean tissue 
deposition slows significantly (Bergen, 1974; Prior and Scott, 1980; Smith 
and Crouse, 1984; Smith et al., 2009; Smith and Johnson, 2016) has also 
been related to an increased rate of marbling at that point.
The population of IMF adipocytes is very dynamic, ranging from preadi-
pocytes to fully mature adipocytes. This is also accompanied in shifts in 
DE of adipogenic (differentiation) and lipogenic genes (fat synthesis) as IMF 
adipocytes accumulate. Pethick et al. (2004) noted that the fractional rate of 
IMF fat accretion is similar to that of the major depot fat sites. 
11.9 Glucose versus Acetate as Precursors for IMF
The primary precursor for fatty acid synthesis is acetic acid in rumi-
nants (cattle) and glucose in nonruminants (pigs, rodents). The rumen 
fermentation of all but high-starch-containing feeds produces princi-
pally acetic acid, but production of the two other SCFA is also prevalent  

365
Nutrigenomics in Food-Producing Animals
(propionic acid and butyric acid). Consuming diets high in readily ferment-
able carbohydrates (starch from zea maize), as typical in finishing diets for 
cattle in the United States, produces a higher molar percent of propionic acid 
of the total SCFA production. Propionic acid can be channeled directly into 
hepatic gluconeogenesis since it can enter the anapleoretic portion of the 
citric acid cycle via succinate. While the present consensus is that in major 
adipose depots (subcutaneous, visceral, pelvic, kidney, and IMF), acetate is 
the principal substrate for de novo fatty acid synthesis in ruminants (Bergen 
and Mersmann, 2005), there is some evidence that in the IMF adipocytes of 
high-energy diet fed steers, glucose (from propionic acid) may be the pri-
mary carbon source for de novo fatty acid synthesis possibly accounting 
for a rapid rise in intensity of marbling in the finishing phase. These con-
clusions were based on in vitro incubations of various lipogenic substrates 
with ruminant liver and adipose slices and with in vivo  infusions of radio-
labeled acetate and glucose (Prior and Scott, 1980; Smith and Crouse, 1984). 
It should be noted here that in ruminants as compared to rodents, de novo 
fatty acid synthesis is minimal in liver (Bergen and Mersman, 2005). Acetic 
acid as acetyl-CoA is a precursor of de novo fatty acid synthesis in the cyto-
sol and available directly from the rumen fermentation; however, glucose 
by itself is not a direct substrate for lipogenesis, and there appears to little 
real biochemical advantage to glucose as a lipogenic substrate in ruminants. 
Glucose must proceed through glycolysis and then early reactions in the 
mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle to obtain citrate from which 
then AcCoA arises in the cytosol upon citrate cleavage. A benefit of glucose 
may be related to stimulation of glucose transporters and the possibility 
of enhanced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH+H) 
production for reducing fatty acid carbon skeletons in IMF adipocytes. Fur-
ther, acetic acid can never be converted to glucose and since glycerol (aris-
ing from glyceroneogenesis) is essential for the synthesis of triglycerides 
(triacylglycerols), the potential role of glucose in IMF lipogenesis may be 
significant. In this sense, propionic acid can be similar to a nutrigenomic 
molecule in that when present in adequate concentrations, this SCFA is not 
only an energy substrate for ruminant tissues, but also redirects regulation 
of lipogenesis in ruminant adipose tissues.
Questions about lipogenic precursors in ruminant for de novo fatty 
acid synthesis have, however, not been fully answered. Recently, workers 
(Nayananjalie et al., 2015) established a precocious fat deposition model by 
feeding weaned steer calves high-energy diets, followed by growing and fin-
ishing regimes. This experimental model was then utilized to assess differ-
ential incorporation of glucose and acetate into subcutaneous, intramuscular, 
and visceral palmitic acid. To determine differential utilization of lipogenic 
substrates, these finished cattle were infused with either (2H3) acetic acid or 
(U-13C6) glucose. Results showed that irrespective of location of the fat depot, 
fractional synthesis rates of palmitic acid from acetate were about 13-fold 
higher than rates observed for glucose. This recent study clearly indicates 

366
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
that acetate is the highly preferred precursor for de novo fatty acid synthesis 
for all fat depots in ruminants.
11.10 Conclusions and Future Trends
Our understanding of the impacts of nutrigenomics on production, health, 
and disease of food animals is just emerging. This research field is emerg-
ing as an ongoing culmination of application of all the genomics, tran-
scriptomics, and bioinformatics to animal systems. Potential downstream 
benefits of nutrigenomics research have largely not yet impacted animal 
agriculture and discovery of many hitherto unknown nutrient–genome 
interactions are anticipated in the future. In this chapter, a number of top-
ics in nutrigenomics that currently represent this rapidly advancing field of 
knowledge are described. Potential nutrigenomic effects of amino acids have 
not been discussed in detail as we cannot readily separate amino acids’ role 
as protein building blocks, impacts on hormonal status and gene expres-
sion. From an era of technological innovations and new tools in agriculture 
(global positioning system [GPS], use of computer technology, minimum till-
age, more efficient planting, and harvesting equipment and animal housing) 
we are now engaged in the discovery and application of biological innova-
tions beyond traditional selection and propagation techniques to secure an 
adequate, wholesome food supply for an ever-expanding human population.
References
Ayuso, M., Fernández, A., Núñez, Y. et al. (2015). Comparative analysis of muscle tran-
scriptome between pig genotypes identifies genes and regulatory mechanisms 
associated to growth, fatness and metabolism. PLOS ONE, 22, 10:e0145162. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0145162.
Baldwin, R. L., France, J., Beever, D. E. et al. (1987). Metabolism of the lactating dairy 
cow. III. Properties of mechanistic models suitable for evaluation of energetic 
relationships and factors involved in the partition of nutrients. Journal of Dairy 
Research, 54, 133–145.
Barnes, K. M., Winslow, N. R., Shelton, A. G. et al. (2012). Effect of dietary conju-
gated linoleic acid on marbling and intramuscular adipocytes in pork. Journal of 
Animal Science, 90, 1142–1149.
Bauman, D. E. and Griinari, J. M. (2003). Nutritional regulation of milk fat synthesis. 
Annual Review of Nutrition, 23, 203–227.
Bauman, D. E., Harvatine, K. J. and Lock, A. L. (2011). Nutrigenomics, rumen-derived 
bioactive fatty acids, and the regulation of milk fat synthesis. Annual Review of 
Nutrition, 31, 299–319.

367
Nutrigenomics in Food-Producing Animals
Bergen, W. G. (1974). Protein synthesis in animal models. Journal of Animal Science, 38, 
1079–1091.
Bergen, W. G. (2009). Milk-fat depression and lipid repartitioning in lactating dairy 
cows. Journal of Nutrition, 139, 826–827.
Bergen, W. G. and Mersmann, H. J. (2005). Comparative aspects of lipid metabolism: 
Impact on contemporary research and use of animal models. Journal of Nutrition, 
135, 2499–2502.
Bionaz, M., Osorio, J. and Loor, J. J. (2015). Nutrigenomics in dairy cows: Nutrients, 
transcription factors, and techniques. Journal of Animal Science, 93:5531–5553.
Burnett, D. D. (2014). Targeted gene expression profiling in beef cattle under finishing 
conditions in the south eastern United States: Identification of regulatory fac-
tors involved in metabolic efficiency, energy partitioning, and intramuscular fat 
deposition. PhD dissertation, Auburn University, Alabama.
Columbus, D. A., Fiorotto, M. L. and Davis, T. A. (2013). Leucine is a major regulator 
of muscle protein synthesis in neonatal pigs. Amino Acids, 47, 259–270.
DeBose-Boyd, R. A., Ou, J., Goldstein, J. L. et al. (2001). Expression of sterol regulatory 
element-binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c) mRNA in rat hepatoma cells requires 
endogenous LXR ligands. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 
98, 1477–1482.
France, J., Gill, M., Thornly, J. H. et al. (1987). A model of nutrient utilization and body 
composition in beef cattle. Animal Production, 44, 371–385.
Graugnard, D. E., Berger, L. L., Faulkner, D. B. et al. (2010). High-starch diets induce 
precocious adipogenic gene network up-regulation in longissimus lumborum 
of early-weaned Angus cattle. British Journal of Nutrition, 103, 953–963.
Guo, B., Kongsuwan, K., Greenwood, P. L. et al. (2014). A gene expression estimator of 
intramuscular fat percentage for use in both cattle and sheep. Journal of Animal 
Science and Biotechnology, 5, 35.
Ha, Y. L., Grimm, N. K. and Pariza, M. W. (1987). Anticarcinogens from fried ground 
beef: Heat-altered derivatives of linoleic acid. Carcinogenesis, 12, 1881–1887.
Halsey, C. H. C., Weber, P. S., Reiter, S. S. et al. (2011). The effect of ractopamine 
hydrochloride on gene expression in adipose tissues of finishing pigs. Journal of 
Animal Science, 89, 1011–1019.
Harvatine, K. J., Perfield, J. W. and Bauman, D. E. (2009). Expression of enzymes and 
key regulators of lipid synthesis is upregulated in adipose tissue during CLA-
induced milk fat depression in dairy cows. Journal of Nutrition, 139, 849–854.
Joffe, Y. T. and Houghton, C. A. (2016). A novel approach to the nutrigenetics and 
nutrigenomics of obesity and weight management. Current Oncology Reports, 
18, 43–50.
Johnson, I. R., France, J., Thornley, J. H. et al. (2012). A generic model of growth, 
energy metabolism, and body composition for cattle and sheep. Journal of 
Animal Science, 90, 4741–4751.
Jump, D. B., Depner, C. M., Tripathy, S. et al. (2015). Potential for dietary ω-3 fatty 
acids to prevent nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and reduce the risk of primary 
liver cancer. Advances in Nutrition, 6, 694–702.
Jump, D. B., Tripathy, S. and Depner, C. M. (2013). Fatty acid-regulated transcription 
factors in the liver. Annual Review of Nutrition, 33, 249–269.
Key, C. N., Perkins, S. D., Bratcher, C. L. et al. (2013). Grain feeding coordinately alters 
expression patterns of transcription factor and metabolic genes in subcutaneous 
adipose tissue of crossbred heifers. Journal of Animal Science, 91, 2616–2627.

368
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Kim, M., Wang, L. and Morrison, M. (2014). Development of a phylogenetic micro-
array for comprehensive analysis of ruminal bacterial communities. Journal of 
Applied Microbiology, 117, 949–960.
Komolka, K., Albrecht, E., Wimmers, K. et al. (2014). Molecular heterogeneities of 
adipose depots—Potential effects on adipose-muscle cross-talk in humans, mice 
and farm animals. Journal of Genomics, 2, 31–44.
Lancaster, P. A., Sharman, E. D., Horn, G. V. et al. (2014). Effect of rate of weight gain 
of steers during the stocker phase. III. Gene expression of adipose tissues and 
skeletal muscle in growing-finishing beef cattle. Journal of Animal Science, 92, 
1462–1472.
Loor, J. J., Bionaz, M. and Drackley, J. K. (2013). Systems physiology in dairy cattle: 
Nutritional genomics and beyond. Annual Review of Animal Biosciences, 1, 
365–392.
Loor, J. J., Vailati-Riboni, M., McCann, J. C. et al. (2015). Lactation symposium: Nutrig-
enomics in livestock: Systems biology meets nutrition. Journal of Animal Science, 
93, 5554–5574.
Luo, T., Miranda-Garcia, O., Adamson, A. et al. (2016). Consumption of walnuts in 
combination with other whole foods produces physiologic, metabolic, and 
gene expression changes in obese C57BL/6J high-fat-fed male mice. Journal of 
Nutrition, 146, 1641–1650.
McCann, J. C., Wickersham, T. A., Loor, J. J. et al. (2014). High-throughput methods 
redefine the rumen microbiome and its relationship with nutrition and metabo-
lism. Bioinformatics and Biology Insights, 8, 109–125.
Minuti, A., Palladino, A., Khan, M. J. et al. (2015). Abundance of ruminal bacteria, 
epithelial gene expression, and systemic biomarkers of metabolism and inflam-
mation are altered during the peripartal period in dairy cows. Journal of Dairy 
Science, 98, 8940–8951.
Nayananjalie, W. A., Wiles, T. R., Gerrard, D. E., McCann, M. A., Hanigan, M. D. (2015). 
Acetate and glucose incorporation into subcutaneous, intramuscular, and vis-
ceral fat of finishing steers. Journal of Animal Science, 93, 2451–2459.
Ou, J., Tu, H., Shan, B. et al. (2001). Unsaturated fatty acids inhibit transcription of the 
sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c) gene by antagonizing 
ligand-dependent activation of the LXR. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA, 98, 6027–6032.
Pariza, M. W., Park, Y. and Cook, M. E. (2001). The biologically active isomers of 
conjugated linoleic acid. Progress in Lipid Research, 40, 283–298.
Perkins, S. D., Key, C. N., Garrett, C. F. et al. (2014a). Residual feed intake studies in 
Angus-sired cattle reveal a potential role for hypothalamic gene expression in 
regulating feed efficiency. Journal of Animal Science, 92, 549–560.
Perkins, S. D., Key, C. N., Marvin, M. N. et al. (2014b). Effect of residual feed intake 
on hypothalamic gene expression and meat quality in Angus-sired cattle grown 
during the hot season. Journal of Animal Science, 92, 1451–1461.
Pethick, D. W., Harper, G. S. and Oddy, V. H. (2004). Growth, development and 
nutritional manipulation of marbling in cattle: A review. Australian Journal of 
Experimental Agriculture, 44, 705–715.
Picard, B., Lebret, B., Cassar-Malek, I. et al. (2015). Recent advances in omic technolo-
gies for meat quality management. Meat Science, 109, 18–26.

369
Nutrigenomics in Food-Producing Animals
Prior, R. L. and Scott, R. A. (1980). Effects of intravenous infusions of glucose, lactate, 
propionate or acetate on the induction of lipogenesis in bovine adipose tissue. 
Journal of Nutrition, 110, 2011–2019.
Reiter, S. S., Halsey, C. H. C., Stronach, B. N., Bartosh, J. L., Owsley, W. F., Bergen, W. G. 
(2007). Lipid metabolism related gene-expression profiling in liver, skeletal 
muscle a adipose tissue in crossbred Duroc and Pietrain pigs. Comparative Bio-
chemistry and Physiology Part D, 2, 200–2007.
Roberts, S. L., Lancaster, P. A., DeSilva, U., Horn, G. W., Krehbiel, C. R. (2015a). 
Coordinated gene expression between skeletal muscle and intramuscular adi-
pose tissue in growing beef cattle. Journal of Animal Science, 93, 4302–4311.
Roberts, T. C. (2015b). The micro-RNA machinery. Advances in Experimental Medicine 
and Biology, 887, 15–30.
Shen, W. and McIntosh, M. K. (2016). Nutrient regulation: Conjugated linoleic acid’s 
inflammatory and browning properties in adipose tissue. Annual Review of 
Nutrition, 36, 183–210.
Skjaerlund, D. M., Grant, A. L. and Helferich, W. G. (1993). Determination of the 
relative abundance of skeletal muscle alpha actin mRNA in muscle of livestock 
species. Journal of Animal Science, 71, 393–399.
Smith, S. B. and Crouse, J. D. (1984). Relative contributions of acetate, lactate and glu-
cose to lipogenesis in bovine intramuscular and subcutaneous adipose tissue. 
Journal of Nutrition, 114, 792–800.
Smith, S. B. and Johnson, B. J. (2016). Marbling of cattle to maximize the deposition of 
intramuscular adipose. Journal of Animal Science, 94(eE-Suppl 5), 374.
Smith, S. B., Kawachi, H. and Choi, C. B. (2009). Cellular regulation of bovine intra-
muscular adipose development and composition. Journal of Animal Science, 
87(14 Suppl), E72–E82.
Svobodova, E., Kubikova, J. and Svoboda, P. (2016). Production of small RNAs by 
mammalian Dicer. Pflugers Arch Review, 468: 1089–1101.
Tedeschi, L. O., Fox, D. G. and Kononoff, P. J. (2013). A dynamic model to predict fat 
and protein fluxes and dry matter intake associated with body reserve changes 
in cattle. Journal of Dairy Science, 96, 2448–2463.
Teran-Garcia, M., Rufo, C., Nakamura, M. T., Osborne, T. F., Clarke, S. D. (2002). 
NF-Y involvement in the polyunsaturated fat inhibition of fatty acid synthase 
gene transcription. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 290, 
1295–1299.
Thomas, J.W. and Moore, R.A. (1953). Thyroprotein feeding to dairy cows during suc-
cessive lactations. Journal of Dairy Science, 36, 657–672.
Wahli, W. and Michalik, L. (2012). PPARs at the crossroads of lipid signaling and 
inflammation. Trends Endocrinology Metabolism, 32, 351–363.
Wang, Y. W. and Jones, P. J. (2004). Conjugated linoleic acid and obesity control: 
Efficacy and mechanisms. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic 
Disorders, 28, 941–955.
Williams, E. G, Wu, Y. J., Pooja, J. et al. (2016). Systems proteomics of liver mitochon-
dria function. Science, 352, 1292.


371
12
Bioactive Properties of Peptides 
 Generated from Meat Proteins
Keizo Arihara and Yusuke Komiya 
12.1 Introduction
Functional foods are foods with additional functions related to health pro-
motion or disease prevention by functional ingredients (Arihara, 2006a, 
2014; Bagchi and Nair, 2017). Peptides generated from food proteins are 
CONTENTS
12.1 Introduction ................................................................................................371
12.2 Generation of Peptides from Meat Proteins ...........................................372
12.2.1 
Gastrointestinal Proteolysis .......................................................373
12.2.2 
Aging of Meats .............................................................................373
12.2.3 
Fermentation of Meats ................................................................374
12.2.4 
Enzymatic Treatment .................................................................. 374
12.3 Bioactivities of Meat Protein-Derived Peptides .....................................375
12.3.1 
ACE Inhibitory/Antihypertensive Peptides ............................375
12.3.2 
Antioxidative Peptides ................................................................ 378
12.3.3 
Opioid Peptides ...........................................................................379
12.3.4 
Immunomodulatory Peptides ...................................................380
12.3.5 
Hypocholesterolemic Peptides ..................................................381
12.3.6 
Antithrombotic Peptides ............................................................381
12.3.7 
Antimicrobial Peptides ...............................................................382
12.3.8 
Prebiotic Peptides ........................................................................382
12.3.9 
Bioactive Peptides from By-Products ........................................383
12.3.10 Peptides with Sensory Properties .............................................385
12.4 Peptides and the Maillard Reaction ........................................................385
12.4.1 
The Maillard Reaction .................................................................385
12.4.2 
Maillard Reaction and Meat .......................................................386
12.4.3 
Bioactivities of MRPs from Peptides.........................................387
12.4.4 
Bioactivities of Volatile MRPs from Peptides ..........................388
12.5 Conclusions .................................................................................................389
References ............................................................................................................. 391

372
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
representative functional food ingredients (Aleixandre and Miguel, 2012; 
Bowman, 2015). Although the activities of these peptides are latent in par-
ent food proteins, they are released by enzymatic treatments. Mellander 
(1950) first reported that bioactive peptides were generated from food pro-
teins. He suggested that casein-derived phosphorylated peptides enhanced 
vitamin D-independent bone calcification in rachitic infants. Since then, 
information on bioactivities of peptides generated from food proteins has 
steadily accumulated, and numerous peptides exhibiting various activities 
have been discovered (Bowman, 2015; Hettiarachchy, 2012; Owusu-Apenten, 
2010). Such peptides include antihypertensive, opioid, immunostimulating, 
antimicrobial, antithrombotic, hypocholesterolemic, and antioxidative pep-
tides. It goes without saying that these peptides can be generated from meat 
proteins. There is a great possibility of utilizing such components for devel-
oping novel functional meat products and food ingredients (Arihara, 2006b, 
2014; Pathera et al., 2017). In this chapter, generation of peptides from meat 
proteins and potential benefits of such peptides are discussed. Maillard reac-
tion products (MRPs) generated from meat protein-derived peptides are also 
focused.
12.2 Generation of Peptides from Meat Proteins
Although most proteins contain bioactive sequences, those sequences are 
inactive or incomplete within the parent proteins. Only via proteolytic diges-
tion are active peptide fragments released from native proteins. Once such 
peptides are liberated, they can act as regulatory compounds. Along with 
gastrointestinal digestion, there are several ways in which peptides are gen-
erated from meat proteins (Figure 12.1).
Meat proteins
e.g., myosin, actin
Oligopeptides
bioactive peptides
Protease treatment
Aging/storage of meats
Gastrointestinal digestion
Fermentation of meats
e.g., pepsin, trypsin, chymotrypsin
e.g., endopeptidases, exopeptidases
Microbial and muscle enzymes
Commercial exogenous proteases
FIGURE 12.1
Generation of peptides from meat proteins.

373
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
12.2.1 Gastrointestinal Proteolysis
During gastrointestinal proteolysis, bioactive peptides are liberated  from 
food proteins by various digestive enzymes (Pihlanto and Korhonen, 2003). 
Ingested proteins are attacked first by pepsin in the stomach. They are fur-
ther hydrolyzed by trypsin, chymotrypsin, elastase, and carboxypeptidase 
in the small intestine. Katayama et al. (2003b) reported that angiotensin 
I-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitory activity was generated from meat 
proteins (i.e., myosin, actin, tropomyosin, and troponin) by pancreatic pro-
tease treatment. ACE inhibitory (antihypertensive) peptides generated from 
pork meat were found during in vitro gastrointestinal digestion (Escudero 
et al., 2010, 2012). Terashima et al. (2010) identified ACE inhibitory peptides 
from the hydrolysate of boneless chicken leg meat digested with artificial 
gastric juice. Recently, Simonetti et al. (2016) reported that in vitro gastrointes-
tinal digestion enhanced the biological activity of pig meat. Sayd et al. (2016) 
identified and quantified peptides released from cooked meat during in vitro 
gastric and intestinal digestion.
12.2.2 Aging of Meats
The content of peptides in meat increases during postmortem aging. 
Nishimura et al. (1988) reported changes in oligopeptide levels occurring 
during the storage of beef, pork, and chicken. Oligopeptides increased in all 
meats during storage. For example, the content of peptide in pork increased 
from 2.40 mg at day 1 to 3.05 mg/g meat at day 6 (53% increment). Mikami 
et al. (1995) reported that peptide contents of beef varied widely, ranging 
from 0.69 to 1.44 mg and from 2.64 to 4.65 mg/g meat 2 and 21 days after 
slaughter, respectively.
During aging or storage, meat proteins are hydrolyzed by muscle endog-
enous proteases (Etherington, 1984; Koohmaraie, 1994). Initially, endo-
peptidases (e.g., calpains and cathepsins) hydrolyze muscle proteins and 
generate polypeptides. Then such polypeptides are further hydrolyzed by 
exopeptidases and dipeptyl peptidases. Such enzymatic hydrolysis con-
tributes to improvement of sensory properties of meat (texture, taste, and 
flavor). In addition, peptides with bioactivities can be generated in meat 
during postmortem aging. Bauchart et al. (2006) examined the peptide gen-
eration in fresh beef after 14 days of ripening and after cooking. In their 
study, the content of several presumable bioactive peptides was greatly 
increased. Arihara and Ohata (2015) identified ACE inhibitory (antihy-
pertensive) peptides (i.e., Gly-Pro-Leu-Lys, Ile-Pro-Ile-Lys, Ile-Pro) in aged 
pork. Also, they showed an increase in ACE inhibitory activity of beef dur-
ing cold storage (Arihara and Ohata, 2017). Recently, Fu et al. (2017) inves-
tigated endogenous release of bioactive (e.g., ACE inhibitory) peptides in 
beef during aging. Findings provided insights on development of healthy 
beef through postmortem aging.

374
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
12.2.3 Fermentation of Meats
Bioactive compounds including peptides are produced during fermentation 
processes of foods. In most fermented foods, proteolytic changes occur and 
various peptides are generated from food proteins (Hernändez-Ledesma 
et al., 2004; Hayes and García-Vaquero, 2016). It has been reported that fer-
mented dairy products (e.g., cheese and yoghurt) contain bioactive peptides, 
such as ACE inhibitory and antioxidative peptides (Bütikofer et al., 2008; 
Gagnaire et al., 2001; Gobbetti et al., 2007; Gomez-Ruiz et al., 2002; Saito et al., 
2000). These peptides are generated by proteolytic activities of starter micro-
organisms (i.e., lactic acid bacteria and mold).
Proteolytic degradations that occur during fermentation of raw sausages 
and dry-cured ham have been studied extensively, since components gener-
ated from meat proteins are critical for the development of sensory proper-
ties of fermented meat products (Toldrá and Flores, 1998; Ordonez et al., 1998; 
Toldrá, 2014). Although both muscle endogenous and microbial proteolytic 
enzymes are involved in fermentation of meat products, the former enzymes 
contribute greatly to meat protein degradation. During fermentation of meat 
products, primarily, proteins are degraded into peptides by endogenous 
enzymes (cathepsins B, D, H, and L). Although calpains play a central role 
in the conditioning of meat, they do not exhibit activity at the end of the 
salting step (Sarraga et al., 1989). Since most bacteria (e.g., lactobacilli) found 
in fermented meat products have only weak proteolytic activity, the deg-
radation of proteins (e.g., myosin and actin) is not greatly affected by the 
bacteria (Hierro et al., 1999). However, lactic acid bacteria influence protein 
degradation by causing reduction in pH, which results in increased activity 
of muscle proteases (Kato et al., 1994).
During fermentation of sausages, the content of peptides and amino acids 
reaches about 1% dry matter of products (Dainty and Blom, 1995). Sentan-
dreu et al. (2003) and Mora et al. (2009) identified small peptides in Spanish 
dry-cured ham. As described later in this chapter, they identified many bio-
active peptides generated in dry-cured ham. López et al. (2015) characterized 
proteolysis and low-molecular-weight peptides of commercial Argentinean 
fermented sausages by applying a peptidomic approach. This study repre-
sents a first peptidomic approach for fermented sausages, thereby providing 
a baseline to define key peptides acting as potential biomarkers.
12.2.4 Enzymatic Treatment
The last, but most efficient, method of peptide preparation from food pro-
teins is by utilizing commercial exogenous proteases. Proteases from ani-
mal, plant, and microbial sources have been applied to food protein solution 
for the industrial scale production of bioactive peptides (Agyei and Dan-
quah, 2011; Young and Mine, 2009). Utilization of various commercial pro-
teases is one approach for producing bioactive peptides from food proteins. 

375
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
Many bioactive peptides have been experimentally generated in this way 
(Korhonen and Pihlanto, 2003; Pihlanto-Leppala, 2001; Pihlanto and Korho-
nen, 2003). Single proteinases from animal, plant, and microbial sources 
and combinations of them have been used for the digestion of food proteins 
(Yoshikawa, 1996). As described later, several proteases have been utilized 
for the generation of bioactive peptides from meat proteins.
In the meat industry, proteolytic enzymes have been used for meat ten-
derization. The most commonly used enzymes for meat tenderization are 
the plant enzymes papain, bromelain, and ficin (Dransfield and Etherington, 
1981). In meat treated with enzymatic tenderization, peptides having bioac-
tivities could be generated. On the other hand, effects of commercial pro-
teases on protein breakdown and sensory characteristics of dry fermented 
sausages have been investigated (Diaz et al., 1997; Bruna et al., 2000). Such 
treatment would also generate bioactive peptides in meat products. Mird-
hayati et al. (2015) prepared hydrolysates of goat meat proteins by using 
sequential digestion of commercial endoproteinase and protease complex. 
Since they successfully obtained hydrolysates with ACE inhibitory and anti-
hypertensive activities, they are trying to develop a functional ingredient 
utilizing a meat protein hydrolysate. More recently, Ryder et al. (2016) evalu-
ated commercially available food-grade microbial protease preparations for 
their ability to produce bioactive peptides by hydrolyzing meat myofibrillar 
and connective tissue protein extracts.
12.3 Bioactivities of Meat Protein-Derived Peptides
Since the first discovery of bioactive peptides generated from food proteins 
(Mellander, 1950), information about such peptides has accumulated (Bow-
man, 2015; Wu et al., 2015). Various bioactive peptides have been found in 
hydrolysates of food proteins (Figure 12.2). Such peptides have been also 
identified in hydrolysates of meat proteins and in meat products (Arihara, 
2006b; Arihara and Ohata, 2017; Lafarga and Hayes, 2014; Mora and Toldrá, 
2014; Ryan et al., 2011; Udenigwe and Howard, 2013; Wu et al., 2015).
12.3.1 ACE Inhibitory/Antihypertensive Peptides
The most extensively studied bioactive peptide generated from food pro-
teins is the ACE inhibitory peptide (Aleixandre and Miguel, 2012; He et al., 
2013; Meisel et al., 2005; Norris and FitzGerald, 2015). ACE inhibitory pep-
tides lower blood pressure through inhibition of ACE in the body. ACE is 
a dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase, which is widely distributed in mammalian 
bodies, predominantly as a membrane-bound ectoenzyme in vascular endo-
thelial cells. ACE plays a critical role in the regulation of blood pressure in 

376
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
the renin angiotensin system (Figure 12.3). ACE converts the inactive deca-
peptide angiotensin I into the potent vasoconstricting octapeptide angio-
tensin II, resulting in an increase in blood pressure. ACE also inactivates 
the antihypertensive vasodilator bradykinin. Therefore, by inhibiting the 
catalytic action of ACE, the elevation of blood pressure can be suppressed 
(Li et al., 2004). Oshima et al. (1979) first found ACE inhibitory peptides 
derived from food proteins in the hydrolysate of gelatin. Thereafter, these 
peptides have been identified in the hydrolysates of various proteins (Aleix-
andre and Miguel, 2012; He et al., 2013; Norris and FitzGerald, 2015). To date, 
many ACE-I inhibitory peptides have been isolated from hydrolysates of 
muscle (meat) proteins and have been reviewed (Ahhmed and Muguruma, 
2010; Di Bernardini et al., 2012; Vercruysse et al., 2005; Wu et al., 2015). Meat 
proteins seem to be good sources of ACE inhibitory peptides (Gu et al., 2011).
Fujita et al. (2000) isolated ACE inhibitory peptides (Leu-Lys-Ala, Leu-Lys-
Pro, Leu-Ala-Pro, Phe-Gln-Lys-Pro-Lys-Arg, Ile-Val-Gly-Arg-Arg-Arg-His-
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II
ACE
ACE inhibitory peptides
Inactive fragments
Increase of blood pressure
Bradykinin
Decrease of blood pressure
Meat proteins
Hydrolysis
FIGURE 12.3
Blood pressure regulation by angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE) and ACE inhibitory pep-
tides generated from meat proteins.
Antihypertensive peptides
Circulatory system
Antioxidative peptides
Antithrombotic peptides
Opioid peptides
Nervous system
– Opioid agonist
– Opioid antagonist
Mineral-binding peptides
Alimentary system
Antimicrobial peptides
Prebiotic peptides
Immunomodulating peptides
Immune system
Antimicrobial peptides
Cytomodulatory peptides
FIGURE 12.2
Representative bioactive peptides generated from food proteins.

377
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
Gln-Gly, Phe-Lys-Gly-Arg-Tyr-Tyr-Pro, Ile-Lys-Trp) generated from chicken 
muscle proteins by thermolysin treatment. Arihara et al. (2001) reported ACE 
inhibitory peptides in enzymatic hydrolysates of porcine skeletal muscle 
proteins. Among the digests of porcine muscle proteins, thermolysin digest 
showed the most potent inhibitory activity. Two ACE inhibitory peptides 
(Met-Asn-Pro-Pro-Lys and Ile-Thr-Thr-Asn-Pro), which are found in the 
sequence of myosin heavy chain, were purified from thermolysin digest 
of myosin. These peptides showed antihypertensive activity when admin-
istered orally to spontaneously hypertensive rats (Nakashima et al., 2002). 
Katayama et al. (2003a,b, 2004) utilized porcine skeletal muscle and respec-
tive muscle proteins for proteolytic digestion in a series of studies. All enzy-
matic hydrolysates of water-soluble protein extracted from pork loin, myosin 
B, myosin, actin, and tropomyosin, which were prepared by eight kinds of 
proteases, showed ACE inhibitory activities, and the pepsin-treated hydro-
lysate showed the highest activity (Katayama et al., 2003a). They isolated a 
corresponding peptide (Arg-Met-Leu-Gly-Gln-Thr-Pro-Thr-Lys) from hydro-
lyzed porcine troponin C with pepsin (Katayama et al., 2003b). They also 
investigated the inhibitory profile of this noncompetitive peptide (Katayama 
et al., 2004). ACE inhibitory activity and antihypertensive effect were also 
generated from pork muscle by fermentation with lactic acid bacteria (Ari-
hara et al., 2004). Octapeptide (Val-Phe-Pro-Met-Asn-Pro-Pro-Lys) with ACE 
inhibitory activity was identified from the fermented pork meat.
Saiga et al. (2003a) reported antihypertensive activity of Aspergillus prote-
ase-treated chicken muscle extract in spontaneously hypertensive rats. Fur-
thermore, they isolated four ACE inhibitory peptides from the hydrolysate. 
Among the four peptides, three peptides possessed a common sequence, 
Gly-X-X-Gly-X-X-Gly-X-X, which is homologous with that of collagen. The 
peptide 
Gly-Phe-Hyp-Gly-Thr-Hyp-Gly-Leu-Hyp-Gly-Phe 
showed 
the 
strongest inhibitory activity. Jang and Lee (2005) assayed ACE inhibitory 
activities of several enzymatic hydrolysates of sarcoplasmic protein extracts 
from beef rump. An ACE inhibitory peptide (Val-Leu-Ala-Gln-Tyr-Lys) 
purified from the hydrolysate with the highest ACE inhibitory activity was 
prepared by using the combination of thermolysin and proteinase A. Sentan-
dreu and Toldrá (2007) identified seven ACE inhibitory peptides from por-
cine skeletal muscle treated with dipeptidyl peptidase. These included the 
peptides Arg-Pro, Lys-Ala, Ala-Ala, Gly-Pro, Ala-Arg, Gly-Arg, and Arg-Arg. 
Di Bernardini et al. (2012) studied ACE inhibitory and antioxidant activities 
of hydrolysates of bovine brisket sarcoplasmic proteins produced by papain. 
Similarities between the amino acid sequences of the peptides identified in 
their study and previously identified antioxidant and ACE inhibitory pep-
tides detailed in the BIOPEP database were outlined.
During fermentation, bioactive peptides are also generated from muscle 
proteins in meat products. As a source of bioactive peptides including ACE 
inhibitory (antihypertensive) peptides, Spanish dry-cured ham has been 
extensively studied by a group of Spanish researchers (Escudero et al., 2013a, 

378
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
2014; Gallego et al., 2014, 2015, 2016; Mora et al., 2014, 2015, 2016). Their great 
efforts will make traditional cured ham reborn as novel functional meat 
products. Dellafiora et al. (2015) utilized a hybrid in silico/in vitro approach 
for the identification of ACE inhibitory peptides from Parma dry-cured ham.
Castellano et al. (2013) investigated ACE inhibitory peptides derived 
from the hydrolysates of sarcoplasmic and myofibrillar porcine proteins 
by the action of Lactobacillus sakei and Lactobacillus curvatus. Their results 
suggested that meat-borne Lactobacillus were able to generate peptides 
with ACE inhibitory activity, highlighting their potential to be used in the 
development of functional fermented products. Ferranti et al. (2014) identi-
fied many ACE inhibitory and antioxidative peptides from cured ham and 
fermented sausages.
ACE inhibitory peptides from various sources, including meat proteins, have 
been shown to have antihypertensive effects by oral administration in animal 
experiments using spontaneously hypertensive rats (Fujita and Yoshikawa, 
1999; Fujita et al., 2000; Nakashima et al., 2002). However, the inhibitory poten-
cies of peptides do not always correlate with their antihypertensive effects. 
Some peptides with potent ACE inhibitory activities in vitro are inactive by 
oral administration. Regarding the ACE inhibitory peptides derived from 
food proteins, Li et al. (2004) reviewed the phenomenon between inhibitory 
activity and antihypertensive effect and the structure–activity relationships.
Although many ACE inhibitory peptides with diverse sequence proper-
ties have been isolated from food proteins, their structure–activity relation-
ships have not been fully clarified (Li et al., 2004). However, binding of ACE 
inhibitory peptides to an ACE seemed to be influenced by the C-terminal 
tripeptide sequence of peptides (Ondetti and Cushman, 1982). Also, stud-
ies have demonstrated that the C-terminal amino acid residue of peptides 
is critical for their potential. It has been reported that many ACE inhibitory 
peptides with potent activity have Trp, Phe, Tyr, or Pro at their C-terminus 
(Maruyama et al., 1987; Miyoshi et al., 1991; Cheung et al., 1980).
12.3.2 Antioxidative Peptides
Neutralization and reduced release of free radicals occur through the inges-
tion of diet. This beneficial action of food is attributed to the antioxidant 
potency of various compounds, such as vitamin C and E, and polyphenols. 
Meat contains endogenous peptides with antioxidative activities such as 
carnosine (β-alanyl-l-histidine) and anserine (β-alanyl-1-methyl-l-histidine) 
(Arihara, 2014). In addition to these endogenous peptides, antioxidative pep-
tides can be generated from meat proteins by enzymatic hydrolysis (Liu 
et al., 2016; Stadnik and Kęska, 2015).
Antioxidative peptides have been identified from various food proteins, 
such as soybean, milk, eggs, and meat (Bernardini et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2012; 
Liu et al., 2016). Saiga et al. (2003b) identified five antioxidative peptides in the 
enzymatic hydrolysate of porcine muscle proteins. These peptides contain 

379
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
acidic amino acids, Asp or Glu, in their sequences. Although basic amino 
acids, such as His and Lys, showed strong antioxidative activity (Chen et al., 
1996), acidic peptides as well as basic peptides possess antioxidative activity.
Arihara et al. (2011) investigated antioxidative activities of enzymatic 
hydrolysates of porcine muscle actomyosin. Three antioxidative peptides 
were isolated from a papain-treated hydrolysate of actomyosin and were 
sequenced as Asp-Leu-Tyr-Ala, Ser-Leu-Tyr-Ala, and Val-Trp. Each of these 
peptides had an antifatigue effect when orally administered to mice in an 
experiment using a treadmill. 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) activi-
ties and superoxide ion extinguishing ability were identified for peptide 
extracts isolated from Spanish dry-cured ham (Escudero et al., 2012, 2013b). 
Recently, Xing et al. (2016) identified antioxidative peptides from dry-cured 
Xuanwei ham. Asp-Leu-Glu-Glu seemed to be one of the main peptides that 
plays a key role in the antioxidant activity. Ohata et al. (2016) paid attention 
to antioxidant activities of fermented meat sauce, which was prepared by 
mixing ground pork, Koji mold, and salt, and fermenting for 24 weeks. The 
tripeptide Gln-Tyr-Pro with an extremely high antioxidant activity against 
the OH-radical was identified.
12.3.3 Opioid Peptides
Opioid peptides are defined as peptides that have an affinity for an opioid 
receptor as well as opiate-like effects (Pihlanto and Korhonen, 2003). These 
peptides influence the nerve system and gastrointestinal functions. Typical 
opioid peptides are endorphins, enkephalin, and prodynorphin. These opi-
oid peptides have the same N-terminal sequence, Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe. Opioid 
peptides exert their activity by binding to intestinal-specific receptors of the 
target cell. The individual receptors are responsible for specific physiological 
effects (i.e., emotional behavior, suppression of intestinal motility, sedation, 
and food intake).
Several opioid peptides derived from food proteins have been reported. 
The N-terminal sequence of most of these peptides is Tyr-X-Phe or Tyr-X1-X2-
Phe. The N-terminal tyrosine residue and the presence of an aromatic amino 
acid at the third or fourth position form a critical structure that fits with 
the binding site of opioid receptors (Pihlanto-Leppälä, 2001). Casomorphins, 
the first identified group of opioid peptides derived from food proteins, are 
generated from milk casein by enzymatic hydrolysis (Brantl et al., 1979). Gen-
eration of casomorphins from casein during gastrointestinal digestion has 
been demonstrated (Meisel, 1986). Also, proteolysis of milk whey proteins 
(α-lactalbumin and β-lactoglobulin) with digestive enzymes produced opi-
oid peptides with sequences Tyr-Gly-Leu-Phe and Tyr-Leu-Leu-Phe, which 
were named α-lactorphin and β-lactorphin (Chiba and Yoshikawa, 1986).
Subcutaneous administration of α-lactorphin dose-dependently lowered 
systolic and diastolic blood pressures in spontaneously hypertensive rats as 
well as in normotensive rats (Nurminen et al., 2000). The antihypertensive 

380
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
mechanism of α-lactorphin is not by ACE inhibition but rather appears to be 
due to interaction with opioid receptors. This provides further evidence for 
the multifunctional role of bioactive peptides. Thus, mechanisms other than 
ACE inhibition may be involved in the antihypertensive actions of various 
peptides. Opioid peptides were also found in hydrolysates of wheat gluten 
(exorphins) (Fukudome and Yoshikawa, 1992, 1993) and blood hemoglobin 
(hemorphons) (Nyberg et al., 1997; Zhao et al., 1997).
There has been no report on the generation of opioid peptides from meat 
proteins. However, possible opioid sequences, such as Tyr-X-Phe or Tyr-X1-
X2-Phe, are found in the sequences of muscle proteins (e.g., myosin heavy 
chain). Therefore, it should be possible to find opioid peptides in meat pro-
teins by proteolytic treatment. Bovine blood hemoglobin is regarded as a 
minor component in meat and meat products. In some meat products, such 
as blood sausage, hemoglobin is a major component of the product. Investiga-
tion of hemoglobin peptic hydrolysate revealed the presence of biologically 
active peptides with affinity for opioid receptors (Nyberg et al., 1997; Zhao 
et al., 1997). These peptides were named hemorphins (VV-hemorphin 7, Val-
Val-Tyr-Pro-Trp-Thr-Gln-Arg-Phe; LVV-hemorphin-7, Leu-Val-Val-Tyr-Pro-
Trp-Thr-Gln-Arg-Phe). Hemorphins were first isolated from enzymatically 
treated bovine blood. Later, these peptides were found in the brain, plasma, 
and cerebrospinal fluid. When proteolytically degraded, hemoglobin gives 
rise to active peptides that are probably involved in regulatory functions in 
vivo during pain, physical effort, inflammation, and blood pressure varia-
tion. Also, a study on quantification of hemorphins in Alzheimer’s disease 
brains suggests that these peptides could be candidates for pharmacological 
prevention of this disease (Poljak et al., 2004). Another study has demon-
strated that valorphin (Val-Val-Tyr-Pro-Trp-Thr-Gln), a fragment of hemor-
phins, suppressed the proliferation of tumor cells (Blishchenko et al., 2002).
12.3.4 Immunomodulatory Peptides
Immunomodulatory peptides affect both the immune system and cell pro-
liferation responses. It has been reported that several hydrolysates of milk 
caseins stimulate the immune system. Many studies have shown that immu-
nomodulatory sequences exist within food proteins, especially milk pro-
teins. Although several hydrolysates of milk caseins stimulate the immune 
system, their modulatory effects are dependent on the proteolytic systems 
employed. Peptides generated from milk caseins by pancreatin or trypsin 
inhibited the proliferative responses of murine splenic lymphocytes and 
Peyer’s patch cells (Otani and Hata, 1995). However, digests generated by 
pepsin or chymotrypsin did not show such activity. Peptides derived from 
pepsin-trypsin hydrolysis of caseins strongly suppressed mitogen-induced 
proliferation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (Kayser and Meisel, 
1996). Casein-derived peptides sequenced as Val-Glu-Pro-Ile-Pro-Asn and 
Gly-Leu-Tyr enhanced phagocytosis of human and murine macrophages 

381
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
and prevented Klebsiella pneumoniae infection in mice (Migliore-Samour 
et al., 1989; Fiat et al., 1993).
Immunomodulating peptides have also been discovered in enzymatic 
hydrolysates of proteins from various foods, such as eggs (Watanabe et al., 
1998), soybean (Yoshikawa et al., 1993), and rice (Matsubayashi and Saka-
gami, 1999). Although meat protein-derived immunomodulating peptides 
have not been reported, Kęska and Stadnik (2016) suggested that pork myo-
fibrillar proteins are a promising source of various bioactive peptides based 
on in silico analysis.
12.3.5 Hypocholesterolemic Peptides
Dietary proteins (e.g., milk and soy proteins) have been shown to lower 
serum cholesterol level (Nagaoka et al., 1992). However, until recently, the 
mechanism of the hypocholesterolemic activity induced by food proteins 
was unclear. Based on the hypothesis that hypocholesterolemic peptides 
derived from food protein exist and influence serum cholesterol level (Sug-
ano et al., 1990), Nagaoka et al. (2001) attempted to clarify the mechanism of 
the hypocholesterolemic action of milk β-lactoglobulin. A hypocholesterol-
emic peptide (Ile-Ile-Ala-Glu-Lys) was found in the enzymatic hydrolyzates 
of bovine milk β-lactoglobulin (Nagaoka, 2012). This peptide has a strong 
effect on serum cholesterol level, and the hypocholesterolemic activity of 
the peptide was greater than that of the drug β-sitosterol in rats. Nagaoka 
et al. (2001) speculated that the peptide reduces the micellar solubility of 
cholesterol and inhibits cholesterol absorption. However, the mechanisms 
of interaction between hypocholesterolemic peptides and cholesterol micelle 
of cholesterol are still unknown. The peptide is speculated to reduce the 
micellar solubility of cholesterol and inhibit cholesterol absorption.
Morimatsu et al. (1996) examined the effects of a papain-hydrolyzed pork 
muscle diet on the plasma and liver cholesterol levels in rats. Plasma and 
liver cholesterol concentrations were significantly lower in rats fed with the 
hydrolyzed pork. However, the amino acid sequence of pork peptide was not 
determined.
12.3.6 Antithrombotic Peptides
Venous thromboembolism is related either to trauma, long immobilization, 
or abnormalities in blood coagulation. Based on the knowledge that the 
mechanism of blood clotting is similar to that of milk clotting, milk protein–
derived antithrombotic peptides have been studied (Fiat et al., 1993; Jollès 
and Henschen, 1982). Milk clotting occurs by the interaction of casein with 
a coagulating enzyme. Similarly, blood clotting occurs by the interaction of 
fibrinogen with thrombin. The dodecapeptide of human fibrinogen and the 
undecapeptide (Met-Ala-Ile-Pro-Pro-Lys-Lys-Asn-Gln-Asp-Lys) of bovine 
κ-casein are both structurally and functionally similar. This κ-casein-derived 

382
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
undecapeptide (casoplatelin) inhibited adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-
induced platelet aggregation and combined with the fibrinogen receptor of 
blood platelets (Jollès et al., 1986). Also, tryptic fragments of casoplatelin-
inhibited platelet aggregation (Bouhallab et al., 1992).
Shimizu et al. (2009) isolated an antithrombotic peptide fraction from pork 
muscle hydrolyzed with papain. The peptide fraction with mean molecular 
weight of 2500 showed antithrombotic activity in vivo after oral adminis-
tration to mice. The fraction with mean molecular weight of 2517 further 
purified showed antithrombotic activity after oral administration. Further 
studies are required to identify the active peptide and to reveal the mecha-
nism of the antithrombotic effect.
12.3.7 Antimicrobial Peptides
Antimicrobial peptides have been isolated from milk and egg proteins. Case-
cidin, generated from milk casein by chymosin digestion, exhibits activity 
against Staphylococcus aureus, Sarcina, Bacillus subtilis, Diplococcus pneumoniae, 
and Streptococcus pyogenes (Lahov and Regelson, 1996). Isracidin is another 
casein-derived antimicrobial peptide. It protected mice against infection 
with S. aureus and Candida albicans (Lahov and Regelson, 1996). Antimicro-
bial peptides generated by proteolytic digestion of milk lactoferrin have been 
studied most extensively (Tomita et al., 1994). The hydrolysate exhibits broad 
antibacterial activity against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. 
Several lactoferrin-derived antimicrobial peptides named lactoferricins (e.g., 
lactoferricin B) have been isolated (Shin et al., 1998). A hen egg ovotransfer-
rin-derived antimicrobial peptide (OTAP-92) that is active against S. aureus 
and Escherichia coli has been isolated (Ibrahim et al., 2000).
Spanish dry-cured ham has a particular sensory quality that makes it a dis-
tinctive food. Its high salt content and reduced water activity contribute to its 
shelf stability. However, postprocessing actions carried out for the commercial-
ization of these products such as slicing may increase the risk of development of 
pathogenic microorganisms such as Listeria monocytogenes. A peptidomic strat-
egy with mass spectrometry techniques was directed to naturally generated 
peptides showing antilisterial activity in Spanish dry-cured ham (Castellano 
et al., 2016). Ten identified peptides inhibited the growth of L. monocytogenes. Of 
these peptides, Arg-His-Gly-Tyr-Met was the most effective, showing a mini-
mum inhibitory concentration (MIC) value of 6.25 mM. This is the first report 
of the generation of an antimicrobial peptide from meat proteins.
12.3.8 Prebiotic Peptides
Several substances are known to enhance the activity of probiotic bacteria, 
such as intestinal Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium. Such substances are called 
prebiotics (Gibson, 2004). Oligosaccharides are representative prebiotic sub-
stances. In addition to oligosaccharides, the presence of prebiotic peptides 

383
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
has been suggested. Many studies have shown that hydrolysates of milk pro-
teins exhibited stimulation of the growth of lactic acid bacteria and bifidobac-
teria (Brody, 2000). However, the main growth factors have been estimated to 
be the sugar moieties (e.g., N-acetylglucosamine and glucosamine) of glyco-
sylated peptides (Idota et al., 1994). Nonglycosylated peptides derived from 
proteins have recently been identified. Liepke et al. (2002) first reported non-
glycosylated peptides that selectively stimulate the growth of bifidobacteria. 
These peptides (5584 and 5801 Da) were isolated from pepsin-treated human 
milk and identified as lactoferrin fragments. Based on structural characteris-
tics, a small peptide named prebiotic lactoferrin-derived peptide-I (PRELP-I; 
Cys-Ala-Val-Gly-Gly-Cys-Ile-Ala-Leu) was designed and characterized.
Arihara et al. found that the hydrolysate of porcine skeletal muscle acto-
myosin digested by papain enhanced the growth of Bifidobacterium strains in 
media (Arihara et al., 2011; Arihara and Ohata, 2011a). One of the correspond-
ing prebiotic peptides was purified from the hydrolysate and identified as a 
tripeptide (Glu-Leu-Met). Although Glu-Leu-Met showed growth-promoting 
activity of Bifidobacterium bifidum, neither the dipeptides (Glu-Leu, Leu-Met) 
nor amino acids (Glu, Leu, Met), which are parts of the tripeptides, showed 
growth-promoting activity. Therefore, the sequence of the tripeptide is criti-
cal for its growth-promoting activity. Glu-Leu-Met promoted the growth of 
11 strains of 26 Bifidobacterium strains in skim milk.
12.3.9 Bioactive Peptides from By-Products
Animal by-products include entire bodies or parts of animals, or products 
of animal origin, and other products obtained from animals (Lafarga and 
Hayes, 2014; Toldrá et al., 2012). They are generally recognized as carcasses, 
skins, bones, meat trimmings, blood, fatty tissues, horns, feet, hoofs, or 
internal organs. Most parts of animal by-products are discarded as waste 
or used for low-value products. Since meat by-products (e.g., trimmings and 
mechanically recovered meat, collagen, and blood) are rich in proteins, bio-
active peptides can be generated from them by enzymatic treatments (Ari-
hara and Ohata, 2017; Bernardini et al., 2011; Mora and Toldrá, 2014; Toldrá 
et al., 2012; Lafarga and Hayes, 2014).
Blood is the most common and first by-product of the meat industry (Parés 
et al., 2011). Large volumes of blood from domestic animals (e.g., cattle and pigs) 
are obtained in industrial slaughterhouses. Since blood contains proteins in rich 
amounts, it seems to be a good source of bioactive peptides (Bah et al., 2013). Anti-
hypertensive, antioxidative, antimicrobial, and opioid peptides have been found 
in hydrolysates of blood proteins, such as hemoglobin and plasma (Chang et al., 
2007). As such peptides, ACE-inhibitory peptides Gly-Phe-Pro-Thr-Thr-Lys-Thr-
Tyr-Phe-Pro-His-Phe and Val-Val-Tyr-Pro-Trp-Thr, which are corresponding to 
the sequences of porcine hemoglobin, are identified (Yu et al., 2006). As described 
earlier, biologically active peptides with affinity for the opioid receptor were 
found in the hemoglobin peptic hydrolysate (Nyberg et al., 1997; Zhao et al., 1997).

384
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Several antimicrobial peptides have been found in the hydrolysates of 
hemoglobin. Fogaca et al. (1999) identified the first antimicrobial peptide 
from bovine hemoglobin. This peptide (FLSFPTTKTYFPHFDLSHGSAA-
QVKGHGAK) was active against Micrococcus luteus. Froidevaux et al. (2001) 
found the peptide from the hydrolysate of bovine α-hemoglobin. The peptide 
(VLSAADKGNVKAAWGKVGGHAAE) was also active against M. luteus. 
Furthermore, the peptide (VTLASHLPSDFTPAVHASLDKFLANVSTVL) 
obtained from bovine hemoglobin showed activity against M. luteus, Liste-
ria innocua, E. coli, and Salmonella enteritidis (Daoud et al., 2005). Also, Ned-
jar-Arroume et al. (2006) identified four peptides from bovine hemoglobin. 
These peptides were active against M. luteus, L. innocua, E. coli, and S. enter-
itidis. VNFKLLSHSLLVTLASHL was purified from the hydrolysate of bovine 
α-hemoglobin and showed antimicrobial activity against E. coli, S. aureus, 
and C. albicans (Hu et al., 2011). Recently, Przybylski et al. (2016) identified a 
small antimicrobial peptide (Thr-Ser-Tyr-Arg, fragment of hemoglobin) from 
pepsin-treated bovine cruor.
Collagen is the most abundant protein in mammals (Mora and Toldrá, 
2014). The most common motifs in the amino acid sequence of collagen 
are Gly-Pro-X and Gly-X-Hyp, where X can be any amino acid other than 
Gly, Pro, or Hyp. Since collagen lacks certain essential amino acids, it has 
less nutritional value than most other food proteins (Gomez-Guillen et al., 
2011). Saiga et al. (2003a) reported antihypertensive activity of Aspergillus 
protease-treated chicken muscle extract in spontaneously hypertensive 
rats. Furthermore, they isolated four ACE inhibitory peptides from the 
hydrolysate. Three of those four peptides possessed a common sequence, 
Gly-X-X-Gly-X-X-Gly-X-X, which is homologous with that of collagen. 
Banerjee and Shanthi (2012) identified ACE inhibitory peptides generated 
from bovine Achilles tendon collagen hydrolyzed with bacterial colla-
genase. The identified peptides were AKGANGAPGIAGAPGFPGARG-
PSGPQGPSGPP and PAGNPGADGQPGAKGANGAP. Kim et al. (2001) 
hydrolyzed bovine skin, rich in collagen, with pronase E. Three antioxi-
dative peptides were purified from pronase E hydrolysate. The peptide 
Gly-Pro-Hyp-Gly-Pro-Hyp-Gly-Pro-Hyp-Gly showed the highest activ-
ity with the thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARSs) method. 
Li et al. (2007) hydrolyzed porcine skin collagen with different protease 
treatments and found four antioxidative peptides. Their sequences were 
identified as Gln-Gly-Ala-Arg, Leu-Gln-Gly-Met, Leu-Gln-Gly-Met-Hyp, 
and Hyp-Cys.
Fermentation of by-product from meat processing has been used to gener-
ate bioactive compounds (Hayes and García-Vaquero, 2016). Goat placenta 
has long been used in Chinese medicine and is recognized as rich in bioac-
tive components (Chakraborty and Bhattacharyya, 2005). Hou et al. (2014) 
assayed peptides generated in goat placenta by fermentation. They identified 
that the DPPH scavenging activity of goat placenta peptides reached 85.43% 
at a concentration of 1.4 μg/mL.

385
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
12.3.10 Peptides with Sensory Properties
Apart from bioactivities, food protein–derived peptides contribute signifi-
cantly to sensory properties of foods (Pihlanto and Korhonen, 2003; Gonzalez 
de Llano and Polo Sanchez, 2003; Nishimura and Kato, 1988; Temussi, 2012). 
In foods with protein-hydrolysis processes, such as fermentation and aging, 
generation of flavor peptides is an important event. Peptides that have a 
savory flavor are known to be generated from food proteins. Some savory 
peptides (Glu-Asp-Glu, Asp-Glu-Ser, Ser-Glu-Glu) were generated in fish 
muscle protein hydrolysates (Noguchi et al., 1975). An octapeptide with 
delicious taste (Lys-Gly-Asp-Glu-Glu-Ser-Leu-Ala) was isolated from beef 
treated with papain (Yamazaki and Maekawa, 1980). Later, this peptide was 
called “beef meaty peptide” or “savory taste-enhancing peptide” (Hau et al., 
1997). Henriksen and Stahnke (1997) fractionated low-molecular-weight 
water-soluble compounds extracted from dried sausages. Fractions contain-
ing smaller peptides enhanced savory taste impressions.
Umami taste-enhancing peptides (Glu-Glu, Glu-Val, Ala-Asp-Glu, Ala-
Glu-Asp, Asp-Glu-Glu, and Ser-Pro-Glu) were found in chicken protein 
hydrolysate (Maehashi et al., 1999). Okumura et al. (2004) investigated sour-
ness-suppressing peptides generated in cooked pork loins. They obtained a 
fraction that exhibited sourness-suppressing and umami-enhancing effects 
from an extract prepared from vacuum-cooked pork loins. Three peptides 
purified from this fraction had a common sequence (Ala-Pro-Pro-Pro-Pro-
Ala-Glu-Val-His-Glu-Val). A synthetic peptide having this common sequence 
exhibited suppression of sour taste. Also, peptides containing this sequence 
were generated during postmortem aging (Kitamura et al., 2005).
12.4 Peptides and the Maillard Reaction
12.4.1 The Maillard Reaction
Numerous chemical reactions occur in foods during manufacture, storage, 
and cooking and they change the color, aroma, taste, and nutritional value of 
foods. The Maillard reaction is a critical chemical reaction in such changes 
(Losso, 2016; Shahidi et al., 2014). This reaction occurs between amines (e.g., 
amino acids, peptides, and proteins) and carbonyl compounds, especially 
reducing sugars. Since food protein–derived peptides are widely utilized in 
many processed foods, the changes of peptides by the Maillard reaction in 
foods deserve concern and research (Arihara et al., 2017).
The Maillard reaction occurs in several stages (Figure 12.4). The initial stage 
of the reaction involves a Schiff base formation between the free amino and 
carbonyl group (amino-carbonyl reaction). This is followed by the rearrange-
ment of the Schiff base to an Amadori compound. The intermediate stage 

386
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
starts from the Amadori compounds. They react further by several pathways, 
such as enolization, dehydration, aldol condensations, and Strecker degra-
dation, to generate numerous compounds. Melanoidins, which are the final 
products of the reaction, are nitrogen-containing polymeric substances that 
decompose with difficulty (Hayase, 1996). Melanoidins demonstrate physio-
logically positive effects because of unique partial structures in the molecules. 
Melanoidins have a strong scavenging activity against active oxygen species, 
such as hydroxyl radicals, hydrogen peroxides, and superoxides. Also, they 
show antimicrobial activity and the ability to chelate different minerals and 
to promote the growth of beneficial bacteria (Morales et al., 2012).
12.4.2 Maillard Reaction and Meat
Meat and meat products are closely related with the Maillard reaction. Meat 
and meat products are very complex systems with numerous compounds 
and generally cooked before eating. Although raw meat has little or no aroma 
and only a blood-like taste, each type of cooked meat has a characteristic 
flavor (Shahidi et al., 2014). More than 1000 compounds have been identi-
fied in the aroma profiles of cooked meat products and the Maillard reaction 
has a critical role in generating such compounds (Pegg and Shahidi, 2014). 
Free amino groups of amino acids or peptides in meat can react with reduc-
ing sugars in the presence of heat. MRPs generated in cooked meat include 
many important classes of meat flavor compounds such as pyrazines, oxa-
zoles, thiophenes, thiazoles, and other heterocyclic compounds. Sulfur com-
pounds are especially important for the characteristic aroma of meat.
Amino compounds
e.g., peptides 
Amadori rearrangement
Melanoidin formation (brown in color)
Fission
Dehydration
Strecker reaction
Dicarbonyls
Dicarbonyls
Aldehydes
Reducing sugars
e.g., glucose
Early stage
+
Final stage
Intermediate stage
FIGURE 12.4
Outline of the Maillard reaction of amino compounds and reducing sugars.

387
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
Cheng et al. (2011) explored the MRPs of enzymatic hydrolysates 
(peptides) prepared from beef proteins for the relationship between flavor 
products and reactants in model system. The majority of peptides partici-
pating in the Maillard reaction were reported to have a molecular weight 
from 1000 to 2000 Da. Furans and furanones were the major products 
from the degradation of carbohydrates. Pyrazines were produced from 
the reaction of peptides and xylose. Thiazole, thiophene, and thiols were 
generated from the degradation of thiamin. The Maillard reaction of pep-
tides is also a critical phenomenon in meat products without heat treat-
ment (Jayasena et al., 2013; Ventanas et al., 1992; Weerawatanakorn et al., 
2015). Hams from the Iberian breed are processed by the traditional dry-
curing procedure and proteolysis and autooxidation occur during ripen-
ing/drying. As a result, peptides, nitrogen, and carbonyl compounds are 
accumulated. In the next step, a rapid increase of amino acid nitrogen is 
observed, and aldehydes decrease notably. This change seems to be due to 
condensations between carbonyls and free amino acids. While hams are 
kept in the cellar, the overall increase of amino acid nitrogen is in contrast 
to the slow rate of accumulation of some individual amino acids. This is 
presumably due to degradation to volatile derivatives, where Maillard 
reactions could be involved.
12.4.3 Bioactivities of MRPs from Peptides
MRPs show some biological activities, such as antioxidative activity, antibac-
terial activity, and ACE inhibitory activity (Somoza, 2005; Van Lancker et al., 
2011). Several studies have focused on the heating effect on the functional 
properties of MRPs generated from vegetable protein hydrolysate (Lertitti-
kula et al., 2007; Li et al., 2009). However, the published information about 
animal proteins (e.g., meat proteins) involved in the generation about flavor 
compounds in the Maillard reaction is still limited.
Arihara et al. have been trying to develop peptide-based functional food 
ingredients by the Maillard reaction (Arihara et al., 2017). Since collagen is an 
abundant protein in animal by-products, attention has been given to devel-
oping functional materials from collagen (Arihara et al., 2013, 2017). Col-
lagen contains approximately 33% glycine, which is a nonessential amino 
acid, thus it has been considered of low nutritional value. However, glycine 
is a good source for the Maillard reaction with reducing sugars. Also, col-
lagen does not contain asparagine, which is a major amino acid in potatoes 
and cereals. Acrylamide, which is found in a range of fried and oven-cooked 
foods, is a known human neurotoxin and has been classified as probably car-
cinogenic in humans. The main formation pathway of acrylamide in foods is 
linked to the Maillard reaction and, in particular, the amino acid asparagine 
(Mottram et al., 2002; Stadler et al., 2002; Blank, 2005). Therefore, proteins 
without asparagine such as collagen are appropriate candidates for the pro-
cess of the Maillard reaction.

388
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Collagen was heated to transfer to gelatin and digested by commercial 
proteases (Arihara et al., 2017). Such collagen-derived peptides were added 
with reducing sugars (e.g., xylose) and a pH adjuster (e.g., sodium carbonate). 
Since the Maillard reaction prefers the alkaline condition, a pH adjuster was 
added in the reaction solution. The solution was further heated at 90°C for 
the Maillard reaction. The activities by using superoxide ion and DPPH radi-
cal were increased significantly by heat treatment (the Maillard reaction). 
Oral administration of the MRPs to mice suppressed the stress marker (e.g., 
hydroperoxide value of serum). Also, continuous oral administration of the 
MRPs to the spontaneously hypertensive rats decreased the blood pressure 
compared to collagen peptides without the heat treatment. Since this colla-
gen peptide-based product prepared by the Maillard reaction showed good 
sensory properties, it will be a possible functional food ingredient.
Ējiāo (Asini Corii Collas) is a Chinese crude drug made of dry skin, bone, ten-
dons, and ligaments of donkeys (Equus asinus) by decoction, degreasing, and 
concentration (Kumeta et al., 2014). The main component of Ējiāo is collagen. 
It has been mainly used for promoting hematopoiesis and arresting bleed-
ing. Although it is specified as being made of dry skin derived from donkeys 
in the Chinese Pharmacopoeia, adulteration with skins or bones from other 
animals such as horses, cattle, and pigs has been found. Since it is brown in 
color, the Maillard reaction seems to have occurred during its processing. 
The advanced glycation end products (AGE), such as Nϵ-(carboxymethyl) 
lysine was detected in Ējiāo. Oral administration of Ējiāo to spontaneously 
hypertensive rats decreased blood pressure. At least a part of this activity 
would proceed from MRPs of Ējiāo.
12.4.4 Bioactivities of Volatile MRPs from Peptides
As described earlier, MRPs include a wide variety of odor components, 
which can contribute to the perceived quality of foods. However, very few 
studies have been conducted on the bioactivities of the odor components 
generated by the Maillard reaction (Zhou et al., 2016). Initially, Ohata et al. 
investigated the effects of the odor produced by the Maillard reaction on 
blood pressure (Ohata et al., 2014). Chicken meat protein digests (peptides) 
prepared by papain treatment were mixed with xylose in buffer. They 
were heated at 90°C for 240 minutes at pH 5 or pH 10. Wistar rats were 
exposed to the vapor of these solutions for 5 min, and systolic blood pres-
sure (SBP) was measured. The pH 10 sample significantly decreased SBP 
after 10–15 minutes exposure. Volatile compounds generated in the pH 
10 sample would have the effect of decreasing SBP of rats. Further experi-
ments indicated that the pH 10 sample odor caused parasympathetic ner-
vous system dominance and induced a relaxed and sedated state (Ohata 
et al., 2014). 2,3-dimethyl-pyrazine, acetic acid, 2-furancarboxyaldehyde, 
2-hydroxy-3-methyl-2-cyclopenten-1-one 
(cyclotene), 
2,5-dimethyl-4-hy-
droxy-3(2H)-furanone (DMHF), and 5-methylpyrazine-2-methanol were 

389
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
identified as odor components contributing to the odor of the pH 10 sample. 
Since 2-furanoncarboxyaldehyde, cyclotene, DMHF, and 5-methylpyrazine-
2-methanol were absent in the sample before heat treatment, these com-
pounds were generated by the Maillard reaction. Some of these compounds 
seem to be implicated in the effects on the autonomic system in rats.
12.5 Conclusions
Bioactive peptides generated from meat proteins are promising food ingre-
dients for developing functional foods (Arihara, 2014; Arihara and Ohata, 
2011b; Olmedilla-Alonso et al., 2013; Young et al., 2013). Also, since tradi-
tional meat products, such as fermented sausages and dry-cured ham, 
have been revealed to contain various bioactive peptides, they have a great 
possibility to be reborn as functional foods. Apart from bioactivities, meat 
protein–derived peptides also contribute to the sensory properties of meat 
and meat products. Since peptides have a wide range of taste from sweet to 
umami (Temussi, 2012), generation of peptides from meat proteins would 
lead to development of novel functional meat products with favorable sen-
sory characteristics.
In addition to conventional research techniques (Martínez-Maqueda 
et al., 2013), the modern nutrigenomics approach have been rapidly 
applied to the field of nutrition and health (Figure 12.5) (Arihara, 2013; 
Cevallos-Cevallos and Reyes-De-Corcuera, 2012; Ortea et al., 2016; Pavli-
dis et al., 2015). Nutrigenomics seeks to find out the interaction between 
dietary factors and host genes and how genes and their products metabo-
Transcriptomics
Proteomics
Metabolomics
DNA
mRNA
Protein
Genomics
DNA microarrays
2D-gel electrophoresis
MALDI-TOF and MS/MS
Conventional
approach
Nutrigenomics
system biology
Bioactive peptides
GC/MS, LC/MS
Peptidomics
Bioinformatics
 in silico study 
Metabolite
FIGURE 12.5
Strategy for approaching bioactivity of meat protein-derived peptides.

390
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
lize these constituents into health-promoting nutrients or disease-causing 
antinutrients, and bioactive compounds. Omics technologies including 
transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics offer exciting opportuni-
ties to address complex issues related to human health. Although applica-
tion of this strategy for studying meat protein–derived bioactive peptides is 
still limited, it has great potential to help us understand and utilize bioac-
tive peptides (Carrasco-Castilla et al., 2012). The identification of peptides 
using mass spectrometry and searching for their sequences in the database 
is one representative approach. Mora and Toldrá (2013) described the appli-
cation of proteomic tools to dry-cured ham in order to better understand 
the intense proteolysis phenomena that occur during its processing. They 
pointed out that modern mass spectrometry techniques with the analyz-
ers in tandem allows a faster and more reliable identification of the pep-
tide sequences because the obtained MS/MS spectra are matched with the 
theoretical sequences contained in the databases.
Along with analytical methods, computer-aided techniques are uti-
lized to evaluate food components including bioactive peptides (Dziuba 
et al., 2012). Bioinformatics combines computers, software tools, statis-
tics, and databases and has been used for in silico analyses of biological 
queries in the omics, including genomics, proteomics, transcriptomics, 
metabolomics, and peptidomics. Furthermore, system biology involves 
the integration of genomics, proteomics, and bioinformatics information 
to create a whole-system view of a biological entity. Bioinformatics and 
proteomics are useful tools toward the identification of peptides with 
potent biological activities (Carrasco-Castilla et al., 2012; Khaldi, 2012; 
Udenigwe, 2014). The hydrolysis of the selected protein can be simulated 
to generate in silico peptides using an open-access database, such as BIO-
PEP, PEPBANK, or ERP-Moscow. The BIOPEP database provides a useful 
resource when looking for peptides with different bioactivities. Lafarga 
et al. (2015) identified meat-derived prolyl endopeptidase inhibitory pep-
tides using in silico methods. They evaluated five proteins commonly 
found in meat by-products (e.g., serum albumin, collagen, and myosin) 
as a substrate for use in the generation of peptides. These proteins were 
cleaved in silico using the BIOPEP and ExPASy PeptideCutter and gen-
erated peptides were compared to known peptides in the BIOPEP. This 
study demonstrated the usefulness of in silico analysis for predicting the 
release of bioactive peptides from meat proteins.
By combining various techniques and information, it will be possible to 
understand all aspects and implications of bioactive peptides generated 
from meat proteins. Also, with the advent of new techniques, the mecha-
nisms underlying numerous biological properties of meat protein–derived 
peptides will be revealed. Such efforts will contribute to the demonstration 
of the scientific benefits of meat and meat products and the development of 
novel functional meat products with bioactive peptides.

391
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
References
Agyei, D. and Danquah, M. K. (2011). Industrial-scale manufacturing of pharmaceuti-
cal-grade bioactive peptides. Biotechnology Advances, 29, 272–277.
Ahhmed, A. M. and Muguruma, M. (2010). A review of meat protein hydrolysates 
and hypertension. Meat Science, 86, 110–118.
Aleixandre, A. and Miguel, M. (2012). Food proteins and peptide as bioactive agents. 
In: Hettiarachchy, N. S., Sato, K., Marshall, M. R. and Kannan A. (eds.) Bioactive 
Food Proteins and Peptides: Applications in Human Health. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press, pp. 131–180.
Arihara, K. (2006a). Strategies for designing novel functional meat products. Meat 
Science, 74, 219–229.
Arihara, K. (2006b). Functional properties of bioactive peptides derived from meat 
proteins. In: Nollet, L. M. L. and Toldrá, F. (eds.) Advanced Technologies for Meat 
Processing. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 245–274.
Arihara, K. (2013). Relevance of peptides bioactivity in foods. In: Toldrá, F. and Nollet, 
L. M. L. (eds.) Proteomics in Foods. New York, NY: Springer, pp. 447–463.
Arihara, K. (2014). Functional foods. In: Dikeman, M. and Devine, C. (eds.) Encyclope-
dia of Meat Sciences (2nd Ed., vol. 2). Oxford: Elsevier/Academic Press, pp. 32–36.
Arihara, K., Arai, T., Ohata, M., Ishikawa, S. and Itoh, M. (2013). Food/pet food mate-
rial having health functionality and linking-improving effect with collagen as 
raw material. Japan Patent No. 2013-5326489.
Arihara, K., Ishikawa, S. and Itoh, M. (2011). Bifidobacterium growth promoting pep-
tides derived from meat proteins. Japan Patent No. 2011-4726129.
Arihara, K., Nakashima, Y., Ishikawa, S. and Itoh, M. (2004). Antihypertensive activi-
ties generated from porcine skeletal muscle proteins by lactic acid bacteria. In 
Abstracts of 50th International Congress of Meat Science and Technology, Helsinki, 
Finland, p. 236.
Arihara, K., Nakashima, Y., Mukai, T., Ishikawa, S. and Itoh, M. (2001). Peptide inhibi-
tors for angiotensin I-converting enzyme from enzymatic hydrolysates of por-
cine skeletal muscle proteins. Meat Science, 57, 319–324.
Arihara, K. and Ohata, M. (2011a). Use of probiotics and prebiotics in meat products. 
In: Kerry, J. P. and Kerry. J. F. (eds.) Processed Meats: Improving Safety, Nutrition 
and Quality. Cambridge: Woodhead Publishing, pp. 403–417.
Arihara, K. and Ohata, M. (2011b). Functional meat products. In: Saarela, M. (ed.) 
Functional Foods: Concept to Products (2nd Ed.). Cambridge: Woodhead Publish-
ing, pp. 512–533.
Arihara, K. and Ohata, M. (2015). Antihypertensive peptides generated in aged pork. 
Japan Patent No. 2015-154703.
Arihara, K. and Ohata, M. (2017). Production of bioactives from meat and animal 
by-products. In: Bekhit, A. E.-D. A. (ed.) Advances in Meat Processing Technology. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Arihara, K., Tomita, K., Ishikawa, S., Itoh, M., Akimoto, M. and Sameshima, T. (2011). 
Anti-fatigue peptides derived from meat proteins. Japan Patent No. 2011-4828890.
Arihara, K., Zhou, L. and Ohata, M. (2017). Bioactive properties of Maillard reaction 
products generated from food protein-derived peptides. Advances in Food and 
Nutrition Research, 81, 161–185.

392
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Bagchi, D. and Nair, S. (2017). Developing New Functional Food and Nutraceutical Prod-
ucts. London: Academic Press.
Bah, C. S. F., Bekhit, E.-D. A., Carne, A. and McConnell, M. A. (2013). Slaughterhouse 
blood: An emerging source of bioactive compounds. Comprehensive Reviews in 
Food Science and Food Safety, 12, 314–331.
Banerjee, P. and Shanthi, C. (2012). Isolation of novel bioactive regions from bovine 
Achilles tendon collagen having angiotensin I-converting enzyme-inhibitory 
properties. Process Biochemistry, 47, 2335–2346.
Bauchart, C., Remond, D., Chambon, C. et al. (2006). Small peptides (<5 kDa) found 
in ready-to-eat beef meat. Meat Science, 74, 658–666.
Bernardini, R. D., Harnedy, P., Bolton, D., Kerry, J. and O’Neil, E. (2011). Antioxidant 
and antimicrobial peptidic hydrolysates from muscle protein sources and by-
products. Food Chemistry, 124, 1296–1307.
Blank, I. (2005). Current status of acrylamide research in food: Measurement, safety 
assessment, and formation. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1043, 
30–40.
Blishchenko, E., Sazonova, O., Surovoy, A. et al. (2002). Antiproliferative action of 
valorphin in cell cultures. Journal of Peptide Science, 8, 438–452.
Bouhallab, S., Molle, D. and Leonil, J. (1992). Tryptic hydrolysis of caseinomacropep-
tide in membrane reactor: Preparation of bioactive peptides. Biotechnology Let-
ters, 14, 805–810.
Bowman, L. (2015). Bioactive Food Peptides: Production and Health Benefits. Forest Hills, 
NJ: Foster Academics.
Brantl, V., Teschemacher, H., Henschen, A. and Lottspeich, F. (1979). Novel opioid 
peptides derived from casein (β-Casomorphins) I. Isolation from bovine casein 
peptone. Hoppe-Seyler’s Zeitschrift fur physiologische Chemie, 360, 1211–1216.
Brody, E. P. (2000). Biological activities of bovine glycomacropeptide. British Journal of 
Nutrition, 84, S39–S46.
Bruna, J. M., Fernandez, M., Hierro, E. M., Ordonez, J. A. and de la Hoz, L. (2000). 
Combined use of pronase E and a fungal extract (Penicillium aurantiogriseum) to 
potentiate the sensory characteristics of dry fermented sausages. Meat Science, 
54, 135–145.
Bütikofer, U., Meyer, J., Sieber, R., Walther, B. and Wechsler, D. (2008). Occurrence of 
the angiotensin-converting enzyme-inhibiting tripeptides Val-Pro-Pro and Ile-
Pro-Pro in different cheese varieties of Swiss origin. Journal of Dairy Science, 91, 
29–38.
Carrasco-Castilla, J., Hernández-Álvarez, A. J., Jiménez-Martínez, C., Gutierrez-
López, G. F. and Dávila-Ortiz, G. (2012). Use of proteomics and peptidomics 
methods in food bioactive peptide science and engineering. Food Engineering 
Reviews, 4, 224–243.
Castellano, P., Aristoy, M. C., Sentandreu, M. Á., Vignolo, G. and Toldrá, F. (2013). 
Peptides with angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitory activity gener-
ated from porcine skeletal muscle proteins by the action of meat-borne Lactoba-
cillus. Journal of Proteomics, 89, 183–190.
Castellano, P., Mora, L., Escudero, E., Vignolo, G., Aznar, R. and Toldrá, F. (2016). 
Antilisterial peptides from Spanish dry-cured hams: Purification and identifica-
tion. Food Microbiology, 59, 133–141.
Cevallos-Cevallos, J. M. and Reyes-De-Corcuera, J. I. (2012). Metabolomics in food 
science. Advances in Food and Nutrition Research, 67, 1–24.

393
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
Chakraborty, P. D. and Bhattacharyya, D. (2005). Isolation of fibronectin type III like 
peptide from human placental extract used as wound healer. Journal of Chroma-
tography B, 818, 67–73.
Chang, C.-Y., Wu, K.-C. and Chiang, S.-H. (2007). Antioxidant properties and pro-
tein compositions of porcine haemoglobin hydrolysates. Food Chemistry, 100, 
1537–1543.
Chen, H.-M., Muramoto, K. and Yamauchi, F. (1996). Antioxidative activity of 
designed peptides based on the antioxidative peptide isolated from digests of a 
soybean protein. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 44, 2619–2623.
Cheng, L.-K., Song, H.-L. and Wang, P.-X. C. (2011). Degradation of peptides derived 
from enzymatic hydrolysis of beef during Maillard reaction. Food Science, 32, 
46–50.
Cheung, H. S., Wang, F. L., Ondetti, M. A., Sabe, E. F. and Cushman, D. W. (1980). 
Binding of peptide substrate and inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzyme: 
Importance of the COOH-terminal dipeptides sequence. Journal of Biological 
Chemistry, 255, 401–407.
Chiba, H. and Yoshikawa, M. (1986). Biologically functional peptides from food pro-
teins: New opioid peptides from milk proteins. In: Feeney, R. E. and Whitaker, 
J. R. (eds.) Protein Tailoring for Food and Medical Users. New York, NY: Marcel 
Dekker, pp. 123–153.
Dainty, R. and Blom, H. (1995). Flavor chemistry of fermented sausages. In: Campbell 
Platt, G. and Cook, P. E. (eds.) Fermented Meats. Glasgow: Blackie Academic & 
Professional, pp. 176–193.
Daoud, R., Dubois, V., Bors-Dodita, L. et al. (2005). New antibacterial peptide derived 
from bovine hemoglobin. Peptides, 26, 713–719.
Dellafiora, L., Paolella, S., Dall’Asta, C., Dossena, A., Cozzini, P. and Galaverna, 
G. (2015). Hybrid in silico/in vitro approach for the identification of angiotensin 
I converting enzyme inhibitory peptides from Parma dry-cured ham. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 63, 6366–6375.
Diaz, O., Fernandez, M., Garcia De Fernando, G. D., de la Hoz, L. and Ordonez, J. A. 
(1997). Proteolysis in dry fermented sausages: The effect of selected exogenous 
proteases. Meat Science, 46, 115–128.
Di Bernardini, R., Mullen, A. M., Bolton, D., Kerry, J., O’Neill, E. and Hayes, M. (2012). 
Assessment of the angiotensin-I-converting enzyme (ACE-I) inhibitory and 
antioxidant activities of hydrolysates of bovine brisket sarcoplasmic proteins 
produced by papain and characterisation of associated bioactive peptidic frac-
tions. Meat Science, 90, 226–235.
Dransfield, E. and Etherington, D. (1981). Enzymes in the tenderization of meat. In: 
Birch, G. G., Blakebrough, N. and Parker, K. J. (eds.) Enzymes and Food Process-
ing. London: Applied Science Publishers, pp. 177–194.
Dziuba, B., Minkiewicz, P. and Darewicz, M. (2012). Database of biologically active 
proteins and peptides. In: Hettiarachchy, N. S. (ed.) Bioactive Food Proteins and 
Peptides. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 331–373.
Escudero, E., Aristoy, M.-C., Nishimura, H., Arihara, K. and Toldrá, F. (2012). Anti-
hypertensive effect and antioxidant activity of peptide fractions extracted from 
Spanish dry-cured ham. Meat Science, 91, 306–311.
Escudero, E., Mora, L., Fraser, P. D., Aristoy, M. C., Arihara, K. and Toldrá, F. (2013a). 
Purification and identification of antihypertensive peptides in Spanish dry-
cured ham. Journal of Proteomics, 78, 499–507.

394
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Escudero, E., Mora, L., Fraser, P. D., Aristoy, M. C., Arihara, K. and Toldrá, F. (2013b). 
Identification of novel antioxidant peptides generated in Spanish dry-cured 
ham. Food Chemistry, 138, 1282–1288.
Escudero, E., Mora, L. and Toldrá, F. (2014). Stability of ACE inhibitory ham peptides 
against heat treatment and in vitro digestion. Food Chemistry, 161, 305–311.
Escudero, E., Sentandreu, M., Arihara, K. and Toldrá, F. (2010). Angiotensin I-convert-
ing enzyme inhibitory peptides generated from in vitro gastrointestinal diges-
tion of pork meat. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 58, 2895–2901.
Etherington, D. J. (1984). The contribution of proteolytic enzymes to postmortem 
changes in muscle. Journal of Animal Science, 59, 1644–1650.
Ferranti, P., Nitride, C., Nicolai, M. A. et al. (2014). In vitro digestion of Bresaola proteins 
and release of potential bioactive peptides. Food Research International, 63, 157–169.
Fiat, A.-M., Migliore-Samour, D., Jollès, P., Drout, L., Collier, C. and Caen, J. (1993). 
Biologically active peptides from milk proteins with emphasis on two examples 
concerning antithrombotic and immunomodulating activities. Journal of Dairy 
Science, 76, 301–310.
Fogaca, A. C., da Silva, P. I., Miranda, M. T. M. et al. (1999). Antimicrobial activity of a 
bovine hemoglobin fragment in the tick Boophilus microplus. Journal of Biological 
Chemistry, 274, 25330–25334.
Froidevaux, R., Krier, F., Nedjar-Arroume, N. et al. (2001). Antimicrobial activity of a 
pepsin-derived bovine hemoglobin fragment. FEBS Letters, 491, 159–163.
Fu, Y., Young, J. F. and Therkildsen, M. (2017). Bioactive peptides in beef: Endogenous 
generation through postmortem aging. Meat Science, 123, 134–142.
Fujita, H. and Yoshikawa, M. (1999). LKPNM: A prodrug-type ACE-inhibitory pep-
tide derived from fish protein. Immunopharmacology, 44, 123–127.
Fujita, H., Yokoyama, K. and Yoshikawa, M. (2000). Classification and antihyperten-
sive activity of angiotensin I-converting enzyme inhibitory peptides derived 
from food proteins. Journal of Food Science, 65, 564–569.
Fukudome, S. and Yoshikawa, M. (1992). Opioid peptides derived from wheat gluten, 
their isolation and characterization. FEBS Letters, 296, 107–111.
Fukudome, S. and Yoshikawa, M. (1993). A novel opioid peptide derived from wheat 
gluten. FEBS Letters, 316, 17–19.
Gagnaire, V., Molle, D., Herrouin, M. and Leonil, J. (2001). Peptides identified during 
Emmental cheese ripening: Origin and proteolytic systems involved. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 49, 4402–4413.
Gallego, M., Mora, L., Fraser, P. D., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (2014). Degradation of 
LIM domain-binding protein 3 during Spanish dry-cured ham processing. Food 
Chemistry, 149, 121–128.
Gallego, M., Grootaert, C., Mora, L., Aristoy, M. C., Van Camp, J. and Toldrá, F. (2016). 
Transepithelial transport of dry-cured ham peptides with ACE inhibitory activ-
ity through a Caco-2 cell monolayer. Journal of Functional Foods, 21, 388–395.
Gallego, M., Mora, L., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (2015). Titin-derived peptides as 
processing time markers in dry-cured ham. Food Chemistry, 167, 326–339.
Gibson, G. R. (2004). From probiotics to prebiotics. Journal of Food Science, 69, 
M141–M143.
Gobbetti, M., Minervini, F. and Rizzello, C. G. (2007). Bioactive peptides in dairy 
products. In: Hui, Y. H. (ed.) Handbook of Food Products Manufacturing: Health, 
Meat, Milk, Poultry, Seafood, and Vegetables. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 
489–517.

395
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
Gomez-Guillen, C. M., Gimenez, B., Lopez-Caballero, M. E. and Montero, M. P. 
(2011). Functional and bioactive properties of collagen and gelatin from alterna-
tive sources: A review. Food Hydrocolloids, 25, 1813–1827.
Gomez-Ruiz, J. A., Ramos, M. and Recio, I. (2002). Angiotensin-converting enzyme-
inhibitory peptides in Manchego cheeses manufactured with different starter 
cultures. International Dairy Journal, 12, 697–706.
Gonzalez de Llano, D. and Polo Sanchez, C. (2003). Peptides. In: Caballero, B., Trugo, 
L. C. and Finglas, P. M. (eds.) Encyclopedia of Food Science and Nutrition (2nd Ed.). 
London: Academic Press, pp. 4468–4473.
Gu, Y., Majumder, K. and Wu, J. (2011). QSAR-aided in silico approach in evaluation 
of food proteins as precursors of ACE inhibitory peptides. Food Research Interna-
tional, 44, 2465–2474.
Hau, J., Cazes, D. and Fay, L. B. (1997). Comprehensive study of the “beefy meaty 
peptide”. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 45, 1351–1355.
Hayase, F. (1996). Scavenging of active oxygen by melanoidins. In: Ikan, R. (ed.) The 
Maillard Reaction, Consequences for the Chemical and Life Sciences. Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley & Sons, pp. 89–104.
Hayes, M. and García-Vaquero, M. (2016). Bioactive compounds from fermented food 
products. In: Ojha, K. S. and Tiwari, B. K. (eds.) Novel Food Fermentation Technolo-
gies. Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing, pp. 293–310.
He, H. L., Liu, D. and Ma, C. B. (2013). Review on the angiotensin-I-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor peptides from marine proteins. Applied Biochemistry and 
Biotechnology, 169, 738–749.
Henriksen, A. H. and Stahnke, L. H. (1997). Sensory and chromatographic evalua-
tions of water soluble fractions from dried sausages. Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry, 45, 2679–2684.
Hernändez-Ledesma, B., Amigo, L., Ramos, M. and Recio, I. (2004). Angiotensin con-
verting enzyme inhibitory activity in commercial fermented products. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 52, 1504–1510.
Hettiarachchy, N. S. (2012). Bioactive Food Proteins and Peptides. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press.
Hierro, E., de la Hoz, L. and Ordonez, J. A. (1999). Contribution of the microbial 
and meat endogenous enzymes to the free amino acid and amine contents 
of dry fermented sausages. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 47, 
1156–1161.
Hou, Y., Liu, W., Cheng, Y., Zhou, J., Wu, L. and Yang, G. (2014). Production, opti-
mization and characterization of immunomodulatory peptides obtained from 
fermented goal placenta. Food Science and Technology (Campinas), 34, 723–729.
Hu J., Xu, M., Hang, B. et al. (2011). Isolation and characterization of an antimicrobial 
peptide from bovine hemoglobin α-subunit. World Journal of Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 27, 767–771.
Ibrahim, H. R., Sugimoto, Y. and Aoki, T. (2000). Ovotransferrin antimicrobial peptide 
(OTAP-92) kills bacteria through a membrane damage mechanism. Biochimica 
et Biophysica Acta, 1523, 196–205.
Idota, T., Kawakami, H. and Nakajima, I. (1994). Growth-promoting effects of 
N-acetylneuraminic acid containing substances on bifidobacteria. Bioscience, 
Biotechnology, and Biochemistry, 58, 1720–1722.
Jang, A. and Lee, M. (2005). Purification and identification of angiotensin converting 
enzyme inhibitory peptides from beef hydrolysates. Meat Science, 69, 653–661.

396
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Jayasena, D. D., Ahn, D. U., Nam, K. C. and Jo, C. (2013). Flavour chemistry of chicken 
meat: A review. Asian-Australasian Journal of Animal Sciences, 26, 732–742.
Jollès, P. and Henschen, A. (1982). Comparison between the clotting of blood and 
milk. Trends in Biochemical Sciences, 7, 325–328.
Jollès, P., Levy-Toledano, S., Fiat, A. M. et al. (1986). Analogy between fibrinogen and 
casein. Effect of an undecapeptide isolated from κ-casein on platelet function. 
European Journal of Biochemistry, 158, 379–384.
Katayama, K., Fuchu, H., Sakata, A. et al. (2003a). Angiotensin I-converting enzyme 
inhibitory activities of porcine skeletal muscle proteins following enzyme diges-
tion. Asian-Australasian Journal of Animal Sciences, 16, 417–424.
Katayama, K., Tomatsu, M., Fuchu, H. et al. (2003b). Purification and characterization 
of an angiotensin I-converting enzyme inhibitory peptide derived from porcine 
troponin C. Animal Science Journal, 74, 53–58.
Katayama, K., Tomatsu, M., Kawahara, S. et al. (2004). Inhibitory profile of nonapep-
tide derived from porcine troponin C against angiotensin I-converting enzyme. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 52, 771–775.
Kato, T., Matsuda, T., Tahara, T., Sugimoto, M., Sato, Y. and Nakamura, R. (1994). 
Effects of meat conditioning and lactic fermentation on pork muscle protein 
degradation. Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry, 58, 408–410.
Kayser, H. and Meisel, H. (1996). Stimulation of human peripheral blood lymphocytes 
by bioactive peptides derived from bovine milk proteins. FEBS Letters, 383, 18–20.
Kęska, P. and Stadnik, J. (2016). Porcine myofibrillar proteins as potential precursors 
of bioactive peptides—An in silico study. Food Function, 7, 2878–2885.
Khaldi, N. (2012). Bioinformatics approaches for identifying new therapeutic bioac-
tive peptides in food. Functional Foods in Health and Disease, 2, 325–338.
Kim, S.-K., Kim, Y.-T., Byun, H.-G., Park, P.-J. and Ito, H. (2001). Purification and char-
acterization of antioxidative peptides from bovine skin. Biochemistry and Molec-
ular Biology, 34, 219–224.
Kim, S.-K., Wijesekara, I., Park, E. Y., Matsumura, Y., Nakamura, Y. and Sato, K. (2012). 
Proteins and peptide as antioxidants. In: Hettiarachchy, N. S., Sato, K., Marshall, 
M. R. and Kannan, A. (eds.) Bioactive Food Proteins and Peptides, Applications in 
Human Health. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 97–115.
Kitamura, S., Muroya, S., Tanabe, S., Okumura, T., Chikuni, K. and Nishimura, 
T. (2005). Mechanism of production of troponin T fragments during postmortem 
aging of porcine muscle. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 53, 4178–4181.
Koohmaraie, M. (1994). Muscle proteinases and meat aging. Meat Science, 36, 93–104.
Korhonen, H. and Pihlanto, A. (2003). Food-derived bioactive peptides: Opportuni-
ties for designing future foods. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 9, 1297–1308.
Kumeta, Y., Maruyama, T., Asama, H., Yamamoto, Y., Hakamatsuka, T. and Goda, 
Y. (2014). Species identification of Asini Corii Collas (donkey glue) by PCR ampli-
fication of cytochrome b gene. Journal of Natural Medicines, 68, 181–185.
Lafarga, T. and Hayes, M. (2014). Bioactive peptides from meat muscle and by-
products: Generation, functionality and application as functional ingredients. 
Meat Science, 98, 227–239.
Lafarga, T., O’Connor, P. and Hayes, M. (2015). In silico methods to identify meat-
derived prolyl endopeptidase inhibitors. Food Chemistry, 175, 337–343.
Lahov, E. and Regelson, W. (1996). Antibacterial and immunostimulating casein-
derived substances from milk: Casecidin, istacidin peptides. Food and Chemical 
Toxicology, 34, 131–145.

397
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
Lertittikula, W., Benjakula, S. and Tanaka, M. (2007). Characteristics and antioxidative 
activity of Maillard reaction products from a porcine plasma protein–glucose 
model system as influenced by pH. Food Chemistry, 100, 669–677.
Li, B., Chen, F., Xang, X., Ji, B. and Wu, Y. (2007). Isolation and identification of anti-
oxidative peptides from porcine collagen hydrolysate by consecutive chroma-
tography. Food Chemistry, 102, 1135–1143.
Li, G. H., Le, G. W., Shi, Y. H. and Shrestha, S. (2004). Angiotensin I-converting 
enzyme inhibitory peptides derived from food proteins and their physiological 
and pharmacological effects. Nutrition Research, 24, 469–486.
Li, Y., Lu, F., Luo, C., Chen, Z., Mao, J. and Shoemaker, C. (2009). Functional proper-
ties of the Maillard reaction products of rice protein with sugar. Food Chemistry, 
117, 69–74.
Liepke, C., Adermann, K., Raida, M., Magert, H.-J., Forssman, W.-G. and Zucht, H.-D. 
(2002). Human milk provides peptides highly stimulating the growth of bifido-
bacteria. European Journal of Biochemistry, 269, 712–718.
Liu, R., Xing, L., Fu, Q., Zhou, G.-H. and Zhang, W.-G. (2016). A review of antioxidant 
peptides derived from meat muscle and by-products. Antioxidants, 5, 32–46.
López, C. M., Bru, E., Vignolo, G. and Fedda, S. G. (2015). Identification of small pep-
tides arising from hydrolysis of meat proteins in dry fermented sausages. Meat 
Science, 104, 20–29.
Losso, J. N. (2016). The Maillard Reaction Reconsidered. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Maehashi, K., Matsuzaki, M., Yamamoto, Y. and Udaka, S. (1999). Isolation of 
peptides from an enzymatic hydrolysate of food proteins and characteriza-
tion of their taste properties. Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry, 63, 
555–559.
Martínez-Maqueda, D., Hernández-Ledesma, B., Amigo, L., Miralles, B. and Gómez-
Ruiz, J. Á. (2013). Extraction/fractionation techniques for proteins and peptides 
and protein digestion. In: Toldrá, F. and Nollet, L. M. L. (eds.) Proteomics in 
Foods. New York, NY: Springer, pp. 21–50.
Maruyama, S., Mitachi, H., Awaya, J., Kurono, M., Tomizuka, N. and Suzuki, H. 
(1987). Angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitory activity of the C-terminal 
hexapeptide of αs1-casein. Agricultural and Biological Chemistry, 51, 2557–2561.
Matsubayashi, Y. and Sakagami, Y. (1999). Characterization of specific binding sites 
for a mitogenic sulfated peptide, phytosulfokine-α, in the plasma-membrane 
fraction derived from Oryza sativa L. European Journal of Biochemistry, 262, 
666–671.
Meisel, H. (1986). Chemical characterization and opioid activity of an exorphin iso-
lated from in vivo digests of casein. FEBS Letters, 196, 223–227.
Meisel, H., Walsh, D. J., Murry, B. and FitzGerald, R. J. (2005). ACE inhibitory pep-
tides. In: Mine, Y. and Shahidi, F. (eds.) Nutraceutical Proteins and Peptides in 
Health and Disease. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 269–315.
Mellander, O. (1950). The physiological importance of the casein phosphopeptide cal-
cium salts II: Peroral calcium dosage in infants. Acta Societatis Medicorum Upsa-
liensis, 55, 247–255.
Mikami, M., Nagao, M., Sekikawa, M. and Miura, H. (1995). Changes in peptide and 
free amino acid contents of different bovine muscle homogenate during storage. 
Animal Science and Technology (Japan), 66, 630–638.
Migliore-Samour, D., Floc’h, F. and Jollès, P. (1989). Biologically active casein peptides 
implicated in immunomodulation. Journal of Dairy Research, 56, 357–362.

398
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Mirdhayati, I., Hermanianto, J., Wijaya, C. H., Sajuthi, D. and Arihara, K. (2015). 
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitory and antihypertensive activi-
ties of protein hydrolysate from meat of Kacang goat (Capra aegagrus hircus). 
Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 96, 3536–3542.
Miyoshi, S., Ishikawa, H., Kaneko, T., Fukui, F., Tanaka, H. and Maruyama, S. (1991). 
Structures and activity of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors α-zein 
hydrolysate. Agricultural and Biological Chemistry, 55, 1313–1318.
Mora, L., Escudero, E., Arihara, K. and Toldrá, F. (2015). Antihypertensive effect of 
peptides naturally generated during Iberian dry-cured ham processing. Food 
Research International, 78, 71–78.
Mora, L., Escudero, E., Fraser, P. D., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (2014). Proteomic 
identification of antioxidant peptides from 400 to 2500 Da generated in Span-
ish dry-cured ham contained in a size-exclusion chromatography. Food Research 
International, 56, 68–76.
Mora, L., Escudero, E. and Toldrá, F. (2016). Characterization of the peptide profile 
in Spanish Teruel, Italian Parma and Belgian dry-cured hams and its potential 
bioactivity. Food Research International, 89, 638–646.
Mora, L., Sentandreu, M. A., Fraser, P. D., Toldrá, F. and Bramley, P. M. (2009). Oligo-
peptides arising the degradation of creatine kinase in Spanish dry-cured ham. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 57, 8982–8988.
Mora, L. and Toldrá, F. (2013). Dry-cured ham. In: Toldrá, F. and Nollet, L. M. L. (eds.) 
Proteomics in Foods. New York, NY: Springer, pp. 147–160.
Mora, L. and Toldrá, F. (2014). Bioactive peptides generated from meat industry by-
products. Food Research International, 65, 344–349.
Morales, F., Somoza, V. and Fogliano, V. (2012). Physiological relevance of dietary 
melanoidins. Amino Acids, 42, 1097–1109.
Morimatsu, F., Ito, M., Budijanto, S., Watanabe, I., Furukawa, Y. and Kimura, S. (1996). 
Plasma cholesterol-suppressing effect of papain-hydrolyzed pork meat in rats 
fed hypercholesterolemic diet. Journal of Nutritional Science and Vitaminology, 42, 
145–153.
Mottram, D. S., Wedzicha, B. L. and Dodson, A. T. (2002). Food chemistry: Acrylamide 
is formed in the Maillard reaction. Nature, 419, 448–449.
Nagaoka, S. (2012). Peptide-lipid interactions and functionalities. In: Hettiarachchy, 
N. S., Sato, K., Marshall, M. R. and Kannan, A. (eds.) Food Proteins and Peptides: 
Chemistry, Functionality, Interactions and Commercialization. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press, pp. 263–276.
Nagaoka, S., Futamura, Y., Miwa, K. et al. (2001). Identification of novel hypocholes-
terolemic peptides derived from bovine milk β-lactoglobulin. Biochemical and 
Biophysical Research Communications, 281, 11–17.
Nagaoka, S., Kanamaru, Y. and Kuzuya, Y. (1992). Comparative studies on the serum 
cholesterol lowering action of whey protein and soyprotein in rats. Bioscience, 
Biotechnology, and Biochemistry, 56, 1484–1485.
Nakashima, Y., Arihara, K., Sasaki, A., Ishikawa, S. and Itoh, M. (2002). Antihyper-
tensive activities of peptides derived from porcine skeletal muscle myosin in 
spontaneously hypertensive rats. Journal of Food Science, 67, 434–437.
Nedjar-Arroume, N., Dubois-Delval, V., Miloudi, K. et al. (2006). Isolation and char-
acterization of four antibacterial peptides from bovine hemoglobin. Peptides, 27, 
2082–2089.

399
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
Nishimura, T. and Kato, H. (1988). Mechanisms involved in the improvement of meat 
taste during postmortem aging. Food Science and Technology International (Tokyo), 
4, 241–249.
Nishimura, T., Rhue, M. R., Okitani, A. and Kato, H. (1988). Components contribut-
ing to the improvement of meat taste during storage. Agricultural and Biological 
Chemistry, 52, 2323–2330.
Noguchi, M., Arai, S., Yamashita, M., Kato, H. and Fujimaki, M. (1975). Isolation and 
identification of acidic oligopeptides occurring in a flavor potentiating fraction 
from a fish protein hydrolysate. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 23, 
49–53.
Norris, R. and FitzGerald, J. R. (2015). Antihypertensive peptides from food proteins. 
In: Bowman, L. (ed.) Bioactive Food Peptides: Production and Health Benefits. Forest 
Hills, NJ: Foster Academics, pp. 3–30.
Nurminen, M.-L., Sipola, M., Kaarto, H. et al. (2000). α-Lactophin lowers blood pres-
sure via radiotelemetry in normotensive and spontaneously hypertensive rats. 
Life Sciences, 66, 1535–1543.
Nyberg, F., Sanderson, K. and Glamsta, E.-L. (1997). The hemorphins: A new class of 
opioid peptides derived from the blood protein hemoglobin. Biopolymers, 43, 
147–156.
Ohata, M., Uchida, S., Zhou, L. and Arihara, K. (2016). Antioxidant activity of fer-
mented meat sauce and isolation of an associated antioxidant peptide. Food 
Chemistry, 194, 1034–1039.
Ohata, M., Zhou, L., Owashi, C. and Arihara, K. (2014). The effect of odor generated 
from protein digests and reducing sugars by the Maillard reaction on blood 
pressure. IMARS News Letter, 9, 21–25.
Okumura, T., Yamada, R. and Nishimura, T. (2004). Sourness-suppressing peptides 
in cooked pork loins. Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry, 68, 1657–1662.
Olmedilla-Alonso, B., Jiménez-Colmenero, F. and Sánchez-Muniz, F. J. (2013). Devel-
opment and assessment of healthy properties of meat and meat products 
designed as functional foods. Meat Science, 95, 919–930.
Ondetti, M. A. and Cushman, D. W. (1982). Enzymes of the renin-angiotensin system 
and their inhibitors. Annual Review of Biochemistry, 51, 283–308.
Ordonez, J. A., Hierro, E. M., Bruna, J. M. and de la Hoz, L. (1998). Changes in the 
components of dry fermented sausages during ripening. Critical Reviews in Food 
Science and Nutrition, 39, 329–367.
Ortea, I., O’Connor, G. and Maquet, A. (2016). Review on proteomics for food authen-
tication. Journal of Proteomics, 147, 212–225.
Oshima, G., Shimabukuro, H. and Nagasawa, K. (1979). Peptide inhibitors of angio-
tensin I-converting enzyme in digests of gelatin by bacterial collagenase. Biochi-
mica et Biophysica Acta, 566, 128–137.
Otani, H. and Hata, I. (1995). Inhibition of proliferative responses of mouse spleen 
lymphocytes and rabbit Peyer’s patch cells by bovine milk caseins and their 
digests. Journal of Dairy Research, 62, 339–348.
Owusu-Apenten, R. (2010). Bioactive Peptides Applications for Improving Nutrition and 
Health. Baca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Parés, D., Saguer, E. and Carretero, C. (2011). Blood by-products as ingredients in 
processed meat. In: Kerry, J. P. and Kerry, J. F. (eds.) Processed Meats: Improving 
Safety, Nutrition and Quality. Oxford: Woodhead Publishing, pp. 219–242.

400
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Pathera, A. K., Jairath, G., Singh, P. K. and Yadav, S. (2017). Health promoting func-
tional properties of meat and meat products. In: Mudgil, D. and Barak, S. (eds.) 
Functional Foods: Sources and Health Benefits. Jodhpur, India: Scientific Publishers, 
pp. 333–362.
Pavlidis, C., Patrinos, G. P. and Katsila, T. (2015). Nutrigenomics: A controversy. 
Applied & Translational Genomics, 4, 50–53.
Pegg, R. B. and Shahidi, F. (2014). Flavor development. In: Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences 
(2nd Ed., vol. 1), Dikeman, M. and Devine, C (eds.). Oxford: Elsevier/Academic 
Press, pp. 377–384.
Pihlanto-Leppälä, A. (2001). Bioactive peptides derived from bovine whey proteins: 
Opioid and ACE inhibitory peptides. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 11, 
347–356.
Pihlanto, A. and Korhonen, H. (2003). Bioactive peptides and proteins. Advances in 
Food and Nutrition Research, 47, 175–276.
Poljak, A., McLean, C. A., Sachdev, P., Brodaty, H. and Smythe, G. A. (2004). Quan-
tification of hemorphins in Alzheimer’s disease brains. Journal of Neuroscience 
Research, 75, 704–714.
Przybylski, R., Firdaous, L., Châtaigné, G., Dhulster, P. and Nedjar, N. (2016). Produc-
tion of an antimicrobial peptide derived from slaughterhouse by-product and 
its potential application on meat as preservative. Food Chemistry, 211, 306–313.
Ryan, J. T., Ross, R. P., Bolton, D., Fitzgerald, G. F. and Stanton, C. (2011). Bioactive 
peptides from muscle sources: Meat and fish (review). Nutrients, 3, 765–791.
Ryder, K., Bekhit, A. E.-D., McConnell, M. and Carne, A. (2016). Towards generation 
of bioactive peptides from meat industry waste proteins: Generation of peptides 
using commercial microbial proteases. Food Chemistry, 208, 42–50.
Saiga, A., Okumura, T., Makihara, T. et al. (2003a). Angiotensin I-converting enzyme 
inhibitory peptides in a hydrolyzed chicken breast muscle extract. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 51, 1741–1745.
Saiga, A., Tanabe, S. and Nishimura, T. (2003b). Antioxidant activity of peptides 
obtained from porcine myofibrillar proteins by protease treatment. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 51, 3661–3667.
Saito, T., Nakamura, T., Kitazawa, H., Kawai, Y. and Itoh, T. (2000). Isolation and 
structural analysis of antihypertensive peptides that exist naturally in Gouda 
cheese. Journal of Dairy Science, 83, 1434–1440.
Sarraga, C., Gil, M., Arnau, J., Monfort, J. M. and Cusso, R. (1989). Effect of curing 
salt and phosphate on the activity of porcine muscle proteases. Meat Science, 25, 
241–249.
Sayd, T., Chambon, C. and Santé-Lhoutellier, V. (2016). Quantification of peptides 
released during in vitro digestion of cooked meat. Food Chemistry, 197, 1311–1323.
Sentandreu, M. A., Stoeva, S., Aristoy, M. C., Laib, K., Voelter, W. and Toldrá, F. (2003). 
Identification of small peptides generated in Spanish dry-cured ham. Journal of 
Food Science, 68, 64–69.
Sentandreu, M. A. and Toldrá, F. (2007). Evaluation of ACE inhibitory activity of 
dipeptides generated by the action of porcine muscle dipeptidyl peptidases. 
Food Chemistry, 102, 511–515.
Shahidi, F., Samaranayaka, A. G. P. and Pegg, R. B. (2014). Flavor development. In: 
Dikeman, M. and Devine, C. (eds.) Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences (2nd Ed., vol. 1). 
London: Elsevier/Academic Press, pp. 391–403.

401
Bioactive Properties of Peptides  Generated from Meat Proteins
Shimizu, M., Sawashita, N., Morimatsu, F. et al. (2009). Antithrombotic papain-
hydrolyzed peptides isolated from pork meat. Thrombosis Research, 123, 753–757.
Shin, K., Yamauchi, K., Teraguchi, S. et al. (1998). Antibacterial activity of bovine lac-
toferrin and its peptides against enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli O157:H7. 
Letters in Applied Microbiology, 6, 407–411.
Simonetti, A., Gambacorta, E. and Perna, A. (2016). Antioxidative and antihyperten-
sive activities of pig meat before and after cooking and in vitro gastrointestinal 
digestion: Comparison between Italian autochthonous pig Suino Nero Lucano 
and a modern crossbred pig. Food Chemistry, 212, 590–595.
Somoza, V. (2005). Five years of research on health risks and benefits of Maillard reac-
tion products: An update. Molecular Nutrition & Food Research, 49, 663–672.
Stadler, R. H., Blank, I., Varga, N. et al. (2002). Food chemistry: Acrylamide from Mail-
lard reaction products. Nature, 419, 449–450.
Stadnik, J. and Kęska, P. (2015). Meat and fermented meat products as a source of bio-
active peptides. Acta Scientiarum Polonorum Technologia Alimentaria, 14, 181–190.
Sugano, M., Goto, S., Yamada, Y. et al. (1990). Cholesterol-lowering activity of various 
undigested fraction of soybean protein in rats. Journal of Nutrition, 120, 977–985.
Temussi, P. A. (2012). The good taste of peptides. Journal of Peptide Science, 18, 73–82.
Terashima, M., Baba, T., Ikemoto, N., Katayama, M., Morimoto, T. and Matsumura, 
S. (2010). Novel angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitory peptides 
derived from boneless chicken leg meat. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemis-
try, 58, 7432–7436.
Toldrá, F. (2014). Dry. In: Dikeman, M. and Devine, C. (eds.) Encyclopedia of Meat Sci-
ences (2nd Ed., vol. 1). Oxford: Elsevier/Academic Press, pp. 425–429.
Toldrá, F., Aristoy, M.-C., Mora, L. and Reig, M. (2012). Innovations in value-addition 
of edible meat by-products. Meat Science, 92, 290–296.
Toldrá, F. and Flores, M. (1988). The role of muscle proteases and lipases in flavor 
development during the processing of dry-cured ham. Critical Reviews in Food 
Science and Nutrition, 38, 331–352.
Tomita, M., Takase, M., Bellamy, W. R. and Shimamura, S. (1994). A review, the active 
peptide of lactoferrin. Acta Paediatrica Japonica, 36, 585–591.
Udenigwe, C. C. (2014). Bioinformatics approaches, prospects and challenges 
of food bioactive peptide research. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 36, 
137–143.
Udenigwe, C. C. and Howard, A. (2013). Meat proteome as source of functional bio-
peptides. Food Research International, 54, 1021–1032.
Van Lancker, F., Adams, A. and De Kimpe, N. (2011). Chemical modifications of pep-
tides and their impact on food properties. Chemical Reviews, 111, 7876–7903.
Ventanas, J., Cordoba, J. J., Antequera, T., Garcia, C., López-bote, C. and Asensio, 
M. A. (1992). Hydrolysis and Maillard reactions during ripening of Iberian ham. 
Journal of Food Science, 57, 813–815.
Vercruysse, L., Van Camp, J. and Smagghe, G. (2005). ACE inhibitory peptides derived 
from enzymatic hydrolysates of animal muscles protein: A review. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 53, 8106–8115.
Watanabe, K., Tsuji, Y., Shimoyamada, M., Ogama, N. and Ebina, T. (1998). Antitumor 
effects of pronase-treated fragments, glycopeptides, from ovomucin in hen egg 
white in a double grafted tumor system. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemis-
try, 46, 3033–3038.

402
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Weerawatanakorn, M., Wu, J.-C., Pan, M.-H. and Ho, C.-T. (2015). Reactivity and 
stability of selected flavor compounds. Journal of Food and Drug Analysis, 23, 
176–190.
Wu, J., Jahandideh, F., Yu, W. and Majumder, K. (2015). Bioactive peptides from meat 
proteins as functional food components. In: Girillo, G., Gianfranco Spizzirri, U. 
and Iemma, F. (eds.) Functional Polymers in Food Science. Beverly, MA: Scrivener 
Publishing, pp. 181–208.
Xing, L.-J., Hu, Y. Y., Hu, H.-Y., Ge, Q.-F., Zhou, G.-H. and Zhang, W.-G. (2016). Puri-
fication and identification of antioxidative peptides from dry-cured Xuanwei 
ham. Food Chemistry, 194, 951–958.
Yamazaki, Y. and Maekawa, K. (1980). Synthesis of a peptide with delicious taste. 
Agricultural and Biological Chemistry, 44, 93–97.
Yoshikawa, M. (1996). Selection of proteases for production of biologically active pep-
tides from food proteins. Japanese Journal of Dairy and Food Science, 45, A51–A60.
Yoshikawa, M., Kishi, K., Takahashi, M. et al. (1993). Immunostimulating peptide 
derived from soybean protein. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 685, 
375–376.
Young, D. and Mine, Y. (2009). Functional bioactive proteins and peptides in nutrig-
enomics. In: Mine, Y., Miyashita, K. and Shahidi, F. (eds.) Nutrigenomics and Pro-
teomics in Health and Disease. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 129–144.
Young, J. F., Therkildsen, M., Ekstrand, B. et al. (2013). Novel aspects of health pro-
moting compounds in meat. Meat Science, 95, 904–911.
Yu, Y., Hu, J. N., Miyaguchi, Y., Bai, X. F., Du, Y. G. and Lin, B. C. (2006). Isolation 
and characterization of angiotensin I-converting enzyme inhibitory peptides 
derived from porcine hemoglobin. Peptides, 27, 2950–2956.
Zhao, Q., Garreau, I., Sannier, F. and Piot, J. M. (1997). Opioid peptides derived from 
hemoglobin: Hemorphins. Biopolymers, 43, 75–98.
Zhou, L., Ohata, M. and Arihara, K. (2016). Effects of odor generated from the glycine/
glucose Maillard reaction on human mood and brainwaves. Food Function, 7, 
2574–2581.

403
13
New Approaches for the Development 
of Functional Meat Products
Francisco Jiménez-Colmenero, Milagro Reig, and Fidel Toldrá
CONTENTS
13.1 Introduction: A Global Perspective on Functional Foods ....................404
13.2 Options to Design Functional Meat and Meat Products......................405
13.3 Animal Production Strategies for Improving the Nutritional 
Profiles of Raw Meat ..................................................................................407
13.3.1 Genetics for the Reduction of Animal Fats ................................407
13.3.2 Dietary Feed Formulation for the Modification of Animal Fats ... 408
13.3.2.1 Manipulation of Fatty Acids in Pigs ............................409
13.3.2.2 Manipulation of Fatty Acids in Ruminants ................ 412
13.3.3 Dietary Enrichment in Compounds of Specific Nutritional 
Interest ............................................................................................. 413
13.3.3.1 Vitamins and Antioxidants ........................................... 413
13.3.3.2 Minerals ............................................................................ 415
13.4 Processing Strategies for Developing Functional Meat Products ....... 415
13.4.1 Reduction of Specific Unhealthy Compounds .......................... 417
13.4.1.1 Fat and Cholesterol ......................................................... 417
13.4.1.2 Sodium and Phosphate .................................................. 419
13.4.1.3 Nitrite ................................................................................ 419
13.4.1.4 Allergens .......................................................................... 419
13.4.2 Promoting the Presence of Specific Healthy Compounds .......420
13.4.2.1 Fat and Fatty Acid Profile ..............................................420
13.4.2.2 Proteins, Peptides, and Amino Acids ..........................422
13.4.2.3 Prebiotics and Probiotics ................................................423
13.4.2.4 Antioxidants and Vitamins ...........................................425
13.4.2.5 Minerals ............................................................................427
13.4.2.6 Plant Sterols and Stanols ................................................427
13.4.2.7 Other Compounds ..........................................................428
13.5 Safety and Scientific Criteria for Nutrition and Health Claims: 
Legislative Implications ............................................................................428
13.6 Final Considerations ..................................................................................429
Acknowledgments ..............................................................................................430
References .............................................................................................................430

404
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
13.1 Introduction: A Global Perspective on Functional Foods
The last few decades have seen rapid expansion of knowledge about the influ-
ence of diet on health and well-being. The concept of food in the developed 
world is changing drastically from the classical idea whereby the purpose of 
food was to supply the nutrients required for proper metabolism by consum-
ers and to satisfy their expectations; now, the emphasis is increasingly on the 
beneficial and psychological effects of the diet. In this sense, an adequate diet 
can not only help to achieve optimal health and development, but it can also 
play an important role in reducing the risk of disease (Diplock et al., 1999).
The influence of certain foods on human health has long been known, but 
the scientific basis for the role of certain physiologically active food com-
pounds in the modulation of specific bodily functions was only established 
recently. Such knowledge has contributed to a concept of optimal nutrition 
in developed countries and the development of functional foods within that 
context. This new concept focuses on optimizing the quality of the daily diet. 
This is achieved by controlling nutrient and nonnutrient contents, and also 
other food properties that favor health maintenance (Ashwell, 2002).
There is no clear universally accepted definition of functional foods. How-
ever, several organizations have attempted to define this emerging food cat-
egory. Japan was the first country to introduce specific regulatory approval, 
in 1991. Foods for specified health use (FOSHU) were defined as “foods 
which, based on knowledge concerning the relationship between foods or 
food components and health, are expected to have certain health benefits 
and have been licensed to bear labeling claiming that a person using them 
may expect to obtain that health through the consumption of these foods” 
(Arihara, 2004). The American Dietetic Association considers functional 
foods, including whole foods and fortified, enriched, or enhanced foods, as 
those having a potential benefit for health when consumed as part of a var-
ied diet on a regular basis, at effective levels (Hasler et al., 2004). A European 
Commission Concerted Action coordinated by the International Life Science 
Institute (ILSI Europe) produced a consensus document concerning Scien-
tific Concepts of Functional Foods in Europe and proposed the following 
definition: “A food can be regarded as a functional food if it is satisfacto-
rily demonstrated to affect beneficially one or more target functions in the 
body, beyond adequate nutritional effects, in a way that is relevant to an 
improved health status and well-being and/or reduction of risk of disease. 
Functional foods must remain as foods and must demonstrate their effects 
in amounts that can normally be expected to be consumed in the diet: they 
are not pills or capsules, but part of a normal food pattern” (Diplock et al., 
1999). A functional food may be a natural food or one that can be made func-
tional by means of different technological approaches. This refers to new 
foods specifically designed for health enhancement, but it also includes tra-
ditional, family foods where recent research has highlighted health benefits, 

405
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
previously unknown, or dispelled old dogma about potential adverse health 
effects (Hasler, 2000).
Functional food effects are based on the way in which specific nutrients 
and food components positively affect target functions in the organism. 
The substantiation of these effects should be based on the knowledge of the 
mechanisms by which functional foods can modulate the target function and 
their relevance to the state of well-being and health and/or reduction of a dis-
ease. Although the substantiation should be based on a systematic review of 
all available relevant evidences, in general, experimental human trial is the 
most useful experimental study (Diplock et al., 1999; Ashwell, 2002).
13.2 Options to Design Functional Meat and Meat Products
A food can be made functional by using appropriate technologies to optimize 
beneficial properties. Depending on the origin and targeted modification, 
within the field of meat these include the following approaches (Roberfroid, 
2000; Ashwell, 2002; Holm, 2003): (1) to raise the concentration of the benefi-
cial natural compound (either nutrient or nonnutrient) in the food up to the 
desired effective level, where such enhancement can be naturally induced 
(e.g., by increasing specific compounds like n-3 fatty acids or conjugated lin-
oleic acid [CLA] in raw meat by animal production practices) or produced by 
reformulation (e.g., calcium-fortified meat products); (2) to add a compound 
that is not normally present in the food but has proven benefits (e.g., a pre-
biotic in meat products); (3) to replace a compound, usually a macronutrient 
(e.g., a fat) whose intake is usually excessive and hence harmful to health, by 
a compound with demonstrated health benefits; (4) to remove specific com-
pounds so as to reduce adverse health effects, where these compounds may 
be naturally present or produced by processing (e.g., the reduction of satu-
rated fatty acids [SFAs], trans-fatty acids (TFAs), a toxic compound, or a food 
allergen); (5) to improve the bioavailability (e.g., improved iron absorption) 
or stability of a compound that is known to produce a functional effect or to 
reduce the potential disease risk of the food; and (6) any combination of the 
preceding possibilities.
These different approaches to the production of meat-based functional 
foods entail the use of a wide range of common bioactive components, both 
phytochemicals and zoochemicals (see Table 13.1). The more promising target 
functions for these foods concern: (1) growth, development, and differentia-
tion; (2) substrate metabolism; (3) defense against reactive oxidative species; 
(4) cardiovascular system; (5) intestinal physiology; and (6) behavioral and 
psychological functions (Diplock et al., 1999).
Meat and meat products are generally recognized as being contributors 
to nutrition because they constitute an important source of high biological 

406
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
value proteins, group B vitamins, minerals, trace elements, and other bio-
active compounds including strategies to get them enriched in such com-
pounds in order to get enhanced bioactivity (Toldrá and Reig, 2011). On the 
other hand, they also contribute to the intake of fat, SFAs, cholesterol, salt, 
and other substances that in inappropriate amounts may result in nega-
tive physiological effects. For many years now, the image of meat and meat 
products has tended to deteriorate because they are viewed as a serious risk 
factor (through various of their different constituents) involved in some of 
the most prevalent diseases of western society, such as cardiovascular dis-
ease (CVD), hypertension, obesity/diabetes, and certain types of cancer.
The meat industry must adapt to the new concepts in nutrition. There is 
now a potential market for functional foods, based on the principle of added 
value linked to health benefits (Diplock et al., 1999), which is one of the main 
trends in the development of food (meat) products (Sloan, 2000). The scien-
tific research process must be clearly integrated with insights into consumer 
needs and demands (Weststrate et al., 2002). Functional meats constitute an 
excellent opportunity to improve their “image” and help facilitate the imple-
mentation of strategies (in different areas such as family, health, education, 
etc.) for updating the recommendations relating to nutrient and dietary goals 
(WHO, 2003). It is an essential task for the meat sector to promote the pro-
duction of foods for a healthy and balanced diet. At the same time, leaving 
aside their current relative importance, this type of food could also furnish 
a means to achieve more diversification in the sector and to take up a solid 
position in emerging markets with considerable promise for the future. As a 
result, more and more work is being done on food processing and technol-
ogy for the production of functional foods (Jimenez-Colmenero, 2007a).
TABLE 13.1
Examples of Major Classes of Bioactive Food Components
Bioactive Component
Examples
Lipids and fatty acids
n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (eicosapentaenoic and 
docosahexaenoic acids), monounsaturated fatty acids, 
conjugated linoleic acid
Proteins and peptides
Soy protein, bioactive peptides (inhibitors of the angiotensin 
I-converting enzyme, antioxidants, carnitine, carnosine, 
anserine, etc.)
Prebiotic
Dietary fibers (oats, soy, citrus, etc.), oligosaccharides
Probiotic
Lactic acid bacteria (Lactobacillus casei, Lactobacillus acidophilus, 
etc.), Bifidobacteria
Vitamins
Tocopherols, folic acid, ascorbic acid
Minerals
Calcium, magnesium, selenium, zinc, iron
Phytochemicals
Phytosterols (sterol and stanol esters), carotenoids (β-carotene, 
lycopene, zeaxanthin, lutein, etc.), flavonoids (flavones, 
flavonones, catechins, etc.), phytoestrogens (isoflavones), etc.

407
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
From farm to table, different strategies can be effectively used to increase 
or reduce bioactive compounds in meat and meat products and thus pro-
duce functional meat products. These strategies basically address such lev-
els as animal production practices, meat processing, and cooking systems 
(Jimenez-Colmenero, 2007a). This chapter provides an overview of these 
strategies, focusing on certain aspects of interest for the development of 
functional meat products. It also discusses the potential benefits of meat 
components for human health, modifications in bioactive compounds, and 
their health implications.
13.3  Animal Production Strategies for Improving 
the Nutritional Profiles of Raw Meat
13.3.1 Genetics for the Reduction of Animal Fats
The genetic type plays an important role in nutritional quality. Many 
breeding strategies in recent years have focused mainly on increasing lean 
meat content and reducing intramuscular fat content and back fat thick-
ness. Sometimes, the meat is poorer in quality even though grading traits 
are better (Hovenier et al., 1992). Some studies with cattle breeds have been 
directed toward more tender meat (Johnson et al., 1990; Wheeler et al., 
1990). There are several strategies for increasing the ratio of lean to fat in 
farm animals. Some are based on the repartitioning effects of somatotro-
pin, specific β-adrenergic agonists, some growth promoting agents, and 
gene manipulation techniques (Solomon et al., 2002). Other strategies for 
increasing the lean to fat ratio are based on different breeding schemes, but 
most entail a backcross or a three- or four-way cross. A three-way cross is 
quite usual for pigs in the European Union (EU), using a Landrace × Large 
White (LR × LW) crossbreed as sow. The terminal sire is chosen from a 
wide range of possibilities like Duroc, Pietrain, Belgian Landrace, Land-
race, etc. The choice is very important as it affects not only production and 
quality but also the nutritional profile, given that the intramuscular fat 
content may reach anywhere between 1.2 and 2.9/100 g of meat (Leclerq, 
1990). Thus, when Duroc is used, the result is an excess of fat and hence 
an excess of calories. Belgian Landrace and Pietrain, on the other hand, 
are heavily muscled and consequently have a lower fat content (Toldrá et 
al., 1996a; Toldrá, 2002). We would note that leaner carcasses are gener-
ally associated with a more glycolytic muscle fiber type and hence more 
rapid postmortem metabolism, paler meat color, and lower water holding 
capacity (De Smet et al., 2002). Moreover, some changes in lipids have been 
reported depending on the sire genetic type (Armero et al., 2002). Enzyme 
fingerprinting, in the form of reports on the activity of endo- and exopro-
teases, lipases, and esterases, constitutes a useful tool for understanding 

408
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
the biochemical activity of a given meat and for predicting its sensory and 
nutritional quality and behavior (expected proteolysis and lipolysis) dur-
ing processing (Armero et al., 1999a).
The age of the animal correlates directly with increased intramuscular 
fat content (higher calorie intake) and connective tissue (tougher meat and 
poorer biological value), even though the meat may have stronger flavor 
and color due to greater generation of volatile compounds and myoglobin, 
respectively (Armero et al., 1999b). This is a consequence of the action of 
muscle proteolytic and lipolytic enzymes, which are affected by age. Thus, 
muscles from heavy pigs have been reported to exhibit a higher peptidase to 
proteinase ratio and higher lipase activity than muscles from younger pigs 
(Toldrá et al., 1996b; Rosell and Toldrá, 1998).
Sex mainly affects the fat content. Thus, meat from barrows has more fat, 
more marbling, and a thicker subcutaneous fat layer than meat from gilts 
(Armero et al., 1999a). For example, a fat thickness of 15.4 mm has been 
reported for barrows and 9.0 mm for boars at 90 kg live weight (Wood et al., 
1985). The elimination of castration would help reduce fat content in boars to 
close to that of gilts (Bass et al., 1990).
13.3.2 Dietary Feed Formulation for the Modification of Animal Fats
There has been a good deal of research since the 1980s on altering the fatty 
acid composition of meat to attain the levels recommended by nutritionists. 
Initially, the target was to increase the ratio between polyunsaturated and 
SFAs (PUFA:SFA ratio) to above 0.4. A few years later, nutritionists also rec-
ommended manipulating PUFA composition in the direction of a lower 
n-6:n-3 ratio so as to reduce the adverse effect of arachidonic acid and its 
eicosanoid products (Simopoulos et al., 2000). This n-6:n-3 ratio constitutes a 
risk factor in coronary heart diseases and cancers (Enser et al., 2000), so that 
a n-6:n-3 ratio below 4 is highly recommended (Wood et al., 2003). Meats 
evidently far exceed these target values, but there are ways to improve them 
based on the type of feed, as described below. It should be mentioned that 
manipulation of fats to attain a higher PUFA content may cause indirect 
problems during processing, such as softer fats (due to its lower melting 
point). Other major problems such as oxidation and generation of off-fla-
vors (rancid aromas) and color deterioration (trend toward yellowness in 
the fat) are also likely to arise unless antioxidants are added (Toldrá and 
Flores, 2004).
The amount of feed also influences the fat content in meat. Thus, an excess 
of feed may increase the amount of intramuscular fat, but if animals are 
deprived of feed, lipolysis may be induced and the amount of fat reduced, 
especially in glycolytic muscles (Fernández et al., 1995). The amount of cho-
lesterol accretion in tissues of growing pigs is not generally influenced by 
their serum cholesterol content or by the fat and cholesterol content in the 
diet (Harris et al., 1993).

409
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
13.3.2.1 Manipulation of Fatty Acids in Pigs
Pigs are monogastric animals that incorporate part of their dietary fatty acid 
intake practically unchanged into the adipose tissue and cellular membranes, 
where desaturation and chain elongation processes may take place (Toldrá 
et al., 1996a; Jakobsen, 1999). The extent of incorporation may vary depend-
ing on the specific fatty acid, the time of feeding, and the type of feed. 
Maximal effect with essential fatty acids has been reported within 40 days, 
while only half of the effect was achieved in 14 days (Warnants et al., 1999; 
Wood et al., 2003).
A large variety of dietary oils and their respective effects on the propor-
tions of fatty acid composition have been studied. When feeds are rich in 
saturated fats like tallow, the levels of palmitic, palmitoleic, stearic, and 
oleic acids in pork meat are substantially higher and the PUFA:SFA ratio 
is lower (Morgan et al., 1992). However, the primordial objective of most 
of the assayed oils was to raise the PUFA content and hence the PUFA:SFA 
ratio. Thus, dietary oils rich in linoleic acid (C 18:2), a n-6 fatty acid typi-
cally present in soy, maize, sunflower, and barley, significantly increase 
the concentration of this fatty acid in meat (see Table 13.2). When these 
oils are used in feeds, the oleic acid content is partly replaced by linoleic 
acid (Hernández et al., 1998). There is a serious potential problem derived 
from rapid oxidation during heating, caused by the generation of volatile 
compounds, like some aldehydes, which produce rancid aromas (Larick 
et al., 1992). Even more serious is an increase in the n-6:n-3 ratio, commonly 
observed when feeds contain oils of this type, to well above the nutritional 
recommendations.
Some strategies have focused on n-3 fatty acids in the dietary supply, 
as these compounds have been shown to protect against some cancers, 
reduce CVDs, improve rheumatoid arthritis, and reduce inflammatory 
bowel diseases (Hoz et al., 2003). Dietary oils rich in linolenic acid (C 18:3), 
a n-3 fatty acid typically present in canola and linseed oils, have been 
tested recently. These feeds increase the linolenic acid content, and slightly 
increase the eicosapentaenoic (EPA, C 22:5) and docosahexaenoic (DHA, C 
22:6) acid contents, in pork meat, also decreasing the linoleic acid content. 
In this way, they raise the PUFA:SFA ratio to 0.4, close to the minimum 
recommended value for the human diet, and reduce the n-6:n-3 ratio to 5, 
close to the recommended maximum of 4 (Enser et al., 2000). On the other 
hand, no significant effects on oxidative stability or sensory characteris-
tics have been reported (Sheard et al., 2000). Other authors, feeding either 
linseed oil alone or a mixture of linseed and olive oils (see Table 13.3), 
have reported even higher PUFA:SFA ratios, around 0.6–0.7, and lower 
n-6:n-3 ratios, close to 2.0 (Hoz et al., 2003), although stability against oxi-
dation was lower. Large differences in linoleic and linolenic acid contents 
between the leanest and fattest animals are common (Enser et al., 1998).  
A recent work studied the performance and meat quality of grower-finisher 

410
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
pigs when received a feed containing 0.4% of the basal diet as a herb com-
bination (pomegranate, Ginkgo biloba, licorice) either in a natural or fer-
mented form (Ahmed et al., 2016). The feed intake was reduced in both 
cases as well as the back fat thickness of pigs. The lean production and the 
content of n-3 fatty acids in the longissimus muscle were increased with 
a reduced ratio of n-6/n-3 while the cholesterol was lower in the natural 
herb combination group (Ahmed et al., 2016). Other strategies are based 
on the use of feeds enriched with n-3 fatty acids like EPA and DHA, by 
the addition of fish oils or algae (Jakobsen, 1999). Feeding 4%–6% fish 
oil to pigs for two to four weeks before slaughter produced a substantial 
increase in EPA and DHA (see Table 13.3) and reduced the n-6:n-3 ratio 
to 2.2 (Irie and Sakimoto, 1992). However, feeding with 6% unrefined fish 
TABLE 13.2
Examples of the Effect of Type of Feed on Fatty Acid Composition (Expressed as % 
of Total Fatty Acids) of Pork Meat Lipids
Feed Enriched in:
Fatty Acid
Barley + 
Soya Bean 
Meala
Safflower 
Oilb
Tallow Dietc
Barley + 
Wheat + 
Maized
Canola 
Oile
6% 
Fish 
Oilf
C 14:0
–
–
 1.37
 1.55
 1.6
 1.93
C 16:0
23.86
27.82
24.15
25.10
20.6
26.89
C 18:0
10.16
12.53
11.73
12.62
 9.8
16.30
C 16:1
3.0
 3.56
 3.63
 2.79
 3.6
 2.56
C 18:1
39.06
37.81
46.22
36.47
45.9
37.31
C 20:1
–
 0.01
 0.29
 0.47
–
–
C 18:2
17.15
14.60
 8.95
16.49
12.3
 7.78
C 20:2
–
 0.01
 0.44
 0.49
 0.4
 0.59
C 18:3
 0.91
 0.01
 0.26
 1.14
 3.0
 2.08
C 20:3
 0.21
 0.01
 0.25
 0.30
 0.1
 0.08
C 20:4
 4.26
 2.14
 2.13
 0.25
 0.74
 0.46
C 22:5
 0.64
 0.01
–
–
–
 0.91
C 22:6
 0.75
 0.01
–
–
–
 1.13
Total SFA
34.02
40.35
37.83
39.42
33.6
45.12
Total MUFA
42.06
42.38
50.26
39.74
49.5
39.87
Total PUFA
23.92
16.79
11.91
20.84
16.6
13.03
PUFA:SFA ratio
 0.70
 0.42
 0.32
 0.53
 0.49
 0.29
n-6:n-3 ratio
9.4
559
45.3
16.6
 4.5
2.2
a Morgan et al. (1992).
b Larick et al. (1992).
c Leszczynski et al. (1992).
d Toldrá et al. (2004).
e Miller et al. (1990).
f Irie and Sakimoto (1992).
SFA, saturated fatty acid; MUFA, monounsaturated fatty acid; PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acid.

411
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
oil up to 60 kg live weight caused off-flavor (Lauridsen et al., 1999). These 
fatty acids with large numbers of double bonds are evidently prone to oxi-
dation, so that feeds of this type require addition of antioxidants like vita-
min E to prevent any oxidation and rancidity development. The amount 
depends, for instance, enrichment with 250 g per pig for 22–42 days was 
reported to have no adverse effects on sensory attributes (Marriott et al., 
2002). Dietary CLA has been reported to enrich the CLA isomer content to 
around 0.35/100 g total fatty acids, and to reduce the intramuscular cho-
lesterol (Lauridsen et al., 2005).
Poultry meat has an n-6:n-3 ratio similar to pork, and for similar reasons: 
basically, the use of feeds rich in linoleic acid (grain, maize, plant seeds, 
oils). Higher concentrations of n-3 fatty acids may be attained by feeding 
TABLE 13.3
Examples of the Effect of Type of Feed on Fatty Acid Composition (Expressed as % 
of Total Fatty Acids) of Beef Meat Lipids
Feed Enriched in Beef
Fatty Acid
Maize-
Based 
Concentratea
Pastureb
Pasturec
Soybean Meal 
+ Corn + 33% 
Peanut Caked
Soybean 
Oila
Canola 
Meale
C 14:0
2.9
2.9
1.6
2.9
3.3
2.8
C 15:0
1.3
–
–
0.3
1.5
0.5
C 16:0
26.7
23.9
21.6
25.4
26.0
24.8
C 17:0
1.6
–
–
0.8
1.6
1.0
C 18:0
9.7
19.4
17.7
18.2
11.0
11.4
C 14:1
–
0.4
0.2
0.1
–
–
C 16:1
4.9
2.4
2.5
1.8
3.9
4.8
C 18:1
40.0
35.4
31.5
38.9
33.4
44.8
C 18:2
6.0
1.8
3.3
3.7
7.4
5.7
C 18:3
0.5
0.6
1.3
0.4
0.6
0.5
C 20:3
2.4
–
–
0.9
2.1
–
CLA
0.23
1.3
0.53
3.8
0.3
–
C 20:4
–
–
–
–
–
1.5
Total SFA
42.2
48.1
49.1
50.3
42.4
40.5
Total MUFA
44.9
38.2
41.0
43.9
37.3
50.5
Total PUFA
9.1
4.3
10.0
5.9
10.4
7.7
PUFA:SFA 
ratio
 0.22
0.09
0.20
0.12
0.24
0.19
n-6:n-3 ratio
16.8
3.0
1.4
1.7
15.8
11.4
a Dhiman et al. (2005).
b Realini et al. (2004a).
c Realini et al. (2004b).
d Correia et al. (2016).
e Rule et al. (1994).

412
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
canola oil, flax seed, fish oil, or algae. For instance, a feed with 20% white 
fish meal may enrich the n-3 fatty acid content from 3% (on a basal diet) 
up to 10.4% and reduce the n-6:n-3 ratio from 8.4 to 1.7 (Jakobsen, 1999).
13.3.2.2 Manipulation of Fatty Acids in Ruminants
Fatty acid profiles are more saturated in ruminants than in pigs and the fat is 
firmer (Wood et al., 2003). The manipulation of fatty acids through the type 
of feed is more difficult because the rumen is biohydrogenated, producing 
mainly stearic acid as the final product. It is therefore difficult to increase the 
PUFA:SFA ratio since more than 90% of the PUFAs are hydrogenated unless 
they are protected against hydrogenation in the forestomach. Dietary lin-
oleic and linolenic acids may be partially hydrogenated, forming oleic acid 
and trans-, odd chain, branched-chain, and conjugated fatty acids (Jakobsen, 
1999). Meats from ruminants are rich in CLA, mainly cis-9, trans-11 octadeca-
dienoic acid, which has been reported to exert important health-promoting 
biological activity (Belury, 2002). CLA has exhibited anticarcinogenic, anti-
oxidative, and antidiabetic effects in animal models. In any case, feeding 
strategies were recommended to be adapted to the priority target of each 
farm. This means that goals may be quite different: achieve good carcass 
performance, or reduce fat in the carcass or even get rumen health (Bello 
et al., 2016).
Some researchers have attempted to manipulate fatty acids in ruminants 
and, especially in recent years, to enrich beef with CLA. Some examples of 
final composition in fatty acids in intramuscular lipids of beef and lamb are 
shown in Tables 13.3 and 13.4, respectively. Dietary full canola altered the 
fatty acid composition in beef meat, especially by decreasing palmitic acid 
and increasing stearic and oleic acids (Rule et al., 1994). Comparison of a 
maize-based concentrated feed with soybean oil revealed that even though 
the linolenic content twice as high in soybean oil as in the other feed, the 
final content in the beef was almost identical (Dhiman et al., 2005). Feeding 
with high-starch (25%) diets improved the nutritional value of beef because 
the SFAs were decreased and the unsaturated fatty acids increased (Rossi 
et al., 2016). The inclusion of 25% soybean in the diets increased the amount 
of PUFA in the meat (Rossi et al., 2016). Feeding with soybean oil increased 
the trans-10, cis-12 CLAs in the adipose tissue but did not increase the cis-9, 
trans-11 CLA isomer that was the target (Dhiman et al., 2005). An increase in 
this last CLA isomer was achieved by feeding with sunflower oil, although 
this also raised the n-6:n-3 ratio (Noci et al., 2005).
Lambs on pasture usually present more n-3 fatty acids than when they 
are fed concentrates (Jakobsen, 1999). When lambs are fed with linseed, the 
amount of n-3 fatty acids increases; similar findings with EPA and DHA 
have been reported in lambs fed a mixture of fish oil and marine algae 
(Elmore et al., 2005). However, the results are better when lambs are fed with 
protected lipid supplements. Then, the amount of n-6 and n-3 fatty acids 

413
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
increases substantially (see Table 13.2) due to the effectiveness of the pro-
tection system (Elmore et al., 2005). On the other hand, feeding with palm 
oil supplements enriches the meat lipids with SFAs, especially palmitic acid 
(Castro et al., 2005). It has been reported that the fatty acid composition is 
somehow affected by genotype (Salvatori et al., 2004).
13.3.3  Dietary Enrichment in Compounds of 
Specific Nutritional Interest
13.3.3.1 Vitamins and Antioxidants
Meat contains considerable amounts of water-soluble vitamins like B vita-
mins. However, its content in vitamins A, D, C, and E is rather poor (Reig 
and Toldrá, 1998a). The deposition of vitamin E in pig and poultry muscles 
TABLE 13.4
Examples of the Effect of Type of Feed on Fatty Acid Composition (Expressed as % 
of Total Fatty Acids) of Lamb Meat Lipids
Feed Enriched in Lamb
Fatty Acid
Barley, Maize, 
Wheat and Soybean 
Meala
Concentrate + 
Forageb
Concentrate + 
Corn + Soybeanc
C 14:0
2.2
 3.7
 1.5
C 15:0
–
–
–
C 16:0
21.1
23.2
 2.3
C 17:0
1.3
–
 0.9
C 18:0
11.6
16.3
17.4
C 14:1
–
–
–
C 16:1
2.1
 2.3
 1.5
C 18:1
38.7
40.4
40.9
C 18:2
10.2
 7.5
 3.3
C 18:3
 0.56
 1.0
 0.5
C 20:3
–
–
–
CLA
–
–
 0.4
C 20:4
–
 2.1
 2.4
Total SFA
42.7
43.2
46.1
Total MUFA
46.0
42.7
46.8
Total PUFA
4.8
10.6
 7.1
PUFA:SFA ratio
0.11
 3.31
 0.15
n-6:n-3 ratio
18.1
 9.32
12.2
a Castro et al. (2005).
b Salvatori et al. (2005).
c Pereira et al. (2016).

414
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
is dependent on its concentration and time of supplementation (Mercier 
et al., 1998). Usual levels are around 100–200 mg/kg in the feed for several 
weeks prior to slaughter. For instance, vitamin E content of 12.9 mg/kg dry 
matter may be reached after feeding 200 mg of α-tocopheryl acetate per kg 
diet in pigs between 60 and 93 kg live weight (Isabel et al., 2003). The distri-
bution of vitamin E in the organism is variable; it is higher in the muscles 
of the thoracic limb, neck, and thorax and lower in the muscles of the pelvic 
limb and back (O’Sullivan et al., 1997). Dietary supplementation with this 
lipid-soluble antioxidant improves the oxidative stability of the meat (Buck-
ley et al., 1995), which is important because phospholipids are located in 
subcellular membranes such as mitochondria, microsomes, etc. Their PUFA 
content is relatively high and this makes them susceptible to peroxidation 
due to the proximity of prooxidants like myoglobin, cytochromes, nonheme 
iron, and trace elements (Buckley et al., 1995). Although meat contains sev-
eral natural antioxidant enzymes like the superoxide dismutase and gluta-
thione peroxidase, their activity is weakened during postmortem storage. 
Several antioxidants have therefore been assayed as an effective alternative 
for protection against oxidation. Vitamin E (α-tocopheryl acetate), which 
was studied in depth in the 1990s, is a very effective antioxidant because it 
is accumulated in tissues and subcellular structures, including membranes. 
It is commonly added to the feed today. There are other endogenous antioxi-
dants like the histidine-containing dipeptides carnosine and anserine, but 
contents vary according to anatomical location and species. These dipep-
tides are therefore more abundant in light muscles than in dark muscles 
(Aristoy and Toldrá, 1998). Carnosine content is higher in beef and pork and 
anserine content is higher in poultry (Reig and Toldrá, 1998b; Toldrá and 
Reig, 2004).
The use of essential oils as feed additives for livestock production has 
been reported to increase feed efficiency and animal productivity due to 
their antimicrobial, antiinflammatory, and antioxidant effects (Bakkali 
et al., 2008, Benchaar et al., 2006, 2008; Jayasena and Jo, 2013). The antimi-
crobial activity of essential oils added to livestock feed can contribute to a 
decreased ruminal biohydrogenation that consequently results in a higher 
deposition of PUFA in meat (Martineau et al., 2008). Antioxidant activity 
is widely observed in spices and herbs, for example, oregano, rosemary, 
thyme, cinnamon, pepper, nutmeg, licorice, aniseed, cassia bark, fennel, 
prickly ash, round cardamom, basil, garlic, coriander, and ginger. Such 
antioxidant activity is attributed to various phenolic compounds, structur-
ally related but different in quantity and type, depending on the respective 
source (Morán et al., 2012, 2013; Jiang and Xiong, 2016). The addition of 3.5 
g/animal/day of an essential oil blend (oregano, garlic, lemon, rosemary, 
thyme, eucalyptus, and sweet orange) was reported to reduce lipid oxida-
tion in bulls even though higher doses had a prooxidant effect (Rivaroli 
et al., 2016). Such an essential oil blend did not influence the chemical com-
position nor the fatty acid profile.

415
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
13.3.3.2 Minerals
Meat constitutes a rich source of iron, and also of trace elements like sele-
nium, magnesium, and zinc. Red meats, i.e., beef and lamb, contain higher 
levels of iron than pork and poultry. The iron present is part of the heme mol-
ecule, an essential component of myoglobin in the muscle, which is highly 
bioavailable for humans. Iron content is higher in oxidative than in glycolytic 
muscles. Iron, phosphorus, copper, and zinc contents are little affected by 
dietary levels; however, the levels of selenium in meat are highly dependent 
on dietary intakes (Lynch and Kerry, 2000).
Different magnesium salts, such as magnesium aspartate, magnesium 
aspartate hydrochloride, and magnesium fumarate, have been used as dietary 
supplements to improve pork meat quality, but cheaper sources like magne-
sium sulfate and magnesium chloride can also be effective. Magnesium acts 
as a cofactor for several metabolic and enzymatic pathways; for instance, it 
reduces skeletal muscle activity by antagonizing calcium (D’Souza et al., 1999). 
Selenium is needed in certain metabolic processes like the defense against 
free radicals and their detoxification (Lener et al., 2012) and contributes to 
better health status (Fairweather-Tait et al., 2011). Selenium can also regulate 
adipogenesis and lipolysis in the organism (Wang et al., 2016). Supplementa-
tion with sodium selenite or selenium-rich yeast makes for a high selenium 
content in meat. In fact, dietary selenium supplementation has been reported 
to delay postmortem oxidation reactions, especially due to its antioxidant are 
more effective when supplied in the organic form (Mahan et al., 2014) as the 
selenium reaches tissues more efficiently (Jang et al., 2010). Organic selenium, 
in the form of selenium-enriched yeast, is taken up via methionine transporter 
mechanisms and located either into selenoenzymes or in place of methionine 
in muscle proteins (Suzuki and Ogra, 2002). The water holding capacity was 
improved with organic selenium because the lowest water losses in pork meat 
were observed when feeding with selenium-rich yeast in comparison to other 
inorganic sources of selenium like sodium selenite or selenium and vitamin 
E (Calvo et al., 2016a,b). Further, the inclusion of 0.4 ppm of organic selenium 
in pig diets improved the lipid stability against oxidation (Calvo et al., 2017).
It was also reported that supplementation with selenium-enriched yeast 
in sheep is more efficient compared to inorganic selenium supplementation 
(Stewart et al., 2012).
13.4  Processing Strategies for Developing 
Functional Meat Products
Meat technology plays a number of major roles in the development of func-
tional meat products. As well as animal production strategies, processing 
strategies can be used to alter the composition of meat products. For the 

416
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
production of functional meat products (as with others functional foods), 
there are a number of different technological approaches that can be adopted 
to remove, reduce, increase, add, and/or replace different components with 
physiological activity (functional or bioactive components), any of which 
may help achieve an improved state of health and well-being and/or reduce 
the risk of disease (Roberfroid, 2000; Ashwell, 2002; Jimenez-Colmenero, 
2007a). The presence, absence, or reduced content of substances known to 
have physiological effects are cited in the EU proposal for the purposes of 
health claims (EU Commission, 2003).
The beneficial effects of functional foods derive from bioactive compo-
nents (phytochemicals and zoochemicals) which may have specific posi-
tive and negative implications for health. In some cases, these substances 
may occur naturally in the product (in meat raw materials, or ingredients 
or additives used in their preparation), while in others they may be formed 
or their presence may be modified in the course of processing, storage, or 
cooking.
It is essential to know the role and source of healthy and unhealthy com-
pounds in order to be able to identify, design, and more effectively imple-
ment procedures for the development of functional meat products. There are 
basically two kinds of procedure with regard to the composition of func-
tional meat products (Jimenez-Colmenero et al., 2001) aimed at:
• Reducing the concentration or limiting the formation of unhealthy 
compounds
• Promoting the presence of healthy compounds
Several basic approaches can be adopted to successfully induce such 
effects (Jimenez-Colmenero, 2007a). These focus on aspects relating to: selec-
tion and preparation (postslaughter) of meat ingredients in order to secure 
raw materials with suitable composition (mainly in terms of lipidic compo-
nents: fat proportion, fatty acid profile, and cholesterol content); reformula-
tion of products to induce certain changes in composition; and adaptation of 
preparation, storage, and cooking technologies so as to limit the concentra-
tion and/or formation of unhealthy components.
The development of functional meat products poses some technological 
challenges, chiefly as regards optimizing the formulation, processing, and 
subsequent storage so as to promote the presence and activity of healthy 
components and reduce or eliminate unhealthy substances (optimization of 
functional food components) without this affecting the quality of meat prod-
ucts. The technological feasibility of achieving the desired composition with 
optimum palatability depends very much on the product type, i.e., whether 
it is composed of identifiable pieces of meat, coarsely or finely ground, emul-
sions, cooked, cured, etc. To help optimize the desired beneficial properties 
there are a number of technologies (conventional and emerging) that prom-
ise friendly processing conditions.

417
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
13.4.1 Reduction of Specific Unhealthy Compounds
Meat and meat derivatives, like any other food, may contain a number of 
components (of highly diverse origins) which can have unhealthy implica-
tions if more than a given amount is ingested. Some of these compounds 
may be naturally present in the meat or its derivatives as part of the various 
raw materials used in their preparation. Examples include fat, SFAs, choles-
terol, salt, and others.
There are a number of steps in the processing and storage of meat prod-
ucts, and also in their preparation and consumption, which can modify the 
concentration and bioavailability of some of their components. These may 
equally cause the density of some nutrients to increase (e.g., due to cooking-
induced drying, etc.) or that of others to decrease (due to cooking). At the 
same time, like other complex foods, during processing, storage, and cook-
ing, meat and meat products undergo major chemical changes which cause 
the formation of a number of nonintrinsic components. Although some 
are health-promoting components such as antioxidant and antimicrobial 
agents or are probiotic during fermentation (Knorr, 1998), others may have 
potentially harmful biological properties. This is true of substances such as 
nitrosamines, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, heterocyclic amines (HA), 
biogenic amines, lipid oxidation products, or advanced glycoxidation end 
products (Hotchkiss and Parker, 1990; Cassens, 1999; Goldberg et al., 2004; 
Ruiz-Capillas and Jiménez Colmenero, 2004; Vitaglione and Fogliano, 2004). 
Some of them present mutagenic, carcinogenic, and cytotoxic properties 
related to the etiology of various forms of human cancer, CVD, arterioscle-
rosis, renal complications, Alzheimer’s disease, etc. The presence of these 
nonintrinsic substances in meat products has prompted several mechanistic 
hypotheses in which meat intake is associated with some health problem. It 
has been suggested that these compounds may have more to do with the risk 
of disease than the meat itself (Ulrich and Potter, 2004), although the rela-
tionship has yet to be demonstrated (Carbajal, 2004; Ulrich and Potter, 2004).
Meat products could potentially be made healthier by applying technology 
strategies that do not lead to the formation (at least in excess of established 
limits) of such unhealthy nonintrinsic substances. From a practical point of 
view, any approach to promoting potential functional meat products must 
involve reducing the concentration and/or formation of those compounds to 
within acceptable limits. Following are a number of examples.
13.4.1.1 Fat and Cholesterol
Recent years have seen the development of numerous meat products with 
lower fat content, which consumers perceive as healthier. As a result of recom-
mendations regarding quantitative and qualitative aspects of fat included in 
population nutrient intake goals for preventing diet-related chronic diseases 
(WHO, 2003), many consumers are currently limiting the amount of fat and 

418
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
calories in their diet. These recommendations must therefore be a key consid-
eration when a new composition is designed for any product; this is particu-
larly true of meat products given their importance as a source of fat in the diet.
The proportion of calories in the diet contributed by the intake of fat is 
around 36%–40%, almost a quarter of which derives from the consumption 
of meat and meat products (Sheard et al., 1998; Chizzolini et al., 1999; Jiménez-
Colmenero et al., 2012).
While meat cannot be considered a high-energy food given the current 
trends in meat production toward leaner animals (retail cuts frequently con-
tain less than 5%), there are various meat products to which the same does 
not apply, containing fat levels over 30%. Where it is most desirable to reduce 
fat is in frequently consumed products with higher fat levels, whose poor 
image in terms of health benefits would really be improved thereby. Fat is 
a major determinant of the sensory characteristics of a product, and hence 
acceptable low-fat meat products cannot be effectively achieved simply by 
reducing the fat in the formulation. There are generally two basic criteria 
governing fat reduction technology: the use of leaner meat raw materials, 
and the reduction of fat and energy density (dilution) through the addition 
of water and other ingredients. However, as fat content falls and water con-
tent rises, increasing attention must be paid to water holding ability. In this 
context, different protein-, carbohydrate-, or fat-based are used, classified as 
“fat replacers,” “fat substitutes,” “fat analogs,” “fat mimetics,” “fat extend-
ers,” or “fat barrier compounds,” generally depending on their composition, 
properties, and the functions that they perform in the meat matrix (Jiménez-
Colmenero et al., 2012). The feasibility to reduce fat in meat products depends 
on a number of factors such as the desired fat level, the nature of the product 
to be reformulated, and the kind of processing required (emulsifying, heat-
ing, curing, and others).
Cholesterol content can vary considerably in meat products. Under the 
heading of processing strategies, there are two main approaches to choles-
terol reduction, one entailing alteration of the composition of meat prod-
ucts and another entailing direct removal of cholesterol by supercritical 
carbon dioxide extraction (Clarke, 1997). A number of different meat prod-
ucts (ground beef, frankfurters, pork patties, restructured pork, structured 
beef rolls, etc.) have been reformulated; their original composition has been 
altered by reducing animal fat and/or partially replacing it with vegetable 
oils (olive, maize, sunflower, soybean, etc.) and adding various plant-based 
proteins (soy, maize, oat, wild rice, wheat gluten, etc.) or other fat replac-
ers (free cholesterol). This dilution method has made significant cholesterol 
reduction (20%–50% less than conventional products) possible in meat prod-
ucts such as low-fat ground beef, pork sausages, frankfurters, and others 
(Sandrou and Arvanitoyannis, 2000; Jiménez Colmenero, 2007a). Some meat 
products are currently being marketed with claims relating to fat and cho-
lesterol contents. Further information on fat reduction in processed meats is 
reported in Chapter 15.

419
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
13.4.1.2 Sodium and Phosphate
Sodium intake generally exceeds nutritional recommendations in industrial-
ized countries (Antonios and MacGregor, 1997; WHO, 2003). Excessive intake 
of sodium has been associated with high blood pressure, one of the major 
risk factors for CVD (Antonios and MacGregor, 1997). Since approximately 
20%–30% of common salt intake comes from meat products (Wirth, 1991), 
there is increasing interest among consumers and processors in reducing the 
use of salt (minimizing sodium) in meat processing.
Sodium reduction requires partial substitution of the sodium chloride 
added to meat derivatives by other compounds that have similar effects on 
sensory, technological, and microbiological properties. Different strategies 
based on selection of meat raw material, modification of processing tech-
niques, use of salt substitutes and flavor enhancers and masking agents, and 
optimization of the physical form of salt have been used in order to reduce 
the salt addition in meat products (Desmond, 2006). A number of compounds 
have been used to overcome property problems in low-salt products, includ-
ing problems associated with water- and fat-binding properties and texture. 
These include chlorides, phosphates, lactates, alginate, transglutaminase, 
and others (Collins, 1997; Monahan and Troy, 1997; Jimenez-Colmenero et al., 
2005). More extensive information on sodium reduction in meats and pro-
cessed meats can be found in Chapter 14. Since excessive dietary inorganic 
phosphate may increase the risk of lung cancer (Jin et al., 2009) and bone 
disease (Shahidi and Synowiecki, 1997), different meat products have been 
reformulated without added phosphates.
13.4.1.3 Nitrite
It is suggested that dietary nitrites (from processed meats among other 
foods) considered as human carcinogens because they may be converted in 
the body to N-nitroso compounds that are known carcinogens (Demeyer 
et al., 2008). In order to limit this unhealthy effect, various ingredients have 
been used to reduce or even eliminate the added nitrites to ensure that these 
additives perform their functions (color, antioxidant, antimicrobial, etc.) in 
the end product while maintaining quality. In this regard, the utilization 
of nonmeat ingredients that, by nature, have high nitrate content has been 
proposed to avoid the direct addition of nitrite to meat products (Weiss et al., 
2010). On the other hand, different strategies have been suggested to inhibit 
damage due to nitros(yl)ation reactions, including the use of dietary com-
ponents such as pre- and probiotics, resistant starch, vitamin C and E, etc. 
(Demeyer et al., 2008). More extensive information on nitrite reduction in 
meats can be found in Chapter 16.
13.4.1.4 Allergens
Some of the ingredients used in the preparation of meat products, like veg-
etable (i.e., soy), egg, or milk proteins, contain substances that cause allergic 

420
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
reactions in some consumers. Such nonmeat ingredients must be excluded 
to produce “allergen-free” meat products such as pork sausages, hamburger 
steak, or meatballs, recently approved (FOSHU) in Japan (Arihara, 2004). Dif-
ferent meat products (turkey breast, sausages, ham, etc.) are marketed as glu-
ten free and lactose free.
13.4.2 Promoting the Presence of Specific Healthy Compounds
Some food components possess potential health-beneficial properties, and 
efforts are therefore being made to promote increased dietary intake. A good 
way to increase the dietary intake of a functional ingredient is to incorpo-
rate it in common foods, such as meat products, and meat processing offers 
an excellent opportunity to do this. Although some biologically active com-
pounds occur naturally in meat, most are produced by plants. In meat pro-
cessing, it is possible to promote the presence of functional ingredients by 
substituting, adding, or enhancing food components. Whereas replacing 
basically targets lipidic material, adding or increasing embraces a large group 
of bioactive substances, and this opens up major prospects. Such substances 
have been used in the form of specific preparations and as constituents of 
some nonmeat ingredients (extracts, meals, concentrates, homogenates, etc.) 
used for various different purposes (technological, sensory, nutritional, 
microbiological, and economical) in the meat industry. The fact is that many 
of these ingredients (both common and otherwise) are of vegetable origin 
(oats, soy, wheat, sunflower, rosemary, apple, mushroom, walnut, etc.) and 
are composed of a variety of biologically active phytochemicals.
13.4.2.1 Fat and Fatty Acid Profile
The basic requirement for any major advance in the direction of diet opti-
mization and human health is that food fat (and meat products are some of 
the most important sources of dietary fat) be brought down closer to rec-
ommended population nutrient dietary goals (WHO, 2003). By means of a 
formulation approach, changes in lipid content and fatty acid profile can be 
tailored to help prevent many human diseases. These changes involve reduc-
ing SFA levels, raising mono- and PUFA levels (n-3, CLA), improving n-6:n-3 
PUFA balances, and limiting cholesterol contents. In meat products, such 
modifications can be achieved by means of formulation and technological 
processing, including raw material selection.
Healthier meat products can be made using meat raw materials with 
improved composition (higher monounsaturated fatty acid [MUFA] or n-3 
PUFA contents and lower n-6:n-3 PUFA ratio) achieved by animal production 
practices (see Section 13.3). Frankfurters, low-fat sausages, dry fermented 
sausages, and cooked ham or pork liver pate have been manufactured using 
materials (back fat and meat) obtained from pigs fed diets enriched with saf-
flower, sunflower and canola, linseed or fish oils (St. John et al., 1986; Shack-

421
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
elford et al., 1990; Hoz et al., 2004; Jeun-Horng et al., 2002; Santos et al., 2004; 
D’Arrigo et al., 2004).
In order to achieve healthier meat products, part of the animal fat normally 
present in the product can be replaced with another component more suited 
to human needs (Jiménez Colmenero, 2005). Lipids from nonmeat sources, 
for example, vegetable and fish oils, have been used for that purpose. Veg-
etable oils are of particular interest for meat product development because 
they are free of cholesterol and high in unsaturated fatty acids. Various dif-
ferent vegetable oils (maize, cottonseed, palm, peanut, soybean, high-oleic 
acid sunflower, olive, linseed) have been used to replace animal fats (pork 
back fat or beef fat) in normal and low-fat meat products such as frankfurt-
ers (Marquez et al., 1989; Paneras et al., 1998; Lurueña-Martinez et al., 2004), 
cooked sausages (Yilmaz et al., 2002), ground beef patties (Liu et al., 1991), 
fermented sausages (Bloukas et al., 1997; Muguerza et al., 2002; Ansorena 
and Astiasaran, 2004), and others. Other nonmeat ingredients such as wal-
nut have been used to achieve healthier fatty acid profiles in frankfurters 
and restructured beef steaks (Jimenez-Colmenero et al., 2003; Serrano et al., 
2005). A mixture of crushed linseed and linseed oil has been used to produce 
a range of basic Finnish meat products: sausage, meatballs, liver paste, etc. 
(Ahola, 2001). Fish oils (n-3 polyunsaturated oil) have been used in low-fat 
frankfurters (Park et al., 1989). Generally, the procedures used to incorporate 
natural or processed plant and marine lipids into meat products range from 
direct addition in the form of liquid oils and interesterified oils, to incorpora-
tion in encapsulated or emulsified forms (simple and multiple emulsions) or 
as part of plant ingredients (Jimenez-Colmenero, 2007b). Novel approaches 
of stabilizing and structuring liquid oils to create a plastic fat which retains 
solid-like properties while possessing a healthier fatty acid profile has been 
suggested recently as an animal fat alternative in order to improve the fat 
content of meat products. These strategies include those based on the appli-
cation of interesterification and organogelation processes, the creation of 
structured emulsions, and the formation of oil bulking agents (Jiménez-
Colmenero et al., 2015). A recent example is the use of structured canola oil 
consisting of an organogel produced with ethylcellulose and sorbitan mono-
stearate to replace beef fat in frankfurters. The replacement of beef fat with 
such organogel containing 8% ethylcellulose and 1.5% sorbitan monoestea-
rate was reported to give a hardness value similar to that of beef fat, by both 
sensory and texture profile analysis (Barbut et al., 2016).
There is evidence of a positive association between levels of TFA intake 
and the risk of CVD. Population nutrient intake goals recommend less than 
1% of the total energy as TFA (WHO, 2003). Dietary surveys indicate that 
intakes of TFA have decreased in a number of EU countries, mainly thanks 
to reformulation of food products (EFSA, 2004). Although natural TFAs 
found in ruminant meat fat appear to have a less unhealthy effect than other 
processed food fats (Higgs, 2000), in any case TFAs of meat products have 
been reduced by reformulation (adding oat bran or rye bran) (Yilmaz, 2004).

422
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Fatty acid profiles of meat products have been improved by direct addition 
of CLA to pork patties (Joo et al., 2000), beef patties (Chae et al., 2004; Hur 
et al., 2004), or liver pâté (Martin et al., 2008). Although feeding rather than 
processing conditions determine the CLA content in foods (Williams, 2000), 
endogen or exogen CLA content in meat is not negatively altered by cook-
ing or storage; to the contrary, it is increased by heating (Mulvihill, 2001; 
Arihara, 2004).
The varying effect of fats (depending in part on fatty acid composition) 
on satiety signaling could be used to develop fat-containing foods (meat 
products) that modulate satiety. Specific manipulations of fats (and also of 
proteins and carbohydrates) have the potential to act as functional foods for 
appetite control (Dye and Blundell, 2002). Modified-fatty-acid-profile and 
trans-fat-free meat products are currently being marketed.
13.4.2.2 Proteins, Peptides, and Amino Acids
Meat products contain high levels of both meat protein and nonmeat pro-
tein from the numerous ingredients used in their manufacture. Essential 
nutrients can be considered functional components if in addition to the req-
uisite nutritional effect they provide benefit to the human body (Arihara, 
2004). Meat protein is an important factor in permitting antibody synthe-
sis, thus allowing for acquired immunity to disease (Romans et al., 1994). 
A number of amino acids from meat have beneficial effects on the nervous 
and immune systems. Peptides like carnosine and anserine, which are 
found in muscle, are the most abundant antioxidants in meats. They have 
been reported to play roles in wound healing, recovery from fatigue, and 
prevention of stress-related diseases (Arihara, 2004). Recent research has 
been disclosing the role of meat proteins as precursors of bioactive peptides. 
These are fragments that are inactive within the precursor protein, but once 
released during food processing or during digestion, they can carry out 
various different health physiological functions in the organism (Toldrá 
and Reig, 2011). More detailed information on bioactive peptides is given 
in Chapter 13. l-Carnitine, which is naturally abundant in skeletal muscle, 
especially in beef, helps the body to reduce cholesterol levels and absorb cal-
cium (Arihara, 2004). The l-carnitine content in processed meat is normally 
rather low, but levels similar to those found in muscle have been achieved 
by adding l-carnitine to such products. The first l-carnitine-enriched meat 
products (wiener sausage and salami) were introduced in 2002 in Germany 
(Anonymous, 2002).
Protein-based ingredients are among the principal nonmeat ingredients 
used in the manufacture of meat products. Nonmeat proteins have been used 
in meat products for technological purposes and to reduce costs. They have 
also been used to provide nutritional benefits by lowering the caloric and 
cholesterol contents (when used as fat replacers) and by increasing the pro-
tein level and balancing the amino acid profile (Jiménez Colmenero, 2004). 

423
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
Some also contain health-enhancing components which make for healthier 
processed meats. The range of applicable nonmeat proteins from animal and 
plant sources is very large.
Plant proteins from soy, sunflower, wheat, and maize derivatives, and 
flours from cottonseed and oats have been utilized in the meat industry 
as fat replacers among other purposes (Keeton, 1994). Soy proteins are a 
good example of such proteins with health-enhancing activity; they are 
thought to exert a preventive and therapeutic effect in CVDs, cancer, and 
osteoporosis, and in the relief of menopausal symptoms (Hasler, 1998). In 
the United States, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved 
health claims on soy protein (containing isoflavons) in connection with a 
reduced risk of coronary heart disease (Holm, 2003). Low-fat sausage prod-
ucts containing soy proteins (as functional ingredients) have recently been 
approved in Japan, with the claim that an acceptable blood cholesterol level 
can be maintained by consumption of this product (Arihara, 2004). Some 
proteins from vegetal sources (sunflower, walnut, etc.) contain high pro-
portions of arginine and have low lysine/arginine ratios, both characteris-
tics that have beneficial effects for heart failure, blood pressure, and stroke 
(Feldman, 2002). Lysine/arginine ratios of restructured beef steak proteins 
have been reported to decrease with the addition of 20% walnut (Serrano 
et al., 2005).
Nonmeat proteins from animal sources have also been used in meat 
products. Whey protein products are used in a variety of processed meats 
(ground meats, emulsion products, coarse ground products, whole muscle 
products) to improve flavor, texture, emulsification, water binding, and cook 
yield. Whey protein contains bioactive components that help the release of 
two appetite-suppressing hormones and may have positive effects on cardio-
vascular health (Ohr, 2004).
13.4.2.3 Prebiotics and Probiotics
One of the most promising areas for the development of functional foods 
lies in the use of prebiotics and probiotics. A prebiotic is a “nondigestible 
food ingredient that beneficially affects the host by selectively stimulating 
the growth and/or activity of one or a limited number of bacteria in the 
colon and thus improves the health of the host” (Arihara, 2004). Prebiotics 
utilized in a number of meat products include dietary fibers and oligosac-
charides.
Dietary fibers have frequently been claimed to influence a number of ben-
eficial health characteristics, for instance by increasing fecal volume, limit-
ing caloric intake, to favor regulation of blood glucose levels, and to prevent 
CVDs , colon cancer, and constipation by regulating intestinal transit (Holm, 
2003). Consumption of either insoluble or soluble fiber results in distinct 
physiological effects. Aside from its potential physiological effects, addition 
of fiber to meat products has been widely practiced because of its role as a 

424
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
technological coadjuvant: its presence can improve water binding properties, 
texture, or emulsion stability of meat products and can help overcome the 
effects produced by changes of composition (e.g., due to fat reduction) on 
meat product characteristics. Dietary fiber from oats, sugar beet, soy, rice, 
apples, peas, citrus (lemons, oranges), etc. have been incorporated in the 
formulations of several meat products including ground meat and sausages 
(Keeton, 1994; Kim et al., 2000; Jimenez Colmenero et al., 2001; Fernández-
López et al., 2004). Antioxidant dietary fiber opens up interesting possibili-
ties for meat products.
Oligosaccharides such as inulin, which is composed of a blend of fructose 
polymers extracted from chicory, has been used in the preparation of vari-
ous meat products (Pszczola, 1998; Sloan, 2000; Archer et al., 2004). Intake 
of oligosaccharides improves beneficial intestinal microflora, reduces blood 
glucose levels, and reduces the production of carcinogens in the intestine 
(Anandh et al., 2003). Inulin has been used as a fat replacer in sausage, where 
it presented interesting satiating properties (Archer et al., 2004). The use of 
dietary fiber in the development of fiber-enriched meat products has been 
recently reviewed (Jiménez-Colmenero and Delgado-Pando, 2013; Verma 
and Banerjee, 2010).
Probiotics are live microbial food ingredients that, when ingested in suf-
ficient quantities, exert health benefits on the consumer (Ashwell, 2002). 
Health benefits relating to gastrointestinal disorders, food allergies, inflam-
matory bowel diseases, or immune functions have been attributed to pro-
biotics. These health benefits depend on many factors associated to the 
microorganism (genus, species, strain, etc.) and the product (processing, 
temperature, pH, aw, etc.). The level of probiotics required in food products to 
warrant health claims is not clear, although the minimum daily ingestion of 
probiotic bacteria needed to show a health effect is estimated at 106–10 viable 
microbes (Anandh et al., 2003; Työppönen et al., 2003). A variety of probiotic 
meat products have been prepared with most of the focus on fermented meat 
products as these provide a more appropriate environment (no heat treat-
ment) for the viability of microorganisms. A number of meat products (dry 
sausage, meat spreads) have been prepared with lactic acid bacteria (Lactoba-
cillus acidophilus, Lactobacillus casei, Lactobacillus paracassei, Lactobacillus rham-
nosus) or bifidobacteria (Bifidobacterium spp.) (Arihara, 2004; Työppönen et al., 
2003). Studies using probiotic microorganisms in other types of meat prod-
ucts such as cooked meat sausages and fresh ground or raw meat are still 
scarce mainly because of the processing required for these products such 
as heating, the use of additives (sodium chloride, sodium nitrite, etc.), and 
consume conditions (Cavalheiro et al., 2015). Probiotic delivery strategies, 
based on encapsulation and/or entrapping in gelled dispersions, designed 
to enhance probiotic viability during manufacture, storage, cooking, and 
gastrointestinal stages in meat matrices, have been recently reviewed (Cav-
alheiro et al., 2015). Meat products with added prebiotics and probiotics have 
been marketed in different countries.

425
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
13.4.2.4 Antioxidants and Vitamins
The best way to achieve a balance between oxidative damage and anti-
oxidant defense in the human body would be to enhance antioxidant 
capacity by optimizing the dietary intake of antioxidants through increased 
consumption of antioxidant-rich foods, among them animal-derived foods 
(Suray, 2003). The biological hypothesis suggests that dietary antioxidants 
have the capacity to prevent oxidative damage in the body, so that increased 
levels will also reduce the risk of several diseases, in particular CVD, some 
cancers, Alzheimer’s disease, and impairment of vision (Holm, 2003).
The presence of antioxidants also limits the susceptibility of foods to oxida-
tion by reducing the formation (and hence ingestion) of by-products with neg-
ative implications for health. Attempting to produce functional meat products 
entails changes in food composition; depending on the nature of the products, 
these may in turn entail alterations in the ratio of oxidizable substrate/prooxi-
dants/antioxidants, and consequently also changes in the rate and extent of 
the oxidative processes, with undesirable effects as regards oxidative damage. 
Meat and meat products enriched with PUFAs are generally characterized by 
increased susceptibility to lipid peroxidation. In fact, although PUFAs elicit a 
greater cholesterol-lowering response than MUFAs, there has been caution in 
recommending high-PUFA diets because of potentially adverse health effects 
of their lipoperoxidation products (Williams, 2000). Since antioxidants are 
known to be effective in decreasing lipid peroxidation in such products, it 
seems logical that an increase in the degree of unsaturation should be accom-
panied by enhancement of antioxidant capacity.
The most prominent dietary antioxidants are tocopherols, vitamin C, 
carotenoids, flavonoids, and phenolic compounds. Animal feeding strategies 
(see Section 13.3.3) have been used to promote their presence in intact mus-
cle. Reformed and restructured cured turkey products (Walsh et al., 1998), 
cooked ham (Santos et al., 2004), and dry fermented sausage (Hoz et al., 2004) 
have all been made with improved meat raw materials of this kind.
The antioxidant profile of meat products has also been improved by add-
ing antioxidants during the manufacturing process, either as a specific prep-
aration or as a component of nonmeat ingredients. One example of this is 
the incorporation of a wide variety of synthetic or natural exogenous anti-
oxidants (nitrite, phenolic compounds, tocopherols, chelants, plant extracts, 
etc.), which in some cases are added in the form of complex mixtures of bio-
active compounds with multiple functions. Technological processing strate-
gies can also be used to minimize oxidation in muscle foods (Decker and 
Xu, 1998).
Vitamin E has been added to several meat products (sausages, ham) (Jimé-
nez Colmenero, 2005; Jensen et al., 1998). Various plant-derived ingredients 
containing tocopherols (and tocotrienols) have been used in the preparation 
of meat products, including wheat germ in frankfurters (Gnanasambandam 
and Zayas, 1992), walnut in restructured steak (Serrano et al., 2005), and rice 

426
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
bran oil in roast beef (Kim et al., 2000). Honey, which possesses important 
antioxidant properties attributed to the presence of α-tocopherol (along with 
other substances such as ascorbic acid, catalase, flavonoids, etc.), has been 
used as an agent against lipid oxidation in muscle food (Pszczola, 1998).
Ascorbic acid supplementation presents health-beneficial effects in 
connection with improvement of the immune function and the prevention 
of heart diseases and certain types of cancers (Johnston, 2003). Ascorbic acid 
has been incorporated as an isolate or as a component of nonmeat ingre-
dients (citrus by-products, honey, etc.) in meat products such as beef pat-
ties (Sánchez-Escalante et al., 2001), dry-cured sausages (Fernández-López 
et al., 2004), roasted chicken (Pszczola, 1998), and cooked pork (O’Connell 
et al., 2002). Additionally, meat products (cooked sausages, hamburgers) have 
been enriched with folic acid (Cáceres et al., 2008). Folic acid presents dif-
ferent health benefits, for example a reduction in the risk of the incidence of 
neural tube defects.
Carotenoids (β-carotene, lycopene, lutein, zeaxanthin, etc.) are naturally 
present in different vegetables (Pennington, 2002), some of which are used as 
nonmeat ingredients in processed meats. Potential health-promoting effects 
of dietary carotenoids include antioxidant activity and a contribution to the 
prevention of common chronic diseases, including reduction of the risk of 
cancer, CVD, age-related macular degeneration, and cataracts (Suray, 2003). 
Several carotenoids have been tested as exogenous antioxidant additives in 
meat products. Lycopene has been used in the production of beef patties 
(Desmond and Troy, 2004). Beef patties, restructured beef steak, frankfurters, 
and meat/liver loaves have been prepared with plant-derived ingredients 
such as tomato pulp or juice (lycopene rich) (Yilmaz et al., 2002; Sánchez-
Escalante et al., 2003), carrot and sweet potato (rich in provitamin A) (Saleh 
and Ahmed, 1998; Devatkal et al., 2004), or spinach (rich in lutein and zea-
xanthin) (Pizzocaro et al., 1998). Lutein has been directly incorporated in 
meat products (Granado-Lorencio et al., 2010). The ready availability of carot-
enoids (e.g., lycopene and lutein) as food ingredients means that industrial 
use is likely to grow fast (Sloan, 2000).
There has been growing interest in the meat industry in the use of some 
plant-derived materials (from herbs, spices or fruit), as sources of natural 
phenolic antioxidants. For example, antioxidant activity has been reported 
for extract of cherry in lean ground beef; green tea in poultry meat; grape, lic-
orine root, and horsetail in pork meat; or coffee, rosemary, and grape skin in 
precooked pork patties or beef patties (Sánchez-Escalante et al., 2001; Turu-
batovic and Milatovic-Stevanovic, 2001; Nissen et al., 2004). The antioxidant 
activity of hydroxytyrosol has been demonstrated in frankfurters enriched 
with n-3 PUFA (Cofrades et al., 2011). Other compounds like taurine or car-
nosine have been added to meat products during processing to limit lipid 
oxidation (Morrissey et al., 1998; Sánchez-Escalante et al., 2001).
Some of the compounds cited above have also been used in meat products 
for purposes other than enhancing lipid stability. For instance, antioxidants 

427
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
(synthetic and natural, pure compounds or food extracts, and whole foods) 
are thought to be a promising means of reducing HA exposure because of 
their ability to inhibit HA formation or to block/suppress HA biotransforma-
tion/metabolism (Vitaglione and Fogliano, 2004). Addition of vitamin E in 
certain cured products has been shown to reduce the production of nitrosa-
mines (Jensen et al., 1998).
13.4.2.5 Minerals
Technological strategies have been employed to increase the concentration 
of various minerals in meat products. In this regard, different meat prod-
ucts have been enriched with minerals such as calcium (Arihara, 2004;  
Cáceres et al., 2006), selenium (García-Iñiguez et al., 2010), or iron (Navas-
Carretero et al., 2009). At the same time, some nonmeat ingredients (walnut, 
seaweed, etc.) can promote the presence in processed meat of a number of 
minerals (Cu, Mg, Mn, K, etc.) (Serrano et al., 2005; Olmedilla-Alonso et al., 
2013). Iodine has been incorporated into dry fermented sausage (García-Iñi-
guez et al., 2010).
13.4.2.6 Plant Sterols and Stanols
Plant sterols are natural constituents of plants (Pennington, 2002). How-
ever, they are generally present in the diet in relatively low concentrations 
(Ashwell, 2002). Structurally, plant sterols and stanols (the saturated deri-
vates) resemble cholesterol. A number of studies have demonstrated the 
ability of plant sterols/stanols to reduce total and low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL) cholesterol in humans, inhibit the absorption of dietary cholesterol, 
and reabsorb endogenous cholesterol from the digestive tract (Holm, 2003). 
In the United States, the FDA has approved the use of a health claim for 
plant sterol and plant stanol esters based on evidence that they may help 
to reduce the risk of CVD when the content of saturated fats and dietary 
cholesterol is low. Meat products such as frankfurters and broiler meat-
balls have been developed with stanols (Benecol) for marketing in Finland 
(Leino, 2001).
Some plant ingredients (e.g., vegetable oils) used in meat processing con-
tain phytosterols such as β-sitosterol, camposterol, and stingmasterol, which 
pass into meat products. They may be incorporated either as isolated phytos-
terols or through the use of vegetable oils containing them in the course of 
meat processing. A mixture of plant sterols and/or their esterified forms and 
mineral salts has been used to prepare plant sterol-enriched frankfurters, 
sausage, and cold cuts (SCF, 2003).
Vegetable oils (and other plant products) used as animal fat replacers or 
in frying processes (either industrially or in domestic food preparation) pro-
mote the presence of sterols in meat derivatives.

428
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
13.4.2.7 Other Compounds
The roles of some phytochemicals have so far been noted individually 
(chiefly as antioxidants); however, many plant products (spices, condiments, 
and herbs) used in meat products are sources of phytochemicals (flavonols, 
lignans, allicin, etc.) with potential health-promoting properties (Gibis et al., 
1999; Anandh et al., 2003; Fista et al., 2004; Sadler, 2004), including anticar-
cinogenic, antihypertensive, antihypercholesterolaemic, antibacterial, and 
antioxidant properties.
13.5  Safety and Scientific Criteria for Nutrition and 
Health Claims: Legislative Implications
Food safety is an important and essential aspect for food consumers, espe-
cially in the meat sector, which is highly sensitive to such considerations. 
Safety is therefore an essential factor that must be taken into account in the 
development of new functional meat products. Functional foods (and func-
tional meat products) are consumed as part of a normal food pattern. How-
ever, there are several considerations that must be addressed when assessing 
food risk: (1) altered consumption behavior; (2) the negative effect of this on 
particular highly sensitive groups of the population; (3) interactions between 
components and medicaments; (4) effects of low micronutrient intakes; 
(5) effects of excessive micronutrient intakes; and (6) long-term consequences 
of their consumption (Diplock et al., 1999).
Most studies on functional meats have focused chiefly on the improve-
ment of their composition by means of one or more functional compo-
nents. As mentioned in the introduction, the beneficial effect of a functional 
food must be demonstrated by scientific methods. Such a demonstration 
will furnish scientific support for health claims, which normally address 
(1) improvement of physiological functions or (2) reduced risk of certain dis-
eases. The ultimate purpose of the foods obtained using any of the strategies 
mentioned above is to obtain a given benefit, to be functional, for the target 
user, the consumer. In the case of certain claims of health-promoting prop-
erties, based on generally accepted scientific proof, it is possible to admit 
a cause–effect relationship between a food category, a food, or one of its 
constituents, and the claimed effect (Olmedilla-Alonso et al., 2013). This has 
enabled the EU to establish a list of authorized claims of health-promoting 
properties of foods other than those relative to the reduction of disease risk 
and the development and health of children (European Commission, 2012). 
When this cause–effect relationship is yet to be convincingly established, 
or substantiation of it is sought in a specific food matrix, it is necessary to 
evaluate the functional effect, which can be carried out using in vitro and in 
vivo models that provide information on mechanisms of action, the effect 

429
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
on function–response in vivo, the dose–response relationship, and acute and 
chronic effects (Ashwell et al., 2002;  Howlett, 2008).
Although no simple matter in practice, regulation of nutrition and health 
claims with respect to foods would help to achieve a high level of protection of 
human health and to promote the protection of consumer interests by ensur-
ing that foods bearing nutrition and health claims are labeled and advertised 
in an appropriate and clear manner that enables consumers to make ratio-
nal choices (EU Commission, 2003). Obviously, such regulations will have a 
strong influence on the development and marketing of functional foods. The 
increasing public interest in dietary health benefits have led to the develop-
ment of different legislative texts (with important global variations) on nutri-
tion and health claims worldwide. Recently, Boer and Bast (2015) reviewed 
the current international pieces of legislation on nutrition and health claims 
in an attempt to show the diverse approaches and to envision ways to opti-
mize procedures from a scientific perspective. As indicated by these authors 
the international harmonization of claims should globally lead to improved 
pieces of legislation, stimulate industrial efforts in functional foods, and 
enhance consumers’ opportunity to use health-enhancing products.
In the context of EU legislation, meat and meat products, as other foods, have 
different possibilities related health claims. Commission Regulation (EU) No 
432/2012 established a list of permitted health claims made on foods, other 
than those referring to the reduction of disease risk and to children’s develop-
ment and health. In this document, meat is directly included in relation to the 
claim: meat contributes to the improvement of iron absorption when eaten 
with other foods containing iron. In order to bear the claim, information shall 
be given to the consumer that the beneficial effect is obtained by consuming 
50 g of meat together with food(s) containing nonheme iron. However, taking 
in account the permitted claims, there are many other possibilities to provide 
meat products with claims (including those related to the reduction of disease 
risk and to children’s development and health), as the conditions of use of the 
claim are referred to the nutrient, substance, food, or food category, in general 
according with the conditions of use for the nutrition claims. In this regard, 
numerous products has been designed and developed in order to improve 
the presence/absence of compounds with health implications as described 
in this chapter. On the other hand, novel perspectives can be considered in 
meat production and processing strategies, as well in the use of new candi-
date bioactive components. All this opens up a wide range of possibilities of 
establishing definite designs to provide specific health claim.
13.6 Final Considerations
Meat and meat products are essential foods in our diet. The main role of diet 
consists in providing enough nutrients to meet all metabolic requirements 
and maintain well-being. In addition, diet can help to modulate some specific 

430
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
physiological functions and to reduce the risk of certain diseases. Functional 
foods have progressed very fast in the last few years and are contributing to 
the development of new foods, including meats. In this context, functional 
meats and meat products will most probably gain increased market share in 
the short term, thus helping to project a better image of meat.
The meat industry possesses the technology with which to produce a good 
number of potential functional meat and meat products, some of which have 
actually been on the market for several years. Moreover, emerging technologies 
may also offer interesting possibilities for new functional meat products in the 
near future. However, for the meat industry, communication with its consum-
ers could present a major challenge given that meat functional foods are uncon-
ventional and consumers by no means always perceive meats as healthy foods.
Acknowledgments
To projects AGL2014-53207-C2-1-R and AGL2014-57367-R of the Plan Nacio-
nal de Investigación Cientifica, Desarrollo e Innovación Tecnológica (I+D+I), 
Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad, FEDER funds, and Intramural 
CSIC: 201470E056.
References
Ahmed, S. T., Mun, H. S., Islam, M. M., Ko, S.-Y. and Yang, C.-J. (2016). Effects of 
dietary natural and fermented herb combination on growth performance, car-
cass traits and meat quality in grower-finisher pigs. Meat Science, 122, 7–15.
Ahola, M. (2001). Innovation in Foods: Health, Quality and Well Being Links. Scandinavia: 
Finnish Food Industry and Research. February/March, pp. 56–57.
Anandh, M. A., Lakshmanan, V. and Anjaneluyu, A. S. R. (2003). Designer meat foods. 
Indian Food Industry, 22(4), 40–45.
Anonymous. (2002). L-carnitine: Bringing health to functional foods. Innovative Food 
Science and Emerging Technologies, 17, 14–15.
Ansorena, D. and Astiasarán, I. (2004). The use of linseed oil improves nutritional 
quality of the lipid fraction of dry-fermented sausages. Food Chemistry, 87, 69–74.
Antonios, T. F. T. and MacGregor, G. A. (1997). Scientific basis for reducing the salt 
(sodium) content in food products. In: Pearson, A. M. and Dutson, T. R. (eds.) 
Production and Processing of Healthy Meat, Poultry and Fish Products. London: 
Blackie Academic & Professional, pp. 84–100.
Archer, B. J., Johnson, S. K., Devereux, H. M. and Baxter, A. (2004). Effect of fat 
replacement by inulin or lupin-kernel fibre on sausage patty acceptability, post-
meal perceptions of satiety and food intake in men. British Journal of Nutrition, 
91, 591–599.
Arihara, K. (2004). Functional foods. In: Jensen, W., Devine, C. and Dikemann, M. 
(eds.) Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences, vol. 1. London: Elsevier Science, pp. 492–499.

431
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (1998). Concentration of free amino acids and dipeptides 
in porcine skeletal muscles with different oxidative patterns. Meat Science, 50, 
327–332.
Armero, E., Barbosa, J. A., Toldrá, F., Baselga, M., and Pla, M. (1999a). Effect of the ter-
minal sire and sex on pork muscle cathepsin (B, B+L and H), cysteine proteinase 
inhibitors and lipolytic enzyme activities. Meat Science, 51, 185–189.
Armero, E., Flores, M., Toldrá, F. et al. (1999b). Effects of pig sire types and sex on 
carcass traits, meat quality and sensory quality of dry-cured ham. Journal of the 
Science of Food and Agriculture, 79, 1147–1154.
Armero, E., Navarro, J. L., Nadal, M. I., Baselga, M. and Toldrá, F. (2002). Lipid com-
position of pork muscle as affected by sire genetic type. Journal of Food Biochem-
istry, 26, 91–102.
Ashwell, M. 2002. Concepts of Functional Foods. ILSI Europe Concise Monograph Series. 
Brussels: International Life Science Institute.
Bakkali, F., Averbeck, S., Averbeck, D. and Idaomar, M. (2008). Biological effects of 
essential oils—A review. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 46, 446–475.
Barbut, S., Wood, J. and Marangoni, A. (2016). Potential use of organogels to replace 
animal fat in comminuted meat products. Meat Science, 122, 155–162.
Bass, J. J., Butler-Hogg, B. W. and Kirton, A. H. (1990). Practical methods of control-
ling fatness in farm animals. In: Wood, J. D. and Fischer, A. V. (eds.) Reducing Fat 
in Meat Animals. London: Elsevier Applied Science, pp. 398–436.
Bello, J. M., Mantecón, A. R., Rodríguez, M., Cuestas, R., Beltrán, J. M. and González, 
J. M. (2016). Fattening lamb nutrition. Approaches and strategies in feedlot. 
Small Ruminant Research, 142, 78–82.
Belury, M. A. (2002). Dietary conjugated linoleic acid in health: Physiological effects 
and mechanisms of action. Annual Review of Nutrition, 22, 505–531.
Benchaar, C., Calsamiglia, S., Chaves, A. V. et al. (2008). A review of plant-derived 
essential oils in ruminant nutrition and production. Animal Feed Science and Tech-
nology, 145, 209–228.
Benchaar, C., Duynisveld, J. L. and Charmley, E. (2006). Effects of monensin and 
increasing dose levels of a mixture of essential oil compound on intake, diges-
tion and growth performance of beef cattle. Canadian Journal of Animal Science, 
86, 91–96.
Bloukas, J. G., Paneras, E. D. and Fournitzis, G. C. (1997). Effect of replacing pork 
backfat with olive oil on processing and quality characteristics of fermented 
sausages. Meat Science, 45, 133–144.
Boer, A. and Bast, A. (2015). International legislation on nutrition and health claims. 
Food Policy, 55, 61–70.
Buckley, D. J., Morrisey, P. A. and Gray, J. I. (1995). Influence of dietary vitamin E 
on the oxidative stability and quality of pig meat. Journal of Animal Science, 73, 
3122–3130.
Cáceres, E., García, M. L. and Selgas, M. D. (2006). Design of a new cooked meat sau-
sage enriched with calcium. Meat Science, 73, 368–377.
Cáceres, E., García, M. L. and Selgas, M. D. (2008). Conventional and reduced-fat 
cooked meat sausages enriched with folic acid. Fleischwirtschaft, 23, 58–60.
Carbajal, A. (2004). Consumo de carne y tendencias. Calidad de vida y epidemiología 
de enfermedades asociadas. In: Jiménez Colmenero, F., Sánchez-Muniz, F. J. and 
Olmedilla, B. (eds.) La Carne y Productos Cárnicos Como Alimentos Funcionales. 
Madrid, Spain: editec@red, pp. 13–38.

432
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Calvo, L., Segura, J., Toldrá, F. et al. (2017). Dietary organic selenium increases post-
mortem free fatty acid concentration in pigs. Food Science and Technology Interna-
tional (accepted for publication).
Calvo, L., Toldrá, F., Aristoy, M. C., López-Bote, C. J. and Rey, A. I. (2016a). Effect 
of dietary organic selenium on muscle proteolytic activity and water-holding 
capacity in pork. Meat Science, 121, 1–11.
Calvo, L., Toldrá, F., Rodríguez, A. I., López-Bote, C. and Rey, A. I. (2016b). Effect of 
dietary selenium source (organic vs. mineral) and muscle pH on meat quality 
characteristics of pigs. Food Science & Nutrition, 5(1), 94–102. doi:10.1002/fsn3.368.
Cassens, R. G. 1999. Contribution of meat to human health. Proceedings of the 45th 
International Congress of Meat Science and Technology. Yokohama, Japan, vol. 2, 
642–648.
Castro, T., Manso, T., Mantecón, A. R., Guirao, J. and Jimeno, V. (2005). Fatty acid 
composition and carcass characteristics of growing lamb fed diets containing 
palm oil supplements. Meat Science, 69, 757–764.
Cavalheiro, C. P., Ruiz-Capillas, C., Herrero, A. M., Jimenez-Colmenero, F., Ragagnin 
de Menezes, C. and Martins Fries, L. L. (2015). Application of probiotic delivery 
systems in meat products. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 46, 120–131.
Chae, S. H., Keeton, J. T. and Smith, S. B. (2004). Conjugated linoleic acid reduces 
lipid oxidation in aerobically stored, cooked ground beef patties. Journal of Food 
Science, 69, 306–309.
Chizzolini, R., Zanardi, E., Dorigoni, V. and Ghidini, S. (1999). Calorific value and 
cholesterol content of normal and low-fat meat and meat products. Trends in 
Food Science & Technology, 10, 119–128.
Clarke, A. D. (1997). Reducing cholesterol levels in meat, poultry and fish products. 
In: Pearson, A. M., Dutson, T. R. (eds.) Production and Processing of Healthy Meat, 
Poultry and Fish Products. London: Blackie Academic & Professional, pp. 101–117.
Cofrades, S., Salcedo Sandoval, L., Delgado-Pando, G., López-López, I., Ruiz-Capil-
las, C. and Jiménez-Colmenero, F. (2011). Antioxidant activity of hydroxytyrosol 
in frankfurters enriched with n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. Food Chemistry, 
129, 429–436.
Collins, J. E. (1997). Reducing salt (sodium) levels in processed meat, poultry and fish 
products. In: Pearson, A. M. and Dutson, T. R. (eds.) Production and Processing 
of Healthy Meat, Poultry and Fish Products. London: Blackie Academic & Profes-
sional, pp. 282–297.
Correia, B. R., Carvalho, G. G. P., Oliveira, R. L. et al. (2016). Production and quality of 
beef from young bulls fed diets supplemented with peanut cake. Meat Science, 
118, 157–163.
D’Arrigo, M., Hoz, L., Cambero, I., Lopez-Bote, C. J., Pin, C. and Ordoñez, J. A. 
(2004). Production of n-3 enriched pork liver paté. Lebensmittel-Wissenschaft und-
Technologie, 37, 585–591.
Decker, E. A. and Xu, Z. (1998). Minimizing rancidity in muscle foods. Food Technology, 
52, 54–59.
De Smet, S., Claeys, E. and Demeyer, D. (2002). Muscle enzymes in relation to meat 
quality and muscularity. In: Toldrá, F. (ed.) Research Advances in the Quality of 
Meat and Meat Products. Trivandrum, India: Research Signpost, pp. 123–142.
Demeyer, D., Honikel, K. and De Smet, S. (2008). The World Cancer Research Fund 
report 2007: A challenge for the meat processing industry. Meat Science, 80, 
953–959.

433
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
Desmond, E. (2006). Reducing salt: A challenge for the meat industry. Meat Science, 
74, 188–196.
Desmond, E. and Troy, D. (2004). Nutrient claims on packaging. In: Jensen, W. K, 
Devine, C. and Dikeman, M. (eds.) Encyclopaedia of Meat Science, vol. 2. Oxford: 
Elsevier Academic Press, pp. 903–910.
Devatkal, S., Mendiratta, S. K. and Kondaiah, N. (2004). Quality characteristics of 
loaves from buffalo meat, liver and vegetables. Meat Science, 67, 377–383.
Dhiman, T. R., Zaman, S., Olson, K. C., Bingham, H. R., Ure, A. L. and Pariza, M. W. 
(2005). Influence of feeding soybean oil on conjugated linoleic acid content in 
beef. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 53, 684–689.
Diplock, A. T., Aggett, P. J., Ashwell, M., Bornet, F., Fern, E. B. and Roberfroid, M. B. 
(1999). Scientific concept of functional foods in Europe. Consensus document. 
British Journal of Nutrition, 81, S1–S27.
D’Souza, D. N., Warner, R. D., Dunshea, F. R. and Leury, B. J. (1999). Comparison 
of different dietary magnesium supplements on pork quality. Meat Science, 51, 
221–225.
Dye, L. and Blundell, J. (2002). Functional foods: Psychological and behavioural func-
tions. British Journal of Nutrition, 88(Suppl 2), S187–S211.
EFSA. (2004). Opinion of the Scientific Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and 
Allergies on a request from the Commission related to the presence of trans fatty 
acids in foods and the effect on human health of the consumption of trans fatty 
acids. (Request N EFSA-Q-2003-022). EFSA Journal, 81, 1–49
Elmore, J. S., Cooper, S. L., Enser, M. et al. (2005). Dietary manipulation of fatty acid 
composition in lamb meat and its effect on the volatile aroma compounds of 
grilled lamb. Meat Science, 69, 233–242.
Enser, M., Hallet, K. G., Hewett, B., Fursey, G. A., Wood, J. D. and Harrington, G. 
(1998). Fatty acid content and composition of UK beef and lamb muscle in rela-
tion to production system and implications for human nutrition. Meat Science, 
49, 329–341.
Enser, M., Richardson, R. I., Wood, J. D., Gill, B. P. and Sheard, P. R. (2000). Feeding 
linseed to increase the n-3 PUFA of pork: Fatty acid composition of muscle, adi-
pose tissue, liver and sausages. Meat Science, 55, 201–212.
European Commission (EU). (2012). Regulation (EU) No 432/2012 of 16 May 2012 
establishing a list of permitted health claims made on foods, other than those 
referring to the reduction of disease risk and to children’s development and 
health. Official Journal of the European Union, L136, 1–40.
European Commission (EU). (2003). Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parlia-
ment and of the Council on nutrition and health claims made on food. COM 424, 
Commission of the European Communities 2003/0165, Brussels.
Fairweather-Tait, S. J., Bao, Y., Broadley, M. R. et al. (2011). Selenium in human health 
and disease. Antioxidants & Redox Signaling, 14, 1337–1383.
Feldman, L. B. (2002). The scientific evidence for a beneficial health relationship 
between walnuts and coronary disease. Journal of Nutrition, 132, 1062S–1101S.
Fernández, X., Mourot, J., Mounier, A. and Ecolan, P. (1995). Effect of muscle type and 
food deprivation for 24 hours on the composition of the lipid fraction in muscles 
of Large White pigs. Meat Science, 41, 335–343.
Fernández-López, J., Fernández-Ginés, J. M., Aleson-Carbonell, L., Sendra, E., Sayas-
Barberá, E. and Pérez-Alvarez, J. A. (2004). Application of functional citrus by-
products to meat products. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 15, 176–185.

434
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Fista, G. A., Bloukas, J. G. and Siomos, A. S. (2004). Effect of leek and onion on processing 
and quality characteristics of Greek traditional sausages. Meat Science, 68, 163–172.
García-Iñiguez, C., Larequi, E., Rehecho, S. et al. (2010). Selenium, iodine, ω-3 
PUFA and natural antioxidant form Melissa officinalis L: A combination of 
components for healthier dry fermented sausage formulation. Meat Science, 
85, 274–279.
Gibis, M., Schoch, A. and Fisher, A. (1999). The effect of spices on the reduction of the 
formation of mutagenic/carcinogenic heterocyclic amines in beef patties. Pro-
ceedings of 45th International Congress of Meat Science and Technology, 2, (716–717) 
Yokohama, Japan.
Gnanasambandam, R. and Zayas, J. F. (1992). Functionality of wheat germ protein 
in comminuted meat products as compared with corn germ and soy proteins. 
Journal of Food Science, 57, 829–833.
Goldberg, T., Cai, W., Peppa, M. et al. (2004). Advanced glycoxidation end products 
in commonly consumed foods. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 104(8), 
1287–1291.
Granado-Lorencio, F., López-López, I., Herrero-Barbudo, C. et al. (2010). Lutein-
enriched frankfurter-type products: Physicochemical characteristics and lutein 
in vitro bioaccessibility. Food Chemistry, 120, 741–748.
Harris K. B., Cross, H. R., Pond, W. G. and Mersmann, H. J. (1993). Effect of dietary 
fat and cholesterol level on tissue cholesterol concentrations of growing pigs 
selected for high or low serum cholesterol. Journal of Animal Science, 71, 807–810.
Hasler, C. M. (1998). Functional foods: Their role in disease prevention and health 
promotion. Food Technology, 52, 63–70.
Hasler, C. M. (2000). The changing face of functional foods. Journal of the American 
College of Nutrition, 19, 499S–506S.
Hasler, C. M., Bloch, A. S., Thomson, C. A., Enrione, E. and Manning, C. (2004). Posi-
tion of the American Dietetic Association: Functional foods. Journal of the Ameri-
can Dietetic Association, 104, 814–826.
Hernández, P., Navarro, J. L. and Toldrá, F. (1998). Lipid composition and lipolytic 
enzyme activities in porcine skeletal muscles with different oxidative pattern. 
Meat Science, 49, 1–10.
Higgs, J. D. (2000). The changing nature of red meat: 20 years of improving nutritional 
quality. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 11, 85–95.
Holm, F. (2003). New Functional Foods Ingredients Cardiovascular Health. Project no. 
QLK1-CT-2000-00040. SMEs no.5. Available at www.nutrition.org.uk (accessed 
October 2004).
Hotchkiss, J. H. and Parker, R. S. (1990). Toxic compounds produced during cooking 
and meat processing. In: Pearson, A. M. and Dutson, T. R. (eds.) Advances in 
Meat Research, vol. 6. London: Elsevier Applied Science, pp. 105–134.
Hovenier, R., Kanis, E., Asseldonk, T. H. and Westerink, N. G. (1992). Genetic param-
eters of pig meat quality traits in a halothane negative population. Meat Science, 
32, 309–321.
Howlett, J. (2008). Functional Foods: From Science to Health and Claims. ILSI Europe Con-
cise Monographs Series. Belgium, Brussels: ILSI Europe.
Hoz, L., D’Arrigo, M. D., Camberro, I. and Ordoñez, J. A. (2004). Development of an 
n-3 fatty acid and α-tocopherol enriched dry fermented sausage. Meat Science, 
67, 485–495.

435
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
Hoz, L., López-Bote, C. J., Cambero, M. I. et al. (2003). Effect of dietary linseed oil and 
α-tocopherol on pork tenderloin (Psoas major) muscle. Meat Science, 65, 1039–1044.
Hur, S. J., Ye, B. W., Lee, J. L., Ha, Y. L., Park, G. B. and Joo, S. T. (2004). Effects of 
conjugated linoleic acid on color and lipid oxidation of beef patties during cold 
storage. Meat Science, 66, 771–775.
Irie, M. and Sakimoto, M. (1992). Fat characteristics of pigs fed fish oil contain-
ing eicosapentaenoic and docosahexanoic acids. Journal of Animal Science, 70, 
470–477.
Isabel, B., López-Bote, C. J., Hoz, L., Timón, M., García, C. and Ruiz, J. (2003). Effects 
of feeding elevated concentrations of monounsaturated fatty acids and vitamin 
E to swine on characteristics of dry-cured hams. Meat Science, 64, 475–482.
Jakobsen, K. (1999). Dietary modifications of animal fats: Status and future perspec-
tives. Fett/Lipid, 101, 475–483.
Jang, Y. D., Choi, H. B., Durosoy, S., Schlegel, P., Choie, B. R. and Kim, Y. Y. (2010). 
Comparison of bioavailability of organic selenium sources in finishing pigs. 
Asian Australasian Journal of Animal Sciences, 23, 931–936.
Jayasena, D. D. and Jo, C. (2013). Essential oils as potential antimicrobial agents 
in meat and meat products: A review. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 34, 
96–108.
Jensen, C., Lauridsen, C. and Bertelsen, G. (1998). Dietary vitamin E: Quality and stor-
age stability of pork and poultry. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 9, 62–72.
Jeun-Horng, L., Yuan-Hui, L. and Chun-Chin, K. (2002). Effect of dietary fish oil on 
fatty acid composition, lipid oxidation and sensory property of chicken frank-
furters during storage. Meat Science, 60, 161–167.
Jiang, J. and Xiong, Y. L. (2016). Natural antioxidants as food and feed additives to 
promote health benefits and quality of meat products: A review. Meat Science, 
120, 107–117.
Jiménez-Colmenero, F. (2004). Chemistry and physics of comminuted meat products. 
Non-meat proteins. In: Jensen, W. K., Devine, C. and Dikeman, M. (eds.) Ency-
clopaedia of Meat Science, vol. 1. Oxford: Elsevier Academic Press, pp. 271–278.
Jimenez-Colmenero, F. (2007a). Meat based functional foods. In: Hui, Y. H., Chandan, 
R. C., Clark, S. et al. (eds.) Handbook of Food Products Manufacturing. Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley & Son, pp. 989–1015.
Jimenez-Colmenero, F. (2007b). Healthier lipid formulation approaches in meat based 
functional foods. Technological options for replacement of meat fats by non-
meat fats. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 18, 567–578.
Jimenez-Colmenero, F., Ayo, M. J. and Carballo, J. (2005). Physicochemical proper-
ties of low sodium frankfurter with added walnut: Effect of transglutaminase 
combined with caseinate, KCl and dietary fibre as salt replacers. Meat Science, 
69, 781–788.
Jimenez-Colmenero, F., Carballo, J. and Cofrades S. (2001). Healthier meat and meat 
products: Their role as functional foods. Meat Science, 59, 5–13.
Jiménez-Colmenero, F. and Delgado-Pando, G. (2013). Fibre-enriched meat products. 
In: Delcour, J. A. and Poutanen, K. (eds.) Fibre-Rich and Wholegrain Foods. Oxford: 
Woodhead Publishing, pp. 329–347.
Jiménez-Colmenero, F., Herrero, A., Cofrades, S. and Ruiz-Capillas, C. (2012). Meat 
and functional foods. In: Hui, Y. H. (ed.) Handbook of Meat and Meat Processing 
(2nd Ed.). Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis Group, CRC Press, pp. 225–248.

436
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Jiménez-Colmenero, F., Salcedo-Sandoval, L., Bou, R., Cofrades, S., Herrero, A. M. 
and Ruiz-Capillas, C. (2015). Novel applications of oil-structuring methods as 
a strategy to improve the fat content of meat products. Trends in Food Science & 
Technology, 44, 177–188.
Jimenez-Colmenero, F., Serrano, A., Ayo, J., Solas, M. T., Cofrades, S. and Carballo, J. 
(2003). Physicochemical and sensory characteristics of restructured beef steak 
with added walnuts. Meat Science, 65, 1391–1397.
Jin, H., Xu, C. X., Lim, H. T. et al. (2009). High dietary inorganic phosphate increases 
lung tumorigenesis and alters akt signaling. American Journal of Respiratory and 
Critical Care Medicine, 179, 59–68.
Johnson, M. H., Calkins, C. R., Huffman, R. D., Johnson, D. D. and Hargrove, D. D. 
(1990). Differences in cathepsin B+L and calcium-dependent protease activities 
among breed type and their relationship to beef tenderness. Journal of Animal 
Science, 68, 2371–2379.
Johnston, C. S. (2003). Vitamin C In: Bowman, B. A. and Russell, R. M. (eds.) Cono-
cimientos Actuales sobre Nutrición. Washington, DC: Organización Panamericana 
de la Salud, ILSI Press, pp. 191–200.
Joo, S. T., Lee, J. I., Hah, K. H., Ha, Y. L. and Park, G. B. (2000). Effect of conjugated 
linoleic acid additives on quality characteristics of pork patties. Korean Journal of 
Food Science and Technology, 32, 62–68.
Keeton, J. T. (1994). Low-fat meat products. Technological problems with processing. 
Meat Science, 36, 261–276.
Kim, J.S., Godber, J.S. and Prinaywiwatkul, W. (2000) Restructured beef roasts con-
taining rice bran oil and fiber influences cholesterol oxidation and nutritional 
profile. Journal of Muscle Foods, 11, 111–127.
Knorr, D. (1998). Technology aspects related to microorganisms in functional foods. 
Trends in Food Science & Technology, 9, 295–306.
Larick, D. K., Turner, B. E., Schoenherr, W. D., Coffey, M. T. and Pilkington, D. H. 
(1992). Volatile compound contents and fatty acid composition of pork as influ-
enced by linoleic acid content of the diet. Journal of Animal Science, 70, 1397–1403.
Lauridsen, C., Andersen, G., Andersson, M., Danielsen, V., Engberg, R. and Jakobsen, 
K. (1999). Effect of dietary fish oil supplied to pigs from weaning to 60 kg live-
weight on performance, tissue fatty acid composition and palatability of pork 
when slaughtered at 100 kg liveweight. Journal of Animal and Feed Sciences, 8, 
441–456.
Lauridsen, C., Mu, H. and Henckel, P. (2005). Influence of dietary conjugated linoleic 
acid (CLA) and age at slaughtering on performance, slaughter- and meat quality, 
lipoproteins, and tissue deposition of CLA in barrows. Meat Science, 69, 393–399.
Leclerq, B. (1990). Facteurs influençant la teneur en lipids des viands de porc et de 
volailles. Viandes Produits Carnées, 11, 250–254.
Leino, M. 2001. Health trends in meat production. IFAJ 45th Annual Congress, Savon-
linna, Finland. Available at http://www.maataloustoimittajat.fi/ifaj-2001/
speeches/monday/leino_en.htm (accessed 5 October 2004).
Lener, M., Jaworska, K., Muszy ska, M. et al. (2012). Selenium as marker for cancer 
risk and prevention. Polish Journal of Surgery, 84, 470–475.
Leszczynski, D. E., Pikul, J., Easter, R. A. et al. (1992). Characterization of lipid in loin 
and bacon from finishing pigs fed full-fat soybeans or tallow. Journal of Animal 
Science, 70, 2175–2181.

437
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
Liu, M. N., Huffman, D. L. and Egbert, W. R. (1991). Replacement of beef fat with 
partially hydrogenated plant oil in lean ground beef patties. Journal of Food Sci-
ence, 56, 861–862.
Lurueña-Martinez, M. A., Vivar-Quintana, A. M. and Revilla, I. (2004). Effect of locust 
bean/xanthan gum addition and replacement of pork fat with olive oil on the 
quality characteristics of low-fat frankfurters. Meat Science, 68, 383–389.
Lynch, P. B. and Kerry, J. P. (2000). Utilizing diet to incorporate bioactive compounds 
and improve the nutritional quality of muscle foods. In: Decker, E., Faustman, 
C. and López-Bote, C. J. (eds.) Antioxidants in Muscle Foods. New York, NY: Wiley 
Interscience, pp. 455–480.
Mahan, D. C., Azain, M., Crenshaw, T. D. et al. (2014). Supplementation of organic 
and inorganic selenium to diets using grains grown in various regions of the 
United States with differing natural Se concentrations and fed to grower-fin-
isher swine. Journal of Animal Science, 92, 4991–4997.
Marquez, E. J., Ahmed, E. M., West, R. L. and Johnson, D. D. (1989). Emulsion stability 
and sensory quality of beef frankfurters produced at different fat and peanut oil 
levels. Journal of Food Science, 54, 867–870, 873.
Marriott, N. G., Garrett, J. E., Sims, M. D., Wang, H. and Abril, J. R. (2002). Charac-
teristics of pork with docosahexanoic acid supplemented in the diet. Journal of 
Muscle Foods, 13, 253–263.
Martin, D., Ruiz, J., Kivikari, R. and Puolanne E. (2008). Partial replacement of pork 
fat by conjugated linoleic acid and/or olive oil in liver pâtés: Effect on physico-
chemical characteristics and oxidative stability. Meat Science, 80, 496–504.
Martineau, R., Petit, H. V., Benchaar, C. et al. (2008). Effects of lasalocid or monensin 
on in situ biohydrogenation of flaxseed and sunflower seed unsaturated fatty 
acids. Canadian Journal of Animal Science, 88, 335–339.
Mercier, Y., Gatellier, P., Viau, M., Remignon, H. and Renerre, M. (1998). Effect of 
dietary fat and vitamin E on colour stability and on lipid and protein oxidation 
in turkey meat during storage. Meat Science, 48, 301–318.
Miller, M. F., Shackelford, S. D., Hayden, K. D. and Reagan, J. O. (1990). Determina-
tion of the alteration in fatty acid profiles, sensory characteristics and carcass 
traits of swine fed elevated levels of monounsaturated fats in the diet. Journal of 
Animal Science, 68, 1624–1631.
Monahan, F. J. and Troy, D. J. (1997). Over coming sensory problems in low fat and 
low salt products. In: Pearson, A. M. and Dutson, T. R. (eds.) Production and 
Processing of Healthy Meat, Poultry and Fish Products. London: Blackie Academic 
& Professional, pp. 257–281.
Morán, L., Andrés, S., Bodas, R., Prieto, N. and Giráldez, F. J. (2012). Meat texture and 
antioxidant status are improved when carnosic acid is included in the diet of 
fattening lambs. Meat Science, 91, 430–434.
Morán, L., Giráldez, F. J., Panseri, S. et al. (2013). Effect of dietary carnosic acid on 
the fatty acid profile and flavour stability of meat from fattening lambs. Food 
Chemistry, 138, 2407–2414.
Morgan, C. A., Noble, R. C., Cocchi, M. and McCartney, R. (1992). Manipulation of the 
fatty acid composition of pig meat lipids by dietary means. Journal of the Science 
of Food and Agriculture, 58, 357–368.
Morrissey, P. A., Sheehy, P. J. A., Galvin, K., Kerry, J. P. and Buckley, D. J. (1998). Lipid 
stability in meat and meat products. Meat Science, 49(Suppl 1), S73–S86.

438
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Muguerza, E., Ansorena, D., Gimeno, O., and Astiasarán, I. (2002). Nutritional advan-
tages of dry fermented sausages elaborated with vegetable oils. In Proceedings 
of 48th International Congress of Meat Science and Technology, Rome, Italy, 2, pp. 
1012–1013.
Mulvihill, B. (2001). Rumiant meat as a source of conjugated linoleic acid (CLA). 
Nutrition Bulletin, 26, 295–299.
Navas-Carretero, S., Pérez-Granados, A. M., Sarriá, B. and Vaquero, M. P. (2009). Iron 
absorption from meat pâté fortified with ferric pyrophosphate in iron-deficient 
women. Nutrition, 25, 20–24.
Nissen, L. R., Byrne, D. V., Bertelsen, G. and Skibsted, L. H. (2004). The antioxidative 
activity of plant extracts in cooked pork patties as evaluated by descriptive sen-
sory profiling and chemical analysis. Meat Science, 68, 485–495.
Noci, F., O’Kiely, P., Monahan, F. J., Stanton, C. and Moloney, A. P. (2005). Con-
jugated linoleic acid concentration in M. Longissimus dorsi from the heifers 
offered sunflower oil-based concentrates and conserved forages. Meat Science, 
69, 509–518.
O’Connell, M., Kerry, J. P., Fannin, S., and Gilroy, D. (2002). Assessment of honey as a 
functional ingredient in cooked meat pork. In Proceeding 48th International Con-
gress of Meat Science and Technology, Rome, Italy, 2, pp. 1016–1017.
Ohr, L. M. (2004). Nutraceutical & functional foods. Food Technology, 58, 71–76.
Olmedilla-Alonso, B., Jiménez-Colmenero, F. and Sánchez-Muniz, F. (2013). Develop-
ment and assessment of healthy properties of meat and meat products designed 
as functional foods. Meat Science, 95, 919–930.
O’Sullivan, M. G., Kerry, J. P., Buckley, D. J., Lynch, P. B. and Morrisey, P. A. (1997). 
The distribution of dietary vitamin E in the muscles of the porcine carcass. Meat 
Science, 45, 297–305.
Paneras, E. D., Bloukas, J. G. and Filis, D. G. (1998). Production of low-fat frankfurt-
ers with vegetable oils following the dietary guidelines for fatty acids. Journal of 
Muscle Foods, 9, 111–126.
Park, J., Rhee, K. S., Keeton, J. T. and Rhee, K. C. (1989). Properties of low-fat frank-
furters containing monounsaturated and omega-3 polyunsaturated oils. Journal 
of Food Science, 54, 500–504.
Pennington, J. A. T. (2002). Food composition databases for bioactive food compo-
nents. Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 15, 419–434.
Pereira, E. S., Mizubuti, I. Y., Oliveira, R. L. et al. (2016). Supplementation with cashew 
nut and cottonseed meal to modify fatty acid content in lamb meat. Journal of 
Food Science, 81, c2143–c2148.
Pizzocaro, F., Senesi, E., Veronese, P. and Gasparoli, A. (1998). Mechanically 
deboned poultry meat hamburgers. II. Protective and antioxidant effect of 
the carrot and spinach tissues during frozen storage. Industrie Alimentari, 37, 
710–720.
Pszczola, D. E. (1998). Addressing functional problems in fortified foods. Food Tech-
nology, 52, 38–46.
Realini, C. E., Duckett, S. K., Brito, G. W., Dalla Rizza, M. and De Mattos, D. (2004b). 
Effect of pasture vs. concentrate feeding with or without antioxidants on carcass 
characteristics, fatty acid composition, and quality of Uruguayan beef. Meat Sci-
ence, 66, 567–577.

439
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
Realini, C. E., Duckett, S. K. and Windham, W. R. (2004a). Effect of vitamin C addition 
to ground beef from grass fed or grain-fed sources on color and lipid stability, 
and prediction of fatty acid composition by near-infrared reflectance analysis. 
Meat Science, 68, 35–43.
Reig, M. and Toldrá, F. (1998a). Pork meat as a source of vitamins. Recent Research 
Developments in Nutrition, 2, 29–34.
Reig, M. and Toldrá, F. (1998b). Protein nutritional quality of muscle foods. Recent 
Research Developments in Agricultural & Food Chemistry, 2, 71–78.
Rivaroli, D. C., Guerrero, A., Valero, M. V. et al. (2016). Effect of essential oils on meat 
and fat qualities of crossbred young bulls finished in feedlots. Meat Science, 121, 
278–284.
Roberfroid, M. B. (2000). Concept and strategies of functional food science: The Euro-
pean perspective. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 71(Suppl 6), 1660S–1664S.
Romans, J. R., Costello, W. J., Carlson, C. W., Greaser, M. L. and Jones, K. W. 1994. The 
Meat We Eat. Danville, IL: Interstate Publisher, p. 1193.
Rosell, C. M. and Toldrá, F. (1998). Comparison of muscle proteolytic and lipolytic 
enzyme levels in raw hams from Iberian and White pigs. Journal of the Science of 
Food and Agriculture, 76, 117–122.
Rossi, L. G., Fiorentini, G., Netoa, A. J. et al. (2016). Impact of ground soybean and 
starch levels on the quality of meat from feedlot young Nellore bulls. Meat Sci-
ence, 122, 1–6.
Ruiz-Capillas, C. and Jiménez Colmenero, F. (2004). Biogenic amines in meat and 
meat products. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 44, 489–499.
Rule, D. C., Busboom, J. R. and Kercher, C. J. (1994). Effect of dietary canola on fatty 
acid composition of bovine adipose tissue, muscle, kidney, and liver. Journal of 
Animal Science, 72, 2735–2744.
Sadler, M. J. (2004). Meat alternatives-market developments and health benefits. 
Trends in Food Science & Technology, 15, 250–260.
Saleh, N. T. and Ahmed, Z. S. (1998). Impact of natural sources rich in provitamin A 
on cooking characteristics, color, texture and sensory attributes of beef patties. 
Meat Science, 50, 285–293.
Salvatori, G., Pantaleo, L., Di Cesare, C., Maiorano, G., Filetti, F. and Oriani, G. 
(2004). Fatty acid composition and cholesterol content of muscles as related 
to genotype and vitamin E treatment in crossbred lambs. Meat Science, 67, 
45–55.
Sánchez-Escalante, A., Djenane, D., Torrescano, G., Beltrán, J. A. and Roncalés P. 
(2001). The effects of ascorbic acid, taurine, carnosine and rosemary powder on 
colour and lipid stability of beef patties packaged in modified atmosphere. Meat 
Science, 58, 421–429.
Sánchez-Escalante, A., Torrescano, G., Djenane, D., Beltran, J. A. and Roncales, P. 
(2003). Combined effect of modified atmosphere packaging and addition of 
lycopene rich tomato pulp, oregano and ascorbic acid and their mixtures on the 
stability of beef patties. Food Science and Technology International, 9, 77–84.
Santos, C., Ordoñez, J. A., Camberro, I., D’Arrigo, M. and Hoz, L. (2004). Physico-
chemical characteristics of an α-linolenic acid and α-tocopherol-enriched 
cooked ham. Food Chemistry, 88, 123–128.
Sandrou, D. K. and Arvanitoyannis, I. S. (2000). Low-fat/calorie foods: Current state 
and perspectives. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition Technology, 40, 
427–447.

440
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
SCF (2003). Opinion of the Scientific Committee on Food on an application from 
MultiBene for approval of plant-sterol enriched foods (Scientific Committee 
on Food, SFC/CS/NF/DOS/24ADD2 Final). Health and Consumer Protection 
Directorate-General, European Commission, Brussels, Belgium.
Serrano, A., Cofrades, S., Ruiz-Capillas, C., Olmedilla-Alonso, B., Herrero-Barbudo, 
C. and Jiménez-Colmenero, F. (2005). Nutritional profile of restructured beef 
steak with added walnuts. Meat Science, 70, 647–654.
Shackelford, S. D., Miller, M. F., Haydon, K. D. and Reagan, J. O. (1990). Effects of 
feeding elevated levels of monounsaturated fats to growing-finishing swine on 
acceptability of low-fat sausage. Journal of Food Science, 55, 1497–1500.
Shahidi, F. and Synowiecki, J. (1997). Protein hydrolyzates from seal meat as phos-
phate alternatives in food processing applications. Food Chemistry, 60, 29–32.
Sheard, P. R., Enser, M., Wood, D. J., Nute, G. R., Gill, B. P. and Richardson, R. I. (2000). 
Shelf life and quality of pork and pork products with raised n-3 PUFA. Meat 
Science, 55, 213–221.
Sheard, P. R., Wood, J. D., Nute, G. R. and Ball, R. C. (1998). Effects of grilling to 80°C 
on the chemical composition of pork loin chops and some observations on the 
UK National Food Survey estimate of fat consumption. Meat Science, 49, 193–204.
Simopoulos, A. P., Leaf, A. and Salem, N. (2000). Workshop on the essentiality of 
and recommended dietary intakes for omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids. Food 
Reviews International, 16, 113–117.
Sloan, A. E. (2000). The top ten functional food trends. Food Technology, 54, 33–62.
Solomon, M. B., Pursel, V. G. and Mitchell, A. D. (2002). Biotechnology for meat qual-
ity enhancement. In: Toldrá, F. (ed.) Research Advances in the Quality of Meat and 
Meat Products. Trivandrum, India: Research Signpost, pp. 17–31.
Stewart, W.C., Bobe, G., Pirelli, G.J., Mosher, W.D. and Hall, J.A. (2012) Organic and 
inorganic selenium: III. Ewe and progeny performance. Journal of Animal Sci-
ence, 90, 4536-4543.
St. John, L. C., Buyck, M. J., Keeton, J. T., Leu, R. and Smith, S. B. (1986). Sensory and 
physical attributes of frankfurters with reduced fat and elevated monounsatu-
rated fats. Journal of Food Science, 51, 1144–1146, 1179.
Suray, P. F. (2003). Natural antioxidants: From the animal feed industry to human 
health. In: Suray, P. F. (ed.) Natural Antioxidants in Avian Nutrition and Reproduc-
tion. Nottingham: Nottingham University Press, pp. 565–604.
Suzuki, K. T. and Ogra, Y. (2002). Metabolic pathway for selenium in the body: Speciation 
by HPLC-ICP MS with enriched Se. Food Additives & Contaminants, 19, 974–983.
Toldrá, F. (2002). Dry-Cured Meat Products. Trumbull, CT: Food & Nutrition Press, pp. 
1–238.
Toldrá, F. and Flores, M. (2004). Meat quality factors. In: Nollet, L. M. L. (ed.) Handbook 
of Food Analysis. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, pp. 1961–1977.
Toldrá, F., Flores, M., Aristoy, M. C., Virgili, R. and Parolari, G. (1996b). Pattern of 
muscle proteolytic and lipolytic enzymes from light and heavy pigs. Journal of 
the Science of Food and Agriculture, 71, 124–128.
Toldrá, F. and Reig, M. (2004). Analysis of meat in food. In: Nollet, L. M. L. (ed.) Hand-
book of Food Analysis. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, pp. 1941–1959.
Toldrá, F. and Reig, M. (2011). Innovations for healthier processed meats. Trends in 
Food Science & Technology, 22, 517–522.
Toldrá, F., Reig, M., Hernández, P. and Navarro, J. L. (1996a). Lipids from pork meat 
as related to a healthy diet. Recent Research Development in Nutrition, 1, 79–86.

441
New Approaches for the Development of Functional Meat Products
Toldrá, F., Rubio, M. A., Navarro, J. L. and Cabrerizo, L. (2004). Quality aspects of 
pork and its nutritional impact. In: Shahidi, F., Spanier, A. M., Ho, C.-T. and 
Braggins, T. (eds.) Quality of Fresh and Processed Foods. Advances in Experimental 
Medicine and Biology, vol. 542. New York, NY: Kluwer Academic/Plenum, 25–32.
Työppönen, S., Petäjä, E. and Mattila-Sandlhom, T. (2003). Bioprotective and probiot-
ics for dry sausages. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 83, 233–244.
Turubatovic, L. and Milatovic-Stevanovic, M. (2001). Bioactive components—New 
aspects of applying supplements in the meat industry. Tehnologija Mesa, 42(5–6), 
377–397.
Ulrich, C. M. and Potter, J. D. (2004). Diet, genes and cancer risk. In: Senate Commis-
sion on Food Safety (ed.) Functional Foods: Safety Aspects. Weinheim: Wiley-Vch. 
KgaA, pp. 37–49.
Verma, A. K. and Banerjee, R. (2010). Dietary fibre as functional ingredient in meat 
products: A novel approach for healthy living—A review. Journal of Food Science 
and Technology–Mysore, 47, 247–257.
Vitaglione, P. and Fogliano, V. (2004). Use of antioxidants to minimize the human 
health risk associated to mutagenic/carcinogenic heterocyclic amines in food. 
Journal of Chromatography B, 8002, 189–199.
Walsh, M. M., Kerry, J. F., Buckley, D. J., Arendt, E. K. and Morrissey, P. A. (1998). Effect 
of dietary supplementation with α-tocopheryl acetate on stability of reformed 
and restructured low nitrite cured turkey products. Meat Science, 50, 191–201.
Wang, X., Wu, H., Long, Z. et al. (2016). Differential effect of Se on insulin resistance, 
regulation of adipogenesis and lipolysis. Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, 415, 
89–102.
Warnants, N., Van Oeckel, M. J. and Boucqué, C. V. (1999). Incorporation of dietary 
polyunsaturated fatty acids into pork fatty tissues. Journal of Animal Science, 77, 
2478–2490.
Weiss, J., Gibis, M., Schuh, V. and Salminen, H. (2010). Advances in ingredient and 
processing systems for meat and meat products. Meat Science, 86, 196–213.
Weststrate, J. A., van Poppel, G. and Verschuren, P. M. (2002). Functional foods, trends 
and future. British Journal of Nutrition, 88, s233–s235.
Wheeler, T. L., Savell, J. W., Cross, H. R., Lunt, D. K. and Smith, S. B. (1990). Mecha-
nisms associated with the variation in tenderness of meat from Brahman and 
Hereford cattle. Journal of Animal Science, 68, 4206–4220.
WHO (2003). Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic diseases. WHO Library Cata-
loguing-in-Publication Data, Geneva, WHO Technical Report Series 916.
Williams, C. M. (2000). Dietary fatty acids and human health. Annales de Zootechnie, 
49, 165–180.
Wirth, F. (1991). Reducing the fat and sodium content of meat products. What pos-
sibilities are there? Fleischwirtschaft, 7, 294–297.
Wood, J. D., Jones, R. C. D., Bayntun, J. A. and Dransfield, E. (1985). Backfat quality in 
boars and barrows at 90 kg live weight. Animal Production, 40, 481–487.
Wood, J. D., Richardson, R. I., Nute, G. R. et al. (2003). Effects of fatty acids on meat 
quality: A review. Meat Science, 66, 21–32.
Yılmaz, I. (2004). Effects of rye bran addition on fatty acid composition and quality 
characteristics of low-fat meatballs. Meat Science, 67, 245–249.
Yılmaz, I., Simsek, O. and Isıkli, M. (2002). Fatty acid composition and quality char-
acteristics of low-fat cooked sausages made with beef and chicken meat, tomato 
juice and sunflower oil. Meat Science, 62, 253–258.


443
14
Salt Reduction in Processed Meats
Fidel Toldrá and José M. Barat
14.1 Introduction
Western societies are concerned with the increased dietary consumption of 
sodium and, in fact, it is well recognized that sodium intake exceeds the nutri-
tional recommendations in most industrialized countries. The main reasons 
for such concern is the evidence related to consumers’ health. So, an excess of 
sodium in the diet may result in a significant rise of blood pressure in signifi-
cant sectors of population having hypertension or prehypertension. This may 
contribute to an increased risk of coronary heart disease and both forms of 
stroke (WHO/FAO, 2003; WHO, 2007). High salt intake has been also related as 
a possible cause contributing to colorectal cancer (Demeyer et al., 2008), stom-
ach cancer, and osteoporosis due to increases in urinary calcium levels excreted 
even though solid evidence has yet to be demonstrated (Gilbert and Heiser, 2005; 
Glass and Doyle, 2010).
The major risk factor for cardiovascular disease and one of the three leading 
risk factors for global disease burden in 2010 is high blood pressure (Lim et al., 
CONTENTS
14.1 Introduction ................................................................................................443
14.2 Manufacturing Strategies for Low-Salt Foods .......................................445
14.2.1 Sodium Reduction .........................................................................445
14.2.2 Sodium Replacement .....................................................................445
14.2.3 Change of Size and Shape of Salt Crystals .................................446
14.2.4 Other Strategies: Masking Agents ...............................................446
14.3 Effects of Salt on the Quality and Safety of Meat Products .................447
14.3.1 Physical Properties ........................................................................447
14.3.2 Chemical Properties: Enzyme Inhibition ...................................448
14.3.3 Chemical Properties: Sensory Effects .........................................449
14.3.4 Preservation Properties .................................................................452
14.4 Current Regulations on Salt Reduction and Labeling ..........................453
14.5 Conclusions .................................................................................................454
References .............................................................................................................454

444
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
2012). Dietary risk factors, diets low in fruits and high in sodium being the 
most relevant, and physical inactivity collectively accounted for 100% of the 
disability-adjusted life years in 2010 (Lim et al., 2012). Excessive sodium intake 
has been confirmed as an important cause for high blood pressure (Aburto et 
al., 2013; He and MacGregor, 2003). The amount of dietary salt consumed is an 
important determinant of blood pressure levels and a major risk factor for cor-
onary heart disease and ischemic as well as hemorrhagic stroke (WHO/FSA, 
2010). In fact, raised blood pressure is estimated to cause 7.5 million deaths, 
about 12.8% of all deaths (WHO, 2011). So, sodium consumption of more than 
2 g/day is estimated to cause 1.65 million cardiovascular-related deaths each 
year, representing around 1 of every 10 deaths from cardiovascular causes 
(Mozaffarian et al., 2014). Raised blood pressure is positively and progressively 
related to the risk for stroke and coronary heart disease (Whitworth, 2003).
The efficacy of reduced sodium intake in lowering blood pressure is well 
established. A reduction in salt intake to less than 5 g/day (2 g/day of sodium) 
was recommended by WHO (2014) in order to reduce blood pressure and the 
risk of coronary heart disease and stroke. Seventy-five percent of our sodium 
dietary intake comes from processed foods (Appel and Anderson, 2010). The 
main source of sodium in the diet is sodium chloride and the use is estimated 
to be around 9–12 g of salt per day. Dietary salt intake is recommended to 
decrease to 5 g/day, since this reduction would also decrease the impact of 
blood pressure and cardiovascular disease. For instance, a study carried out 
in the United Kingdom demonstrated that blood pressure was reduced to 
3.6–5.6/1.9–3.2 mmHg (systolic/diastolic) in hypertensive volunteers when salt 
intake was reduced by 3 g/day (He and Macgregor, 2003). It was also estimated 
that with such salt reduction, strokes could be reduced by 13% and ischemic 
heart disease by 10% (Gilbert and Heiser, 2005). Member states have been sup-
ported by the WHO for the development, implementation, and monitoring of 
salt reduction strategies (WHO, 2010). In 2014, there were 75 countries with 
national salt reduction strategies, more than double that in 2010 (WHO, 2014).
The consumption of meat products may represent up to 30% of the total 
dietary sodium intake. Cooked, fermented, and dry-cured meat products 
contain high concentrations of sodium that may range from 800 to 1900 mg 
Na+/100 g product and an example of typical content in a variety of meat 
products is shown in Table 14.1 (USDA, 2017). The reduction of salt in meat 
products is not an easy task due to the multiple technological benefits of 
salt to the final product quality, especially from sensory and safety point 
of views (Ruusunen and Puolanne, 2005; Desmond, 2006; Toldrá and Reig, 
2011). There is a relevant influence of salt content on flavor, water activity, 
microbial stability, enzyme activity, water holding capacity (WHC), protein 
solubility, and texture (Toldrá, 2006a; Weiss et al., 2010; Toldrá and Barat, 
2012). The content of salt in the meat products can be reduced through differ-
ent strategies like reducing the amount of added sodium chloride (Andrés et 
al., 2004), partially replacing the sodium chloride with other salts (i.e., potas-
sium chloride) having similar technological properties (Sofos, 1989; Aliño 

445
Salt Reduction in Processed Meats
et al., 2010b; Toldrá and Barat, 2012), replacing salt with other substances that 
may mask salt characteristics (Inguglia et al., 2017), or reducing the salt crys-
tal size or changing its shape while maintaining the salty taste (Angus et al., 
2006; Hanley, 2005).
There are some recent reviews on the different strategies for salt reduction 
in processed meats (Barat and Toldrá, 2012; Toldrá and Barat, 2009, 2012, 2015, 
2016; Inguglia et al., 2017). This chapter deals with and summarizes the avail-
able strategies for salt reduction in the processing of meat products.
14.2 Manufacturing Strategies for Low-Salt Foods
14.2.1 Sodium Reduction
The first and basic strategy to reduce salt content in food is the direct reduc-
tion of the added salt (Samapundo et al., 2010). In the case of meat products 
obtained by mixing all the ingredients, the total amount of salt to be added 
should be reduced (Aaslyng et al., 2014). In the case of salted products, when 
placing the meat product in contact with the salting media, a reduction of 
the salting time or salt concentration would be needed (Aliño et al., 2009a).
Nevertheless, the direct reduction of salt content in food is limited by one 
or more aspects, depending on the type of meat product: WHC, texture, pro-
tein extraction, or solution, enzyme activity, sensory, or preservation aspects.
The problems related to the direct reduction of salt in food could be 
avoided by using total or partial replacement of NaCl by other types of salts.
14.2.2 Sodium Replacement
NaCl can be partially or totally replaced by a nonsodium ingredient to reduce 
the sodium content of the meat product. The main replacer is KCl, although 
TABLE 14.1
Typical Reported Content of Sodium Chloride in Selected Meat Products
Meat Product
Sodium Content  
(mg Na+/100 g)
Sodium Chloride Content 
(g NaCl/100 g)
Pork cured ham
977
2.49
Bacon
1420
3.62
Bologna
920
2.34
Frankfurter
816
2.08
Cooked ham
900
2.29
Cooked sausage
809
2.06
Salami
1889
4.80
Source: Adapted from USDA. (2017). Food National Database. Nutritional composition of 
foods. Available at http://www.ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/nutrients.

446
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
MgCl2, CaCl2, K-lactate, glycine, or a mixture of them have also been used. 
Table 14.2 shows some studies about NaCl replacement in meat products.
14.2.3 Change of Size and Shape of Salt Crystals
Salt is hydrated and dissolved by saliva and then it is distributed through-
out the mouth. So, the salt crystal size and shape may affect both the rate of 
hydration and dissolution phenomena (Rama et al., 2013). The reduction of 
size of the salt crystal results in an increase of the surface area. In fact, the 
particle size of salt crystals when applied to fried potato crisps was reported 
to have a strong effect on the delivery rate and concentration of sodium into 
the saliva and on the perceived saltiness (Rama et al., 2013). The use of differ-
ent particulate sizes was patented for an instant soup with low salt content. 
Different sodium levels and distribution between the particulate phase and 
the soluble phase was reported (Busch et al., 2008).
14.2.4 Other Strategies: Masking Agents
Unpleasant tastes (bitter or metallic aftertaste) can appear as a consequence 
of NaCl replacement by other salts. The use of masking agents to reduce 
those unpleasant tastes is an option. Some masking agents are natural condi-
ments which act in masking the bitter or metallic aftertaste: pepper, onion, 
garlic, curry, and so on (Toldrá and Barat, 2012). Table 14.3 shows masking 
agents that can be used as reported in the literature.
TABLE 14.2
Studies about NaCl Replacement by Other Salts in Meat Products
Replacement Approach
References
Replacement of NaCl by a mixture of KCl, MgCl2, and CaCl2 in 
dry-cured pork loin showed that reductions up to 40%–50% in 
NaCl could be achieved without significantly affecting sensory 
and/or safety characteristics of the final product.
Aliño et al. (2009b, 2010a) 
and Armenteros et al. 
(2009d, 2009c)
The replacement of NaCl by KCl and/or K-lactate in sausages 
showed that increased K-lactate replacement gave increased 
pH, sweetness, crumbliness, and pastiness while piquantness, 
hardness, cohesiveness, ripened flavor, acid taste, and saltiness 
decreased.
Guàrdia et al. (2008)
Sensory effects were observed at larger replacements than 40% 
Na+, especially some bitter and metallic aftertastes, especially 
when magnesium or calcium chlorides were added.
Armenteros et al. (2011) 
and Barat et al. (2013)
The replacement of NaCl has also been assayed in Spanish 
dry-cured ham by replacement with either K-Lactate, or a 
mixture of KCl alone or mixed with MgCl2 and CaCl2, 
obtaining satisfactory results with an approximate 40% Na+ 
reduction.
Costa-Corredor et al. 
(2009), Fulladosa et al. 
(2009), Aliño et al. (2010c), 
Armenteros et al. (2011), 
and Ripollés et al. (2011)

447
Salt Reduction in Processed Meats
14.3 Effects of Salt on the Quality and Safety of Meat Products
14.3.1 Physical Properties
The interaction of salt with the protein matrix of processed meats has big 
consequences on its physical properties. The influence of salt on the WHC of 
proteins is probably the most important technological parameter related to 
the presence of salt in foods. Differences in WHC may be obtained, depend-
ing on the type of salt used (Puolanne and Halonen, 2010).
The penetration of NaCl into the meat during the salting process induces 
protein–ion interactions and entropic repulsions between the myofibrils 
contained in the muscle fibers (Offer and Knight, 1983). At low salt concen-
tration (around 5%), muscle fibers or myofibrils swell laterally and myosin 
is extracted. As a consequence of that an increase in the WHC of meat is 
observed, and an increase of weight of the salted product occurs (Aliño 
et al., 2010a). This is due to the existence of a swelling pressure that affects 
the mass transfer processes (Barat et al., 2009). At high salt concentrations, 
the phenomenon is the contrary: the competition of Na+ and Cl– ions with 
proteins for water molecules lead to the denaturation and precipitation of 
proteins, with a maximum effect at saturation concentration (26% w/w).
The mentioned behavior contributes to define the most recommendable 
brine concentration to obtain a certain product. For instance, in the case of 
marinated meat, low NaCl concentrations are used, so the obtained product 
is juicy and a high process yield is achieved. Nevertheless, if a salt-dried 
TABLE 14.3
Studies about NaCl Replacement in Meat Products Based on Masking Mixture
Masking Mixture
References
Magnesium glutamate and naringin, alone or in combination
Imada et al. (2010) and 
Yamada (2009)
Combination of carboxymethyl cellulose and carrageenan with 
sodium citrate
Ruusunen et al. (2003)
Combination of one edible nucleotide monophosphate salt and 
another substance (low organic acid, low organic acid salt, 
phosphoric acid, phosphate salt, a magnesium salt, sugar, and 
burnt sugar)
Zolotov et al. (1997)
A cereal flour such as rice flour and a food grade acidulant like 
citric acid
Chigurupati (2007)
An organic acid with potassium, calcium, and magnesium salts, or 
potassium bicarbonate containing magnesium, potassium or 
calcium carbonate, lactate, citrate, tartrate, succinate, glutamate, 
or orthophosphate
Burckel et al. (2003)
Minor amounts of magnesium sulfate and calcium carbonate, with 
trace amounts of folic acid and zinc oxide
Ryberg (2008)

448
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
product is desired, dry salt or saturated brine is used, because of the high 
water loss of the salted product.
A similar effect on WHC to that observed when using NaCl can be partially 
obtained by changing the pH of meat products. Since the minimum WHC 
is achieved at a pH value equal to the isoelectric point of proteins (Warriss, 
1982), the change in the pH of the meat product (e.g., by using acid like lactic 
acid or citric acid [Sawyer et al., 2008; Ke et al., 2009]) allows for an increase in 
WHC. This increase is bigger when the difference with the isoelectric point 
increases (Hultin et al., 2010). Apart from changing the pH, other substances 
can be added to meat products to increase its water binding properties, such 
as other salts, modified food starches, phosphates, low-dextrose equivalent 
corn syrup solids, maltodextrins, gums, wheat, concentrates, flours, edible 
seaweeds (for gel/emulsion meat systems), and whey or soy protein isolates 
or protein isolates made from low quality muscle foods (Imer, 2007; Ruu-
sunen et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2009; Schilling et al., 2004; Cofrades et al., 2008).
Physical treatments like high-pressure technology can also contribute to 
increase WHC as tested in frankfurters (Crehan et al., 2000) and in beef sau-
sage batters (Sikes et al., 2009).
The presence of salt in meat products also affects protein extraction and 
solubility. For instance, an increase in viscosity of meat batter has been 
observed due to the presence of salt (Desmond, 2006). Low salt contents also 
affect the texture in dry-cured hams (Morales et al., 2007) resulting in soft 
hams due to extensive protein breakdown by increased muscle cathepsins 
activity (Toldrá, 2007).
The replacement of sodium by other salts, like potassium, calcium, or mag-
nesium chloride, can enhance emulsion stability and/or protein extraction 
and solubility (Nayak et al., 1998a,b; Piggot et al., 2000). but can also con-
tribute to an increased lipid oxidation (Zanardi et al., 2010). Meat product 
texture can also be improved by using high-pressure treatments (Carballo et 
al., 2001; Campus et al., 2008; Totosaus and Pérez-Chabela, 2009).
14.3.2 Chemical Properties: Enzyme Inhibition
Sodium chloride has been reported as an effective inhibitor of the majority 
of muscle proteolytic enzymes, especially cathepsins, dipeptidylpeptidases, 
and aminopeptidases (Rico et al., 1991; Toldrá and Flores, 1998). Through this 
inhibitory effect, the proteolysis phenomena is not so extensive during the 
processing of dry-cured ham (Toldrá, 2002, 2006b,c).
The effect of chloride salts used as NaCl replacers like KCl, MgCl2, and 
CaCl2 was tested on muscle peptidases (Armenteros et al., 2009b) and a sum-
mary of their effects is shown in Table 14.4. As can be observed in Table 14.4, 
KCl exerts, in general, an effect similar to NaCl, but the inhibitory effect of 
divalent salts (CaCl2 and MgCl2) is more pronounced in most of the cases. 
Cathepsins are quite affected by 0.2 M of NaCl, as reported elsewhere 
(Rico et al., 1991), but also by all other types of assayed salts. In the case of 

449
Salt Reduction in Processed Meats
exopeptidases, dipeptidylpeptidase III (DPP III) is the most affected by all 
types of salts while DPP I, II, and IV remain quite unaffected by 0.2 M of 
NaCl or KCl. Alanyl aminopeptidase is quite affected by 0.2 M of NaCl or KCl, 
although leucyl and methionyl aminopeptidases remain nearly unaffected at 
such concentration. It must be mentioned that arginyl aminopeptidase, also 
named aminopeptidase B, has a different behavior because it is a chloride 
activated enzyme (activated at low amounts of NaCl), and thus is also acti-
vated at low amounts of NaCl and KCl and at very low amounts of MgCl2. 
However, CaCl2 shows a strong inhibitory effect (Armenteros et al., 2009b).
The effect of different salt formulations on the proteolysis and lipolysis phe-
nomena during the processing of dry-cured meats was reported. Most proteo-
lytic enzyme activities from dry-cured loins salted with 50% KCl or with 25% 
KCL, 15% CaCl2, and 5% MgCl2 replacement were higher than those salted 
traditionally with only NaCl and a larger release of free amino acids was 
also observed due to the higher aminopeptidase activity (Armenteros et al., 
2009a,c,d). In the case of dry-cured ham, nonsignificant statistical differences 
were reported for proteolysis after different salting treatments (Armenteros 
et al., 2012b). On the other hand, there was a slight trend toward a major lipol-
ysis in hams salted with MgCl2 and CaCl2 replacement (Ripollés et al., 2011).
14.3.3 Chemical Properties: Sensory Effects
Salt has a salty taste mainly due to its Na+ cation, so sodium is perceived in 
the pores on the tongue via receptor cells that allow the sodium ion to enter 
through specific ion channels. Such channels are quite specific and this is 
TABLE 14.4
Relative Activity of Muscle Enzymes (Expressed as Approximate % Range) in the 
Presence of 0.2 M Salt Concentration
Enzyme/Salt
NaCl
KCl
MgCl2
CaCl2
Cathepsin B
40
40
0–10
10–20
Cathepsin B + L
60–70
60–70
40
40
Cathepsin H
40–50
40–50
0–10
30–40
DPP I
<100
<100
<100
40–50
DPP II
80
80
60
nd
DPP III
50
50
10
0
DPP IV
100
100
40–50
20–30
Alanyl aminopeptidase
70
70
20–30
0–10
Arginyl aminopeptidase
<100
<100
100
0
Leucyl aminopeptidase
80–90
90–100
70
70
Methionyl aminopeptidase
100
100
50
Nd
Source:  Adapted from European Food Research and Technology, 229, Armenteros, M. et al., Effect 
of sodium, potassium, calcium and magnesium chloride salts on pork muscle prote-
ases, 93–98. Copyright 2009 with permission from Elsevier.
nd, no available data.

450
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
one of the reasons why alternative salts are less perceived (Rama et al., 2013). 
It must be taken into account that the complexity of the food matrix such as 
in the case of meat products also exerts an influence on the saltiness per-
ception (Drake et al., 2011). Saltiness was reported to be related to fat and 
water concentrations based on a cheese matrix. The water content influenced 
the sodium release and the fat content influenced saltiness during the chew-
ing process, so that in this way, salt concentration could be reduced without 
saltiness alteration through an increase of water and a decrease of fat content 
(Phan et al., 2008).
Another relevant effect of salt is that it contributes to a flavor-enhancing 
effect in meat products. The most noticeable effect of salt addition to meat 
products is the perception of saltiness (Ruusunen and Puolanne, 2005) and 
this effect is more perceived in those products having higher fat content 
(Matulis et al., 1995) and less perceived in products with more protein con-
tent. In fact, a reduction of 17%–20% of salt in slow dry-fermented sausages 
resulted in sausages perceived as less tasty and less aromatic by panelists   
even though the inoculation of the yeast Debaryomices hansenii improved 
significantly the aroma and taste quality (Corral et al., 2013). In the case of 
17%–20% salt reduction and 10%–16% fat reduction, the sausage quality was 
affected with an increase in aw and hardness and chewiness values, and a 
decrease of staphylococci growth (Corral et al., 2014).
The reduction of salt in meat products affects the sensory quality. For 
instance, salt levels below 1.5% were reported to have a negative effect on 
consumer acceptability; however, 2.5% salt content was the most accepted 
by consumers (Tobin et al., 2012a). Beef patties were also assayed for salt and 
fat reduction, and the beef patty containing 40% fat and 1% salt (a 50% salt 
reduction in comparison to standard patties) was reported to be the most 
acceptable for consumers (Tobin et al., 2012b). Similarly, pork breakfast sau-
sages containing 1.4% and 1.0% salt were reported to be more acceptable to 
consumers than other salt levels (Tobin et al., 2013).
The aroma perception of meat products depends on the concentration and 
odor threshold of the available volatile compounds as well as how they inter-
act with the food matrix (Guichard, 2002). Fermented and/or long ripened 
meat products like dry-fermented sausages and dry-cured hams have a wide 
variety of aroma volatile compounds generated as a consequence of their 
long processing and the action of muscle and microbial enzymes and further 
chemical reactions (Toldrá and Aristoy, 2010; Flores and Hernández, 2007). 
The effect of salt replacers was assayed and the salting-out effects of KCl 
were compared to those of NaCl by analyzing the headspace concentration of 
volatile compounds in water solutions, resulting in similar effects. However, 
no salting-out effects were reported for MgCl2 and CaCl2 (Pérez-Juan et al., 
2007). Dry-cured hams produced with formulations containing NaCl alone 
or in combination 50/50 with KCl were reported to have significantly higher 
amounts of lipid-derived volatiles such as hexanal than hams produced with 
formulations including MgCl2 and CaCl2 (Armenteros et al., 2012a).

451
Salt Reduction in Processed Meats
Salt reduction in dry-fermented sausages was reported to increase 
lipolysis and also to exert a higher oxidation rate and rancid aroma 
generation. The inoculation of D. hansenii yeast in the low-salt dry-fer-
mented sausages resulted in an increased aroma derived from amino 
acid degradation (3-methylbutanoic acid and benzothiazole) and ester 
activities increasing the perception of fruity and cured aroma notes 
from 2-methylpropanoate, 2-methylbutanoate, and 3-methylbutanoate 
(Corral et al., 2015). Yeasts were isolated from traditional fermented 
sausages and were genetically typed. Those with the ability to pro-
duce aroma compounds were selected and tested in different systems 
(culture media, model systems, and dry-fermented sausages) and the 
results revealed that such yeast strains with aroma potential could be 
used to improve the sensory characteristics of low-salt fermented sau-
sages (Flores et al., 2015).
An example of the effect on sensory properties of dry-cured ham when 
sodium chloride is replaced by other chloride salts is shown in Table 14.5. As 
can be observed, the sensory attributes remained unaffected by replacement 
of 50% of NaCl by KCl. However, dry-cured hams prepared with magnesium 
and calcium salts, which are characterized by bitter tastes producing metal-
lic, astringent, and irritative sensations, scored low for all sensory attributes 
(Armenteros et al., 2012b).
TABLE 14.5
Sensory Analysis (Paired Comparison Test): Results of the 9 Month Dry-Cured 
Hams Samples with Different Salting Formulations at the End of the Ripening Stage
Sensory Traits
I
II
III
P-valuea
Aroma
24
24
n.s
33
15
*
34
14
**
Taste
31
17
**
37
11
***
36
12
***
Hardness
28
20
n.s
35
13
**
34
14
**
Juiciness
27
21
n.s
32
16
*
30
18
n.s
Source: Reprinted from Meat Science, 90, Armenteros, M. et al., Biochemical and sensory 
changes in dry-cured ham salted with partial replacements of NaCl by other chloride 
salts, 361–367. Copyright 2012b with permission from Elsevier.
Formulation I, Control, 100% NaCl; Formulation II, 50% NaCl, 50% KCl; Formulation III, 55% 
NaCl, 25% KCl, 15% CaCl2, and 5% MgCl2
. Results based on the number of assessors 
that preferred each batch (total number equal to 48).
*p < .05; **p < .01; and ***p < .001.

452
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
The interaction of volatile compounds with the food matrix is also very 
relevant for the aroma perception as discussed earlier. In this way, it was 
reported that the binding ability of sarcoplasmic proteins to some key vola-
tile compounds (branched aldehydes, hexanal, and methional) was signifi-
cantly reduced by both NaCl and KCl. No effect was observed for other key 
volatile compounds like octanal and 2-pentanone (Pérez-Juan et al., 2006). 
The effects were almost negligible for MgCl2 and CaCl2. Only the branched 
aldehydes were released in the presence of MgCl2 at 1.0 ionic strength (Pérez-
Juan et al., 2006). Similar effects were reported for for the interaction of key 
volatile compounds with some isolated peptides (Martínez-Arellano et al., 
2016). In such a work, peptide extracts from dry-cured ham were defatted 
and deodorized and then used to study the binding effect of each peptide 
extract to key volatile compounds. Approximately 20% and 30% interaction 
was observed for 2-methylpropanal, hexanal, and ethyl acetate and the high-
est interaction was reported for trimethylpyrazine; there was no binding 
effect on 2-methylbutanal (Martínez-Arellano et al., 2016).
In any case, the reduction in NaCl by 16% resulted in a lower acceptance 
of aroma, taste, juiciness, and overall quality. The use of KCl as an NaCl 
replacer resulted in a similar acceptance but the aroma perception was not 
improved (Corral et al., 2013).
14.3.4 Preservation Properties
The first use of salt in food was probably because of its preservation action 
(Sofos, 1984). The reduction of microbial spoilage of foods is mainly due to 
the reduction of the water activity because of the interactions of ions with 
water present in food (Desmond, 2006). Usually a drying process follows the 
salting step, implying a further reduction of water activity.
Nevertheless, the aw values of processed meats are lower than that needed 
to achieve a complete inhibition. It is important to note that under those cir-
cumstances, a combination of preservation factors contribute to extend the 
shelf life of meat products, such as pH, storage temperature, vacuum or con-
trolled atmosphere packaging, and so on (Leistner, 2000).
The reduction of salt content in processed meats has a direct consequence 
on its stability, and as a consequence on safety aspects, due to the increase 
in aw values (for the same moisture of the meat products). In those cases, if 
a lower aw value needs to be achieved, further drying is needed. Neverthe-
less, a higher decrease of moisture content implies an increase in the NaCl 
concentration, which would be contrary to the final objective of reducing the 
salt content.
Although some authors mention a slight effect of NaCl partial replacement 
on the growth certain microorganisms (Raccach and Hennigen, 1997), most 
studies indicate that no significant differences are observed, when compared 
with products having the same water activity (Blesa et al., 2008).

453
Salt Reduction in Processed Meats
14.4 Current Regulations on Salt Reduction and Labeling
Terms like salt reduction or low salt content in foods and drinks have been 
the object of regulation in many countries in order to clarify the market and 
avoid confusion to the consumers. The European Union issued Regulation 
EC 1924/2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods (EC, 2006). This 
regulation describes the terms that may be used in the claims of foods, meats 
in our case, with low sodium/salt content and the requirements needed for 
each claim. The following claims can be used depending on the sodium/salt 
content:
Low in Sodium/Salt: Content of sodium, or the equivalent value for 
salt, less than 0.12 g/100 g.
Very Low in Sodium/Salt: Content of sodium, or the equivalent value 
for salt, less than 0.04 g/100 g.
Sodium/Salt-Free: Content of sodium, or the equivalent value for salt, 
less than 0.005 g/100 g.
Reduced Sodium/Salt: At least 25% of sodium, or the equivalent value 
for salt, less than in the original meat product.
The Nutrition Facts Label (FDA, 2013) in the United States lists the Percent 
Daily Value (% DV) of sodium in one serving of a food, which is based on 
100% of the recommended amount of sodium, which is less than 2400 mg/
day.
The FDA Food Labeling Guide (FDA, 2016) describes the terms that may be 
used in the claims that can be labeled in the package. The following claims 
can be used depending on the sodium/salt content:
Salt/Sodium Free: For less than 5 mg of sodium per serving.
Very Low Sodium: For 35 mg of sodium or less per serving.
Low Sodium: For 140 mg of sodium or less per serving.
Reduced Sodium: For at least 25% less sodium than in the original 
product.
Light in Sodium or Lightly Salted: For at least 50% less sodium than 
the regular product.
No Salt Added or Unsalted: When no salt is added during processing, 
but this does not guarantee that the product is sodium free. It would 
be necessary to check the Nutrition Facts Label to be sure about its 
sodium content.
If the meat product exceeds 480 mg of sodium per serving but other health 
claims are made (e.g., low in fat), then a disclosure statement is required.

454
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
14.5 Conclusions
The consumption of meat products may represent up to 30% of the total 
dietary sodium intake, and there is a clear trend toward its reduction. 
Several approaches for salt reduction have been reported in this chapter. 
The main challenges are related to the technological properties of salt like 
taste, water retention, protein solubilization, and antimicrobial activity 
that are difficult to replace. However, the unpleasant taste derived from 
salt replacers is perhaps the most relevant challenge. New ingredients, 
processes, and technologies are expected to be developed in the near 
future.
References
Aaslyng, M. D., Vestergaard, C. and Koch, A. G. (2014). The effect of salt reduction 
on sensory quality and microbial growth in hotdog sausages, bacon, ham and 
salami. Meat Science, 96, 47–55.
Aburto, N. J., Ziolkovska, A., Hooper, L., Elliott, P., Cappuccio, F. P. and Meerpohl, 
J. J. (2013). Effect of lower sodium intake on health: Systematic review and meta-
analyses. British Medical Journal, 346, f1326.
Aliño, M., Grau, R., Baigts, D. and Barat, J. M. (2009a). Influence of sodium replace-
ment on the salting kinetics of pork loin. Journal of Food Engineering, 95, 551–557.
Aliño, M., Grau, R., Toldrá, F. and Barat, J. M. (2010a). Physicochemical changes in 
dry-cured hams salted with potassium, calcium and magnesium chloride as a 
partial replacement for sodium chloride. Meat Science, 86, 331–336.
Aliño, M., Grau, R., Toldrá, F., Blesa, E., Pagán, M. J. and Barat, J. M. (2009b). Influence 
of sodium replacement on physicochemical properties of dry-cured loin. Meat 
Science, 83, 423–430.
Aliño, M., Grau, R., Toldrá, F., Blesa, E., Pagán, M. J. and Barat, J. M. (2010b). Physi-
cochemical properties and microbiology of dry-cured loins obtained by partial 
sodium replacement with potassium, calcium and magnesium. Meat Science, 85, 
580–588.
Aliño, M., Grau, R., Toldrá, F., Blesa, E., Pagán, M. J. and Barat, J. M. (2010c). Physi-
cochemical properties and microbiology of dry-cured loins obtained by partial 
sodium replacement with potassium, calcium and magnesium. Meat Science, 85, 
580–588.
Andrés, A. I., Cava, R., Ventanas, J., Thovar, V. and Ruiz, J. (2004). Sensory character-
istics of Iberian ham: Influence of salt content and processing conditions. Meat 
Science, 68, 45–51.
Angus, F., Phelps, T., Clegg, S., Narain, C., Den Ridder, C. and Kilcast, D. (2006). Salt 
in Processed Foods: Collaborative Research Project. Leatherhead: Leatherhead Food 
International.
Appel, L. J. and Anderson, C. A. M. (2010). Compelling evidence for public health 
action to reduce salt intake. New England Journal of Medicine, 362, 650–652.

455
Salt Reduction in Processed Meats
Armenteros, M., Aristoy, M. C., Barat, J. M. and Toldrá, F. (2009a). Biochemical and 
sensory properties of dry-cured loins as affected by partial replacement of 
sodium by potassium, calcium and magnesium. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 57, 9699–9705.
Armenteros, M., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (2009b). Effect of sodium, potassium, 
calcium and magnesium chloride salts on pork muscle proteases. European Food 
Research and Technology, 229, 93–98.
Armenteros, M., Aristoy, M. C., Barat, J. M. and Toldrá, F. (2009c). Biochemical and 
sensory properties of dry-cured loins as affected by partial replacement of 
sodium by potassium, calcium and magnesium. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 57, 9699–9705.
Armenteros, M., Aristoy, M. C., Barat, J. M. and Toldrá, F. (2011). Biochemical and 
sensory changes in dry-cured ham salted with partial replacement of sodium 
by a mixture of potassium, calcium and magnesium. Meat Science, 90, 361–367.
Armenteros, M., Aristoy, M. C., Barat, J. M. and Toldrá, F. (2009d). Biochemical 
changes in dry-cured loins salted with partial replacements of NaCl by KCl. 
Food Chemistry, 117, 627–633.
Armenteros, M., Toldrá, F., Aristoy, M. C., Ventanas, J. and Estevez, M. (2012a). Effect 
of the partial replacement of sodium chloride by other salts on the formation of 
volatile compounds during ripening of dry-cured ham. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry, 60, 7607–7615.
Armenteros, M., Aristoy, M. C., Barat, J. M. and Toldrá, F. (2012b). Biochemical and 
sensory changes in dry-cured ham salted with partial replacements of NaCl by 
other chloride salts. Meat Science, 90, 361–367.
Barat, J. M., Aliño, M., Fuentes, A., Grau, R. and Romero, J. B. (2009). Measurement of 
swelling pressure in pork meat brining. Journal of Food Engineering, 93, 455–459.
Barat, J. M., Pérez-Esteve, E., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (2013). Partial replacement 
of sodium in meat and fish products by using magnesium salts. Plant and Soil, 
368, 179–188.
Blesa, E., Aliño, M., Barat, J. M., Grau, R., Toldrá, F. and Pagán, M. J. (2008). Microbiology 
and physico-chemical changes of dry-cured ham during the post-salting stage as 
affected by partial replacement of NaCl by other salts. Meat Science, 78, 135–142.
Burckel, A., Martin, F. and Leclerc, C. (2003). Food supplement composition and use 
thereof. Patent WO03053163.
Busch, J. L., Keulemans, J., Van Den, O. G. J. and Reckweg, F. (2008). Food composi-
tion. Patent WO2008074606.
Campus, M., Flores, M., Martinez, A. and Toldrá, F. (2008). Effect of high pressure 
treatment on colour, microbial and chemical characteristics of dry cured loin. 
Meat Science, 80, 1174–1181.
Carballo, J., Cofrades, S., Fernández-Martín, F. and Jiménez-Colmenero, F. (2001). 
Pressure-assisted gelation of chemically modified poultry meat batters. Food 
Chemistry, 75, 203–209.
Chigurupati, S. R. (2007). Low-sodium salt composition. Patent WO2007032941.
Cofrades, S., López-López, I., Solas, M. T., Bravo, L. and Jiménez-Colmenero, F. (2008). 
Influence of different types and proportions of added edible seaweeds on char-
acteristics of low-saltgel/emulsion meat systems. Meat Science, 79, 767–776.
Corral, S., Salvador, A. and Flores, M. (2013). Salt reduction in slow fermented sau-
sages affects the generation of aroma active compounds. Meat Science, 93, 
776–785.

456
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Corral, S., Salvador, A., Belloch, C. and Flores, M. (2014). Effect of fat and salt reduc-
tion on the sensory quality of slow fermented sausages inoculated with Debaryo-
myces hansenii yeast. Food Control, 45, 1–7.
Corral, S., Salvador, A., Belloch, C. and Flores, M. (2015). Improvement the aroma of 
reduced fat and salt fermented sausages by Debaryomyces hansenii inoculation. 
Food Control, 47, 526–535.
Costa-Corredor, A., Serra, X., Arnau, J. and Gou, P. (2009). Reduction of NaCl con-
tent in restructured dry-cured hams: Post-resting temperature and drying level 
effects on physicochemical and sensory parameters. Meat Science, 83, 390–397.
Crehan, M., Troy, D. J. and Buckley, D. J. (2000). Effects of salt level and high hydro-
static pressure processing on frankfurters formulated with 1.5 and 2.5% salt. 
Meat Science, 55(1), 123–130.
Demeyer, D., Honikel, K. and De Smet, S. (2008). The World Cancer Research Fund report 
2007: A challenge for the meat processing industry. Meat Science, 80, 953–959.
Desmond, E. (2006). Reducing salt: A challenge for the meat industry. Meat Science, 
74, 188–196.
Doyle, M. E. and Glass, K. A. (2010). Sodium reduction and its effect on food safety, 
food quality, and human health. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food 
Safety, 9, 44–56.
Drake, S. L., Lopetcharat, K. and Drake, M. A. (2011). Salty taste in dairy foods: Can 
we reduce the salt? Journal of Dairy Science, 94, 636–645.
EC (2006). Regulation (EC) No 1924/2006 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 20 December 2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods. 
Official Journal of the European Union, 30th December 2006, L404, 9–25.
FDA (2013). Guidance for industries: A food labelling guide. 1–129. Available at 
http://www.fda.gov/FoodLabelingGuide
FDA (2016). Changes to the nutrition facts label. Available at http://www.fda.
gov/Food/GuidanceRegulation/GuidanceDocumentsRegulatoryInforma-
tion/LabelingNutrition
Flores, M. and Hernández, D. (2007). Optimization of multiple headspace dolid-phase 
microextraction for the quantification of volatile compounds in dry fermented 
sausages. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 55, 8688–8695.
Flores, M., Corral, S., Cano-García, L., Salvador, A. and Belloch, C. (2015). Yeast strains 
as potential aroma enhancers in dry fermented sausages. International Journal of 
Food Microbiology, 212, 16–24.
Fulladosa, E., Serra, X., Gou, P. and Arnau, J. (2009). Effects of potassium lactate and 
high pressure on transglutaminase restructured dry-cured hams with reduced 
salt content. Meat Science, 82, 213–218.
Gilbert, P. A. and Heiser, G. (2005). Salt and health: The CASH and BPR perspective. 
British Foundation Nutrition Bulletin, 30, 62–69.
Guàrdia, M. D., Guerrero, L., Gelabert, J., Gou, P. and Arnau, J. (2008). Sensory charac-
terisation and consumer acceptability of small calibre fermented sausages with 
50% substitution of NaCl by mixtures of KCl and potassium lactate. Meat Sci-
ence, 80, 1225–1230.
Guichard, E. (2002) Interactions between flavor compounds and food ingredients and 
their influence on flavor perception. Food Research International, 18, 49-70.
Hanley, B. (2005). Salt, sugar and fat reduction in foods—Technological challenges. 
Presentation Given at Fat, Sugar and Salt: A Question of Balance Event. Dublin: 
Leatherhead Food International.

457
Salt Reduction in Processed Meats
He, F. J. and Macgregor, G. A. (2003). How far should salt intake be reduced? Hyper-
tension, 42, 1093–1099.
Hultin, H. O., Ke, S., Huang, Y., Imer, S. and Vareltzis, P. (2010). Process for improv-
ing water holding capacity and tenderness in cooked protein food products. 
USPTO Applicaton No: #20100009048—Class: 426281 (USPTO).
Imada, T., Ishida, M., Kono, R., Arai, H., So, R. and Kimura, E. (2010). Salty taste 
enhancer containing magnesium glutamate. Patent JP 2010011807A.
Imer, S. (2007). Increasing water holding capacity of muscle foods: Protein isolate 
effect. Electronic doctoral dissertations for UMass Amherst. Paper AAI3254954. 
http://scholarworks.umass.edu/dissertations/AAI3254954
Inguglia, E. S., Zhang, Z., Tiwari, B. K., Kerry, J. P. and Burgess, C. M. (2017). Salt 
reduction strategies in processed meat products—A review. Trends in Food Sci-
ence and Technology, 59, 70–78.
Ke, S., Huang, Y., Decker, E. A. and Hultin, H. O. (2009). Impact of citric acid on the 
tenderness, microstructure and oxidative stability of beef muscle. Meat Science, 
82(1), 113–118.
Leistner, L. (2000). Basic aspects of food preservation by hurdle technology. Interna-
tional Journal of Food Microbiology, 55(1–3), 181–186.
Lim, S. S., Vos, T., Flaxman, A. D. et al. (2012). A comparative risk assessment of bur-
den of disease and injury attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters 
in 21 regions, 1990–2010: A systematic analysis for the global burden of disease 
study2010. Lancet, 380, 2224–2260.
Martínez-Arellano, I., Flores, M. and Toldrá, F. (2016). Ability of peptide extracts 
obtained at different dry cured ham ripening stages to bind aroma compounds. 
Food Chemistry, 196, 9–16.
Matulis, R. J., McKeith, F. K., Sutherland, J. W. and Brewer, M. S. (1995). Sensory char-
acteristics of frankfurters as affected by fat, salt and pH. Journal of Food Science, 
60, 42–47.
Morales, R., Serra, X., Guerrero, L. and Gou, P. (2007). Softness in dry-cured porcine 
biceps femoris muscles in relation to meat quality characteristics and processing 
conditions. Meat Science, 77, 662–669.
Mozaffarian, D., Fahimi, S., Singh, G. M. et al. (2014). Global sodium consumption 
and death from cardiovascular causes. New England Journal of Medicine, 371, 
624–34.
Nayak, R., Kenney, P. B., Slider, S., Head, M. K. and Killefer, J. (1998a). Cook yield, 
texture and gel ultrastructure of model beef batters as affected by low levels of 
calcium, magnesium and zinc chloride. Journal of Food Science, 63, 945–950.
Nayak, R., Kenney, P. B., Slider, S., Head, M. K. and Killefer, J. (1998b). Myofibrillar 
protein solubility affected by low levels of calcium, magnesium and zinc chlo-
ride. Journal of Food Science, 63, 951–954.
Offer, G. and Trinick, J. (1983). On the mechanism of water holding in meat: The 
swelling and shrinking of myofibrils. Meat Science, 8, 245–281.
Pérez-Juan, M., Flores, M. and Toldrá, F. (2006). Model studies on the efficacy of 
protein homogenates from raw pork muscle and dry-cured ham in bind-
ing selected flavor compounds. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 
54, 4802–4808.
Pérez-Juan, M., Flores, M. and Toldrá, F. (2007). Effect of ionic strength of different 
salts on the binding of volatile compounds to sarcoplasmic protein homoge-
nates in model systems. Food Research International, 40, 687–693.

458
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Phan, V. A., Yvena, C., Lawrence, G., Chabanet, C., Reparet, J. M. and Salles, C. (2008). 
In vivo sodium release related to salty perception during eating model cheeses 
of different textures. International Dairy Journal, 18, 956–963.
Piggot, R. S., Kenney, P. B., Slider, S. and Head, M. K. (2000). Formulation protocol 
and dicationic salts affect protein functionality on model systems beef batters. 
Journal of Food Science, 65, 1151–1154.
Puolanne, E. and Halonen, M. (2010). Theoretical aspects of water-holding in meat. 
Meat Science, 86, 151–165.
Raccach, M. and Henningen, E. C. (1997). The effect of chloride salts on Yersinia entero-
colitica in meat. Food Microbiology, 14, 431–438.
Rama, R., Chiu, N., Da Silva, M. C., Hewson, L., Hort, J. and Fisk, I. D. (2013). Impact 
of salt crystal size on in-mouth delivery of sodium and saltiness perception 
from snack foods. Journal of Texture Studies, 44, 338–345.
Rico, E., Flores, J. and Toldrá, F. (1991). Effect of dry-curing process parameters 
on pork muscle cathepsin B, H and L activity. Z Lebensm Unters Forsch, 193, 
541–544.
Ripollés, S., Campagnol, P. C. B., Armenteros, M., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (2011). 
Influence of partial replacement of NaCl for KCl, CaCl2 and MgCl2 in lipolysis 
and lipid oxidation on dry-cured ham. Meat Science, 89, 58–64.
Ruusunen, M. and Puolanne, E. (2005). Reducing sodium intake from meat products. 
Meat Science, 70, 531–541.
Ruusunen, M., Vainionpää, J., Lyly, M. et al. (2005). Reducing the sodium content in 
meat products: The effect of the formulation in low-sodium ground meat pat-
ties. Meat Science, 69(1), 53–60.
Ruusunen, M., Vainionpää, J., Puolanne, E., Lyly, M., Lahteenmaki, L. and Niemisto, 
M. (2003). Effect of sodium citrate, carboxymethyl cellulose and carrageenan 
levels on quality characteristics of low-salt and low-fat bologna type sausages. 
Meat Science, 64, 371–381.
Ryberg, P. (2008). A salt mixture with low sodium content for human consumption. 
Patent WO08024050.
Samapundo, S., Ampofo-Asiama, J., Anthierens, T. et al. (2010). Influence of NaCl 
reduction and replacement on the growth of Lactobacillus sakei in broth, 
cooked ham and white sauce. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 143(1–
2), 9–16.
Sawyer, J. T., Apple, J. K. and Johnson, Z. B. (2008). The impact of lactic acid concen-
tration and sodium chloride on pH, water-holding capacity, and cooked color of 
injection-enhanced dark-cutting beef. Meat Science, 79, 317–325.
Schilling, M. W., Marriott, N. G., Acton, J. C., Anderson-Cook, C., Alvarado, C.Z. and 
Wang, H. (2004). Utilization of response surface modeling to evaluate the effects 
of non-meat adjuncts and combinations of PSE and RFN pork on water holding 
capacity and cooked color in the production of boneless cured pork. Meat Sci-
ence, 66, 371–381.
Sikes, A. L., Tobin, A. B. and Tume, R. K. (2009). Use of high pressure to reduce cook 
loss and improve texture of low-salt beef sausage batters. Innovative Food Science 
and Emerging Technologies, 10, 405–412.
Sofos, J. N. (1984). Antimicrobial effects of sodium and other ions in foods: A review. 
Journal of Food Safety, 6, 45–78.
Sofos, J. N. (1989). Phosphates in meat products. In: Thorne, S., (ed.) Developments in 
Food Preservation—5. New York, NY: Elsevier Applied Science, pp. 207–252.

459
Salt Reduction in Processed Meats
Tobin, B. D., O’Sullivan, M. G., Hamill, R. M. and Kerry, J. P. (2012a). Effect of varying 
salt and fat levels on the sensory and physiochemical quality of frankfurters. 
Meat Science, 92, 659–666.
Tobin, B. D., O’Sullivan, M. G., Hamill, R. M. and Kerry, J. P. (2012b). Effect of vary-
ing salt and fat levels on the sensory quality of beef patties. Meat Science, 91, 
460–465.
Tobin, B. D., O’Sullivan, M. G., Hamill, R. M. and Kerry, J. P. (2013). The impact of salt 
and fat level variation on the physiochemical properties and sensory quality of 
pork breakfast sausages. Meat Science, 93, 145–152.
Toldrá, F. (2002). Dry-Cured Meat Products. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Toldrá, F. (2006a). Dry-cured ham. In: Hui, Y. H., Castell-Perez, E., Cunha, L. M. et al. 
(eds.) Handbook of Food Science, Technology and Engineering, vol. 4. Boca Raton, FL: 
CRC Press, pp. 164-1–164-11.
Toldrá, F. (2006b). Meat: Chemistry and biochemistry. In: Hui, Y. H, Culbertson, J. D., 
Duncan, S. et al. (eds.) Handbook of Food Science, Technology and Engineering, vol. 
1. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 28-1–28-18. ISBN 1-57444-551–0.
Toldrá, F. (2006c). Biochemical proteolysis basis for improved processing of dry-cured 
meats. In: Nollet, L. M. L. and Toldrá, Y. F. (eds.) Advanced Technologies for Meat 
Processing. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 329–351.
Toldrá, F. (2007). Biochemistry of muscle and fat. In: Toldrá, F., Hui, Y. H., Astiasarán, 
I. et al. (eds.) Handbook of Fermented Meat and Poultry. Ames, IA: Blackwell Pub-
lishing, pp. 51–58.
Toldrá, F. and Aristoy, M. C. (2010). Dry-cured ham. In: Toldrá, F. (ed.) Handbook of 
Meat Processing. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 351–362.
Toldrá, F. and Barat, J. M. (2009). Recent patents for sodium reduction in foods. Recent 
Patens on Food, Nutrition and Agriculture, 1, 80–86.
Toldrá, F. and Barat, J. M. (2012). Strategies for salt reduction in foods. Recent Patents 
in Food, Nutrition and Agriculture, 4, 19–25.
Toldrá, F. and Barat, J. M. (2015). Low-sodium products. In: Toldrá, F., Hui, Y. H., 
Astiasarán, I., Sebranek, J. G. and Talon, R. (eds.) Handbook of Fermented Meat and 
Poultry (2nd Ed.). Chichester, West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 251–257.
Toldrá, F. and Barat, J. M. (2016). Low-salt foods: Types and manufacture. In: Cabal-
lero, B., Finglas, P. M. and Toldrá, F. (eds.) Encyclopedia of Food and Health, vol. 3. 
London: Academic Press/Elsevier Science Ltd, pp. 756–758.
Toldrá, F. and Flores, M. (1998). The role of muscle proteases and lipases in flavor 
development during the processing of dry-cured ham. Critical Reviews in Food 
Science and Nutrition, 38, 331–352.
Toldrá, F. and Reig, M. (2011). Innovations for healthier processed meats. Trends in 
Food Science and Technology, 22, 517–522.
Totosaus, A. and Pérez-Chabela, M. L. (2009). Textural properties and microstructure 
of low-fat and sodium-reduced meatbatters formulated with gellan gum and 
dicationic salts. LWT—Food Science and Technology, 42, 563–569.
USDA. (2017). Food National Database. Nutritional composition of foods. Available 
at http://www.ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/nutrients
Wang, P., Xu, X.-L. and Zhou, G. H. (2009). Effects of meat and phosphate level on 
water-holding capacity and texture of emulsion-type sausage during storage. 
Agricultural Sciences in China, 8, 1475–1481.
Warriss, P. D. (1982). The relationship between pH and drip in pig muscle. Journal of 
Food Technology, 17, 573–578.

460
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Weiss, J., Gibis, M., Schuh, V. and Salminen, H. (2010). Advances in ingredient and 
processing systems for meat and meat products. Meat Science, 86, 196–213.
Whitworth, J. A. (2003). World Health Organization/International Society of Hyper-
tension statement on management of hypertension. Journal of Hypertension, 21, 
1983–1992.
WHO/FAO. (2003). Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases. WHO 
Technical Report Series 916. Geneva: World Health Organization/Food and 
Agriculture Organisation. Available at http://www.who.int/dietphysicalactiv-
ity/publications/trs916/en/
WHO. (2007). Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease: Pocket Guidelines for Assessment and 
Management of Cardiovascular Risk. Geneva: World Health Organization. Avail-
able 
at 
http://www.who.int/cardiovascular_diseases/guidelines/Full%20
text.pdf
WHO. (2010). Creating an Enabling Environment for Population-Based Salt Reduction 
Strategies. Geneva: World Health Organization. Available at http://whqlibdoc.
who.int/publications/2010/9789241500777_eng.pdf
WHO/FSA. (2010). Creating an Enabling Environment for Population-Based Salt Reduc-
tion Strategies: Report of a Joint Technical Meeting Held by WHO and the Food Stan-
dards Agency, United Kingdom. Geneva: World Health Organization. Available at 
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2010/9789241500777_eng.pdf
WHO. (2011). Global Status Report on Noncommunicable Diseases 2010. Available at 
http://www.who.int/nmh/publications/ncd_report_full_en.pdf
WHO (2014). Global Status Report on Noncommunicable Diseases 2014. Available at 
http://www.who.int/nmh/publications/ncd-status-report-2014/en/
Yamada, T. (2009). Drink, and method for reducing bitter taste. Patent JP 2009279013A.
Zanardi, E., Ghidini, S., Conter, M. and Ianieri, A. (2010). Mineral composition of Ital-
ian salami and effect of NaCl partial replacement on compositional, physico-
chemical and sensory parameters. Meat Science, 86, 742–747.
Zolotov, S., Braverman, O., Genis, M. and Biale, D. (1997). Low sodium edible salt 
mixture. Patent EP809942.

461
15
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
Marise A. Rodrigues Pollonio
CONTENTS
15.1 Introduction ................................................................................................462
15.2 Implications of Fat Consumption on Health..........................................462
15.2.1 Saturated Fatty Acids ....................................................................463
15.2.2 Mono and Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids .....................................464
15.2.3 Meat Products as a Fat Source ......................................................465
15.3 The Role of Fat in Processed Meats .........................................................466
15.3.1 Texture .............................................................................................466
15.3.2 Flavor and Taste .............................................................................467
15.3.3 Physicochemical Properties ..........................................................467
15.3.4 Perception of Satiety ......................................................................469
15.4 Strategies for Reducing Fat in Meat Products ........................................469
15.4.1 Simple Fat Reduction and Selection of Lean Meat Cuts ...........470
15.4.2 Use of Fat Replacers .......................................................................471
15.4.2.1 Gums .................................................................................471
15.4.2.2 Starch Derivatives ...........................................................472
15.4.2.3 Protein-Based Fat Replacers ..........................................473
15.4.3 Use of Fibers as Functional Ingredients and Fat Replacers ..... 474
15.4.3.1 Insoluble Fibers ............................................................... 474
15.4.3.2 Soluble Fibers ...................................................................478
15.4.4 Lipid Reformulation Using Vegetable Oils ................................484
15.4.5 Use of Structured Lipids ...............................................................488
15.5 Challenges of Fat Reduction in Different Meat Products ....................492
15.5.1 Emulsified Meat Products ............................................................492
15.5.2 Fermented Meat Products .............................................................493
15.5.3 Restructured Injected and Marinated Meat Products ..............494
15.5.4 Restructured and Breaded Meat Products .................................495
15.6 Final Considerations ..................................................................................496
References .............................................................................................................496

462
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
15.1 Introduction
Fat is a macronutrient in foods responsible for various functions in the 
human body including energy supply (9 kcal/g); it also serves as a source 
of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) and essential fatty acids (linoleic and 
linolenic), and is a precursor of important hormones that participate in differ-
ent biochemical and metabolic pathways (Pearson and Gillett, 1996; Varnam 
and Sutherland, 1995). However, the association between high-fat intake and 
increase in the incidence of chronic diseases such as obesity, hypertension, 
certain types of cancer, hypercholesterolemia, and cardiovascular and cere-
bral accidents, among others (Rothstein, 2006; Zhang et al., 2010) requires a 
strict control of dietary fat intake.
Meat and processed meat products are generally recognized as good 
sources of proteins with high biological value, B vitamins, minerals and trace 
elements, and bioactive compounds (Biesalski, 2005; Olmedilla-Alonso et al., 
2013). However, these products are poor sources of fiber and contain high-
sodium levels, various additives, and fat, particularly cholesterol and satu-
rated fat, which make their regular consumption quite criticized (Whitney 
and Rolfes, 2002).
In this scenario, the reformulation of processed meat products aims at 
reducing, suppressing, and/or incorporating ingredients that promote 
healthier appeals to consumers, without losing the identity and quality 
standards (Arihara, 2006). In the search for healthier meat products, the 
reduction of total fat and saturated fat and the reformulation of the lipid 
profile have been widely studied, as well as fat substitutes with adequate 
technological and sensory performance and nutritional benefits that are 
safe and allowed by regulatory agencies.
This chapter addresses the principles for reducing fat in different pro-
cessed meat products, describing the difficulties and possible strategies con-
sidering the sensory acceptance, overall stability, and safe consumption of 
the reformulated products.
15.2 Implications of Fat Consumption on Health
Although the pathogenesis of diseases associated with excess fat intakes, 
such as obesity, hypertension, and cardiovascular diseases, has not yet 
been fully elucidated, several studies have shown that dietary fat may be 
an important modulator of morbidity and mortality (Vessby, 2003; Rubio-
Rodríguez et al., 2010).
However, the simple reduction of total fat is not enough to reduce the risk 
of these pathologies, since this complex class of macromolecules, including 
saturated, mono, polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), and cholesterol, is 

463
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
subdivided into several groups of compounds with specific and diversified 
physiological properties. Several authors have reported that the balanced 
intake of these components is more relevant than the simple suppression 
of total fat (Lamarche and Couture, 2014. This reference is listed in the 
References Recent studies have strongly criticized fat replacement by high 
levels of carbohydrates, responsible for the occurrence of other pathologies, 
thus various scientific authorities have established nutritional recommenda-
tions to guide the intake of this class of compounds. According to many 
studies, only 15%–35% of total calories should come from dietary fat; the 
intake of saturated fatty acids (SFAs) should not exceed 10%, with 6%–11% 
coming from PUFAs, 10%–15% from monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), 
and less than 1% from trans-fatty acids. It is also recommended that choles-
terol intake be less than 300 mg per day (Jiménez-Colmenero, 1996; Cengiz 
and Gokoglu, 2005; WHO, 2003). In this context, the reduction and/or refor-
mulation of processed products with high fat content that are rich in SFAs 
becomes the target of many studies.
15.2.1 Saturated Fatty Acids
There is no absolute consensus on the role of total fat and saturated fat in 
increasing the risk of chronic diseases, especially cardiovascular diseases; 
however, all guidelines from different countries and health agencies are 
unanimous in recommending a control in the dietary SFAs intake. The U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) has suggested a dietary SFA intake of 
less than 7% of daily calories (Eckel et al., 2014), while European Committees 
have proposed that the recommended SFAs and trans-fatty acids intake 
should be as low as possible (EFSA Panel and Dietetic Products, 2010), and 
as previously described, the WHO indicates that fatty acids intake should be 
less than 10% of daily calories.
This lipid fraction, which mainly comprises triacylglycerols of animal 
origin, is known to increase levels of total cholesterol and low-density lipo-
protein (LDL) cholesterol (Valsta et al., 2005). Palmitic (C16:0) and myristic 
(C14:0) fatty acids are among the main SFAs that contribute to the increase 
in cholesterol levels (Spady and Dietschy, 1985). Studies have suggested that 
palmitic acid increases the plasma total cholesterol levels to a greater extent 
when compared to other unsaturated fatty acids and carbohydrates (Mattson 
and Grundy, 1985; Grundy and Vega, 1988). Some authors have also reported 
that palmitic acid is also capable of raising the risk of obesity and insulin 
resistance (Kien et al., 2005).
According to Schaefer (2002), although myristic acid is more hypercholes-
terolemic than palmitic acid, it is less relevant once it is present in most diets 
at lower concentrations when compared to palmitic acid (Grundy, 1994). With 
regard to the hypercholesterolemic role of lauric acid (C12:0), contradictory 
data are found in the literature (Pronczuk et al., 1995; Denke and Grundy, 
1992) and in vivo studies have shown that stearic acid (C:18:0) is partially 

464
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
converted to oleic acid and has not been shown to raise plasma cholesterol 
levels (Bonanome et al., 1992; Bonanome and Grundy, 1988).
Whereas most of the fat from meat products comes from fatty cuts or back 
fat rich in SFAs, the reduction of saturated fat in processed meat products is 
an urgent challenge for the meat processing industry.
15.2.2 Mono and Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids
Along with the reduction of saturated fat intake, the reformulation of the 
lipid profile of processed foods has stood out as one of the main strategies 
to produce healthier products, once the MUFAs and PUFAs have specific 
functions in the human diet and the balanced intake results in physiological 
benefits.
Oleic acid (C18:1 ω -9) is the main fatty acid present in the diet, corre-
sponding to approximately 45% of total fatty acids that make up most of the 
processed meat products. According to Keys et al. (1965) and Mattson and 
Grundy (1985), total plasma cholesterol levels decrease around 2.7 mg/dL for 
each 1% calories from diet when oleic acid (C18:1) is ingested in place of SFA, 
exclusively due to a reduction in the LDL fraction, with no changes in high-
density lipoprotein (HDL).
Although most of the fatty acids can be synthesized by the organism, the 
precursors of the ω -6 and ω -3 PUFAs are considered essential, since they 
cannot be endogenously produced in humans and some animals due to 
deficiency of certain enzymes known as desaturases, which are capable of 
inserting double bonds at the Δ12 and Δ15 positions (Moreira et al., 2002).
The intake recommendations for these essential fatty acids are due to the 
main benefits associated with eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexae-
noic acid (DHA), resulting from the conversion of linoleic acid (w6) and 
α -linolenic acid (w3), including anti-inflammatory action (Vedin et al., 2008; 
Furuhjelm et al., 2009), cardiovascular protective effect (Kris-Elherton et al., 
2002), reduced risk of depression (Appleton et al., 2010), delay in the onset of 
degenerative diseases caused by aging (Dangour et al., 2012), reduced risk for 
certain types of cancer, and promotion of adequate fetal development and 
improvement of baby’s cognition (Dunstan et al., 2008).
With regard to the cholesterolemic effect, the replacement of SFAs by 
PUFAs has been reported in several studies as a very effective way to lower 
plasma cholesterol levels in humans, although this effect is still unclear 
(Lamarche and Coture, 2014) and varies according to the ω -6 and ω -3 fami-
lies. For many years, linoleic acid (C18:2) was recommended for a healthy 
diet due to its effectiveness in reducing cholesterol levels. However, in 
humans, a high linoleic acid (C18:2) intake can reduce HDL levels (Mattson 
and Grundy, 1985) and increase the risk of gallstone cholesterol (Sturdevant 
et al., 1973). On the other hand, high concentrations of ω -3 fatty acids may 
reduce plasma triacylglycerides, which may be responsible for reduction of 
the risk of cardiovascular diseases. Omega-3 PUFAs blood levels have been 

465
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
associated with reduced risk of cardiovascular disease in epidemiological 
studies due to their protective antiarrhythmic, anti-inflammatory, hypo-
tensive, and hypocholesterolemic effects (Balk et al., 2006; Harris and Von 
Schacky, 2004). Although the benefits of ω -3 fatty acids on cardiovascular 
diseases are unclear or referring exclusively to the metabolic transforma-
tions of EPA (C20:5) and DHA (C22:6) (Barceló-Coblijn and Murphy, 2009), 
the ω -6/ω -3 ratio has become increasingly important in human nutrition, 
with a recommended ratio of 5:1 or less (Simopoulos, 1999; Schaefer, 2002; 
Chardigny et al., 2001; Kris-Etherton et al., 2000). However, the ω -6/ω -3 ratio 
has reached alarming proportions, being higher than 20:1 (Simopoulos, 2004) 
probably due to the low concentration of ω -3 in foods, suggesting strategic 
reformulations with enrichment with this nutrient.
15.2.3 Meat Products as a Fat Source
The fat content in lean meats is generally less than 5%. However, as a rule, 
besides the fatty cuts, pork back fat is a key ingredient for the development 
of texture and flavor in meat product formulations. Meat fats contain less 
than 50% SFAs and above 50% unsaturated fatty acids (50%–52% bovine, 
55%–57% swine, 70% chicken, and 62% rabbit). Although meat contains cho-
lesterol levels less than 75 mg/100 g, except kidney, brain, and heart (Jiménez-
Colmenero et al., 2001), these levels are higher in processed meat products.
In meat products, the lipid content depends on both the proportion of fat in 
meat raw materials and mainly the amount of fatty cuts and back fat added 
to the formulations during processing. Although traditionally meat products 
contain between 20% and 35% total fat, fermented meat products such as dry 
fermented sausages can contain up to 45%–50% (Pearson and Gillett, 1996; 
Jiménez-Colmenero, 1996).
Emulsified meat products vary widely in their fat content, with mean percent-
ages of 20%–35%. More popular products that contain less noble raw materials 
such as mechanically separated chicken, organ meats, and skin permitted 
by law are characterized by higher fat contents. The meat matrix stabilized 
by myofibrillar proteins as gelling agents and emulsifiers, as well as addi-
tives such as phosphates and extenders (starch and protein derivatives), can 
provide high fat levels in the network. These products are the target of studies 
to develop new strategies for fat reduction and reformulation of lipid profile.
In fermented meat products, after the fermentation, the drying stage 
allows important proteolytic and lipolytic reactions, with weight losses that 
can reach up to 45%–50%, which increases the fat content, making these 
products the most caloric within this category. However, this characteristic 
is expected and determines the identity and quality standards for the dif-
ferent categories produced worldwide. On the other hand, for using whole 
cuts in its manufacture, raw ham requires an adequate meat toilet in the 
food processing to completely remove the fat covering from the shank, will 
have its fat content defined by the intermuscular fat (marbling). High-quality 

466
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
standards have established adequate fat contents to control the lipolytic and 
proteolytic reactions.
Restructured meat products have physical characteristics that allow the 
use of fat cuts, leading to great variations of fat content, in addition to losses 
of functional quality. These characteristics highlight the complexity of reduc-
ing fat in different meat products from a technological and sensory point of 
view to minimize the changes that can lead to a product’s rejection.
15.3 The Role of Fat in Processed Meats
Fat is one of the main constituents of meat and processed meat products, 
mainly affecting the sensory (flavor, juiciness, texture), physicochemical and 
technological characteristics (batter stability and shelf life, viscosity, yield), and 
microbiological safety, since it contributes to the reduction of water activity 
in certain processed products (Jiménez-Colmenero, 2000; Pearson and Gillett, 
1996). Some of the most important functions are briefly discussed below.
15.3.1 Texture
One of the most important attributes of fat in processed meat products is its 
recognized role in texture properties, as it strongly affects the homogeneity, 
chewing, hardness, cohesiveness, crispness, and creaminess of the processed 
product (Drewnowski, 1997). In reduced-fat products, the texture character-
istics are defined according to the technological strategy used, including the 
type of processing (emulsion formation, fermentation/dehydration, raw mate-
rial injection/restructuring systems, baking systems), cooking, type of pack-
aging, expected shelf life, raw materials, and fat substitutes, among others.
Several studies have shown a modification of the texture profile when using 
different types of fat substitutes in meat products (Mendoza et al., 2001; García 
et al., 2002; Cáceres et al., 2004; Nowak et al., 2007; Fernández-López et al., 
2008; Salazar et al., 2009). In addition, when water is used to compensate for 
the reduced fat, the products tend to become stiffer and firmer, showing yield 
loss and changes in physicochemical, microbiological, and sensory stability. 
In fermented meat products, the decrease in fat levels provides a rubber-like 
texture (Keeton, 1994) and the external appearance of the fermented sausage, 
for example, is impaired by a wrinkled and hardened surface (Muguerza et 
al., 2002). Many studies have pointed out that the reduction of lipid content 
above 20% may result in an unacceptable product to the consumer due to tex-
ture defects, mainly accompanied by changes in flavor and appearance, short 
shelf life, and palatability defects (Yang et al., 2001).
In emulsified meat products, the reduction of saturated fat and/or refor-
mulation of lipid profile by the addition of vegetable oils reduces emulsion 

467
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
stability, leading to loss of juiciness and liquid release during the shelf life 
of the products, with serious consequences on microbiological safety. In 
restructured products such as hamburgers, the cooking losses increase sig-
nificantly, and texture is the most affected parameter (Yang et al., 2001), lead-
ing to rejection by consumers.
15.3.2 Flavor and Taste
In addition to texture, flavor and taste can also be altered by the fat reduction 
in meat products. The fat is responsible for the development of a charac-
teristic flavor, which depends on several factors, including the composition 
of the animal raw material, processing steps, heat treatment, fermentation 
and drying stages, storage conditions, and packaging. The components that 
make up the lipid fraction can interact with amino acids, sugars, and miner-
als in desirable or undesirable reactions involving or not heat treatments. In 
fermented and/or ripened meat products, fat has a highly relevant role in the 
lipolysis reactions that define, along with proteolysis, the characteristics of 
a particular product, which are also used to differentiate items of the same 
category around the world.
Fat in the meat products acts as a carrier of the compounds responsible for 
the aroma, stimulating some senses during the food ingestion. The quan-
tity, composition, and physical state are determining factors for a dynamic 
release of flavor components during consumption (Hort and Cook, 2007; 
Cierach et al., 2009).
The fat content is also related to the alteration of the perception of salinity, 
spicing, and smoking, which can drastically reduce the acceptance of these 
products when compared to traditional ones (Hughes et al., 1997; Chevance 
et al., 2000).
Reformulated meat products with replacement of animal fat (back fat) by 
vegetable oils require additional procedures, such as the use of herbs and 
spices to improve the final flavor (Tan et al., 2006; Pelser et al., 2007) and 
reduce the effects of a possible lipid oxidation. These reactions are particu-
larly relevant when fat is a precursor in the generation of volatile compounds 
(Jiménez-Colmenero, 1996).
15.3.3 Physicochemical Properties
Fat provides various physical characteristics in the meat products, with the 
development of specific functional properties. Thus, several factors includ-
ing crystallization capacity, changes in the melting point, and the hydropho-
bic interactions between meat components and water should be carefully 
evaluated in reduced-fat meat products.
In cooked meat emulsions, fat is associated with the formation and sta-
bility of the emulsion, improvement in the process yield, and increased 
water retention capacity, which directly interfere with the texture, color, 

468
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
and sensory acceptance of the processed products (Keeton, 1994; Jiménez-
Colmenero, 2000). These effects result from the interaction of the saturated 
lipid fraction with the myofibrillar proteins extracted during the comminu-
tion step, under an adequate ionic strength. After cooking and cooling, a 
stable network containing water, protein, and fat is formed (Pietrasik and 
Duda, 2000; Yoo et al., 2007; Hughes et al., 1997). This set of reactions affects 
both the sensory and physicochemical properties of the processed meat 
products.
The color attributes and the overall appearance are commonly altered 
in reduced-fat meat products. Many studies have reported the develop-
ment of darker coloring, probably due to the greater yield loss caused 
by the fluid exudation accompanying this cycle of events, as previously 
described in the texture changes, which make the products drier, harder, 
and more elastic (Cierach et al., 2009). The physicochemical changes may 
also affect the microbiological stability, since the liquid released from 
improperly conducted reformulations may accelerate the development of 
spoilage microorganisms in emulsified and restructured injected meats 
(Pearson and Gillet, 1996; Keeton, 1994), leading to short shelf life and neg-
ative effects on appearance. Some authors have suggested that reducing 
the fat content in meat products by more than 10%, especially in emulsi-
fied products such as sausages, leads to a reduction of palatability, besides 
increasing hardness and depreciating taste and aroma (Claus, 1991; Rust 
and Olson, 1988).
In fermented sausages, fat regulates the continuous water release from 
the inner layers of the product during the manufacturing process, which is 
very important for effective fermentation and drying. Thus, the fat reduction 
in fermented products provides greater weight loss since lean meat has a 
higher moisture content when compared to pork back fat, which is the most 
common fat source used in traditional formulations (Muguerza et al., 2002; 
Papadima and Bloukas, 1999).
The fat composition in meat formulations is a determining factor in the 
physicochemical properties of the processed products. Due to the higher 
melting point of certain animal fats, especially pork back fat, which is 
widely used in a variety of meat products, the reduction of total fat contents 
or their partial substitution by more unsaturated fats can lead to techno-
logical problems, probably due to a reduction in viscosity of the reformu-
lated batters.
Heat treatment is another common operation in the manufacturing of 
emulsified products, and its extent can be affected by the reduced fat in the 
formulations. When fat is partially replaced by water, processing changes are 
required, including a longer cooking time for these products to reach the same 
internal temperature as conventional formulations. However, the increase 
in the cooking time or temperature to guarantee microbiological safety can 
change the palatability of the processed product (Jiménez-Colmenero, 2000), 
thus significantly affecting the product’s acceptance (Giese, 1996).

469
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
15.3.4 Perception of Satiety
From the physiological point of view, fat is responsible for several sensory 
impressions that include pleasure, overall palatability and, among the most 
recently studied, the feeling of satiety. Meat products are characterized by 
a high satiety index, largely due to their high fat content. The development 
of reformulated products with fat reduction with equivalent satiety index, 
that is, those products with greater capacity to inhibit appetite for a longer 
period after consumption, would attract the interest of industry and con-
sumers (Halford and Harrold, 2012), constituting an additional technological 
challenge.
Satiety is the feeling of fullness that persists after eating, suppressing 
further consumption of food. Factors affecting satiety can be character-
ized according to cognitive, postingestion, and postabsorption sensory 
impressions. Initially, sensory and cognitive factors influence expectations 
about the food to be consumed, including aspects such as flavor, texture, 
and aroma or associations with previous experiences. As the food or drink 
reaches the stomach, postingestion effects begin. First, the distension of the 
stomach sends signals to the brain, initiating the sensation of satiety. As the 
digestion process continues in the intestines, hormones that promote satiety 
are released at this location. In the postabsorption stage, the nutrients are 
detected by specialized receptors in various parts of the body, including the 
brain, providing information on nutritional status that can also affect satiety 
(Blundell, 2006).
In this context, fat reduction should be accompanied by a product refor-
mulation that produces physiological effects on satiety, constituting an 
additional challenge. Fibers are considered as suitable vehicles to fulfill this 
objective since they increase volume and weight due to their great water 
absorption capacity, and trigger gastric and postgastric mechanisms that 
send signals from the stomach to the brain, leading to the perception of sati-
ety (Slavin, 2005).
Therefore, studies on soluble and plant-derived fibers such as mucilages 
should gain a foothold among advanced research in reducing fat in meat 
products. Reducing fat levels and preserving the perception of satiety of 
meat products is among the key challenges that must be achieved in obtain-
ing healthier products.
15.4 Strategies for Reducing Fat in Meat Products
Despite the technological and sensory challenges, the development of meat 
products with reduced fat content is an irreversible trend in the indus-
try worldwide. The use of substitute ingredients and the development of 
new processing technologies may be effective alternatives to maintain the 

470
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
identity of the reduced-fat meat product (Mendoza et al., 2001; García et al., 
2002, Weiss et al., 2010).
The strategies for fat reduction vary for each category of products, 
according to their specific characteristics (raw materials, ingredients, pro-
cessing aids, packaging, etc.). In addition, the sensory characteristics of the 
reformulated product should be accepted by the consumer, who can reject 
products with altered identity and quality standards. For a successful fat 
reduction in meat products, each category of processed product requires a 
substitute and/or manufacturing method that results in appropriate tech-
nological properties with low impact on overall quality. Nutritional factors, 
technological properties (lower water retention capacity), cost, acceptance, 
convenience, legislation, and marketing should also be considered. Some 
strategies to improve the lipid profile of processed meat products are 
described below.
15.4.1 Simple Fat Reduction and Selection of Lean Meat Cuts
One of the most common strategies to reduce fat in processed meat products, 
in a simple way, consists in the selection of leaner meat cuts, adipose tissue 
removal, and use of raw materials from animals fed diets aiming at the mod-
ification of fatty acids composition (Decker and Park, 2010; de Oliveira Faria 
et al., 2015). Although this reformulation is one of the pioneers in the devel-
opment of low-fat meat products, some critical points should be investigated.
The selection of lean cuts and the reduction of the energy value cannot 
guarantee a better nutritional profile of the final products. According to 
Novakofski et al. (1989), the composition of the lean pork portion was not 
affected by a good meat toilet before grilling, due to the presence of the mar-
bled fat in the cuts studied. In general, meat contains an approximate PUFA/
MUFA ratio of 0.1, indicating an unbalanced fatty acids intake (Webb and 
O’Neill, 2008). On the other hand, the pork back fat, which is the main com-
ponent to be reduced, has a PUFA/MUFA ratio of 0.4 more favorable when 
compared to the use of meat as a fat substitute in the formulation (Bernardi 
et al., 2016). In addition, the w6/w3 ratio, which is important to ensure many 
health benefits, is quite inadequate in meat and meat products, thus the con-
sumption of foods that can improve this ratio has been widely recommended 
(Valencia et al., 2007).
Another limitation to reduce fat in meat products is the use of cuts without 
marbling, which implies the selection of a few parts of the carcass, mainly 
pork, which may not be economically feasible due to the high cost.
In addition to nutritional and cost constraints, simple fat reduction and 
the increase in meat content to compensate for fat in emulsified meat prod-
ucts gives rise to negative changes in appearance, flavor, and texture, such as 
increased red color intensity and hardness (Weiss et al., 2010). The safety of 
the product should also be considered when some of the fat is replaced with 
water and lean meat since the product’s stability can be compromised.

471
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
15.4.2 Use of Fat Replacers
Many ingredients of different chemical classes can be used as fat replacers in 
processed meat products. Its ranking varies greatly since some compounds 
have more than one specific property to define it. In essence, for an ingredi-
ent to be considered a fat replacer, it should contribute a minimum of calories 
without drastically altering the sensory and functional characteristics of the 
product, in addition to being in compliance with the current legislation and 
having a low cost (Hachmeister and Herald, 1998).
According to Akoh (1998), fat replacers can be classified into two groups. 
The first are fat substitutes, defined as macromolecules that resemble triac-
ylglycerols in the physicochemical aspect, that can theoretically replace fat 
in foods, by weight. They are chemically synthesized or derived from con-
ventional fat or oils by enzymatic modification and must be stable on cook-
ing and freezing. Second are fat mimetics, defined as substances that mimic 
the sensory or physical properties of triacylglycerols, but cannot replace by 
weight. They are made from proteins or carbohydrates present in common 
food components, which undergo physicochemical modifications to provide 
the fat characteristics. In general, these ingredients have no stability to freez-
ing and heating at high temperatures, due to their high water-binding ability.
The wide variety of fat replacers available in the market can be commer-
cially classified into protein extenders (high protein) and nonprotein extend-
ers (high carbohydrate). Protein extenders contribute to increased water 
retention, gelling, and emulsification of fats, whereas the nonprotein extend-
ers contribute significantly to a higher water retention capacity and are less 
involved in fat emulsification (Lucca and Tepper, 1994; Brewer, 2012). The fol-
lowing sections discuss fat replacers according to their importance as com-
monly used ingredients, as well as those that represent nutritional trends 
with respect to healthier calories and calorie reduction.
15.4.2.1 Gums
Gums are high-molecular-weight carbohydrates classified as hydrocolloids, 
used as thickeners and/or gelling agents in various meat products, generally 
in low concentrations. The gums most commonly used in low-fat meat prod-
ucts include carrageenan, agar, alginate, gum arabic, galactomannan (guar 
gum and locust bean), and xanthan gum, because of their water retention 
properties (Candogan and Kolsarici, 2003). Although some authors classify 
these compounds as soluble fibers, this chapter assesses them as a differenti-
ated item, considering their technological relevance and citation in works in 
the literature.
Carrageenan gum has been widely used as a fat substitute and consists of 
a group of sulfated polysaccharides extracted from various red algae formed 
by three major kappa, iota, and lambda fractions. The kappa and iota frac-
tions form thermoreversible gels, while the lambda fraction does not form a 

472
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
gel. Because of its ionic nature, the formation of kappa and iota carrageenan 
gel is strongly influenced by the presence of electrolytes, showing synergy 
with other gums. The kappa carrageenan and calcium ions form a rigid, ther-
moreversible, and highly resistant gel; in contrast, an elastic gel is formed 
with potassium ions. The iota carrageenan produces a flexible gel, stable to 
freezing, and forms an elastic gel in the presence of calcium ions (Shand et 
al., 1990). The functional properties of carrageenan include the water reten-
tion capacity and better slice ability, constituting an excellent fat substitute 
(Bater et al., 1992; Brewer, 2012; Egbert et al., 1991; Trius et al., 1994; Cierach et 
al., 2009); thus, it has been applied in a broad category of meat products such 
as hamburgers, sausages, and hams.
Galactomannans (guar gum and locust) can be used as fat substitutes for 
their ability to control viscosity through water retention, which is relevant 
in low-fat products that do not form gels (Setser and Racette, 1992). Guar 
gum produces solutions with high viscosity, with good stabilizing effect and 
water retention capacity. It confers greater juiciness and creaminess to meat 
products as it is able to interact synergistically with xanthan gum. Locust 
gum is soluble in cold water with a maximum viscosity at 95°C, which limits 
its use in meat products, other than when used in combination with other 
gums, for example, xanthan gum, when it forms very elastic gels after heat-
ing and cooling (Symes, 1980). Lurueña-Martínez et al. (2004) showed that 
a blend containing xanthan gum and locust gum was effective in reducing 
fat of Frankfurt sausages, reducing cooking losses, and improving emul-
sion yield and stability, due to its ability to form hydrogen bonds with water, 
without affecting the sensory properties of the product.
Several other hydrocolloids derived from algae can be used to stabilize 
meat batters. Jiménez-Colmenero et al. (2010) used edible algae, and Konjac 
used algae derivatives as fat substitutes in sausages and found that the emul-
sion stability was dependent on the replacement ratio. That study demon-
strated that a fat substitution up to 15% showed no visible changes in the 
sensory quality of sausages.
15.4.2.2 Starch Derivatives
Starch is one of the most widely used ingredients in meat processing due 
to its extensor properties, low cost, and high availability in the production 
chain. Its properties include increased water retention capacity, reduction of 
cooking losses, emulsion stabilization, positive effect on the texture of some 
meat products, and cost reduction, among others (Carballo et al., 1995; Claus 
and Hunt, 1991; Khalil, 2000; Lyons et al., 1999).
This ingredient is composed of two main fractions, amylose and amylo-
pectin, but its main gelatinization property depends mainly on the content 
of the amylose component, responsible for forming hydrogen bonds for 
the construction of the three-dimensional network and the water retention 
capacity. After gel formation and cooling, the retrogradation of the starch 

473
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
gels is a phenomenon commonly characterized by the reassociation of the 
gelatinized molecules, causing water release known as syneresis and forma-
tion of precipitates that can reduce the quality and safety of vacuum-packed 
and sliced products. The intensity of the retrogradation depends on the amy-
lose content in each type of starch, increasing in the following order: cassava 
> rice > potato > maize > wheat (Murphy, 2000).
Starches may undergo chemical or physical modifications such as acid 
or enzymatic hydrolysis, oxidation, dextrinization, cross-linking, or mono-
substitution to alter their functional properties, becoming ingredients widely 
used in different segments of food processing (Shand et al., 1990).
Native potato and cassava starches have limited dispersibility in cold water 
and are applied in emulsified products to reduce cooking losses, and increase 
yield and shelf life, whereas the modified potato starches produce a firm 
texture gel with potential application in injected, tumbled, and marinated 
meats, with a strong synergistic effect with soybean proteins. Regarding cas-
sava starch, Hart and Price (1993) also observed an increase in the juiciness 
of low-fat cooked meat products, probably due to the greater water retention 
capacity. Rice starch is characterized by its more neutral flavor.
Maltodextrin, resulting from the partial hydrolysis of corn or potato 
starch, is also considered Generally Recognized As Safe (GRAS) and pres-
ents a great application in meat systems requiring increased viscosity, partic-
ularly in emulsified products, since it does not gel, favoring filling operations 
(Akoh, 1998).
15.4.2.3 Protein-Based Fat Replacers
Protein-based fat replacers can be from milk, egg, whey, or plant proteins 
(Giese, 1996). Some of these proteins are microparticulate (denatured by heat-
ing) and form microscopic coagulated round particles that mimic the mouth 
feel and texture of fat, providing lubricity and better palatability (Roller and 
Jones, 1996). Low-molecular-weight proteins can develop fat-like physical 
properties and favorably modify the texture of a lipid-lowering product.
The most commonly used fat substitutes in the meat industry are soy pro-
tein isolates, concentrates, and texturized soy protein; defatted milk pow-
der, caseinates, and whey proteins; and wheat flour and gluten. Flours (50% 
protein) and concentrates (70% protein) are used at levels of 3%–5% (on dry 
basis), while the isolates (90% protein) are limited to 2% of the total formula-
tion. Each country has regulatory standards to control these percentages and 
to curb fraud by reducing the content of meat raw materials while maintain-
ing the protein content in a particular meat product.
The use of by-products of the meat production chain such as porcine and 
bovine skin gels has been explored as potential fat substitutes to add value to 
the meat and meat production chain since they constitute rich sources of col-
lagen (Alves et al., 2016). Pintado et al. (2016) evaluated different strategies for 
the incorporation of chia flour (10%) and olive oil in frankfurters and found 

474
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
an increase in fiber and linolenic acid levels, reduction of purge losses, and a 
26% reduction of fat in all samples.
15.4.3 Use of Fibers as Functional Ingredients and Fat Replacers
Functional ingredients have been recognized for their beneficial physiologi-
cal effects on human diet,  and are widely used to modify nutritional prop-
erties and aggregate healthier consistent appeals in many processed food 
products (Jiménez-Colmenero et al., 2001). Studies have shown changes in 
the nutritional profile of meat products as delivery vehicles for bioactive 
compounds (Zhuang et al., 2016; Alves et al., 2016; Turp, 2016), such as pheno-
lic compounds, flavonoids, PUFAs, prebiotics, and probiotics.
In addition to the high fat content of meat and meat products, one of the 
main complaints is the absence of fibers in their composition. The World 
Health Organization has recommended that more than 55% of the energy 
consumed by humans come from carbohydrates, suggesting fibers as a part 
of food intake (Talukder, 2015). The American Dietetic Association recom-
mends the intake of 25–30 g of fiber/adult/day, or 10–13 g/1000 kcal, and the 
insoluble to soluble fiber ratio should be 3:1. In Europe, the recommendation 
is 20 g fiber/day/person (Borderías et al., 2005). The USDA and US Food and 
drug administration (USFDA) have established the consumption of 38 g fiber 
for men and 26 g for women (Mehta et al., 2015).
Thus, the use of plant fibers of different botanical origins to reformulate 
meat products may be a promising alternative, since they can make the prod-
uct healthier as a fat substitute and add value due to thier physicochemical 
properties (Weiss et al., 2010). In this context, dietary fibers can be very use-
ful for their technological properties in meat products, which briefly include 
(1) increasing water holding capacity, (2) fat binding capacity, (3) increasing 
viscosity, (4) gelling properties, (5) chelating effects, (6) fermentative capacity, 
(7) positive effects on texture and slicing, (8) stabilization in frozen products, 
and (9) prevention of deformation and shrinkage of restructured products 
during cooking (Fernández-López et al., 2008; Sendra et al., 2008; Campagnol 
et al., 2013; Choi et al., 2009).
15.4.3.1 Insoluble Fibers
The water solubility of dietary fibers is one of the criteria most used for its 
classification. Soluble fibers consist of pectins, gums, mucilages, alginates, 
beta-glucans, and some hemicelluloses, whereas insoluble fibers are repre-
sented by lignin, cellulose, and most hemicelluloses (Chawla and Patil, 2010; 
Brennan, 2005).
Insoluble fibers increase the volume of the fecal bulk, decreasing the 
time of intestinal transit, facilitating fecal elimination, and also contribut-
ing to glucose absorption and retarding the starch hydrolysis. This effect on 
intestinal regulation makes them relevant to well-being and contributes to 

475
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
the reduction of the risk of various pathologies (Maffei, 2004; Brennan and 
Cleary, 2005; Mira et al., 2009).
Despite their wide availability, insoluble fibers require very careful stud-
ies for their application in meat products, since they may interact negatively 
with ingredients of the meat matrix, depending on the type of process used. 
Grittiness, loss of texture, and development of off-flavors are the most common 
defects, especially in emulsified and fermented meat products (Catalani et al., 
2003). On the other hand, the technological advantages are related to the high 
water and fat holding capacity, as well as cost reduction. Grains and their deriv-
atives, such as whole flours and bran, along with fruits and vegetables, are the 
main sources of dietary fiber and are among the most studied for application 
in meat products. Table 15.1 shows some of the major studies on the addition of 
insoluble fibers in meat products and the critical points of this reformulation.
TABLE 15.1
Insoluble Fibers from Cereals, Legumes, and Fruits as Fat Substitutes in Processed 
Meats
Insoluble Fiber 
Source (%)
Meat Product
Effects Resulted from Fiber Addition
Reference
Oat bran 
(5%–20%)
Meatballs
Lower total fat and trans-fatty acid 
contents, higher protein, salt and ash 
contents, lightness, yellowness, and 
lower moisture and redness. High 
acceptability.
Yilmaz and 
Dağlıoğ lu 
(2003)
Oat fiber (13%, 
45%)
Beef patties
Higher cooking yield and fat and moisture 
retention due to the water binding 
capacity of β -glucan. No changes in 
appearance, tenderness, and color.
Piñero et al. 
(2008)
Soy flour (5%), rice 
flour (5%)
Nuggets
Both soy flour and rice flour provided 
reduced oil absorption. Soy flour had the 
highest apparent viscosity and was 
found to be an effective ingredient in 
improving batters in crispness and color.
Dogan et al. 
(2005)
Oat bran (0%, 2%, 
4%, 6%)
Beef patties
No changes were observed for protein and 
fat. Reduction of moisture content in raw 
patties but increase in cooked patties with 
improvement of sensory quality.
Serdaroglu 
(2006)
Carrot fiber (3%, 
6%, 9%, 12%)
Sobrassada
Over 3%, the fermentation process in 
these samples was not successful and the 
textural parameters were critically 
affected. Only over 6% was the lipolytic 
process was influenced.
Eim et al. 
(2008)
Orange fiber 1% 
and 2%
Spanish 
salami
No changes during fermentation and 
dehydration stages, reducing residual 
nitrite.
Fernández-
López et al. 
(2008)
(Continued)

476
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
(Continued)
TABLE 15.1 (Continued)
Insoluble Fibers from Cereals, Legumes, and Fruits as Fat Substitutes in Processed 
Meats
Insoluble Fiber 
Source (%)
Meat Product
Effects Resulted from Fiber Addition
Reference
Cereal grain 
(wheat and oat) 
and fruit (peach, 
apple, and 
orange) 
(1.5%–3.0%)
Fermented 
sausage
Reduction of 35% energy value. Sensory 
and texture properties of sausages with 3% 
dietary fiber were not good, due to high 
hardness and cohesiveness value. The best 
results for organoleptic characteristics 
were obtained for 1.5% fruit fiber.
García et al. 
(2002)
Soy fiber 1% and 
2%
Brazilian 
salamis
No changes in global and technological 
properties up to 1% addition.
Campagnol 
et al. (2013)
Wheat fiber 
2.5%–5.5%
Hamburger
No changes in sensory properties
Mansour 
and Kalil 
(1999)
Rye bran 
2.1%–2.95%, oat 
bran 4.3%–6.0%, 
and barley fiber 
1.3%–1.7%
Sausages and 
meatballs
Rye bran was more suitable in meatballs 
due to its particulate nature; oat bran 
was the best alternative in low-fat 
sausages due to its gelling ability upon 
heating. The barley fiber (highest 
amount of soluble β -glucan) resulted in 
higher losses and the lowest firmness.
Petersson 
et al. 
(2014)
Apple pulp 8%, 
10%, 12%
Reduced 
sodium 
chicken 
nuggets
Increasing pH and dietary fiber content, 
redness, yellowness, and chroma index. 
Sensory evaluation showed significant 
reduction in texture, but overall 
acceptability of the treated samples, with 
scores in the range of very good.
Verma et al. 
(2010)
Wheat, rye, oat, 
and corn bran 
5%–20%
Meatballs
Decreasing in weight loss; overall 
acceptability decreased as bran content 
increased specially due to higher firmness; 
redness of meatballs gradually decreased 
and lightness increased as the level of oat 
bran increased from 5% to 20%.
Yasarlar 
et al. 
(2007)
Lemon albedo 
2.5%–10%
Bologna 
sausage
Good sensory acceptance of the fat-
reduction treatments. Sausages 
containing containing 2.5%, 5.0%, or 7.5% 
cooked albedo had similar sensory 
properties when compared to the control.
Fernández-
Ginés 
et al.  
(2004)
Barley flour (4%, 
7%, 10%)
v
Increase in cooking yield and moisture 
retention. The incorporation of 4% barley 
flour had higher flavor and texture 
scores when compared to 7% and 10% 
levels.
Kumar and 
Sharma 
(2004)
Wheat bran (5%, 
10%, 15%, 20%)
Meatballs
Lower total trans-fatty acids and higher 
total unsaturated fatty acids to total 
saturated fatty acids ratio. Samples with 
wheat bran added were lighter and 
yellower than the control.
Yilmaz 
(2005)

477
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
Bran is among the most studied fibers. Rice bran is mainly composed of 
arabinoxylans and cellulose (Andersson et al., 2003), while oat and barley 
bran, in addition to their insoluble fractions, are rich in β -glucans, soluble 
fibers related to the reduction of plasma cholesterol when consumed regu-
larly (Beer et al., 1997).
Fibers from beets, soybeans, carrots, pears, apples, oranges, and peas, 
among others, have been studied as ingredients for the reformulation of 
meat products, especially in hamburgers and sausages (Table 15.1). In most 
TABLE 15.1 (Continued)
Insoluble Fibers from Cereals, Legumes, and Fruits as Fat Substitutes in Processed 
Meats
Insoluble Fiber 
Source (%)
Meat Product
Effects Resulted from Fiber Addition
Reference
Pea flour
Chicken 
nuggets
Higher emulsion stability up to 10% 
levels; decrease in moisture, protein, and 
fat contents and shear force value at 10% 
pea flour level. No significant changes in 
the sensory properties.
Singh et al. 
(2008)
Peach dietary fiber 
suspensions (17% 
and 29%)
Frankfurter
No changes in protein and collagen 
contents; increase of viscosity of the 
meat batters at two levels. Dietary fiber 
was effective in retaining water in the 
final product.
Grigelmo-
Miguel 
et al. 
(1999)
Tomato, beet root, 
and inulin (1%, 
2%, 3%)
Chopped 
chicken 
products
Increase of water-holding capacity and 
reducing in cook loss for tomato fiber; 
significant changes in color and texture 
parameters (higher hardness); tomato 
fiber reduced the extent of lipid 
oxidation.
Cava et al. 
(2012)
Chia (Salvia 
hispanica L.) 
(10%)
Frankfurter
Increase of total dietary fiber and 
minerals; reduction in fat and energy 
content (>265); lower purge; good 
sensorial acceptance and suitable for 
health claims.
Pintado 
et al.  
(2016)
Pea flour, 
starch-rich and 
fiber-rich 
fractions
Low fat 
bologna
Adding fibers improved the poor texture 
of low fat bologna sausage and 
increased water holding capacity. 
Consumer acceptance was not 
influenced, but pea fiber had lowest 
texture and flavor.
Pietrasik 
and Janz 
(2010)
Brown rice fiber 
(1%, 2%, 3%, 6%)
Pork meat 
emulsion 
systems 
with canola 
oil
Lower emulsion stability and higher 
cooking yield and hardness of meat 
emulsion systems were observed in all 
treatments. Partially replacing pork 
back fat with a mix of 10% back fat, 10% 
canola oil, and 2% brown rice fiber was 
most similar to the control with 30% 
pork back fat.
Choi et al. 
(2015)

478
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
applications, despite the good performance in the functional properties 
(Jiménez-Colmenero et al., 2001), some attributes such as flavor and texture 
can be negatively affected.
Various types of cellulose can be obtained industrially by different pro-
cesses and used as fat replacers. Microcrystalline cellulose is considered 
GRAS and noncaloric, contributes to a product’s consistency, and acts as 
emulsion stabilizers, besides controlling baking losses, and conferring vis-
cosity in emulsified products. Various commercial celluloses are available 
in the market, for example, Z-trim® and Oatrim®, obtained from oat, soy, 
corn, or wheat by-products, which have been widely used in meat products 
(Warner and Inglett 1997; Akoh, 1998, Campagnol et al., 2012).
One of the major challenges in the use of insoluble fibers is the sensory 
acceptance and the regulatory aspects that vary between countries since they 
can be considered fraud promoters due to their wide water holding capac-
ity. Insoluble fibers can be incorporated into restructured products such as 
hamburgers and nuggets, as they are compatible with the typical texture of 
such products.
15.4.3.2 Soluble Fibers
In general, soluble fibers have similar effects to the insoluble fibers in small 
intestinal transit, and consequently, reduce the rate of digestion and absorp-
tion of macronutrients, resulting in higher glucose tolerance and higher 
starch content available for colonic fermentation. They also indirectly affect 
the absorption of lipids by the organism, due to their capacity to sequester 
the bile salts (Roberfroid, 1993). Many studies have suggested that the great-
est physiological benefit of soluble fibers results from the action of short-
chain fatty acids, which, when in the bloodstream, reach the liver and/or 
peripheral tissues, causing a decrease in postprandial glycemia, thus reduc-
ing the free fatty acid levels (Trowell et al., 1976; Prosky and Hoebregs, 1999; 
AACC, 2001).
In addition to the solubility criterion, the fibers can be classified based 
on their physiological properties as digestible oligosaccharides (DOs) and 
nondigestible oligosaccharides (NDOs), according to the anomeric carbon 
in the monosaccharide, which makes them available or not for the hydro-
lytic activity of the digestive enzymes (Roberfroid and Slavin, 2000). Great 
prominence has been given to NDOs for their important physicochemical 
properties and health benefits, including the prebiotic effect due to their 
ability to stimulate the growth of Bifidobacteria (Saad, 2006; Mussatto and 
Mancilha, 2007; Finocchiaro et al., 2009; Monsivais et al., 2011). Some of the 
most important NDOs for use in meat products are inulin (IN), fructooligo-
saccharides (FOSs), resistant starch (AR), and polydextrose (PD), which are 
briefly described below; select applications  in processed meats are given in 
Table 15.2.

479
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
(Continued)
TABLE 15.2
Using FOS, IN, RS, and PD as Fat Replacers in Meat Products
Prebiotic Fiber
Product
Effects on Meat Products
Reference
FOS (3%, 6%, 9%)
Pepperoni
Reduction of 50% pork back fat 
without altering texture due to the 
ability of FOS to form a gel at the 
interface of meat and fat particles. 
Good sensorial acceptance and 
microbial stability.
Dos Santos 
et al. 2012
FOS (2%–12%)
Sausages
Reduction of 40% fat and 35% energy 
value; good acceptance scores for 
12% FOS; no changes in texture, pH, 
aw, and weight losses.
Cáceres et al. 
(2004)
FOS (2%, 4%, 6%)
Dry fermented 
sausage
50% and 80% fat reduction with good 
sensorial properties, but with few 
changes on texture and color as 
reduction of hardness and increase 
in lightness.
Salazar et al. 
(2009)
FOS (2.5% and 
5.0%)
Meatballs
No changes in the texture properties 
(2.5% and 5.0%); higher scores were 
observed for 2.5% regarding sensory 
properties when compared to the 
control without addition of FOS.
Ergönül et al. 
(2009)
IN
Mortadella
Reduction of up to 47.5% in energy 
value with use of 12% IN; increase 
in hardness and adhesiveness, dark 
color as negative effect.
Nowak et al. 
(2007)
IN (powder/gel) 
(2.5%–7.5%)
Mortadella
Powdered IN increased the hardness 
of reduced fat in sausages even at 
2.5% level while the gel form 
affected texture of product only at 
7.5% level. Although the sensory 
properties remained similar for all 
products, IN in the form of gel was 
preferred.
García et al. 
(2006)
IN (5%, 10%, 
15%, 20%)
Veal meatball
At 20% IN, significant changes in 
physicochemical properties. Lower 
sensory scores observed with 10%, 
15%, and 20% IN were due to 
hardness, low juiciness, and low 
flavor intensity. 5% level was found 
to be optimum.
Yilmaz and 
Geçgel (2009)
IN
Dry fermented 
chicken 
sausage + 
corn oil
No changes in the physicochemical 
and microbiological parameters and 
the product’s acceptability, but 
resulted in an altered texture profile. 
The products were stable during 
storage at 4°C for 45 days for 
physicochemical and microbial 
parameters.
Menegas et al. 
(2013)

480
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
(Continued)
TABLE 15.2 (Continued)
Using FOS, IN, RS, and PD as Fat Replacers in Meat Products
Prebiotic Fiber
Product
Effects on Meat Products
Reference
IN
Cooked meat 
batters
Better stability of emulsion with 
addition of water to replace fat, 
reduction of cooking losses when 
using the IN powder and greater 
creaminess and softness when using 
the gel form.
Álvarez and 
Barbut (2013)
IN
Comminuted 
meat 
products
Better softness and overall texture, 
emulsion stability, with no changes 
in sensory quality, improvement of 
lipid profile by substitution of pork 
back fat for vegetable oil.
Keenan et al. 
(2014)
IN
Low salt 
Pamplona-
style chorizo
The reformulated chorizo with olive 
alginate emulsion and 6% IN 
resulted in a product with 20% less 
fat than the control, 10% richer in 
MUFAs, and sensory properties 
similar to the traditional chorizo 
used as a control, achieving a good 
acceptability rating.
Beriain et al. 
(2011)
IN (7.5%–12.5%)
Dry fermented 
sausage
The IN led to a softer texture and 
tenderness, springiness, and 
adhesiveness very similar to that of 
conventional sausages. A low-
calorie product (30% of the original) 
was obtained with approximately 
10% IN without significant changes 
in sensory properties.
Mendoza et al. 
(2001)
PD + FOS + IN + 
RS (3% and 6% 
for each one)
Mortadella
Prebiotic fibers reduced the emulsion 
stability of mortadellas when 
cassava starch was suppressed from 
the formulations. There was a 
significant increase in softness. The 
gelation process of myofibrillar 
proteins occurred at lower 
temperatures when compared with 
control.
Felisberto 
et al. (2015)
PD
Nuggets
Increased juiciness and moisture with 
preservation of crispness after 
cooking.
Stowell (2009)
PD (5% and 10%)
Hamburger
Lower cooking losses and reduced 
firmness. Cohesiveness was similar 
to the control formulation (20% fat), 
even with the addition of PD in 
combination with potato starch, beet 
sugar, oat fiber, or pea fiber.
Troutt et al. 
(1992)

481
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
15.4.3.2.1 FOS and IN
IN is a soluble fiber, formed by fructose units joined by linear bonds with 
a terminal glucose unit, and can be found in several plants as an energy 
reserve, especially in chicory (Meyer et al., 2011). FOSs are oligosaccharides 
known as unconventional sugars that originate from plants, and their natu-
ral biosynthesis occurs in asparagus, beet, garlic, chicory, onion, wheat, bar-
ley, and rye (Spiegel et al., 1994; Wang, 2009). FOS can be produced either by 
enzymatic hydrolysis of IN or by transfructosylation of sucrose, consisting 
basically of linear units of fructose, with or without the final glucose unit 
(Passos and Park, 2003).
From the chemical point of view, there is no difference between IN and 
FOS: both are fructose oligomers whose monomers are joined by β -(2,1) gly-
cosidic bonds. However, while IN chains contain 2 ± 60 units, the length 
of FOS chains ranges from 2 to 10 units with an average degree of polym-
erization of four. The molecular weight and size of the chains of these two 
compounds are responsible for their different functional physicochemical 
properties. The long IN chain forms microcrystals when mixed with water. 
On the other hand, the FOS present short chains, which are hygroscopic, 
soluble, and have good water retention capacity (Niness, 1999).
Both IN and FOS travel through the upper intestinal tract and can be fer-
mented in the colon and selectively used by certain types of beneficial bacteria, 
such as Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus, reducing the number of undesirable 
bacteria, such as Clostridium and Escherichia. For these reasons, both fibers are 
considered prebiotic ingredients (Gibson et al., 1995; Tungland and Meyer, 2002).
TABLE 15.2 (Continued)
Using FOS, IN, RS, and PD as Fat Replacers in Meat Products
Prebiotic Fiber
Product
Effects on Meat Products
Reference
PD
Cod surimi
Cryoprotectant effect of myofibrillar 
proteins on cod surimi, due to the 
high availability of hydroxyl groups, 
which act on the hydrogen bonds 
with the protein chains, leading to a 
greater hydration of the protein 
chains and reducing aggregation.
Sych et al. 
(1990)
RS
Sausage
Addition of resistant starch led to an 
undesirable effect on the sensory 
properties and cooking yield, with 
increased hardness. However, an 
appropriate technological 
performance was observed when RS 
was combined with beta-glucan, 
contributing to the prebiotic appeal 
of the meat product.
Sarteshnizi 
et al. (2015)
FOS, fructooligossacharide; IN, inulin; MUFAs, monounsaturated fatty acids; RS, resistant; 
PD, polydextrose.

482
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Many studies have reported the use of IN and FOS as fat replacers in var-
ious categories of meat products, as shown in Table 15.2. They are highly 
stable, supporting pH above 3 and temperatures above 140°C (Bornet, 1994). 
FOS, in particular, can be used at higher levels because of its greater solubil-
ity when compared to IN (Dos Santos et al., 2013). In fermented products, 
FOSs do not undergo hydrolysis, preventing the development of foreign 
microorganisms during the fermentation process.
IN can be incorporated at high levels into emulsified meat products with-
out considerable sensory changes, acting as an excellent fat replacer. Because 
of its ability to form viscous gels, some technological problems can occur 
when IN is mixed with fat in the cutter, which can be minimized with a 
correct formulation and the order of addition of the ingredients. Flavor and 
objective texture measured by texture profile analysis (TPA) are the attri-
butes most affected in emulsified and fermented meat products. Although 
there are few studies in the literature, both FOS and IN can be components of 
brines in injected products aimed at the elaboration of healthier restructured 
meat products with fat reduction.
15.4.3.2.2 Polydextrose
PD is a compound formed by the polycondensation of approximately 89% 
D-glucose, 10% sorbitol, and 1% citric or phosphoric acid. Due to its gly-
cosidic bonds, the molecule has a complex and compact structure which 
resists enzymatic digestion in the body; it has a prebiotic effect and ensures 
a healthy and balanced intestinal microbiota, thus positively affecting the 
physiological functions (Stowell, 2009). Its mechanism of action is similar to 
that of the other soluble fibers such as pectins, β -glucans, and IN since they 
contribute to lower cholesterol levels and blood glucose (Montenegro et al., 
2008). PD also has a low energy value (1 kcal/g), low glycemic index, and 
evidence of reduced risk of colon cancer (Saad, 2006).
In some countries, it has achieved additive status due to its texturizing, stabi-
lizing, thickening, and humectant properties (Burdock and Flamm, 1999), which 
gives it favorable technological properties as a functional filler. In comminuted 
and restructured meat products, such as hamburgers, it can be used to replace 
fat without compromising flavor and aroma; this allows for the creation of low-
fat products with reduced energy value (Stowell, 2009) and increased juiciness 
that maintain the crispness of the product even after cooking.
15.4.3.2.3 Resistant Starch
Resistant starches are defined as compounds capable of resisting digestion 
by the small intestine, passing into the large intestine, where they act as a 
dietary fiber (Annison and Topping, 1994; Champ, 2004; Finocchiaro et al., 
2009) presenting a different behavior when compared to the conventional 
highly digestible starches. According to their resistance ratio, they can be 
classified into five types. Resistant starch type I (RS I) is physically inacces-
sible, since it is trapped in plant tissues, and is not susceptible to enzymatic 

483
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
hydrolysis, such as starches from whole grains; the resistant starch type 
II (RS II) is defined as native granular, occurring in raw grain and having 
type B polymorphism, such as potato, peas, and high amylose starches, also 
resistant to enzymatic hydrolysis; type III (RS III) is retrograded starch, that 
is, it has been cooked and cooled. All these types of starches can be found 
naturally or produced during processing, whereas resistant starch type IV 
(RS IV) is produced only by chemical modifications, providing linkages 
nondigestible by the digestive enzymes (Li et al., 2008; Adam-Perrot et al., 
2009). On the other hand, resistant starch type V (RS V), developed more 
recently, is formed by an amylose-lipid complex, for example, through the 
complexation of maize starch with high amylose and lipid contents (Hasjim 
et al., 2010).
This resistant portion of the starch passes through the colon and is used 
by microflora as energy for growth and fermentation, producing short-chain 
fatty acids (Champ, 2004; Hasjim et al., 2010), accompanied by a reduction of 
pH, increasing the blood flow of the colon, and reducing the development of 
abnormal cells, with effects on the reduction or in the treatment of colon dis-
eases, such as colon cancer and inflammatory diseases (Raigond et al., 2015). 
Studies have shown its effectiveness on the reduction of blood glucose lev-
els and absorption of nutrients, such as calcium and magnesium, due to the 
higher solubility of these minerals in the cecum and large intestine, which is 
promoted by the acidification induced by fermentation.
Some resistant starches are commercially available, for example, resistant 
starches type II (RS II), which include products with higher resistant starch 
levels and smaller particles. Hi-Maize® 260 is a high-amylose-resistant corn 
starch produced without chemical or enzymatic treatment, containing at 
least 60% dietary fiber. When subjected to moderate processes, its granules 
remain resistant and its organoleptic characteristics intact (Finocchiaro et 
al., 2009).
The performance of resistant starches as fat substitutes is due to the exten-
sor properties and low energy value. In addition, RS does not change the 
flavor, texture, and appearance of foods (Yue and Waring, 1998).
Carraro et al. (2012) have reported the technological benefits of using RS by 
replacing swine fat with RS II, which exhibited the best  performance among 
all resistant starches tested. Felisberto et al. (2015) evaluated the rheological 
properties of RS II as a substitute for fat and cassava starch and reported a 
loss of texture in bologna sausages with 50% reduction of pork back fat and 
the addition of 6% RS II. Although the emulsion stability of the meat bat-
ters was also affected, with higher liquid release after the cooking step, the 
products were considered quite stable. The authors suggested the use of an 
extender associated with the RS into less robust reformulations.
The use of resistant starches as fat substitutes in meat products should 
be investigated due to their prebiotic (Sajilata et al., 2006) and technological 
properties, including their swelling, gel-forming and water-binding capaci-
ties, and increased viscosity. In breaded products, resistant starches can act 

484
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
as a coating ingredient as predust and breader due to their crispness prop-
erty, providing an excellent opportunity to promote healthy approaches
15.4.4 Lipid Reformulation Using Vegetable Oils
The improvement of the fatty acid profile of processed meat products as well 
as the reduction of total fat and, mainly, saturated fat, has been the subject of 
much research and is a great challenge for the meat industry (Hur et al., 2008; 
Jiménez-Colmenero, 2007; Hoz et al., 2004; Ansorena and Astiasaran, 2004).
The addition of vegetable or marine oils to meat products is a relevant 
strategy to introduce a new source of PUFAs into the diet with a potential 
health benefit, since the body needs a balance between the consumption of 
saturated, monounsaturated, and PUFAs (López-López et al., 2009).
Vegetable oils reported in the numerous studies in the literature were 
selected for their sources of MUFA and PUFA (Pelser et al., 2007; Serrano 
et al., 2005). Although some of these oils have been used to increase MUFA 
levels, others have been used essentially to increase PUFAs, or more specifi-
cally ω -3, as observed for flaxseed oil (Ansorena and Astiasaran, 2004; Rubio 
et al., 2008). Table 15.3 shows some relevant studies on the improvement of 
the fatty acid profile in meat products. Olive oil, rich in oleic acid (C18:1), 
is one of the most studied vegetable oils, and is used in meat products to 
TABLE 15.3
Reformulating Lipid Profile of Meat Products by Adding Vegetable Oils
Authors
Processed 
Meat 
Product
Vegetable 
Oil/l/% Reduced 
or Replaced 
Animal Fat
Most Important Results
Muguerza 
et al. 
(2002)
Dry fermented 
sausages
Olive oil/10%, 20%, 
and 30% pork 
back fat
Changes in lightness and yellowness but 
the products had a high sensorial score 
for odor and taste for 20% olive oil. 
However, the appearance was just 
acceptable because the surface was 
wrinkled and case hardening had 
developed.
Kayaardı 
and Gök 
(2004)
Soudjouk 
(sucuk)
Pre-emulsified fat 
(soy protein 
isolate)/20%, 40%, 
and 60% of beef 
fat
Moisture, cholesterol, and pH decreased. 
No significant difference in appearance, 
texture, color, and general acceptability 
upto 40% olive oil. The highest TBA 
value was found with the 60% olive oil 
replacement. Oleic and linoleic acid 
contents were high while other fatty acid 
contents were low for the 40% and 60% 
olive oil samples compared with 
controls.
(Continued)

485
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
TABLE 15.3 (Continued)
Reformulating Lipid Profile of Meat Products by Adding Vegetable Oils
Authors
Processed 
Meat 
Product
Vegetable 
Oil/l/% Reduced 
or Replaced 
Animal Fat
Most Important Results
Lurueña-
Martínez 
(2004)
Frankfurters
Olive oil added to 
locust bean/
xanthan gum 
(0.5% and 
0.6%)/25% and 
40% pork back fat
The reformulation did not affect emulsion 
stability, jelly and fat separation, 
processing yield, cook loss, texture, and 
sensory characteristics.
Muguerza 
et al. 
(2003)
Dry fermented 
sausages
Pre-emulsified soy 
oil/15%, 20%, and 
25% of pork back 
fat
Significant increase in polyunsaturated 
fatty acids (25%) and reduction in 
saturated fatty acids. No increase in lipid 
oxidation. There were no considerable 
effects on hardness and springiness, 
color, and sensory attributes.
Severini 
et al. 
(2003)
Salami
Extra-virgin olive 
oil/33.5%, 50%, 
and 66.5% of pork 
back fat
Significant effects on water activity and 
texture. No changes in the shelf life 
regarding both oxidation and loss of 
organoleptic quality. The formulation 
with 5% olive oil (33%, 3% substitution 
of pork back fat) was judged best.
Ansorena 
and 
Astiasaran 
(2004)
Dry-
fermented 
sausages
Linseed/25% pork 
back fat
Increased P/S ratio from 0.4 (control) to 
0.6–0.7 (with linseed oil). The  n−6/ n−3 
ratio decreased from 14.1 (control) to 
1.7–2.1 in modified products as a 
consequence of the α -linolenic acid 
increment. No oxidation changes were 
detected during the ripening process.
Rodríguez-
Carpena 
(2012)
Porcine 
burger 
patties
Avocado, 
sunflower, and 
olive oils/100% 
pork back fat
Lowered percentage of SFA (from 36.96% 
to ~25.30%) and reduction of the 
atherogenic index (from 0.41 to ~0.24) 
and significantly lower amounts of lipid 
and protein oxidation products than 
control patties. Avocado oil contributed 
with specific aroma-active terpenes to 
patties and had a significant impact on 
particular color and texture parameters.
Tan et al. 
(2006)
Chicken 
frankfurters
Palm oil and palm 
stearin/chicken 
fat
Good emulsion stability and strong gels 
after heating; the increment of palm oil 
raised hardness, chewiness, and shear 
hardness; the reduction of CF in the 
formulation resulted in lower scores in 
chicken flavor, juiciness, oiliness, and 
overall acceptance of the frankfurters.
(Continued)

486
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 15.3 (Continued)
Reformulating Lipid Profile of Meat Products by Adding Vegetable Oils
Authors
Processed 
Meat 
Product
Vegetable 
Oil/l/% Reduced 
or Replaced 
Animal Fat
Most Important Results
Choi et al. 
(2009)
Meat 
emulsion 
systems
Olive, corn, 
soybean, canola, 
or grape seed, and 
rice bran 
fiber/66.6% pork 
back fat
Higher values for moisture, protein, ash 
content, uncooked and cooked pH 
values,  b*-value, hardness, cohesiveness, 
gumminess, chewiness, and viscosity 
compared with control containing 30% 
pork back fat. Decrease of cooking loss 
and better emulsion stability.
Youssef and 
Barbut 
(2009)
Comminuted 
meat 
products
Canola oil or 
pre-emulsified 
canola oil (soy 
protein, caseinate, 
or whey protein 
isolate)/25.0%, 
17.5%, and 10.0% 
beef fat
Canola oil or pre-emulsified treatments 
showed a positive effect on improving 
yield and textural parameters, but 
resulted in a significant reduction in 
redness and meat batters became darker. 
The pre-emulsification oil helps to 
produce more stable meat matrix.
Hur et al. 
(2008)
Pork patty
Virgin olive oil 
(isolated soy 
protein and 
carrageenan)/50% 
pork back fat
Reduction in water-holding capacity in 
treatments control and in those 
containing isolated soy protein and 
carrageenan, and increase in hardness in 
samples with virgin oil. Sensory 
evaluation scores were higher in control 
compared to virgin olive oil-substituted 
pork patty samples.
Paneras 
and 
Bloukas 
(1994)
Frankfurter
Olive, corn, 
sunflower, or 
soybean oils/100% 
pork back fat
Reformulated frankfurters (10% fat + 
different oils) had 67% lower total fat, 
40%–45% lower saturated fatty acids, 
50%–53% lower calories, reduced 
cholesterol, and 20% higher meat 
protein. They had a darker red color, and 
were 6%–7.2% lower in processing yield, 
but they were firmer and less juicy. The 
type of oil had no effect on these 
characteristics. Frankfurters with olive 
oil had 41.8% higher monounsaturated 
fatty acids and those with seed oils had 
5–7 times higher polyunsaturated fatty 
acids. Soybean oil negatively affected 
overall acceptability and shelf life due to 
the increased linolenic acid content.
(Continued)

487
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
partially replace pork back fat. Some authors recommend between 1 and 10 g 
of olive oil per 100 g of meatballs (Hsu and Yu, 2002), frankfurters (Lurueña-
Martínez et al., 2004), and dry fermented sausages (Muguerza et al., 2001; 
Severini et al., 2003). It was found that olive oil increases the MUFAs in meat 
products without significantly altering the ω -6/ω -3 ratio (Muguerza et al., 
2002; Ansorena and Astiasaran, 2004).
TABLE 15.3 (Continued)
Reformulating Lipid Profile of Meat Products by Adding Vegetable Oils
Authors
Processed 
Meat 
Product
Vegetable 
Oil/l/% Reduced 
or Replaced 
Animal Fat
Most Important Results
Valencia 
et al. 
(2008)
Fresh pork 
sausages
Linseed oil or fish 
oil added to 
natural 
antioxidants/15% 
pork back fat
Increase in α -linolenic, EPA, and DHA 
and no changes in lightness, but redness 
was lower after 7 days of storage. 
Reformulated cooked pork sausages had 
no effects in sensory properties, 
indicating a potential application to 
enhance nutritional properties.
Backes et 
al. (2013)
Italian-type 
salami
Emulsified canola 
oil/15% and 30% 
pork back fat
No changes in all treatments for pH, color, 
and Aw during manufacture process and 
storage period. The modified salamis 
had lower weight loss and in 
substituting 30% pork back fat, an 
elevation of lipid oxidation was 
observed. At 15% pork back fat 
substitution no effect was reported 
regarding the sensorial acceptance of the 
product for aroma, flavor, color, texture, 
and visual appearance.
Mora-
Gallego 
et al. 
(2016)
Nonacid 
fermented 
sausages
Sunflower oil + 
diacylglycerols/
pork back fat
Fat reduction higher than 70% compared 
with the standard fermented sausages; 
higher sensory ratings and improved 
texture for sunflower oil. Fermented 
sausages containing less than 12.5% of 
fat added of sunflower oil had a good 
overall sensory quality.
Delgado-
Pando 
et al. 
(2012)
Pork liver 
pâtés
Olive, linseed, and 
fish oils added to 
konjac gels/pork 
back fat
The increase of unsaturated fatty acid 
levels resulted in a higher level of lipid 
oxidation, despite the low values 
reported at the end of shelf life. The 
products were considered safe regarding 
biogenic amine contents of products 
during shelf life. No changes in 
microbial stability were observed in 
chilling storage.

488
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Other oils used to reformulate the lipid profile of meat products include 
sunflower, cotton, corn, soybean, peanut, linseed, and palm oils, which stand 
out by raising the MUFA and PUFA levels, reducing cholesterol, and improv-
ing PUFA/SFA and ω-6/ω-3 ratios (Paneras and Bloukas, 1994; Ambrosiadis 
et al., 1996; Hsu and Yu, 2002). Cotton and corn oils are very rich in PUFAs 
and contain high linoleic acid (C18:2 ω -6) levels (>56% total fatty acids). Their 
addition to meat products improves the PUFA/SFA ratio, with a negative 
effect on increasing the ω -6/ω -3 ratio (Paneras and Bloukas, 1994; Paneras 
et al., 1998). In most studies, these vegetable oils partially replaced pork back 
fat at levels up to 50%–100%.
Due to the technological and functional limitations of vegetable oils in 
liquid form, many studies recommend the incorporation of these compo-
nents in the form of pre-emulsions (Berasategi et al., 2011; Beriain et al., 
2011; García-Íñiguez de Ciriano et al., 2010; Rodríguez-Carpena et al., 2012; 
Jiménez-Colmenero, 2007). In emulsified products, the application of oil in 
liquid form may result in loss of functionality of the batter, with exudation 
losses, due to the low melting point, thus requiring a higher content of myofi-
brillar proteins to encompass all lipid content widely dispersed. In addition, 
oil in liquid form can negatively affect the emulsion forming and gelling 
properties. This phenomenon is also observed in fermented products, with 
an extensive oxidative deterioration when vegetable oils in liquid form are 
used in the formulations. In products subjected to high temperatures such 
as hamburgers and nuggets, the lipid fraction will be easily separated, with 
a loss of texture and sensory attributes.
The pre-emulsions used to overcome these technological problems are oil-
in-water type containing an emulsifying agent, generally a nonmeat protein, 
which results in increased stability during the shelf life of the product sub-
jected to processing and storage under adequate conditions (Djordjevic et al., 
2004).
Generally, sodium caseinate and soy protein isolate are the protein extend-
ers most commonly used in this type of reformulation, as listed in Table 15.3.
Regardless of the strategy of the addition of these components rich in 
MUFAs and PUFAs in the reformulation, many preliminary studies are 
required, since they can accelerate the lipid oxidation process, resulting in 
the development of off-flavor and toxic compounds due to the degradation 
of fatty acids (Jacobsen, 1999).
15.4.5 Use of Structured Lipids
Several strategies to reduce saturated fat and improve the fatty acid profile 
may result in defects and technological limitations associated with loss of 
flavor, aroma, juiciness, and texture, heat transfer problems, and other pro-
cessing operations as a function of the solid fats in these products. These 
challenges have focused on developing liquid oils restructured by different 
processes to form functional plastic fats with better technological performance 

489
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
(Continued)
TABLE 15.4
Ingredients Used in Emulsified Lipid Gels and Their Respective Effects
Ingredient
Effects
Concentration 
(%) (References)
Soy protein 
isolate
It forms a gel when subjected to heating and cooling, 
with protein participating in three distinct phases: 
denaturation, aggregation, and gelation. A preheating 
stage induces the molecular changes (unfolding of the 
protein structure and exposure of reactive groups), 
necessary to form the soluble aggregates. The initial 
pH of the solution should be sufficiently different from 
the isoelectric point of the proteins, and the ionic 
strength should be sufficiently low to avoid an 
immediate aggregation of the protein molecules 
during preheating. T required to form gel: >70°C. 
Isoelectric point: 4.5.
5.0%–10.0% (Pires 
Vilela et al., 2011; 
Lee et al., 2006; 
Delgado-Pando 
et al., 2010)
Inulin
It has different applications in the food industry, 
including gelling properties, increase in viscosity, 
improvement of organoleptic properties, and as a 
nondigestible fiber in meat products. It is water 
soluble, but dependent on the temperature and degree 
of polymerization. It is practically insoluble in cold 
water at T < 10°C. It is stable at high temperatures.
2.0%–10.0% 
(Herrero et al., 
2014; Felisberto 
et al., 2015)
Sodium 
caseinate
It is widely used due to its functional properties such as 
emulsification and water and fat holding capacity, as 
well as the thickening and gelling properties. It gives 
good stability to emulsions at neutral pH by 
combination of electrostatic and steric stabilization 
mechanisms. β -casein and α 1-casein, which together 
account for more than 75% of the total casein, are 
particularly disordered and substantially hydrophobic, 
and contribute to its rapid absorption during 
emulsification, leading to the rapid establishment of a 
thick and sterically stable layer that protects the newly 
formed droplets against flocculation and coalescence. 
Isoelectric point: 4.5. Stable at very high temperatures.
0.5%–5.0% (Lee 
et al., 2006; 
Jourdain et al., 
2008; Jiménez-
Colmenero et al., 
2010; Perrechil 
and Cunha, 2013)
Carrageenan
It is part of a group of water-soluble anionic sulfated 
polysaccharides that interact with proteins at pH 
above and below their isoelectric point. It can affect 
the characteristics of the formed gels, depending on its 
composition and type (number/position of sulfate 
groups and number of 3,6-anhydrogalactose rings per 
disaccharide). In emulsion gels, its stabilizing and/or 
emulsifying capacity is mainly due to the greater 
electrostatic repulsion from the interaction between 
the carrageenan (anionic polysaccharide) and the fat 
droplets coated by proteins. This interaction depends 
mainly on polymer concentration, pH, and ionic 
strength. It is subjected to gelation at temperatures 
> 65°C.
0.5%–1.5% 
(Jourdain et al., 
2008, Perrechil 
and Cunha, 2013; 
Poyato et al., 
2014)

490
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
and healthier characteristics when compared to the pre-emulsions previously 
discussed. Among the strategies to improve lipid profile emulsion gels have 
been used as fat substitutes in emulsified meat products. (Jiménez-Colmenero 
et al., 2015; Delgado-Pando et al., 2010).
An emulsified lipid gel is defined as an emulsion containing a gel-like 
network structure with mechanical properties similar to that of a solid 
compound (Dickinson, 2012, 2013). Its development occurs briefly in two 
stages:
1. Formation of an oil + water emulsion containing a protein source 
as a surfactant by homogenization under high pressure or high 
speed (potent mixers, ultra-turrax, cutters), whose stability can be 
improved by the addition of other extender ingredients to the newly 
formed emulsion.
2. Formation of a gel from the emulsion obtained in the first step, obtained by 
the aggregation of emulsion droplets or gelation of the continuous 
phase through an appropriate heat treatment. The transformation 
of the liquid state to the soft solid state of protein-based emulsions 
occurs during the processing steps, such as heating, acidification, or 
enzymatic treatment (Dickinson, 2013).
In meat products, the use of emulsified lipid gels is a very promising strat-
egy for fat reduction. Proteins, different hydrocolloids and functional ingre-
dients, with emphasis on sodium caseinate, whey proteins, soy proteins, 
gelatin, lecithin, carrageenan, and IN, among others (Jiménez-Colmenero 
et al., 2010; Delgado-Pando et al., 2010) have been evaluated as structuring 
agents in the development of lipid gels. Because many of these compounds 
have been used either as extenders in meat product formulations or as fat 
TABLE 15.4 (Continued)
Ingredients Used in Emulsified Lipid Gels and Their Respective Effects
Ingredient
Effects
Concentration 
(%) (References)
Pectin
Anionic polysaccharide composed of polygalacturonic 
acid and its methyl esters which can generate highly 
viscous or gel-like materials by heteroaggregation in 
systems with electrically charged colloidal particles 
(protein-coated fat droplets).
0.07%–0.67% 
(Simo et al., 2012)
Soy lecithin
Emulsifying agent with amphoteric character found in 
different natural sources, such as soybean and egg, 
composed by a mixture of phospholipids. It 
contributes as a stabilizing/gelling agent in systems 
with polar solvents (usually water); it is well accepted 
by the consumer and considered safe for consumption 
by the FDA.
0.5% (Lupi et al., 
2012)
FDA, Food and Drug Administration.

491
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
substitutes in single formulations, the potential use of these new ingredients 
becomes highly promising.
The proteins can be used as emulsifiers, gelling agents, and thickeners in 
the formation of lipid gels due to their ability to facilitate the formation and 
improve the stability of O/W emulsions. Several factors influence protein 
functionality throughout the lipid gel formation process, which is related to 
the solution conditions (pH, ionic strength, surfactants, biopolymers), inter-
actions of the ingredients, and process steps (heat treatment, cooling, freez-
ing, drying, homogenization, and mechanical agitation) (McClements, 2004). 
In inadequate conditions, proteins may suffer electrostatic repulsion, which 
can destabilize the meat system (Picone et al., 2011). Whey protein isolates, 
soy protein isolates, and gluten proteins have been extensively studied for 
this purpose.
In addition to proteins, other ingredients can be added to emulsion gels, 
especially hydrocolloids (polysaccharides), for their effects on texture and 
stability properties (Lal et al., 2006). The protein–polysaccharide interactions 
are mainly electrostatic and thus their intensity and strength are dependent 
on pH and ionic strength (Dickinson, 1994), which affects the emulsifica-
tion and gelling properties (Dickinson, 2012). The use of structured lipids in 
meat products containing substitute salts may affect the technological per-
formance of these compounds as fat substitutes and has been the subject of 
many studies.
In meat products, examples of polysaccharides to stabilize emulsion gels 
include alginate, IN, and carrageenan (Paradiso et al., 2015). Several factors 
can induce gelling of a hydrocolloid, including the addition of calcium ions 
(pectin, alginate), temperature reduction (agar, carrageenan, gellan), or 
increase in temperature (methylcellulose, hydroxypropylmethylcellulose). 
In starches, gelatinization occurs by heating, forming an opaque thermore-
versible gel during cooling. The control of syneresis is one of the points that 
deserves great attention. IN gels are formed by a network of small crystals 
of approximately 100 nm in diameter that aggregate to form clusters larger 
than 1–5 μm, which retain a large amount of water in the network. The 
properties of this network resemble a fat-in-oil crystal network. Due to this 
similarity, IN has been identified as an alternative ingredient for structur-
ing low-fat and fat-free products (Bot et al., 2004). Table 15.4 presents some 
of the gelling agents for gel formation and their potential application in 
meat products considering improvement in the nutritional properties in 
addition to fat reduction.
The emulsion gels may be a better alternative to mimic the hardness and 
water retention capacity conferred by pork back fat in meat products when 
compared to the O/W emulsions (Poyato et al., 2014). Various studies have 
reported the elaboration of emulsion gels based on olive oil, chia oil, and cold 
gelling agents (microblial transglutaminase, alginate, or gelatin) to replace 
saturated fat in emulsified products. As positive points, the authors stated an 
improvement in the fatty acid profile and reduction of saturated fat content 

492
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
by up to 50%. Very positive results on the oxidative stability, sensory perfor-
mance, and physicochemical properties have also been reported.
15.5 Challenges of Fat Reduction in Different Meat Products
Pork back fat is the fat source most widely used in different categories of meat 
products, representing one of the most suitable raw materials of meat prod-
ucts. It has a high melting point, differentiated texture, and distinct flavor 
characteristics due to its high SFA composition (Ospina-E et al., 2012), present-
ing excellent stability. On the other hand, “soft fats” or liquid oils have a high 
content of MUFAs and PUFAs, which can cause technological and sensory 
problems in meat products, affecting the appearance and slice ability, with a 
tendency toward lipid oxidation (Maw et al., 2003). Likewise, some sensory 
problems can take place when fatty cuts are replaced by lean cuts, affecting the 
texture, softness, and juiciness of meat products. Each product category has 
its specific challenges, making it necessary to know them for a senspory suc-
cessful lipid reformulations with stability and safety throughout the shelf life.
15.5.1 Emulsified Meat Products
Meat emulsions are obtained from a mixture of raw meat, fat/fat tissue, water 
in the form of ice, and various additives and ingredients (such as nitrite, salt, 
phosphates, and condiments), subjected to a reduction in particle size (cut-
ter comminution or high-pressure homogenization), processed in a single 
phase, stuffed into natural or artificial casings, and subjected to adequate 
heat treatment and cooling. Myofibrillar proteins are extracted by increasing 
the ionic strength in the presence of sodium chloride, which includes fat and 
water particles, forming a network stabilized by the gel formation during 
cooking and cooling. A wide variety of products consumed throughout the 
world belongs to this category, including bologna sausage, sausage, meatloaf, 
among others (Shimokomaki et al., 2006).
Fat reduction strongly affects emulsion stability, water-binding capacity, 
and gel formation, with negative effects on the quality of the final products. 
It is associated with various factors, such as fat particle size, emulsion pH, 
nonmeat ingredients, meat species (bovine, pork, or poultry), processing 
time and temperature, cooking method, etc. (Sorapukdee et al., 2013). The 
higher the fat reduction with partial replacement by water or vegetable oils, 
the greater the cooking losses, providing a very soft and sandy texture to the 
product (Sorapukdee et al., 2013). In formulations containing high levels of 
vegetable oil, higher protein concentrations are needed to recover the lipid 
content, keeping it in the net of the batter.
Carbohydrate-based extenders or proteins can be used in systems with 
partial replacement of fat by water, which contributes to stabilize the bound 

493
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
water, avoiding water release during cooking or storage. Such extensors, as 
previously discussed, may be hydrocolloids, fibers, or nonmeat proteins, 
but an inadequate selection can result in an increased size of the emulsion 
particles, darker color of the product, reduction of the meat flavor attri-
butes, and decrease in the shelf life, with loss of microbiological stability 
(Cengiz and Gokoglu, 2005). The major challenges are the maintenance of 
the identity of the traditional product, especially firmness and cohesive-
ness, as well as avoiding water release in the package during storage (Claus 
et al., 1990).
These technological challenges stand out in low-cost formulations contain-
ing high levels of mechanically separated chicken meat, which is a techno-
logical resource widely used in many countries and permitted by law. In 
this case, the lower supply of myofibrillar proteins and the higher fat content 
of the low-cost raw materials together with the prooxidant compounds that 
normally occur during the mechanical deboning impair the fat reduction in 
popular products.
15.5.2 Fermented Meat Products
A set of barriers is used to maintain the safety of fermented meat sausages, 
including water activity at around 0.90, a decrease in pH, and the addition of 
nitrite and salt (Leistner, 1992).
Whereas the drying stage leads to high water loss and concentration of 
other components, the fat reduction in fermented sausages, as is the case of 
dry fermented sausages, represents a greater challenge when compared to 
other meat products, concerning the physicochemical stability and sensory 
properties (Mendoza et al., 2001).
The major technological challenge of fat reduction in fermented sau-
sages is the maintenance of the characteristic texture, due to the addi-
tion of pork back fat. The fat content of the fermented sausages can reach 
up to 50% of the formulation after the drying stage (Wirth, 1988), which 
markedly affects the speed and water evaporation during the process. 
This is one of the reasons for the low sensory acceptance of fat-reduced 
sausages (Muguerza et al., 2002), due to the harder and more elastic tex-
ture with undesirable appearance caused by a greater weight loss and fat 
reduction (Muguerza et al., 2002). In addition, fat is responsible for the 
generation of volatile flavor and aroma compounds. Lipolysis has an 
important role in the generation of free fatty acids from the enzymatic 
hydrolysis, which are substrates for oxidation reactions, leading to the 
formation of compounds responsible for the aroma of the product (Lücke, 
1985; Verplaetse, 1994).
However, these defects can be minimized through adequate processing 
and correct control of moisture and temperature of the maturation chamber 
(Jiménez-Colmenero, 1996). Different types of packaging were also studied 
by Liaros et al. (2009) and Koutsopoulos et al. (2008) to improve the external 

494
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
appearance and to control the lipid oxidation improved by the addition of 
vegetable oils to dry fermented sausages with reduced fat content.
As regards the reformulation of lipid profile, some strategies suggest the 
use of vegetable oils in the form of pre-emulsions (Muguerza et al., 2002), 
which may be an additional challenge, once the pre-emulsions require the 
use of stabilizing ingredients, such as caseinates, soy protein isolates, car-
rageenan, etc., which can also interfere with the texture profile and sensory 
properties (Dickinson, 2013; Zóia, 2011).
15.5.3 Restructured Injected and Marinated Meat Products
Restructured injected meat products include hams, loins, perennis, canopy, 
turkey breast, and a series of ready-to-eat seasoned cuts. Generally, the fat 
reduction in such products occurs preferentially by the use of lean cuts, for 
example, cuts from the rear back portion of the animals. However, the search 
for healthier claims and lower costs (Brashear et al., 2002) suggests the use of 
functional ingredients as fat substitutes.
Fibers and a number of soluble hydrocolloids capable of interacting with 
the myofibrillar proteins, water, and fat portion are the preferred ingredi-
ents for reduction and/or partial replacement of fat in restructured prod-
ucts. Such compounds are introduced into the process through the steps of 
marinating, tumbling, and massaging, or simply in the injection step. The 
resulting effects are increased water retention capacity and higher protein–
protein interaction, with the advantage of shortening the processing time, 
and increasing the color uniformity, texture, fat distribution, and binding, 
especially when the injection stage is not conducted (Sheard, 2002).
In general, soluble fibers and hydrocolloids, maltodextrins, and cer-
tain additives such as phosphates are added to the brine in brine-mixing 
tanks, and then incorporated into meat cuts through marinate injectors. 
The retention of the functional compounds will depend on the compatibil-
ity between meat cuts and these ingredients and additives. The ingredients 
may be selected according to their solubility, dispersibility, and the viscosity 
at low temperatures. In most cases, brine should be kept at relatively low 
temperatures to increase muscle retention and process yield (Varnam and 
Sutherland, 1995) and to ensure microbiological safety. The main problem 
that can arise in the manufacturing of restructured products is the need to 
couple a blender to disperse the ingredients, particularly the starch deriva-
tives and soy protein, due to their longer dispersion, which may cause dif-
ficulties in cleaning the circuit the brine passes through. During cooking, 
the product should be kept stable, and the fat reduction should not promote 
the separation of the restructured cuts after cooling. When subjected to high 
temperatures, the gelation phenomenon occurs and the exudate liquid forms 
a film, which retains moisture, improving texture and juiciness (Varnam 
and Sutherland, 1995). However, a large release caused by functional ingre-
dients that don’t have suitable binding properties and reduction of saturated 

495
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
fat with a high melting point can seriously compromise the physicochemical, 
sensory, and microbiological stability of the products.
15.5.4 Restructured and Breaded Meat Products
Breaded meat products subjected to the frying process are among the most 
accepted by consumers since the oil introduced into the product confers 
special crispness, flavor, succulence, and aroma when replacing part of the 
water. However, excessive fat in the final product with an increase of up to 
one-third of the energy value leads to many nutritional restrictions.
According to Ordóñez (2005), the process of elaborating the breaded meat 
products consists basically of the following operations: (1) preparation of the 
meat matrix with particle size reduction (grinding of raw material) in the 
case of nuggets, blends of ingredients and spices, molding or marination for 
small cuts, and tumbling; (2) coating through a specific coating system; and 
(3) partial prefrying or total frying, freezing, and packaging.
The traditional breading system consists of predust, liquid mixtures (bat-
ter), and coating flours. The order of addition and use of these components 
may vary; there is no correct order and not all of these components are used 
(Bortoluzzi, 2006; GL, 2002; Uemura and Luz, 2003).
Strategies have been proposed to reduce the absorbed oil in the coating 
systems and meat batters (Huebner-Keese et al., 2016). According to Brannan 
et al. (2014), the phenomenon of oil absorption is explained by a series of 
events that include (1) replacement of water by oil (mass transfer) at tempera-
tures around 180ºC, (2) a cooling effect, when the fried product is removed 
from the hot oil with sudden drop in pore pressure, creating a vacuum effect 
that sucks the oil that adhered to the surface into the pores, and (3) triacyl-
glycerol degradation in the oil to more polar compounds (diacylglycerols, 
monoglycerides, free fatty acids, and glycerol) that act as surfactants, reduc-
ing the tension between oil and water, collaborating to increase oil absorp-
tion, particularly in aged oils.
Based on these events, many compounds have been added to the predust, 
batter, or breader to reduce oil absorption and to act as barriers, facilitat-
ing water release and reducing oil absorption, often as a consequence of 
reduced vapor escape during frying. Some compounds can favor the forma-
tion of thermally induced gels and alteration of the surface hydrophobicity, 
contributing to the reduction of fat absorbed during the frying process. In 
meat products, these compounds include sodium caseinate, whey protein 
concentrate, starch, methyl cellulose, xanthan gum (Altunakar et al., 2006), 
modified cellulose derivatives, PD, hydroxymethyl cellulose (Jamshidi and 
Shabanpour, 2014), pregelatinized rice flour, phosphorylated rice starch, 
pregelatinized acetylated rice starch, pectates, gelatin, and alginate esters 
(Sahin et al., 2005).
Functional ingredients such as soluble or insoluble fibers have also 
been used as excellent carriers in the batters of restructured breaded and 

496
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
nonbreaded products, such as hamburgers, in general as a model system to 
evaluate new fat substitutes.
15.6 Final Considerations
Fat reduction in processed meat products is one of the most important refor-
mulations aimed at promoting healthier consumption appeals, contribut-
ing to improve their nutritional value. Although these products are sources 
of proteins, liposoluble vitamins, essential fatty acids, and many minerals 
important for maintenance of a healthy diet, their high fat content, especially 
saturated fat, stimulate a negative perception of product quality by consumers.
However, the manufacture of reduced-fat meat products presents many 
technological, sensory, and safety challenges, since fat plays functions that 
cannot be easily replaced. The simple reduction of back fat, the main source 
of fat used in formulations, greatly affects the texture attributes, flavor, per-
ception of satiety, microbiological safety, and physicochemical stability, com-
promising the product’s quality.
Strategies, such as the use of fat replacers based on ingredients compatible 
with meat matrixes of processed products, restructured lipids, such as emul-
sion gels, and partial replacement with vegetable oils, are among the most 
studied alternatives to overcome the technological and sensory challenges 
in low-fat meat products.
The specific characteristics of each category of processed meat product, 
including the raw materials used, processing methods, packaging, and esti-
mated shelf life should be evaluated to obtain safe, stable, and well-accepted 
food products. Finally, simultaneous reformulations, such as sodium or 
phosphate reduction, can present additional challenges that can be overcome 
after careful selection of the manufacturing practices, the use of ingredients 
with functional properties compatible with the new meat matrix, and the 
competence to choose physicochemical and sensory methodologies to accu-
rately interpret the effects of lipid reformulation on consumers’ perception.
References
AACC. (2001). The definition of dietary fiber. Cereal Foods World, 46(3), 112.
Adam-Perrot, A., Gutton, L., Sanders, L., et al. (2009). Resistant starch and starch-
derived oligosaccharides as prebiotics. In: Charalampopoulos, D. and Rastall, 
R. A. (Eds.). Prebiotics and Probiotics Science and Technology. New York: Springer, 
volume 1, pp. 259–291.
Akoh, C. C. (1998). Structured lipids. In: Akoh, C. C. and Min, D. B. (eds.) Food Lipids 
Chemistry, Nutrition, and Biotechnology. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, pp. 699–727.

497
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
Altunakar, B., Sahin, S. and Sumnu, G. (2006). Effects of hydrocolloids on appar-
ent viscosity of batters and quality of chicken nuggets. Chemical Engineering 
Communications, 193(6), 675–682. doi:10.1080/00986440500194069.
Álvarez, D. and Barbut, S. (2013). Effect of inulin, β -glucan and their mixtures on 
emulsion stability, color and textural parameters of cooked meat batters. Meat 
Science, 94(3), 320–327. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2013.02.011.
Alves, L. A. A., dos, S., Lorenzo, J. M., Gonçalves, C. A. A. et al. (2016). Production of 
healthier bologna type sausages using pork skin and green banana flour as fat 
replacers. Meat Science, 121, 73–78. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2016.06.001.
Ambrosiadis, J., Vareltzis, K. P. and Georgakis, S. A. (1996). Physical, chemical 
and sensory characteristics of cooked meat emulsion style products contain-
ing vegetable oils. International Journal of Food Science and Technology, 31(2), 
189–194.
Andersson, R., Eliasson, C., Selenare, M., Kamal-Eldin, A. and Åman, P. (2003). Effect 
of endo-xylanase-containing enzyme preparations and laccase on the solubil-
ity of rye bran arabinoxylan. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 83(7), 
617–623. doi:10.1002/jsfa.1321.
Annison, G. and Topping, D. L. (1994). Nutritional role of resistant starch: Chemical 
structure vs physiological function. Annual Review of Nutrition, 14(1), 297–320. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.nu.14.070194.001501.
Ansorena, D. and Astiasaran, I. (2004). Effect of storage and packaging on fatty 
acid composition and oxidation in dry fermented sausages made with 
added olive oil and antioxidants. Meat Science, 67, 237–244. doi:10.1016/ 
j.meatsci.2003.10.011.
Appleton, K. M, Rogers, P. J. and Ness, A. R. (2010). Updated systematic review 
and meta-analysis of the effects of n-3 long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids 
on depressed mood. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 91(3), 757–770. 
doi:10.3945/ajcn.2009.28313.
Arihara, K. (2006). Strategies for designing novel functional meat products. Meat 
Science, 74(1), 219–229. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2006.04.028.
Backes, A. M., Nascimento Terra, N., Inês, L., Milani, G., De, A. P., Rezer, S. et al. 
(2013). Physico-chemical characteristics and sensory acceptance of Italian-type 
salami with canola oil addition. Semina: Ciências Agrárias, 34(2), 3709–3720. 
doi:10.5433/1679-0359.2013v34n6Supl2p3709.
Balk, E. M., Lichtenstein, A. H., Chung, M., Kupelnick, B., Chew, P. and Lau, J. (2006). 
Effects of omega-3 fatty acids on serum markers of cardiovascular disease risk: 
A systematic review. Atherosclerosis, 189(1), 19–30. doi:10.1016/ j.atherosclero-
sis.2006.02.012.
Barceló-Coblijn, G. and Murphy, E. J. (2009). Alpha-linolenic acid and its conversion 
to longer chain n−3 fatty acids: Benefits for human health and a role in main-
taining tissue n−3 fatty acid levels. Progress in Lipid Research, 48(6), 355–374. 
doi:10.1016/j.plipres.2009.07.002.
Bater, B., Descamps, O. and Maurer, A. J. (1992). Quality characteristics roasted of 
hydrocolloid-added turkey breasts. Journal of Food Science, 57(5), 1068–1070.
Beer, M. U., Wood, P. J. and Weisz, J. (1997). Molecular weight distribution and (1→3)
(1→4)-β -D-glucan content of consecutive extracts of various oat and barley cul-
tivars. Cereal Chemistry. American Association of Cereal Chemists, 74(4), 476–480. 
doi:10.1094/CCHEM.1997.74.4.476.

498
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Berasategi, I., Legarra, S., de Ciriano, M. G. et al. (2011). “High in omega-3 fatty acids” 
bologna-type sausages stabilized with an aqueous-ethanol extract of Melissa offi-
cinalis. Meat Science, 88(4), 705–711. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2011.02.035.
Beriain, M. J., Gómez, I., Petri, E., Insausti, K. and Sarriés, M. V. (2011). The effects of 
olive oil emulsified alginate on the physico-chemical, sensory, microbial, and 
fatty acid profiles of low-salt, inulin-enriched sausages. Meat Science, 88(1) 189–
197. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2010.12.024.
Bernardi, D. M., Bertol, T. M., Pflanzer, S. B., Sgarbieri, V. C. and Pollonio, M. A. 
R. (2016). ω -3 in meat products: Benefits and effects on lipid oxidative stabil-
ity. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 96(8), 2620–2634. doi:10.1002/
jsfa.7559.
Biesalski, H. -K. (2005). Meat as a component of a healthy diet – are there any risks or 
benefits if meat is avoided in the diet? Meat Science, 70(3), 509–524. doi:10.1016/j.
meatsci.2004.07.017.
Blundell, J. E. (2006). Perspective on the central control of appetite. Obesity (Silver 
Spring, Md.) 14(Suppl 4) (July), 160S–163S. doi:10.1038/oby.2006.298.
Bonanome, A., Pagnan, A., Biffanti, S. et al. (1992). Effect of dietary monounsatu-
rated and polyunsaturated fatty acids on the susceptibility of plasma low 
density lipoproteins to oxidative modification. Arteriosclerosis and Thrombosis: 
A Journal of Vascular Biology, 12(4), 529–533. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
pubmed/1558840.
Bonanome, A. and Grundy, S. M. (1988). Effect of dietary stearic acid on plasma cho-
lesterol and lipoprotein levels. New England Journal of Medicine, 318(19), 1244–
1248. doi:10.1056/NEJM198805123181905.
Borderías, A. J., Sánchez-Alonso, I. and Pérez-Mateos, M. (2005). New applications 
of fibres in foods: Addition to fishery products. Trends in Food Science and 
Technology, 16(10), 458–465. doi:10.1016/j.tifs.2005.03.011.
Bornet, F. R. (1994). Undigestible sugars in food products. American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition, 59(3 Suppl), 763S–769S. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
pubmed/8116563.
Bortoluzzi, R. C. (2006). Empanados. In: Olivo, R. (ed.) O mundo do frango: Cadeia 
produtiva da carne de frango. Criciúma: Ed. do Autor, pp. 481–494.
Bot, A., Erle, U., Vreeker, R. and Agterof, W. G. M. (2004). Influence of crystallisation 
conditions on the large deformation rheology of inulin gels. Food Hydrocolloids, 
18(4), 547–556. doi:10.1016/j.foodhyd.2003.09.003.
Brannan, R. G., Mah, E. M. S., Yuan, S., Casher, K. L., Myers, A. and Herrick, C. (2014). 
Influence of ingredients that reduce oil absorption during immersion frying 
of battered and breaded foods. European Journal of Lipid Science and Technology, 
116(3), 240–254. doi:10.1002/ejlt.201200308.
Brashear, G., Brewer, M. S., Meisinger, D. and McKeith, F. K. (2002). Raw mate-
rial pH, pump level and pump composition on quality characteristics of 
pork. Journal of Muscle Foods, 13(3), 189–204. doi:10.1111/j.1745-4573.2002.
tb00330.x.
Brennan, C. S. (2005). Dietary fibre, glycaemic response, and diabetes. Molecular 
Nutrition & Food Research, 49(6), 560–570. doi:10.1002/mnfr.200500025.
Brennan, C. S. and Cleary, L. J. (2005). The potential use of cereal (1→3,1→4)-β -D-glucans 
as functional food ingredients. Journal of Cereal Science, 42(1), 1–13. doi:10.1016/ 
j.jcs.2005.01.002.

499
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
Brewer, M. S. (2012). Reducing the fat content in ground beef without sacrificing qual-
ity: A review. Meat Science, 91(4), 385–395. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2012.02.024.
Burdock, G. A. and Flamm, W. G. (1999). A review of the studies of the safety of 
polydextrose in food. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 37(2), 233–264. doi:10.1016/
S0278-6915(98)00113-6.
Cáceres, E., García, M. L., Toro, J. and Selgas, M. D. (2004). The effect of fructooli-
gosaccharides on the sensory characteristics of cooked sausages. Meat Science, 
68(1), 87–96. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2004.02.008.
Campagnol, P. C. B., dos Santos, B. A., Wagner, R., Terra, N. N. and Pollonio, M. 
A. R. (2013). The effect of soy fiber addition on the quality of fermented 
sausages at low-fat content. Journal of Food Quality, 36(1), 41–50. doi:10.1111/
jfq.12013.
Campagnol, P. C. B., Dos Santos, B. A., Wagner, R., Terra, N. N. and Pollonio, M. A. R. 
(2012). Amorphous cellulose gel as a fat substitute in fermented sausages. Meat 
Science, 90(1), 36–42. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2011.05.026.
Candogan, K. and Kolsarici, N. (2003). The effects of carrageenan and pectin on some 
quality characteristics of low-fat beef frankfurters. Meat Science, 64(2), 199–206. 
doi:10.1016/S0309-1740(02)00181-X.
Carballo, J., Barreto, G. and Jiménez-Colmenero, F. (1995). Starch and egg white influ-
ence on properties of bologna sausage as related to fat content. Journal of Food 
Science, 60(4), 673–677.
Carraro, C. I. (2012). The use of resistant starch as fat replacers extenders ingredients 
in emulsified meat products. Unpublished Master’s dissertation, Universidade 
Estadual de Campinas, Brazil.
Catalani, L. A. et al. 2003. Fibras alimentares. Revista Brasileira de Nutrição Clínica, 
18(4): 178–182.
Cava, R., Ladero, L., Cantero, V. and Rosario Ramírez, M. (2012). Assessment of differ-
ent dietary fibers (tomato fiber, beet root fiber, and inulin) for the manufacture 
of chopped cooked chicken products. Journal of Food Science, 77(4), C346–C352. 
doi:10.1111/j.1750-3841.2011.02597.x.
Cengiz, E. and Gokoglu, N. (2005). Changes in energy and cholesterol contents of 
frankfurter-type sausages with fat reduction and fat replacer addition. Food 
Chemistry, 91(3), 443–447. doi:10.1016/j.foochem.2004.06.025.
Champ, M. M. (2004). Physiological aspects of resistant starch and in vivo measure-
ments. Journal of AOAC International, 87, 749–755.
Chardigny, J. M., Arnal, M. A., Juanéda, P., Genty, M., Grégoire, S. and Sebédio, J. L. 
(2001). Effect of cis-9, trans-11 and 10-trans, 12cis-CLA isomers in two strains of 
mice. Annals of Nutrition and Metabolism, 45(Suppl 1), 559.
Chawla, R. and Patil, G. R. (2010). Soluble dietary fiber. Comprehensive Reviews in Food 
Science and Food Safety, 9(2), 178–196. doi:10.1111/j.1541-4337.2009.00099.x.
Chevance, F. F., Farmer, L. J., Desmond, E. M., Novelli, E., Troy, D. J. and 
Chizzolini, R. (2000). Effect of some fat replacers on the release of vola-
tile aroma compounds from low-fat meat products. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry, 48(8), 3476–3484. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10956136.
Choi, Y. S., Choi, J. H., Han, D. J. et al. (2009). Characteristics of low-fat meat emul-
sion systems with pork fat replaced by vegetable oils and rice bran fiber. Meat 
Science, 82(2), 266–271. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2009.01.019.

500
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Choi, Y. S., Kim, Y. B., Kim, H. W. et al. (2015). Emulsion mapping in pork meat 
emulsion systems with various lipid types and brown rice fiber. Korean 
Journal for Food Science of Animal Resources, 35(2), 258–264. doi:10.5851/
kosfa.2015.35.2.258.
Cierach, M., Modzelewska-Kapituła, M. and Szaciło, K. (2009). The influence of car-
rageenan on the properties of low-fat frankfurters. Meat Science, 82(3), 295–299. 
doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2009.01.025.
Claus, J. R. (1991). Fat reduction in comminuted meat systems. Reciprocal Meat 
Conference Proceedings, 44, 93–99.
Claus, J. R. and Hunt, M. C. (1991). Low-fat, high added-water bologna formulated 
with texture-modifying ingredients. Journal of Food Science, 56(3), 643–647. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.1991.tb05347.x.
Claus, J. R., Hunt, M. C. and Kastner, C. L. (1990). Effects of substituting added water 
for fat on the textural, sensory, and processing characteristics of bologna. Journal 
of Muscle Foods, 1(1), 1–21. doi:10.1111/j.1745-4573.1990.tb00349.x.
Dangour, A. D., Andreeva, V. A., Sydenham, E. and Uauy, R. (2012). Omega 3 fatty 
acids and cognitive health in older people. British Journal of Nutrition, 107(S2), 
S152–S158. doi:10.1017/S0007114512001547.
Decker, E. A. and Park, Y. (2010). Healthier meat products as functional foods. Meat 
Science, 86(1), 49–55. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2010.04.021.
Delgado-Pando, G.; Cofrades, S.; Ruiz-Capillas, C.; et al. (2012). Enriched n-3 PUFA/
konjac gel low-fat pork liver pate: Lipid oxidation, microbiological properties 
and biogenic amine formation during chilling storage. Meat Science 92(4): 762--
767. doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2012.06.035
Denke, M. A. and Grundy, S. M. (1992). Comparison of effects of lauric acid and 
palmitic acid on plasma lipids and lipoproteins. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition, 56(5), 895–898. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1415008.
Dickinson, E. (1994). Protein-stabilized emulsions. Journal of Food Engineering, 22, 59–
74. doi:10.1016/j.cocis.2004.09.003.
Dickinson, E. (2012). Emulsion gels: The structuring of soft solids with protein-
stabilized oil droplets. Food Hydrocolloids, 28(1), 224–241. doi:10.1016/ 
j.foodhyd.2011.12.017.
Dickinson, E. (2013). Stabilising emulsion-based colloidal structures with mixed 
food ingredients. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 93(4), 710–721. 
doi:10.1002/jsfa.6013.
Djordjevic, D., Kim, H. -J., McClements, D. J. and Decker, E. A. (2004). Physical sta-
bility of whey protein-stabilized oil-in-water emulsions at pH 3: Potential ω -3 
fatty acid delivery systems (part A). Journal of Food Science, 69(5), C351–C355. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.2004.tb10696.x.
Dogan, S. F., Sahin, S. and Sumnu, G. (2005). Effects of soy and rice flour addition on 
batter rheology and quality of deep-fat fried chicken nuggets. Journal of Food 
Engineering, 71(1), 127–132.
Dos Santos, B. A., Pollonio, M. A. R. and Cruz, A. G. (2013). Ultra-flash profile and 
projective mapping for describing sensory attributes of prebiotic mortadellas. 
Food Research International, 54, 1705–1711. doi:10.1016/j.foodres.2013.09.022.
De Oliveira Faria, M., Cipriano, T. M., da Cruz, A. G, Santos, B. A., Pollonio, M. A., 
Campagnol, P. C. (2015). Properties of bologna-type sausages with pork back-fat 
replaced with pork skin and amorphous cellulose. Meat Science 104: 44--51. doi.
org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2015.02.002

501
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
Dos Santos, B. A., Bastianello Campagnol, P. C., Bertoldo Pacheco, M. T. et al. 
(2012) Fructooligosaccharides as a fat replacer in fermented cooked sau-
sages. International Journal of Food Science and Technology, 47(6): 1183–1192. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2621.2012.02958.x
Drewnowski, A. (1997). Taste preferences and food intake. Annual Review of Nutrition, 
17(1), 237–253. doi:10.1146/annurev.nutr.17.1.237.
Dunstan, J. A., Simmer, K., Dixon, G. and Prescott, S. L. (2008). Cognitive assessment 
of children at age 21/2 years after maternal fish oil supplementation in preg-
nancy: A randomised controlled trial. Archives of Disease in Childhood—Fetal and 
Neonatal Edition, 93(1), F45–F50. doi:10.1136/adc.2006.099085.
Eckel, R. H., Jakicic, J. M., Ard, J. D. et al. (2014). 2013 AHA/ACC Guideline on 
lifestyle management to reduce cardiovascular risk: A report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association task force on practice 
guidelines. Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 63(25 PART B), 2960–
2984. doi:10.1016/ j.jacc.2013.11.003.
EFSA Panel and Dietetic Products. (2010). Scientific opinion on establishing 
food-based dietary guidelines. EFSA Journal, 8(3), 1460–1502. doi:10.2903/j.
efsa.2010.1460.
Egbert, W., Huffman, R. D. L., Chen, C. M. and Dylewski, D. P. (1991). Development 
of low-fat ground beef. Food Technology, 45, 64.
Eim, V. S., Simal, S., Rosselló, C. and Femenia, A. (2008). Effects of addition of carrot 
dietary fibre on the ripening process of a dry fermented sausage (sobrassada). 
Meat Science, 80(2), 173–182. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2007.11.017.
Ergönül, B., Ergönül, P. G. and Obuz, E. (2009). Functional traits of prebiotic ingredi-
ents of meat products—chemical, textural and sensory traits of meatballs con-
taining inulin and oligofructose as prebiotic additives. Fleischwirtschaft, 89(2), 
140–154.
Felisberto, M. H. F., Galvão, M. T. E. L., Picone, C. S.F. , Cunha, R. L. and Pollonio, 
M. A. R. (2015). Effect of prebiotic ingredients on the rheological properties and 
microstructure of reduced-sodium and low-fat meat emulsions. LWT—Food 
Science and Technology, 60(1), 148–155. doi:10.1016/j.lwt.2014.08.004.
Fernández-Ginés, J. M., Fernández-López, J., Sayas-Barberá, E., Sendra, E. and 
Pérez-Álvarez, J. A. (2004). Lemon albedo as a new source of dietary fiber: 
Application to bologna sausages. Meat Science, 67(1), 7–13. doi:10.1016/j.
meatsci.2003.08.017.
Fernández-López, J., Sendra, E., Sayas-Barberá, E., Navarro, C. and Pérez-Alvarez, 
J. A. (2008). Physico-chemical and microbiological profiles of “salchichón” 
(Spanish dry-fermented sausage) enriched with orange fiber. Meat Science, 80(2), 
410–417. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2008.01.010.
Finocchiaro, E. T., Birkett, A. and Okoniewska, M. (2009). Resistant starch. In: Cho, 
S. S. and Samuel, P. (eds.) Fiber Ingredients: Food Applications and Health Benefits. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Furuhjelm, C., Warstedt, K., Larsson, J. et al. (2009). Fish oil supplementation in preg-
nancy and lactation may decrease the risk of infant allergy. Acta Paediatrica, 
98(9), 1461–1467. doi:10.1111/j.1651-2227.2009.01355.x.
García, M. L., Cáceres, E. and Selgas, M. D. (2006). Effect of inulin on the tex-
tural and sensory properties of mortadella, a Spanish cooked meat prod-
uct. International Journal of Food Science and Technology, 41(10), 1207–1215. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.2006.01186.x.

502
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
García, M. L., Dominguez, R., Galvez, M. D., Casas, C. and Selgas, M. D. (2002). 
Utilization of cereal and fruit fibres in low fat dry fermented sausages. Meat 
Science, 60(3), 227–236. doi:10.1016/S0309-1740(01)00125-5.
García-Íñiguez de Ciriano, M., Larequi, E., Rehecho, S. et al. (2010). Selenium, iodine, 
w-3 PUFA and natural antioxidant from Melissa officinalis L.: A combination of 
components from healthier dry fermented sausages formulation. Meat Science, 
85(2), 274–279. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2010.01.012.
Gibson, G. R., Beatty, E. R. Wang, X. and Cummings, J. H. (1995). Selective stimulation 
of Bifidobacteria in the human colon by oligofructose and inulin. Gastroenterology, 
108(4), 975–982. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7698613.
Giese, J. (1996). Fats, oils, and fat replacers. Food Technology, 61(4), 78–83.
GL-Laboratories Worldwide. (2002). Guia Completo Para Sistemas De Cobertura. 
Guarulhos: GLLW, 41.
Grigelmo-Miguel, N., Abadías-Serós, M. I. and Martín-Belloso, O. (1999). 
Characterisation of low-fat high-dietary fibre frankfurters. Meat Science, 52(3), 
247–256. doi:10.1016/S0309-1740(98)00173-9.
Grundy, S. M. (1994). Influence of stearic acid on cholesterol metabolism relative to 
other long-chain fatty acids. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 60(6 Suppl), 
986S–990S. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7977157.
Grundy, S. M. and Vega, G. L. (1988). Plasma cholesterol responsiveness to saturated 
fatty acids. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 47(5), 822–824. http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3364396.
Hachmeister, K. A. and Herald, T. J. (1998). Thermal and rheological properties and 
textural attributes of reduced-fat turkey batters. Poultry Science, 77(4), 632–638.
Halford, J. C. G. and Harrold, J. A. (2012). Satiety-enhancing products for appe-
tite control: Science and regulation of functional foods for weight man-
agement. Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 71(2), 350–362. doi:10.1017/
S0029665112000134.
Harris, W. S. and Von Schacky, C. (2004). The omega-3 index: A new risk factor 
for death from coronary heart disease? Preventive Medicine, 39(1), 212–220. 
doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2004.02.030.
Hart, B. and Price, K. (1993). New potential for low fat beef burgers. Food Manufacture, 
68, 42–43.
Hasjim, J., Lee, S. O., Hendrich, S., Setiawan, S., Ai, Y. and Jane, J. L. (2010). 
Characterization of a novel resistant-starch and its effects on postpran-
dial plasma-glucose and insulin responses. Cereal Chemistry, 87(4), 257–262. 
doi:10.1094/CCHEM-87-4-0257.
Herrero, A. M., Carmona, P., Jiménez-Colmenero, F. and Ruiz-Capillas, C. (2014). 
Polysaccharide gels as oil bulking agents: Technological and structural proper-
ties. Food Hydrocolloids, 36, 374–381. doi:10.1016/j.foodhyd.2013.08.008.
Hort, J. and Cook, D. (2007). Formulating low-fat food: The challenge of retain-
ing flavour quality. In: Taylor, A. and Hort, J. (eds.) Modifying Flavour in Food. 
Cambridge: Woodhead Publishing in Food Science, Technology and Nutrition, 
131–143.
Hoz, L., D’Arrigo, M., Cambero, I. and Ordóñez, J. A. (2004). Development of an n-3 
fatty acid and a-tocopherol enriched dry fermented sausage. Meat Science, 67(3), 
485–495. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2003.12.001.
Hsu, S. Y. and Yu, S. H. (2002). Comparisons on 11 plant oil fat substitutes for low-fat 
kung-wans. Journal of Food Engineering, 51(3), 9–14.

503
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
Huebner-Keese, B., Guo, J., Adden, R. et al. (2016). Enable fat reduced deep fried 
food and meat products by cellulose ethers. In: Williams, P. A. and Phillips, G. 
(eds.) Gums and Stabilisers for the Food Industry 18: Hydrocolloid Functionality for 
Affordable and Sustainable Global Food Solutions, UK: Royal Society of Chemistry, 
pp. 313–320. doi:10.1039/9781782623830-00313.
Hughes, E., Cofrades, S. and Troy, D. J. (1997). Effects of fat level, oat fibre and car-
rageenan on frankfurters formulated with 5, 12 and 30% fat. Meat Science, 45(3), 
273–281. doi:10.1016/S0309-1740(96)00109-X.
Hur, S. J., Jin, S. K. and Kim, I. S. (2008). Effect of extra virgin olive oil substitution 
for fat on quality of pork patty. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 88, 
1231–1237. doi:10.1002/jsfa.
Jacobsen, C. (1999). Sensory impact of lipid oxidation in complex food systems. 
European Journal of Lipid Science and Technology, 101(12), 484–492. doi:10.1002/
(SICI)1521-4133(199912)101:12<484::AID-LIPI484>3.0.CO;2-H.
Jamshidi, A. and Shabanpour, B. (2014). The effect of hydroxypropyl methylcellulose 
(HPMC) added pre-dust and batter of talang queenfish (Scomberoides commer-
sonnianus) nuggets on the quality and reduction of oil uptake. Minerva Biotec, 
26(1), 57–64.
Jiménez-Colmenero, F. (1996). Technologies for developing low-fat meat products. 
Trends in Food Science & Technology, 7(2), 41–48. doi:10.1016/0924-2244(96)81327-6.
Jiménez-Colmenero, F. (2000). Relevant factors in strategies for fat reduction in 
meat products. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 11(2), 56–66. doi:10.1016/
S0924-2244(00)00042-X.
Jiménez-Colmenero, F. (2007). Healthier lipid formulation approaches in meat-
based functional foods. Technological options for replacement of meat fats by 
non-meat fats. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 18, 567–578. doi:10.1016/ 
j.tifs.2007.05.006.
Jiménez-Colmenero, F., Herrero, A., Pintado, T., Solas, M. T. and Ruiz-Capillas, C. 
(2010). Influence of emulsified olive oil stabilizing system used for pork back-
fat replacement in frankfurters. Food Research International, 43(8), 2068–2076. 
doi:10.1016/j.foodres.2010.06.010.
Jiménez-Colmenero, F., Carballo, J. and Cofrades, S. (2001). Healthier meat and meat 
products: Their role as functional foods. Meat Science, 59(1), 5–13. doi:10.1016/
S0309-1740(01)00053-5.
Jiménez-Colmenero, F., Salcedo-Sandoval, L., Bou, R., Cofrades, S., Herrero, A. M. 
and Ruiz-Capillas, C. (2015). Novel applications of oil-structuring methods as 
a strategy to improve the fat content of meat products. Trends in Food Science & 
Technology, 44(2), 177–188, Elsevier. doi:10.1016/j.tifs.2015.04.011.
Jourdain, L., Leser, M. E., Schmitt, C., Michel, M. and Dickinson, E. (2008). Stability 
of emulsions containing sodium caseinate and dextran sulfate: Relationship 
to complexation in solution. Food Hydrocolloids, 22, 647–659. doi:10.1016/j.
foodhyd.2007.01.007.
Kayaardı, S. and Gök, V. (2004). Effect of replacing beef fat with olive oil on qual-
ity characteristics of turkish soudjouk (Sucuk). Meat Science, 66(1), 249–257. 
doi:10.1016/S0309-1740(03)00098-6.
Keenan, D. F., Resconi, V. C., Kerry, J. P. and Hamill, R. M. (2014). Modelling the influ-
ence of inulin as a fat substitute in comminuted meat products on their physico-
chemical characteristics and eating quality using a mixture design approach. 
Meat Science, 96(3), 1384–1394. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2013.11.025.

504
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Keeton, J. T. (1994). Low-fat meat products technological problems with processing. 
Meat Science, 36, 261–276. doi:10.1016/0309-1740(94)90045-0.
Keys, A., Anderson, J. T. and Grande, F. (1965). Serum cholesterol response to changes 
in the diet: II. The effect of cholesterol in the diet. Metabolism: Clinical and 
Experimental, 14(7), 759–765. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25286460.
Khalil, A. H. (2000). Quality characteristics of low-fat beef patties formulated with 
modified corn starch and water. Food Chemistry, 68(1), 61–68. doi:10.1016/
S0308-8146(99)00156-9.
Kien, C. L., Bunn, J. Y. and Ugrasbul, F. (2005). Increasing dietary palmitic acid 
decreases fat oxidation and daily energy expenditure. American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition, 82(2), 320–326. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16087974.
Koutsopoulos, D. A., Koutsimanis, G. E. and Bloukas, J. G. (2008). Effect of carra-
geenan level and packaging during ripening on processing and quality char-
acteristics of low-fat fermented sausages produced with olive oil. Meat Science, 
79(1), 188–197. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2007.08.016.
Kris-Etherton, P. M., Taylor, D. S. Yu-Poth, S. et al. (2000). Polyunsaturated fatty acids 
in the food chain in the United States. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 71(1 
Suppl): 179S–188S.
Kris-Etherton, P.M., Harris, W.S., Appel, L.J. (2002). Fish consumption, fish oil, 
Omega-3 fatty acids, and cardiovascular disease. Circulation, 106(21): 2747–2757.
Kumar, M. and Sharma, B. D. (2004). Quality and storage stability of low-fat pork 
patties containing barley flour as fat substitute. Journal of Food Science and 
Technology, 41(5), 496–502.
Lal, S. N. D., O’Connor, C. J. and Eyres, L. (2006). Application of emulsifiers/stabiliz-
ers in dairy products of high rheology. Advances in Colloid and Interface Science, 
123–126(SPEC. ISS.), 433–437. doi:10.1016/j.cis.2006.05.009.
Lamarche, B. and Couture, P. (2014). It is time to revisit current dietary recommen-
dations for saturated fat. Applied Physiology Nutrition and Metabolism, 39, 1409–
1411. doi:10.1139/apnm-2014-0141.
Lee, H. A., Choi, S. J. and Moon, T. W. (2006). Characteristics of sodium caseinate- and soy 
protein isolate-stabilized emulsion-gels formed by microbial transglutaminase. 
Journal of Food Science, 71(6), C352–C357. doi:10.1111/j.1750-3841.2006.00110.x.
Leistner, L. (1992). Food preservation by combined processes. Food Research 
International, 25, 151–158.
Li, L., Jiang, H., Campbell, M., Blanco, M. and Jane, J. (2008). Characterization of 
maize amylose-extender (AE) mutant starches. Part I: Relationship between 
resistant starch contents and molecular structures. Carbohydrate Polymers, 74(3), 
396–404. doi:10.1016/j.carbpol.2008.03.012.
Liaros, N. G., Katsanidis, E. and Bloukas, J. G. (2009). Effect of the ripening time under 
vacuum and packaging film permeability on processing and quality character-
istics of low-fat fermented sausages. Meat Science, 83(4), 589–598. doi:10.1016/j.
meatsci.2009.07.006.
López-López, I., Bastida, S., Ruiz-Capillas, C. et al. (2009). Composition and antioxi-
dant capacity of low-salt meat emulsion model systems containing edible sea-
weeds. Meat Science, 83(3), 492–498. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2009.06.031.
Lucca, P. A. and Tepper, B. J. (1994). Fat replacers and the functionality of fat in foods. 
Trends in Food Science and Technology, 5(1), 12–19. doi:10.1016/0924-2244(94)90043-4.
Lücke, F.-K. (1985). Fermented sausages. In: Wood, B. J. B. (ed.) Microbiology of 
Fermented Foods, vol. 2. Essex: Elsevier Applied Science Publishers, pp. 41–83.

505
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
Lupi, F. R., Gabriele, D., Facciolo, D., Baldino, N., Seta, L. and de Cindio, B. (2012). 
Effect of organogelator and fat source on rheological properties of olive oil-
based organogels. Food Research International, 46(1), 177–184. doi:10.1016/j.
foodres.2011.11.029.
Lurueña-Martínez, M. A., Vivar-Quintana, A. M. and Revilla, I. (2004). Effect of locust 
bean/xanthan gum addition and replacement of pork fat with olive oil on 
the quality characteristics of low-fat frankfurters. Meat Science, 68(3), 383–389. 
doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2004.04.005.
Lyons, P. H., Kerry, J. F., Morrissey, P. A. and Buckley, D. J. (1999). The influence 
of added whey protein/carrageenan gels and tapioca starch on the textural 
properties of low fat pork sausages. Meat Science, 51(1), 43–52. doi:10.1016/
S0309-1740(98)00095-3.
Maffei, H. V. L. (2004). Chronic functional constipation. Which supplementary fiber to 
choose? Jornal de Pediatria, 80(3), 167–168.
Mansour, E. H. and Khalil, A. H. (1999). Characteristics of low-fat beef burgers as influenced 
by various types of wheat fibres. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 79(4), 
493–498. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0010(19990315)79:4<493::AID-JSFA4>3.0.CO;2-5.
Mattson, F. H. and Grundy, S. M. (1985). Comparison of effects of dietary saturated, 
monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fatty acids on plasma lipids and lipo-
proteins in man. Journal of Lipid Research, 26(2), 194–202. http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/3989378.
Maw, S. J., Fowler, V. R., Hamilton, M. and Petchey, A. M. (2003). Physical character-
istics of pig fat and their relation to fatty acid composition. Meat Science, 63(2), 
185–190. doi:10.1016/S0309-1740(02)00069-4.
McClements, D. J. (2004). Protein-stabilized emulsions. Current Opinion in Colloid and 
Interface Science, 9, 305–313.
Mehta, N., Ahlawat, S. S., Sharma, D. P. and Dabur, R. S. (2015). Novel trends in devel-
opment of dietary fiber rich meat products—A critical review. Journal of Food 
Science and Technology, 52(2), 633–647. doi:10.1007/s13197-013-1010-2.
Mendoza, E., García, M. L., Casas, C. and Selgas, M. D. (2001). Inulin as fat substitute 
in low fat, dry fermented sausages. Meat Science, 57(4), 387–393. doi:10.1016/
S0309-1740(00)00116-9.
Menegas, L. Z., Pimentel, T. C., Garcia, S. and Prudencio, S. H. (2013). Dry-fermented 
chicken sausage produced with inulin and corn oil: Physicochemical, micro-
biological, and textural characteristics and acceptability during storage. Meat 
Science, 93(3), 501–506. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2012.11.003.
Meyer, D., Bayarri, S., Tárrega, A. and Costell, E. (2011). Inulin as texture modi-
fier in dairy products. Food Hydrocolloids, 25(8), 1881–1890. doi:10.1016/ 
j.foodhyd.2011.04.012.
Mira, G. S., Graf, H. and Cândido, L. M. B. (2009). Visão retrospectiva em 
fibras alimentares com ênfase em beta-glucanas no tratamento do diabe-
tes. Brazilian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 45(1), 11–20. doi:10.1590/
S1984-82502009000100003.
Monsivais, P., Carter, B. E., Christiansen, M., Perrigue, M. M. and Drewnowski, A. 
(2011). Soluble fiber dextrin enhances the satiating power of beverages. Appetite, 
56(1), 9–14. doi:10.1016/j.appet.2010.10.010.
Montenegro, F. M., Gomes-Ruffi, C. R., Vicente, C. A., Collares-Queiroz, F. P. and 
Steel, C. J. (2008). Fermented cassava starch biscuits enriched with soluble and 
insoluble fibers. Ciência E Tecnologia de Alimentos, 2863(9), 184–191.

506
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Mora-Gallego, H., Guàrdia, M. D., Serra, X., Gou, P. and Arnau, J. (2016). Sensory 
characterisation and consumer acceptability of potassium chloride and sun-
flower oil addition in small-caliber non-acid fermented sausages with a reduced 
content of sodium chloride and fat. Meat Science, 112, 9–15. doi:10.1016/j.
meatsci.2015.10.008.
Moreira, N. X., Curi, R. and Mancini-Filho, J. (2002). Fatty acids : A review. Journal 
Brazilian Social Food Nutrition, 24, 105–123.
Muguerza, E., Fista, G., Ansorena, D., Astiasaran, I. and Bloukas, J. G. (2002). Effect 
of fat level and partial replacement of pork backfat with olive oil on processing 
and quality characteristics of fermented sausages. Meat Science, 61(4), 397–404. 
doi:10.1016/S0309-1740(01)00210-8.
Muguerza, E., Gimeno, O., Ansorena, D., Bloukas, J. G. and Astiasarán, I. (2001). 
Effect of replacing pork backfat with pre-emulsified olive oil on lipid fraction 
and sensory quality of chorizo de Pamplona—A traditional Spanish fermented 
sausage. Meat Science, 59(3), 251–258. doi:10.1016/S0309-1740(01)00075-4.
Muguerza, E., Ansorena, D., Astiasaran, I. (2003). Improvement of nutritional proper-
ties of Chorizo de Pamplona by replacement of pork backfat with soy oil. Meat 
Science, 65(4), 1361–1367. doi.org/10.1016/S0309-1740(03)00058-5
Murphy, P. (2000). Starch. In G. O. Phillips & P. A. Williams (Eds.), Handbook of food 
hydrocolloids (pp. 41–65), Cambridge: Woodhead Publishing.
Mussatto, S. I. and Mancilha, I. M. (2007). Non-digestible oligosaccharides: A review. 
Carbohydrate Polymers, 68(3), 587–597. doi:10.1016/j.carbpol.2006.12.011.
Niness, K. R. (1999). Inulin and oligofructose: What are they? Journal of 
Nutrition, 
129(7 
Suppl), 
1402S–1406S. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/10395607.
Novakofski, J., Park, S., Bechtel, P. J. and McKeith, F. K. (1989). Composition of cooked 
pork chops: Effect of removing subcutaneous fat before cooking. Journal of Food 
Science, 54(1), 15–17. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.1989.tb08556.x.
Nowak, B., von Mueffling, T., Grotheer, J., Klein, G. and Watkinson, B.-M. 
(2007). Energy content, sensory properties, and microbiological shelf life 
of German bologna-type sausages produced with citrate or phosphate 
and with inulin as fat replacer. Journal of Food Science, 72(9), S629–S638. 
doi:10.1111/j.1750-3841.2007.00566.x.
Olmedilla-Alonso, B., Jiménez-Colmenero, F. and Sánchez-Muniz, F. J. (2013). 
Development and assessment of healthy properties of meat and meat prod-
ucts designed as functional foods. Meat Science, 95(4), 919–930. doi:10.1016/ 
j.meatsci.2013.03.030.
Ordóñez, J. A. (2005). Tecnologia de Alimentos: Componentes dos Alimentos e Processos (1st 
Ed.). Porto Alegre: Editora Artmed.
Ospina-E, J. C., Sierra-C, A., Ochoa, O., Pérez-Álvarez, J. A. and Fernández-López, 
J. (2012). Substitution of saturated fat in processed meat products: A review. 
Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 52(2), 113–122. doi:10.1080/104083
98.2010.493978.
Paneras, E. D. and Bloukas, J. G. (1994). Vegetable oils replace pork backfat for low-fat 
frankfurters. Journal of Food Science, 59(4), 725–728. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.1994.
tb08113.x.
Paneras, E. D., Bloukas, J. G. and Filis, D. G. (1998). Production of low-fat frankfurt-
ers with vegetable oils following the dietary guidelines for fatty acids. Journal of 
Muscle Foods, 9(2), 111–126. doi:10.1111/j.1745-4573.1998.tb00648.x.

507
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
Papadima, S. N. and Bloukas, J. G. (1999). Effect of fat level and storage conditions 
on quality characteristics of traditional Greek sausages. Meat Science, 51(2), 103–
113. doi:10.1016/S0309-1740(98)00103-X.
Paradiso, V. M., Giarnetti, M., Summo, C., Pasqualone, A., Minervini, F. and 
Caponio, F. (2015). Production and characterization of emulsion filled gels 
based on inulin and extra virgin olive oil. Food Hydrocolloids, 45, 30–40. 
doi:10.1016/j.foodhyd.2014.10.027.
Passos, L. and Park, Y. K. (2003). Fructooligosaccharides: Implications in human 
health being and use in foods. Ciência Rural, 3333(22), 385–390.
Pearson, A. M. and Gillett, T. A. (1996). Processed Meats. US: Springer, pp. 355–371.
Pelser, W. M, Linssen, J. P. H., Legger, A. and Houben, J. H. (2007). Lipid oxidation in 
n-3 fatty acid enriched Dutch style fermented sausages. Meat Science, 75(1), 1–11. 
doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2006.06.007.
Perrechil, F. A. and Cunha, R. L. (2013). Stabilization of multilayered emulsions 
by sodium caseinate and κ-carrageenan. Food Hydrocolloids, 30(2), 606–613. 
doi:10.1016/j.foodhyd.2012.08.006.
Petersson, K., Godard, O., Eliasson, A. and Tornberg, E. (2014). The effects of cereal 
additives in low-fat sausages and meatballs. Part 2: Rye bran, oat bran and bar-
ley fibre. Meat Science, 96(1), 503–508. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2013.08.019.
Picone, C. S. F., Takeuchi, K. P. and Cunha, R. L. (2011). Heat-induced whey protein 
gels: Effects of pH and the addition of sodium caseinate. Food Biophysics, 6(1), 
77–83. doi:10.1007/s11483-010-9177-9.
Pietrasik, Z. and Duda, Z. (2000). Effect of fat content and soy protein/carrageenan 
mix on the quality characteristics of comminuted, scalded sausages. Meat 
Science, 98(2), 181–188. doi.org/10.1016/S0309-1740(00)00038-3
Pietrasik, Z. and Janz, J. A. M. (2010). Utilization of pea flour, starch-rich and fiber-
rich fractions in low fat bologna. Food Research International, 43(2), 602–608. 
doi:10.1016/j.foodres.2009.07.017.
Piñero, M. P., Parra, K., Huerta-Leidenz, N. et al. (2008). Effect of oat’s soluble fibre 
(B-glucan) as a fat replacer on physical, chemical, microbiological and sensory 
properties of low-fat beef patties. Meat Science, 80(3), 675–680. doi:10.1016/ 
j.meatsci.2008.03.006.
Pintado, T., Herrero, A. M., Jiménez-Colmenero, F. and Ruiz-Capillas, C. (2016). 
Strategies for incorporation of chia (Salvia Hispanica L.) in frankfurters as a health-
promoting ingredient. Meat Science, 114, 75–84. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2015.12.009.
Pires Vilela, J. A., Cavallieri, A. L. F. and Lopes da Cunha, R. (2011). The influ-
ence of gelation rate on the physical properties/structure of salt-induced 
gels of soy protein isolate–gellan gum. Food Hydrocolloids, 25(7), 1710–1718. 
doi:10.1016/j.foodhyd.2011.03.012.
Poyato, C., Ansorena, D., Berasategi, I., Navarro-Blasco, Í. and Astiasarán, I. (2014). 
Optimization of a gelled emulsion intended to supply ω -3 fatty acids into meat 
products by means of response surface methodology. Meat Science, 98(4), 615–
621. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2014.06.016.
Pronczuk, A., Khosla, P., Hajri, T. and Hayes, K. C. (1995). Plasma lipids are affected 
similarly by dietary lauric or palmitic acid in gerbils and monkeys. Lipids, 
30(12), 1157–1161. doi:10.1007/BF02536618.
Prosky, L. and Hoebregs, H. (1999). Methods to determine food inulin and oligofruc-
tose. Journal of Nutrition, 129(7 Suppl), 1418S–1423S. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/10395610.

508
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Raigond, P., Ezekiel, R. and Raigond, B. (2015). Resistant starch in food: A review. Journal 
of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 95(10), 1968–1978. doi:10.1002/jsfa.6966.
Roberfroid, M. (1993). Dietary fiber, inulin, and oligofructose: A review comparing 
their physiological effects. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 33(2), 
103–148. doi:10.1080/10408399309527616.
Roberfroid, M. and Slavin, J. L. (2000). Nondigestible oligosaccharides. Critical Reviews 
in Food Science and Nutrition, 40(6), 461–480. doi:10.1080/10408690091189239.
Rodríguez-Carpena, J. G., Morcuende, D. and Estévez, M. (2012). Avocado, sunflower 
and olive oils as replacers of pork back-fat in burger patties: Effect on lipid 
composition, oxidative stability and quality traits. Meat Science, 90(1), 106–115. 
doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2011.06.007.
Roller, S. and Jones, S. A. (1996). Handbook of Fat Replacers.  Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Rothstein, W. G. (2006). Dietary fat, coronary heart disease, and cancer: A historical 
review. Preventive Medicine, 43(5), 356–360. doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2006.07.013.
Rubio, B., Martínez, B., García-Cachán, M. D., Rovira, J. and Jaime, I. (2008). Effect 
of the packaging method and the storage time on lipid oxidation and colour 
stability on dry fermented sausage salchichón manufactured with raw material 
with a high level of mono and polyunsaturated fatty acids. Meat Science, 80, 
1182–1187. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2008.05.012.
Rust, R. and Olson, D. (1988). Making good “lite” sausage. Meat and Poultry, 34, 1012.
Saad, S. M. I. (2006). Probiotics and prebiotics: The state of the art. Revista Brasileira de 
Ciências Farmacêuticas, 42(1), 1–16. doi:10.1590/S1516-93322006000100002.
Sahin, S., Sumnu, G. and Altunakar, B. (2005). Effects of batters containing different 
gum types on the quality of deep-fat fried chicken nuggets. Journal of the Science 
of Food and Agriculture, 85(14), 2375–2379. doi:10.1002/jsfa.2258.
Sajilata, M. G., Singhal, R. S. and Kulkarni, P. R. (2006). Resistant starch—A 
review. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 5(1), 1–17. 
doi:10.1111/j.1541-4337.2006.tb00076.x.
Salazar, P., García, M. L. and Selgas, M. D. (2009). Short-chain fructooligosaccharides 
as potential functional ingredient in dry fermented sausages with different 
fat levels. International Journal of Food Science and Technology, 44(6), 1100–1107. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.2009.01923.x.
Sarteshnizi, A. R., Hosseini, H., Bondarianzadeh, D., Jiménez-Colmenero, F. and 
Khaksar, R. (2015). Optimization of prebiotic sausage formulation: Effect of 
using β -glucan and resistant starch by D-optimal mixture design approach. 
LWT—Food Science and Technology, 62(1), 704–710. doi:10.1016/j.lwt.2014.05.014.
Schaefer, E. J. (2002). Lipoproteins, nutrition, and heart disease. American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 75(2), 191–212. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/11815309.
Sendra, E., Fayos, P., Lario, Y., Fernández-López, J., Sayas-Barberá, E. and Pérez-
Alvarez, J. A. (2008). Incorporation of citrus fibers in fermented milk containing 
probiotic bacteria. Food Microbiology, 25(1), 13–21. doi:10.1016/j.fm.2007.09.003.
Serdaroglu, M. (2006). The characteristics of beef patties containing different levels 
of fat and oat flour. International Journal of Food Science and Technology, 41(2), 
147–153. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.2005.01041.x.
Serrano, A., Cofrades, S., Ruiz-Capillas, C., Olmedilla-Alonso, B., Herrero-
Barbudo, C. and Jiménez-Colmenero, F. (2005). Nutritional profile of 
restructured beef steak with added walnuts. Meat Science, 70(4), 647–654. 
doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2005.02.014.

509
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
Setser, C. S. and Racette, E. L. (1992). Macromolecule replacers in food products. 
Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 32(3), 275–297.
Severini, C., De Pilli, T. and Baiano, A. (2003). Partial substitution of pork back-
fat with extra-virgin olive oil in ‘salami’ products: Effects on chemical, 
physical and sensorial quality. Meat Science, 64(3), 323–331. doi:10.1016/
S0309-1740(02)00204-8.
Shand, J. P., Schmidt, G. R., Mandigo, R. W. and Claus, J. R. (1990). New technology 
for low-fat meat products. Reciprocal Meat Conference Proceedings, 43, 37–46.
Sheard, P. (2002). Processing and quality control of restructured meat. Meat Processing, 
332–358. doi:10.1533/9781855736665.3.332.
Shimokomaki, M.; Olivo, P., Terra, N. N.  Fermentação cárnea: Princípios e Inovações. 
In Atualidades em Ciência e Tecnologia de Carnes. São Paulo: Editora Varela, 29-36.
Simo, O. K., Mao, Y., Tokle, T., Decker, E. A. and McClements, D. J. (2012). Novel 
strategies for fabricating reduced fat foods: Heteroaggregation of lipid 
droplets with polysaccharides. Food Research International, 48(2), 337–345. 
doi:10.1016/j.foodres.2012.04.018.
Simopoulos, A. P. (1999). Essential fatty acids in health and chronic disease. American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 70(3 Suppl), 560S–569S. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/10479232.
Simopoulos, A. P. (2004). Omega-6/omega-3 essential fatty acid ratio and chronic dis-
eases. Food Reviews International, 20(1), 77–90. doi:10.1081/FRI-120028831.
Singh, O. P., Singh, J. N., Barthi, M. K. and Soni, K. (2008). Refrigerated storage stabil-
ity of chicken nuggets containing pea flour. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 
45(5), 460–462.
Slavin, J. L. (2005). Dietary fiber and body weight. Nutrition, 21(3), 411–418. 
doi:10.1016/j.nut.2004.08.018.
Sorapukdee, S., Kongtasorn, C., Benjakul, S. and Visessanguan, W. (2013). Influences 
of muscle composition and structure of pork from different breeds on stabil-
ity and textural properties of cooked meat emulsion. Food Chemistry, 138(2–3), 
1892–1901. doi:10.1016/j.foodchem.2012.10.121.
Spady, D. K. and Dietschy, J. M. (1985). Rates of cholesterol synthesis and low-density 
lipoprotein uptake in the adrenal glands of the rat, hamster and rabbit in vivo. 
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)—Lipids and Lipid Metabolism, 836(2), 167–175. 
doi:10.1016/0005-2760(85)90063-3.
Spiegel, J. E., Rose, R., Karabell, P., Francos, V. H. and Schmitt, D. F. (1994). Safety and 
benefits of frutooligosaccharides as food ingredients. Food Technology, 48, 85–89.
Stowell, J. D. (2009). Polydextrose. In: Cho, S. S. and Samuel, P. (eds.) Fiber Ingredients: 
Food Applications and Health Benefits. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Sturdevant, R. A. L., Pearce, M. L. and Dayton, S. (1973). Increased prevalence of 
cholelithiasis in men ingesting a serum-cholesterol-lowering diet. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 288(1), 24–27, Massachusetts Medical Society. doi:10.1056/
NEJM197301042880106.
Sych, J., Lacroix, C., Adambounou, L. T. and Castaigne, F. (1990). Cryoprotective 
effects of lactitol, palatinit and Polydextrose® on cod surimi proteins during fro-
zen storage. Journal of Food Science, 55(2), 356–360. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.1990.
tb06762.x.
Symes, K. C. (1980). The relationship between the covalent structure of the Xanthomonas 
polysaccharide (xanthan) and its function as a thickening, suspending and gell-
ing agent. Food Chemistry, 6(1), 63–76.

510
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Talukder, S. (2015). Effect of dietary fiber on properties and acceptance of meat prod-
ucts: A review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 55(7), 1005–1011. doi
:10.1080/10408398.2012.682230.
Tan, S. S., Aminah, A., Zhang, X. G. and Abdul, S. B. (2006). Optimizing palm oil and 
palm stearin utilization for sensory and textural properties of chicken frankfurt-
ers. Meat Science, 72(3), 387–397. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2005.07.012.
Trius, A., Sebranek, J. G., Rust, R. E. and Carr, J. M. (1994). Low-fat bologna and bea-
ker sausage: Effects of carrageenans and chloride salts. Journal of Food Science, 
59(5), 941–945. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.1994.tb08163.x.
Troutt, E. S., Hunt, M. C., Johnson, D. E., Claus, J. R., Kastner, C. L. and Kropf, D. 
H. (1992). Characteristics of low-fat ground beef containing texture-modifying 
ingredients. Journal of Food Science, 57(1), 19–24. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.1992.
tb05415.x.
Trowell, H., Southgate, D. A., Wolever, T. M., Leeds, A. R., Gassull, M. A. and Jenkins, 
D. J. (1976). Dietary fibre redefined. Lancet (London, England), 1(7966), 967. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/57372.
Tungland, B. C. and Meyer, D. (2002). Nondigestible oligo- and polysaccharides (dietary 
fiber): Their physiology and role in human health and food. Comprehensive 
Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 1(3), 90–109. doi:10.1111/j.1541-4337.2002.
tb00009.x.
Turp, G. Y. (2016). Effects of four different cooking methods on some quality charac-
teristics of low fat Inegol meatball enriched with flaxseed flour. Meat Science, 
121, 40–46. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2016.05.016.
Uemura, C. H. and Luz, M. B. (2003). Sistemas de cobertura. Aditivos & Ingredientes, 
28, 81–82.
Valencia, I., Ansorena, D. and Astiasaran, I. (2007). Development of dry fer-
mented sausages rich in docosahexaenoic acid with oil from the Microalgae 
schizochytrium sp.: Influence on nutritional properties, sensorial quality 
and oxidation stability. Food Chemistry, 104(3), 1087–1096. doi:10.1016/j.
foodchem.2007.01.021.
Valencia, I., O’Grady, M. N., Ansorena, D., Astiasarán, I. and Kerry, J. P. (2008). 
Enhancement of the nutritional status and quality of fresh pork sausages fol-
lowing the addition of linseed oil, fish oil and natural antioxidants. Meat Science, 
80(4), 1046–1054. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2008.04.024.
Valsta, L. M., Tapanainen, H. and Männistö, S. (2005). Meat fats in nutrition. Meat 
Science, 70(3), 525–530. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2004.12.016.
Varnam, A. H. and Sutherland, J. P. (1995). Meat and Meat Products: Technology, 
Chemistry, and Microbiology. New York, NY: Chapman & Hall.
Vedin, I., Cederholm, T., Levi, Y. F. et al. (2008). Effects of docosahexaenoic acid-rich 
n-3 fatty acid supplementation on cytokine release from blood mononuclear 
leukocytes: The OmegAD study. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 87(6), 
1616–1622. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18541548.
Verma, A. K., Sharma, B. D. and Banerjee, R. (2010). Effect of sodium chloride replace-
ment and apple pulp inclusion on the physico-chemical, textural and sensory 
properties of low fat chicken nuggets. LWT—Food Science and Technology, 43(4), 
715–719. doi:10.1016/j.lwt.2009.12.006.
Verplaetse, A. (1994). Influence of raw meat properties and processing technol-
ogy on aroma quality of raw fermented meat products. Proceedings of the 40th 
International Congress on Meat Science and Technology, 45–65, Den Haag.

511
Fat Reduction in Processed Meats
Vessby, B. (2003). Dietary fat, fatty acid composition in plasma and the meta-
bolic syndrome. Current Opinion in Lipidology, 14(1), 15–19. doi:10.1097/01.
mol.0000052859.26236.5f.
Wang, Y. (2009). Prebiotics: Present and future in food science and technology. Food 
Research International, 42, 8–12.
Warner, K. and Inglett, G. E. (1997). Flavor and texture characteristics of foods con-
taining Z-trim corn and oat fibers as fat and flour replacers. Cereal Foods World, 
42(10), 821–825.
Webb, E. C. and O’Neill, H. A. (2008). The animal fat paradox and meat quality. Meat 
Science, 80(1), 28–36. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2008.05.029.
Weiss, J., Gibis, M., Schuh, V. and Salminen, H. (2010). Advances in ingredient and 
processing systems for meat and meat products. Meat Science, 86(1), 196–213. 
doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2010.05.008.
Whitney, E. N. and Rolfes, S. R. (2002). Understanding Nutrition. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
World Health Organization (WHO). (2003). Diet, nutrition and the prevention of chronic 
diseases. World Health Organization Technical Report Series. Geneva, 916: i–viii-1-149.
Wirth, F. (1988). Technologies for making fat-reduce meat products, what possibilities 
are there? Fleischwirtschaf, 68, 1153–1156.
Yang, A., Keeton, J. T., Beilken, S. L. and Trout, G. R. (2001). Evaluation of some bind-
ers and fat substitutes in low-fat frankfurters. Journal of Food Science, 66(7), 1039–
1046. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.2001.tb08232.x.
Yasarlar, E. E., Daglioglu, O. and Yilmaz, I. (2007). Effects of cereal bran addition on 
chemical composition, cooking characteristics and sensory properties of Turkish 
meatballs. Asian Journal of Chemistry, 19(3), 2353–2361.
Yilmaz, I. (2005). Physicochemical and sensory characteristics of low fat meat-
balls with added wheat bran. Journal of Food Engineering, 69, 369–373. 
doi:10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2004.08.028.
Yilmaz, I. and Dağ lıoğ lu, O. (2003). The effect of replacing fat with oat bran on fatty 
acid composition and physicochemical properties of meatballs. Meat Science, 
65(2), 819–823. doi:10.1016/S0309-1740(02)00286-3.
Yilmaz, I. and Geçgel, U. (2009). Effect of inulin addition on physico-chemical and 
sensory characteristics of meatballs. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 46(5), 
473–476, Association of Food Scientists and Technologists (India).
Yoo, S. S., Kook, S. H., Park, S. Y., Shim, J. H. and Chin, K. B. (2007). Physicochemical 
characteristics, textural properties and volatile compounds in comminuted sau-
sages as affected by various fat levels and fat replacers. International Journal of Food 
Science and Technology, 42(9), 1114–1122. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2621.2006.01402.x.
Youssef, M. K. and Barbut, S. (2009). Effects of protein level and fat/oil on emulsion 
stability, texture, microstructure and color of meat batters. Meat Science, 82(2), 
228–233, Elsevier. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2009.01.015.
Yue, P. and Waring, S. (1998). Resistant starch in food applications. Cereal Foods World, 
43(9), 690–695.
Zhang, W., Xiao, S., Samaraweera, H., Lee, E. J. and Ahn, D. U. (2010). Improving functional 
value of meat products. Meat Science, 86(1), 15–31. doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2010.04.018.
Zhuang, X., Han, M., Kang, Z. L. et al. (2016). Effects of the sugarcane dietary fiber 
and pre-emulsified sesame oil on low-fat meat batter physicochemical prop-
erty, texture, and microstructure. Meat Science, 113, 107–115, Elsevier B.V. 
doi:10.1016/j.meatsci.2015.11.007.
Zóia, D. (2011). As gomas exudadas de plantas. Food Ingredients Brasil, 17, 26.


513
16
Processing of Nitrite-Free Cured Meats
Fereidoon Shahidi and Ronald B. Pegg 
16.1 Origins of Nitrite Curing of Meats
The origin of salting meats is lost in antiquity, but it is believed that it was first 
practiced and flourished in Sumeria during the third and fourth millenniums 
BC. From a historical perspective, meat curing can be defined as the addition 
of salt to meats for the sole purpose of preservation, that is, to inhibit or deter 
microbial spoilage. The preservation of meat resulted from necessity, so that the 
products could be held for extended periods for later consumption in times of 
scarcity. It was recognized that fresh cuts of meat could be preserved by treat-
ing them with a salt solution or packing them in dry salt (Aberle et al., 2001). 
Salting prevented bacterial growth on account of salt’s direct inhibitory effect 
or because of the drying action it had on meat (note that most bacteria require 
CONTENTS
16.1 Origins of Nitrite Curing of Meats .......................................................... 513
16.2 N-Nitrosamines .......................................................................................... 515
16.3 Processing Options When Curing Meats ............................................... 515
16.3.1 Formulating .................................................................................... 515
16.3.2 Curing Methods ............................................................................. 516
16.3.2.1 Dry Curing ....................................................................... 516
16.3.2.2 Brine Curing .................................................................... 517
16.3.2.3 Multiple-Needle Pumping ............................................. 518
16.3.2.4 Tumbling or Massaging ................................................. 518
16.3.2.5 Chopping or Blending .................................................... 519
16.4 Benefits and Drawbacks of Nitrite Curing ............................................. 519
16.4.1 Color Characteristics ..................................................................... 519
16.4.2 Antioxidant Properties ..................................................................523
16.4.3 Flavor Characteristics ....................................................................525
16.4.4 Antimicrobial Properties ..............................................................526
16.5 Tailor Designing Nitrite-Free Meat Products ........................................528
16.6 Other Developments .................................................................................529
References .............................................................................................................529

514
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
substantial amounts of moisture to survive and proliferate). Thus, rock salt was 
an important commodity that was routinely employed for muscle food preser-
vation in ancient China, Babylonia, and Sumeria (Jensen, 1953). However, high 
concentrations of salt promoted the formation of an unattractive brownish-
gray color within lean muscle tissue. At some point in the development of this 
art, more likely by accident than design, it was discovered that certain salts (i.e., 
those containing saltpeter) could impart or “fix” a unique pink or red color and 
flavor in meats (Binkerd and Kolari, 1975). A preference developed for the use 
of this special salt. Granulated or grain salt was formerly called “corn,” which 
comes from the Old Norse, korn, meaning grain; thus when beef was sprinkled 
with these salts, corned beef was the resultant product.
By medieval times, treating meat with salt, saltpeter, and smoke was com-
monplace, and saltpeter’s effect to “fix” the red color was well recognized. 
Gradually, sweet pickle and sugar cures evolved as sucrose became avail-
able as a commodity of trade. Sugar added flavor to the meat and helped to 
counteract some of the harshness and hardening effects of salt. As the art 
progressed, the term meat curing eventually was understood as the addition 
of salt, sugar, spices, saltpeter (nitrate), or nitrite to meat for its preservation 
and flavor enhancement (Townsend and Olson, 1987). Spices and other fla-
vorings were added to achieve distinctive brand flavors.
Scientific principles of meat curing were not applied until the latter half 
of the nineteenth and the early twentieth century when the growing meat-
packing trade began to search for ways to improve quality and to extend the 
shelf life of products. It was discovered that nitrite, not nitrate as originally 
thought, plays a multifunctional role in the meat matrix (Haldane, 1901; 
Polenske, 1891). Nitrite is responsible for developing or “fixing” the charac-
teristic color associated with cured meats; for creating a special flavor so that 
one can distinguish the flavor of corned beef from roast beef; for imparting 
antioxidant activity to the cooked product, thereby extending its shelf life; 
and for suppressing the outgrowth and production of toxin from the anaer-
obic bacterium, Clostridium botulinum. Since nitrite has been added to cure 
meats, U.S. Centers for Disease Control statistics indicate that botulism is no 
longer associated with cured meats. The industry has evolved to the point 
that quite a diverse list of cured meat products offering great taste, conve-
nience, and versatility is available to the consumer. On account of household 
refrigeration, the original need to cure meats no longer exists; nevertheless, 
consumers have become accustomed to certain products in their diet and 
still demand their availability in the market.
Until the late 1960s and early 1970s, the primary technological emphasis 
of nitrite usage had been to reduce the time required for curing as much as 
possible to increase production capacity. Modern technology and scientific 
understanding had made it possible to utilize smaller quantities of nitrite 
while exercising vastly improved control over the curing of meat and meat 
products. Suddenly, the technological emphasis shifted to problem solving 
with particular regard to N-nitrosamine production (Sebranek, 1979, 2010).

515
Processing of Nitrite-Free Cured Meats
16.2 N-Nitrosamines
Despite all of its desirable effects in processed meat products, nitrite under 
certain conditions such as pan frying forms N-nitrosamines at trace quan-
tities (i.e., parts-per-billion levels). Typical volatile N-nitrosamines detected 
in heat processed cured products include N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) 
and N-nitrosopyrrolidine (NPYR). Among cured products, fried bacon has 
consistently shown the presence of NDMA and NPYR at mean levels of up to 
3 and 25 μg/kg, respectively (Glória et al., 1997). These N-nitrosamines are car-
cinogenic, mutagenic, and teratogenic in experimental animals (Preussmann 
and Stewart, 1984; Tricker and Preussmann, 1991). Although the carcinogenic-
ity of N-nitrosamines in humans cannot be tested, epidemiological studies 
have suggested a possible link to the incidence of various cancers in humans.
N-nitrosamines are formed from the reaction of nitrite with free amino 
acids and amines in meat products under certain heat processing conditions 
(e.g., high temperatures associated with frying of bacon), or in the stomach 
after consumption. As it is difficult to control the level of endogenous factors, 
such as amino acids and amines, a reduction in the level of nitrite added 
to products or specifics of reaction and process conditions might be neces-
sary. Thus, the allowable level of nitrite addition in cured meats has been 
reduced to a maximum of 150–200 mg/kg in most products, with lower max-
imum addition levels for bacon (about 120 mg/kg). The meat industry has 
responded adequately and responsibly to concerns expressed about nitrite 
and the control of N-nitrosamine formation in processed meats. Nonetheless, 
two controversial studies published in the mid- to late 1990s recommended 
that excessive consumption of hot dogs and cured products be avoided to 
prevent the occurrence of leukemia in children (Blot et al., 1999; Peters et al., 
1994). To keep things in perspective, it should be noted that humans excrete 
noncarcinogenic N-nitrosoproline in their urine, thereby demonstrating that 
such compounds are also formed within the body (Loeppky, 1994).
16.3 Processing Options When Curing Meats
Before a discussion of processing meats using nitrite-free curing systems can 
be given, a review of formulation and processing options presently employed 
for curing meats is required.
16.3.1 Formulating
Formulating any food product is much more than simply recipe devel-
opment. In fact some even call it an art. It involves detailing the required 
processing steps and in what particular order they must be carried out to 

516
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
produce a high-quality finished product. Decisions when formulating meat 
products can entail the selection of meats and their levels of addition; choice 
of nonmeat ingredients such as salt, sweeteners, binders, and seasonings; 
method and length of curing; grind or chop size of meat and fat; oven or 
smokehouse schedules; type and diameter of casings; and type and method 
of packaging. Formulating meat products also requires preparing a product 
that meets recognized characteristics set out by the country’s standards of 
identity for that product. For meat companies, innovation is one of the single 
most important factors in building and maintaining a successful product or 
brand. A brand can be well recognized, but if over time that brand does not 
continue to offer value to consumers it will soon be eclipsed in the market.
When designing meat products it is practical to formulate by ingredient 
weight, which is based on the amount of the meat block. When formulating 
the seasonings, the processor must work in the weight of seasoning per 100 
lb. or kg of meat. Quantities can then be easily converted to percentages and 
the seasoning formula determined. For meat blocks not in 100 lb. or kg incre-
ments, the percentage usage of spice, oleoresin, or seasoning is calculated 
per pound or kilogram and then multiplied by the weight desired to deter-
mine the quantity required. Many processors weigh out the dry ingredients 
in a controlled-access room where the temperature and humidity are care-
fully monitored. Often after weighing, the critical components are packaged 
and then assembled for batch production. A checklist must be prepared and 
verified to ensure that all of the materials are accounted for. Meat processors 
keep very detailed records of all formulas, and most are proprietary. The 
formulas are designed so that costs can be easily calculated and updated as 
needed (especially in the case of least cost formulation products). Standard 
blending or formulation documentation includes a list of ingredients, the 
weight of the individual ingredients in one seasoning unit, the percentage of 
each ingredient in a batch, and the laboratory and plant code numbers.
16.3.2 Curing Methods
There are a few means by which meats can be cured. The basic methods 
include the following.
16.3.2.1 Dry Curing
Dry curing is the oldest technique, traditionally employed in bacon and ham 
manufacturing. It involves the application of uniform and quantified mix-
tures of salt, sugar, spices, and saltpeter or sodium nitrite to solid meat cuts. 
Industrial applications of dry curing are still carried out in Europe, but are 
generally restricted to the preparation of specialty ham products. The curing 
agents are rubbed in dry form over the surface of meat cuts, which are then 
placed in a cool room and allowed to cure. No water is added, so the curing 
agents are solubilized in the endogenous moisture of the muscle tissue. With 

517
Processing of Nitrite-Free Cured Meats
time, slow penetration of the cure into the meat via diffusion (about 2.5 cm/
week) and micrococcal reduction of nitrate to nitrite affords the character-
istic cured meat color and flavor of the product (Fox, 1974). More than one 
application of the salt mixture is necessary to affect a cure; the cuts must 
be “overhauled,” or turned over and restacked. This labor-intensive process 
requires a considerably longer period than curing comminuted meats; this is 
the main disadvantage of this approach. Another problem is that in thicker 
pieces of meat, spoilage organisms can begin growing before the preserva-
tives reach all parts of the product. The manufacture of dry-cured hams, 
nevertheless, provides a class of products with flavor and taste that cannot 
be re-created by any other nitrite-containing or nitrite-free curing method.
After curing is complete, the excess cure is washed off and the meat is 
placed under refrigeration (2°C–4°C) for 20–40 days to allow for salt equal-
ization throughout. In the case of hams, the meat is held in natural or air-
conditioned drying chambers and ripened for a minimum of 6 months and 
often 12 months or more, depending on each country’s traditional practices. 
The temperature is usually varied between 14°C and 20°C at relative humid-
ities ranging from 90% to 70%. Complex biochemical reactions that are 
mainly proteolytic and lipolytic in nature occur and a characteristic flavor 
is developed (Flores and Toldrá, 1993). Dry curing is used only for specialty 
items such as country-cured hams and bacon, as well as European-type dry-
cured hams such as Spanish Serrano and Iberian hams, Italian Parma, and 
San Daniele prosciuttos, or French Bayonne hams. These European hams are 
usually consumed raw, unlike country-style hams in the United States and 
Westphalia hams in Germany, which are smoked and then thermally pro-
cessed before consumption (Toldrá and Flores, 1998). Worldwide production 
of dry-cured products represents an important segment of the processed 
meat industry because these products possess unique flavor and texture 
attributes that apparently cannot be developed by any other means (Aberle 
et al., 2001).
16.3.2.2 Brine Curing
Brine is prepared by combining the salt, cure (i.e., sodium nitrite), and water-
soluble seasoning mixtures in water, which serves as a carrier. The strength 
of a brine solution or “pickle” is determined by the amount of salt present. 
A salometer is a specially graduated hydrometer that measures the strength 
of brines at a particular temperature (usually 40°F/4.4°C) and is calibrated 
to indicate the degree of salinity (this is essentially a measure of the brine’s 
density). A 100° salometer reading is equivalent to a 100% saturated salt solu-
tion. Most large processors prepare stock solutions of brine at a 100° salom-
eter reading and then formulate working pickles with additional additives 
at lower strengths. The presence of sweeteners, phosphates, nitrite, and ery-
thorbate in a brine will affect salometer readings to an extent. Typical pickles 
have strengths of 60°–70°, with 70° brine being the most common. For brine 

518
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
immersion or cover pickling, the meat pieces are simply immersed in the brine 
for a specified period. For example, hams and shoulders are normally cured 
for 2–2.5 days per pound in 70° brine. Due to high water activity, microbial 
growth and spoilage can arise during pickling even though the product is 
refrigerated and salt is present at an appreciable concentration. Although the 
penetration of ingredients into the muscle tissue is faster than in dry curing, 
this technique also suffers from slowness and is not widely employed by the 
industry. Presently, only specialty products such as neck bones, tails, pigs’ feet, 
and salt pork are cured in North America in this way (Aberle et al., 2001).
16.3.2.3 Multiple-Needle Pumping
The practice of pumping or injecting meat with a perforated needle origi-
nated in the late nineteenth century and greatly shortened the length of time 
required to cure meat. The process of multiple-needle injection has become 
popular and such designed machines have ensured rapid, continuous process-
ing of meat cuts. A brine or pickle is prepared and then injected mechanically 
under pressure through needles, which are perforated along the stem near the 
point, into primal cuts of meat. In this multiple-needle injection technique, a 
conveyor belt carries meat under a bank of offset needles through which brine 
is pumped until a desired target weight is achieved. The spacing of the nee-
dles, their size, and the dwell time between strokes are important variables to 
ensure good distribution and retention of the pickle. By way of the many chan-
nels running throughout the muscle tissue, the cure is rapidly distributed. The 
brine injected into commercial mild-cured products is typically a 70° pickle. 
The main advantages of multiple-needle pumping include increased product 
yield, greatly reduced labor costs, and time required for production. After 
pumping, some products are cooked immediately, whereas others are fur-
ther processed by immersing them in a brine cure for a period (e.g., Canadian 
bacon) or subjecting them to a mechanical operation such as tumbling.
16.3.2.4 Tumbling or Massaging
Tumbling or massaging of pickle-injected meat cuts is generally employed to 
speed up the curing process, to facilitate extraction of salt-soluble proteins, and 
to improve the texture, bind, water-holding capacity, and yield of the finished 
product. Tumblers are large stainless steel units that rotate in a circular fash-
ion for a period of time and may also have vacuum capabilities. Inside, baffles 
continuously lift up pieces of meat to the upper part of the machine. From 
here they fall, striking the meat mass below, producing an intense mechani-
cal action suitable for high-yield products. Muscle fibers are disrupted by this 
mechanical action, which makes cellular membranes more permeable and 
facilitates the distribution and absorption of brine. Some degree of massaging 
also occurs as the chunks slide over each other as the tumbler turns. Tumblers 
typically provide somewhat more of a destructive effect than massagers on 

519
Processing of Nitrite-Free Cured Meats
account of the impact force generated from the mechanical action. Thus, not 
all cured meat products can be tumbled. A fitting example for the benefits of 
tumbling comes from ham production: hams processed in this fashion are 
more uniform, as brine uptake is more tightly controlled and pickle pockets 
are reduced. The tighter control of pickle uptake results from the ability to 
pump the hams at, or somewhat below, the target pump and then adjusting 
the product’s uptake to the exact percentage pump by adding pickle directly 
to the tumbler. Tumblers and massagers in meat processing operations have 
resulted in the higher processing yields and lower production costs for a num-
ber of value-added meat products.
16.3.2.5 Chopping or Blending
Dry-curing ingredients are distributed directly into ground meat products 
during the grinding, chopping, and emulsification steps involved in bat-
ter preparation. The employment of nitrite-free curing systems using the 
preformed cooked cured meat pigment (CCMP), as described later, is best 
achieved for products using this curing method.
16.4 Benefits and Drawbacks of Nitrite Curing
Two ingredients, salt and nitrite, are essential components in meat curing. 
Nitrite is the active agent in curing; all reactions taking place have some rela-
tionship to nitrite chemistry. For the production of dry-cured or fermented 
meat products, however, nitrate is still required in this long ripening process 
for slow nitrite generation by bacterial reduction. Nitrite can therefore be 
considered unique. This one food additive can afford to meet a characteristic 
cured color by means of a heat-stable nitrosylprotoheme pigment, a typical 
cured flavor, an extended period of refrigerated storage of cooked products 
without the worry of warmed-over flavor development, and bacteriostatic 
action against C. botulinum spores. It seems clear that the possibility of finding 
a single compound to mimic all functions of nitrite is remote at best. Although 
the N-nitrosamine scare has died down, nitrite-free curing of meat might still 
be attractive in view of the fact that many of the effects of nitrite can be easily 
duplicated by the presence of adjuncts, together with refrigeration. The answer 
lies in the development of composite nonnitrite curing mixtures.
16.4.1 Color Characteristics
Although the bacteriostatic action of nitrite is most important from a health 
standpoint, the color of the meat product will influence the customer’s 
decision to purchase the product. Numerous studies have supported the 

520
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
view that certain colors do, in fact, influence food acceptance (Kostyla and 
Clydesdale, 1978). For meat, it is the quantity of hemoproteins, particularly 
that of myoglobin and its relationship with the environment surrounding 
it that determines the meat’s color (Ledward, 1992; Livingston and Brown, 
1981). The addition of nitrite to meat followed by thermal processing pro-
duces a relatively stable pink-colored pigment. If nitrite were eliminated 
from cured meats, the result would be products with beige or tan color, 
unless an acceptable colorant is employed.
A number of colorants to replace nitrite such as nicotinic acid, 3- and 
4-acylpyridine, N,N-diethylnicotinamide, erythrosine, protoporphyrin-IX, 
cochineal, dried radish chip extracts, betalain pigments from beet root 
extract, and angkak from Monascus purpureus have been tested in meat sys-
tems. Unfortunately, color fixation, toxicological, oxidation, or thermal sta-
bility issues have prevented their use. In 1975, a U.S. patent was issued to 
Sweet (1975), who first proposed the use of composite nonnitrite curing mix-
tures for duplicating the cumulative action of nitrite. His multicomponent 
system consisted of a red colorant—erythrosine—an antioxidant/chelator, 
an antimicrobial agent, and all other curing adjuncts except for nitrite. 
Efforts in the laboratory of Shahidi toward the development of a compos-
ite nitrite-free curing system, which bestows the characteristic and desirable 
attributes of cooked cured meat products without N-nitrosamine formation 
and which may be employed at an industrial level, have been successful. 
Sweet’s approach was employed for preparing nitrite-free products, but the 
colorant of choice was the natural CCMP. This nitrosylated heme pigment 
was preformed outside the meat matrix and then applied to meat. Palmin 
and coworkers first suggested using such a pigment for improving the color 
of sausages (Palmin et al., 1973, 1975; Palmin and Prizenko, 1974).
The pigment is manufactured from the red blood cells of animals, which 
are an industrial by-product of abattoirs, and a nitrosating agent in the pres-
ence of a reductant. The pigment can be prepared in a direct, one-step process 
or by an indirect method through a hemin intermediate (Shahidi and Pegg, 
1991c,d; Shahidi et al., 1984, 1985, 1994); the preparation of the latter process is 
depicted in Figure 16.1. The coloring efficacy of CCMP, as part of a composite 
nitrite-free curing package, has been tested in the meat from a number of 
species, but mostly for pork. Addition of CCMP to comminuted pork at 3–30 
mg/kg levels produced a pink color after thermal processing in all cases, 
albeit of different intensities that was visually similar to nitrite-treated pork 
systems. Although various levels of CCMP were employed (Table 16.1), colo-
rimetric data (i.e., Hunter color values) demonstrated that pigment-treated 
pork samples at a 12–18 mg/kg addition level were not significantly (p > .05) 
different from their nitrite-cured counterpart (Pegg and Shahidi, 2000). 
Studies have shown that the color intensity of nitrite or CCMP-treated meat 
products depends on the endogenous myoglobin content of meat (Pegg, 1993; 
Shahidi and Pegg, 1991a; Stevanovi  ´c         et al., 1997). Whether there is an interac-
tion between myoglobin and the added CCMP is uncertain. Nevertheless, 

521
Processing of Nitrite-Free Cured Meats
meats richer in myoglobin require greater addition levels of CCMP to attain 
an attractive cured color in the final product (Pegg and Shahidi, 1990).
In a pilot-scale study, nitrite-free cured frankfurter and salami products 
were prepared. Industry panel members were unable to distinguish the 
nitrite-cured control (i.e., 200 mg/kg sodium nitrite addition based on for-
mulation) from the nitrite-free test samples (i.e., 21–27 mg/kg CCMP) based 
on visual observation (Pegg, 1993). Frankfurter and salami products used 
beef, pork, some organ tissues, and mechanically deboned chicken meat in 
their formulations. It was only when the two sets of samples were examined 
under bright daylight that the nitrite-free cured sample was discovered to be 
slightly redder and darker in appearance (Shahidi et al., 1993).
The preformed CCMP undergoes decomposition in the presence of light 
and air, as does the pigment present in nitrite-cured meats. Unlike the 
CCMP in processed products, there is no protein matrix protecting the nitro-
sylated heme pigment from oxidation. Therefore, its stabilization is crucial. 
The preformed CCMP was protected by microencapsulation using modified 
starch, cyclodextrins, and gums followed by spray drying. In this manner, 
the pigment remains “locked” in a powder format until it is released by the 
moisture when mixed into ground meat or by its dissolution in water or a 
pickle. The resultant powdered cooked cured meat pigment (PCCMP) acts as 
a potent agent for color development in nitrite-free curing mixtures. PCCMP 
was applied to various meat systems and found to successfully duplicate 
the color characteristics of nitrite-cured analogues (Shahidi and Pegg, 1991b). 
TABLE 16.1
Concentration Effect of the Preformed CCMP on Hunter Color Values of Cooked 
Ground Porka
Treatment (mg/kg)
Hunter Values
Hue Angle (arctan b/a)
L
a
b
No additive
58.2 ± 0.5
 4.8 ± 0.1
11.9 ± 0.1
68.0 ± 0.4
NaNO2, 156
57.8 ± 0.2
13.4 ± 0.2
 9.2 ± 0.1
34.5 ± 0.5
CCMP, 3
58.4 ± 0.5
12.6 ± 0.2
 9.1 ± 0.1
35.8 ± 0.5
CCMP, 6
57.9 ± 0.2
12.8 ± 0.1
 9.1 ± 0.1
35.4 ± 0.4
CCMP, 9
57.3 ± 0.3
13.0 ± 0.2
 9.1 ± 0.1
35.2 ± 0.5
CCMP, 12
57.1 ± 0.2
13.2 ± 0.1
 9.1 ± 0.1
34.6 ± 0.3
CCMP, 18
56.4 ± 0.2
13.5 ± 0.1
 9.2 ± 0.1
34.3 ± 0.3
CCMP, 24
56.1 ± 0.4
13.8 ± 0.2
 9.1 ± 0.1
33.6 ± 0.4
CCMP, 30
55.8 ± 0.3
14.1 ± 0.2
 9.1 ± 0.1
32.8 ± 0.4
Source: Reprinted from Pegg, R. B. Development of nitrite-free meat curing systems. PhD 
thesis, Memorial University, St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada, 1993. 
With permission.
CCMP, cooked cured meat pigment.
a All pork systems were prepared with 20% (w/w) distilled water and 550 mg/kg sodium 
ascorbate.

522
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
CH
H2C
H3C
CH2
C
H
CH3
N
Protein
N
H
CH3
H2O
Fe(II)
H3C
N
N
N
N
COOH
(One of the four heme moieties from bovine red blood cells, red, Fe2+)
Hemin isolation by
Schalfejew method
using acetic acid/salt
Dissolution in an acetate
buffer containing a reductant
and polyphosphate
Mononitrosyl protoheme
(Cooked cured meat pigment, pink, Fe2+)
(NO) addition
Hemin chloride
(Green/black color in basic solution, Fe3+)
HOOC
NO
CH
H2C
H3C
CH2
C
H
CH3
CH3
Fe(III)
H3C
Cl–
N
N
N
N
COOH
HOOC
CH
H2C
H3C
CH2
C
H
CH3
CH3
Fe(II)
H3C
N
N
N
N
COOH
HOOC
FIGURE 16.1
Preparation and chemical structure of the preformed cooked cured meat pigment from hemin 
chloride after its isolation from bovine red blood cells.

523
Processing of Nitrite-Free Cured Meats
The optimal addition level of PCCMP to meat depends primarily on its 
endogenous myoglobin content (Shahidi and Pegg, 1991a). Best performance 
of the pigment, however, was observed for meat systems containing a low or 
intermediate concentration of myoglobin.
16.4.2 Antioxidant Properties
Nitrite functions as a strong antioxidant in cured meats and thus prevents 
lipid oxidation. However, nitrite is not unique in its role as a food-grade anti-
oxidant. Shahidi (1989) proposed that any agent or combination of agents 
that prevents lipid oxidation, with the exception of nitrite precursors, would 
in principal duplicate the antioxidant role of nitrite in the curing process.
To reproduce the antioxidative efficacy of nitrite, a number of antioxidants 
(Shahidi et al., 1987a), sequestrants (Shahidi et al., 1986), and their combina-
tions (Shahidi et al., 1987b, 1988) were examined. Addition of antioxidants 
to meat and meat products resulted in the preservation of meat quality by 
retarding autoxidation and rancidity development, as well as discoloration 
and loss of nutrients. The inhibitory effect of the antioxidants was attributed 
to their ability to donate a hydrogen atom or an electron to a lipid-free radical 
as well as possibly to form a complex between the antioxidants themselves 
and the lipid molecule (Dziezak, 1986). The concentration of carbonyl com-
pounds produced in these systems from autoxidation was markedly reduced 
when combinations containing polyphosphates, ascorbates, and low levels 
of an antioxidant were used. The spectrum of notable carbonyl compounds 
was, however, similar to the nitrite-cured system.
Among synthetic antioxidants, butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) and 
tert-butylhydroquinone (TBHQ) were most effective, even at 30 mg/kg, in 
retarding oxidation during a five-week storage period at 4°C. This was con-
firmed by monitoring the production of 2-thiobarbituric reactive substances 
(TBARSs) over this period and comparing to those for the nitrite-cured control 
(Table 16.2). Among the food-grade sequestrants, sodium acid pyrophosphate, 
tetrasodium pyrophosphate, sodium tripolyphosphate (STPP), and ethylene-
diaminetetraacetic acid were the most efficacious. Sodium ascorbate and STPP 
alone retarded lipid oxidation, but together, a strong synergistic action was 
noted (Shahidi and Pegg, 1992). In fact, the mixture containing sodium ascor-
bate (550 mg/kg) and STPP (3000 mg/kg) with or without a phenolic antioxi-
dant (30 mg/kg) was as effective as sodium nitrite (150 mg/kg) in the presence 
of sodium ascorbate (550 mg/kg). Addition of sodium nitrite to meat contain-
ing sodium ascorbate and STPP at the abovementioned levels did not have any 
further effect in controlling lipid oxidation (Shahidi et al., 1987b).
In the food industry, there has been a move to clean label products and 
hence the use of natural ingredients due to greater sensitivity of con-
sumers to synthetic additives, and especially since BHA and butylated 
hydroxytoluene (BHT) are suspected to have carcinogenic activity (Valentão 
et al., 2002). Research has shown that constituents of aromatic plants can 

524
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
function as natural antioxidants and thereby prevent or retard rancidity of 
food lipids, improve sensory scores, and offer greater consumer acceptance 
of food products (Nakatani, 1997). Crude extracts of spices, herbs, and other 
plant materials rich in polyphenolics are increasingly of interest because 
they have the capacity to retard oxidative degradation of lipids and thereby 
improve the quality and nutritional value of food (Amarowicz et al., 2004). 
Although certain spices and herbs, or their fractions, may possess marked 
antioxidant activity, their practical application to meat and meat products 
may be restricted due to a pungent or characteristic flavor imparted by the 
spice and to their thermal stability in the product.
The antioxidant activity of selected spices and their oleoresins in pork sys-
tems has been investigated. The TBARS values for spice-containing samples 
were lower than those of the control, thus indicating protection to meat by 
these spices against lipid oxidation. The protection, however, was concentra-
tion dependent and a saturated point was reached after a certain amount of 
spice had been added. For example, the addition of clove at a 500 mg/kg level 
achieved 96% inhibition of TBARS, but this protection remained unchanged 
even when higher concentrations were employed (Shahidi et al., 1995). In the 
TABLE 16.2
TBARS Values of Cooked Ground Pork Pretreated with Different Additives after a 
5-Week Storage Period at 4°C
Exp. No.
Additives (mg/kg)a
TBARS Valueb
1
Control, no additives
15.46
2
Sodium nitrite, 150
0.63
3
Butylated hydroxyanisole, 30
0.44
4
tert-Butylhydroquinone, 30
0.35
5
Sodium tripolyphosphate, 3000
1.86
6
Tetrasodium pyrophosphate, 3000
1.66
7
Sodium hexametaphosphate, 3000
7.21
8
(5) + Sodium ascorbate, 550
0.27
9
(6) + Sodium ascorbate, 550
0.23
10
(7) + Sodium ascorbate, 550
0.29
11
(8) + (3)
0.20
12
(8) + (4)
0.18
13
Preformed cooked cured meat pigment, 12
9.89
14
(11) + (13)
0.34
15
(12) + (13)
0.24
16
(14) + Sodium hypophosphite, 3000
0.28
17
(15) + Sodium hypophosphate, 3000
0.21
Source: Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 43, Shahidi, F. and Pegg, R. B., Nitrite-free meat curing 
systems: Update and review, 185–191, Copyright 1992, with permission from Elsevier.
a All pork systems were prepared with 20% (w/w) distilled water and listed additive(s).
b TBARS (2-thiobarbituric acid reactive substances) values were determined by the classical 
distillation method and are reported as mg malonaldehyde equivalents/kg meat.

525
Processing of Nitrite-Free Cured Meats
pork systems, clove, sage, rosemary, and oregano appeared quite effective in 
retarding lipid oxidation as TBARS values remained at less than 1 μg/g sample 
over the entire three-week storage period at 4°C. Because future research into 
novel sources of natural antioxidants as a component in functional food for-
mulations is expected to continue, there will be new preparations available 
to curb lipid oxidation with the potential of being part of a nitrite-free cur-
ing system. The use of rosemary extract and green tea in meat product has 
been a common practice in the more recent formulations (Senanayake, 2013). 
Furthermore, protein extenders such as meals from mustard, canola, and other 
grains belonging to the cereal, legume, and oilseeds groups may be used as all 
of these include considerable amount of antioxidant phenolics (Shahidi, 2016).
16.4.3 Flavor Characteristics
According to the National Academy of Sciences (NAS, 1982), the generation 
of cured meat flavor is most likely a composite sensation derived from the 
contribution of many odoriferous compounds. No research has been able to 
specify a positive contribution by nitrite to flavor in chemical terms, but the 
NAS suggested that nitrite probably influences the flavor of cured meat by 
virtue of its antioxidative effects. Because the mechanism involved in the 
production of the characteristic cured meat flavor is uncertain, there is no 
known nitrite substitute that can duplicate this flavor.
There were contradicting studies throughout the 1970s and 1980s as to the 
impact of salt and nitrite on cured meat flavor. What is clear, however, is 
that the amount of salt used in curing processes plays a vital role in deter-
mining the overall flavor of the product. Yun (1984) and Yun et al. (1987) 
evaluated combinations of ingredients that would effectively prevent lipid 
oxidation in cooked ground pork systems to be used in the nitrite-free cur-
ing of meat products such as frankfurters. The authors reported that sensory 
evaluation scores of pork systems treated with 3000 mg/kg STPP, 500 mg/kg 
sodium ascorbate, and 30 mg/kg BHA or TBHQ were not significantly dif-
ferent (p > .05) from their nitrite-cured (156 mg/kg) counterparts. Yun (1984) 
also observed that the concentration of volatiles identified in the distillate 
of cooked pork samples, notably hexanal, was significantly reduced (p < .05) 
when samples had been pretreated with the preceding antioxidant/chelating 
agent combinations. The concentration of volatiles in these systems was 
depressed almost to the level of the nitrite-cured control (Table 16.3).
These two studies suggest, for the most part, that it is possible to prepare 
nitrite-free cured meat products without seriously compromising their 
flavor. If one accepts the views of Cross and Ziegler (1965) that cured ham 
flavor represents the basic or true-to-nature flavor of meat derived from pre-
cursors other than triacylglycerols or phospholipids and that the different 
aromas of the various types of cooked meat depend on the spectrum of car-
bonyl compounds derived by lipid oxidation, then any agent or combination 
that suppresses lipid oxidation, would, in principle, duplicate the flavor of 

526
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
nitrite-cured meat. In other words, the antioxidative role of nitrite simply 
retards the breakdown of unsaturated fatty acids and the formation of sec-
ondary lipid oxidation products; this may be the main process involved in 
modifying the volatile profile of cooked cured meats by suppressing the for-
mation of oxidation products, thereby allowing the unique flavor associated 
with cured products to be revealed.
16.4.4 Antimicrobial Properties
Nitrite exerts a concentration-dependent antimicrobial effect in cured meat 
products in the inhibition of the outgrowth of spores of putrefactive and 
pathogenic bacteria such as C. botulinum (NAS, 1982). Irrespective of the 
fate of nitrite, its removal from or reduction in meat products must be coun-
terbalanced by alternatives that will assure safety from botulinal hazards 
in abused products (Shahidi and Pegg, 1991d). At the same time, the tra-
ditional identity of the cured meat product in question must be retained. 
According to Sofos and Busta (1980), any substance to be considered as an 
alternative to nitrite should be suitable for use in all cured meat products 
and should control other microorganisms of public health significance, 
delay product spoilage, and not interfere with beneficial microorganisms, 
such as lactic acid-producing cultures, required in the manufacturing of 
TABLE 16.3
Effect on the Concentration of Dominant Carbonyl Compounds from Cooked 
Ground Pork When Treated with Either Sodium Nitrite or a Nitrite-Free Preparation
Relative Concentration
Carbonyl Compounds
Uncured Meata
Nitrite Curedb
Nitrite-Free Treatedc
Hexanal
100
7.0
6.5
Pentanal
31.3
0.5
0.5
Heptanal
3.8
< 0.5
0.5
Octanal
3.6
< 0.5
0.5
Nonanal
8.8
0.5
0.7
trans-2-Octenal
2.0
–
–
trans-2-Nonenal
1.0
–
–
trans-2-Decenal
1.1
–
<0.1
trans-2-Undecenal
1.4
0.5
0.5
trans,trans-2,4-Decadienal
1.1
—
<0.1
Source:  Reprinted from Food Chemistry, 43, Shahidi, F. and Pegg, R. B., Nitrite-free meat curing 
systems: Update and review, 185–191, Copyright 1992, with permission from Elsevier.
a Pork system contained 20% (w/w) distilled water.
b Pork system contained 20% (w/w) distilled water; sodium nitrite, 150 mg/kg; and sodium 
ascorbate, 550 mg/kg.
c Pork system contained 20% (w/w) distilled water; preformed cooked cured meat pigment, 
12 mg/kg; sodium tripolyphosphate, 3000 mg/kg; sodium ascorbate, 550 mg/kg; and tert-
butylhydroquinone, 30 mg/kg.

527
Processing of Nitrite-Free Cured Meats
fermented meat products. The compound of choice must also be at least as 
effective as nitrite, safe, heat stable, flavorless, and preferably effective at 
low concentrations.
Alternatives to nitrite that have been tested include propylparabens, sorbic 
acid and its potassium salts, esters of fumaric acid, lactic acid and its salts, 
nisin and other bacteriocins. Sodium hypophosphite has been proposed 
for use as an antimicrobial agent in foods (Rhodehamel and Pierson, 1990). 
Microbiological studies have indicated that a total or partial replacement of 
nitrite with this compound effectively inhibits production of C. botulinum 
toxins (Banner, 1981). At 3000 mg/kg alone or at 1000 mg/kg in combina-
tion with 40 mg/kg of nitrite, sodium hypophosphite imparted anticlostrid-
ial protection to meat products equivalent to that provided by 120 mg/kg 
of nitrite. Wood et al. (1986) evaluated the antibotulinal activity of sodium 
hypophosphite, potassium sorbate, and monomethyl fumarate in nitrite-
free curing systems. The treatment containing 3000 mg/kg sodium hypo-
phosphite, together with CCMP, sodium ascorbate, STPP, and TBHQ, most 
closely resembled that of nitrite at 150 mg/kg in its ability to prevent spore 
TABLE 16.4
Effect of Treatment Composition on Gas and Toxin Production by Clostridium 
botulinum in Cooked Ground Porka
Incubation at 27°C (Days)
Exp 
No.
Treatmentb
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
27
1
No additives
34/34 
+
2
NaNO2, 150
0/36 – 11/36 +
5/18 +
8/13 +
3/5 *
2/2 +
3
(2) + ASC
0/36 –
0/32 –
15/30 – 5/14 +
3/9 +
4/6 +
1/2 +
0/1 – 0/1 –
4
CCMP, 12
17/17 
+
5
(4) + ASC + 
STPP + TBHQ
12/37 
+
25/25 +
6
(4) + SHP
1/18 –
1/16 +
2/14 +
4/12 +
3/5 +
1/2 +
0/1 –
0/1 – 0/1 –
7
(4) + ASC + 
SHP
5/17 –
0/11 –
3/11 *
6/8 +
0/2 –
0/2 –
0/2 –
0/2 – 0/2 –
8
(5) + SHP
6/35 –
3/27 *
1/24 –
6/22 + 3/16 * 5/13 + 6/8 +
1/2 + 0/1 –
9
(5) + PS
0/39 – 32/35 +
3/3 +
10
(5) + MMF
0/37 –
1/33 –
17/31 + 9/18 +
3/7 +
3/4 +
0/1 +
0/1 + 0/1 –
Source: Reprinted from Wood, D. S. et al., Journal of Food Protection, 49, 691–695, 1986. 
Copyright held by the International Association for Food Protection, Des Moines, 
Iowa, IA. With permission.
a Number of packs showing gas production/total number of packs. + = toxin present; – = 
toxin absent; * = presence of toxin was not tested.
b Additives were as follows: sodium ascorbate (ASC), preformed cooked cured meat pigment 
(CCMP), sodium tripolyphosphate (STPP), tert-butylhydroquinone (TBHQ), sodium hypo-
phosphite (SHP), potassium sorbate (PS), and monomethyl fumarate (MMF).

528
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
outgrowth and toxin production (Table 16.4). Monomethyl fumarate at 1250 
mg/kg was slightly less effective than sodium hypophosphite and these 
additives had no adverse effect on the oxidative stability or the color of for-
mulated pork products. Moreover, sodium hypophosphite is bland in taste; 
nitrite-free bacon containing 3000 mg/kg of it had a flavor as desirable as 
that of its conventionally cured counterpart.
16.5 Tailor Designing Nitrite-Free Meat Products
The use of the nitrite-free meat curing system is highly dependent on the 
product in question. First, this system cannot be used to dry-cure meat prod-
ucts. Nitrite is a very small anion, whose relative rate of diffusion through 
muscle tissue utilizing the meat’s natural moisture is markedly faster than 
that of CCMP or PCCMP. The molecular size of CCMP/PCCMP is several 
orders of magnitude larger than that of nitrite; this affects the pigment’s rate 
of diffusion through the meat. Second, when formulating meat products, 
nitrite-free curing systems work best in ground or emulsified meat products, 
as opposed to whole muscle cuts; CCMP or PCCMP is more uniformly dis-
tributed throughout the meat matrix. CCMP or PCCMP can also be added 
to a solution and used in a pickle formulation for treating solid cuts of meat. 
Unlike nitrite-containing pickles, nitrite-free ones with CCMP or PCCMP 
are more sensitive to oxidation and therefore need to be prepared in a special 
manner (i.e., dissolution of the pigment in a polyphosphate and ascorbate 
solution before mixing it with brine) just before injecting it into pieces of 
meat. Care must be exercised in the application of nitrite-free curing sys-
tems in whole muscle cuts to ensure that the pigment is evenly distributed 
throughout and that red blotches are avoided. After pumping meats, tum-
bling or massaging of the product facilitates an even distribution of the 
CCMP throughout the muscle tissue.
All nitrite-free cured meat products must contain CCMP or PCCMP for proper 
color fixation and an antioxidant or sequestrant system (i.e., either synthetic or 
natural antioxidants) for protection of meat lipids against oxidation, but not 
necessarily an antimicrobial agent. If the meat product being formulated is to 
be canned, such as a Vienna-type sausage or a meat loaf, the product will be 
heat sterilized and an antimicrobial agent is not required. If the product is to 
be stored in a retail display case under a modified atmosphere at refrigerated 
temperatures, again an antimicrobial agent may not be needed. On the other 
hand, for a traditional product such as a vacuum-packaged frankfurter, inclu-
sion of an antimicrobial agent, such as sodium hypophosphite, is mandatory in 
the product for protection against the outgrowth of spores from C. botulinum.
To summarize, several nitrite-free combinations consisting of the preformed 
CCMP or its encapsulated product, PCCMP, a sequestrant, and an antioxidant, 
as well as an antimicrobial agent for the curing of meat products have been 

529
Processing of Nitrite-Free Cured Meats
described. These mixtures successfully reproduced the color, oxidative stability, 
and flavor as well as the antimicrobial effects of nitrite in meat products. Further 
details on the process are available in three U.S. patents (Shahidi and Pegg, 1993, 
1995a,b). The question now put forward is this: is there any commercial value 
to these nitrite-free meat curing systems? Limits imposed by regulatory agen-
cies on the level of nitrite permitted in various meat products, coupled with the 
responsible reductions in nitrite addition implemented by the meat processing 
industry have reduced the possibility of overcuring and N-nitrosamine forma-
tion. Today, product innovations and food safety (e.g., hazard analysis critical 
control points [HACCPs]) drive the meat industry. Benefits from the controlled 
and responsible use of nitrite overwhelm the possible risks from the outbreak 
of botulinal food poisoning. Because of nitrite’s connection with cancer-causing 
N-nitrosamines, its use, nonetheless, is a potential trouble area. Hence, employ-
ment of a nonnitrite cure for a niche market is deemed desirable and also offers 
a practical solution to address the needs of the industry and consumers.
16.6 Other Developments
Other developments in the field include making use of celery extract as a 
source of nitrate that is carefully reduced to nitrite, which is then used in the 
curing of meat. While this process has also been referenced as nitrite-free cur-
ing by the user industry, this may be considered as misuse of the term as the 
process is not nitrite-free and the residual nitrite in the products is not less than 
those that use nitrite directly. In fact, our own routine testings have shown the 
reverse trend of increased nitrite residues in such products. Although we have 
not checked the N-nitrosamine content of these products, one may assume 
that their content could indeed be higher than directly cured products with 
nitrite. Thus, responsible measures should be considered when developing 
alternatives to the currently used nitrite curing processing. In this connection, 
Sebranek et al. (2012) have summarized advances in natural and organic cur-
ing processes. Related publications on this topic are also worthy of consider-
ation (Jackson et al., 2011; Sebranek and Bacus, 2007; Sindelar et al., 2007a,b,c). 
Thus, the solutions put forward in this chapter fill the existing knowledge gap, 
but their adoption by the industry may need new initiatives.
References
Aberle, E., Forrest, J. C., Gerrard, D. E. and Mills, E. W. (2001). Principles of Meat Science 
(4th Ed.). Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt.
Amarowicz, R., Pegg, R. B., Rahimi-Moghaddam, P., Barl, B. and Weil, J. A. (2004). 
Free-radical scavenging capacity and antioxidant activity of selected plant spe-
cies from the Canadian prairies. Food Chemistry, 84, 551–562.

530
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Banner, R. J. (1981). Sodium hypophosphite: New nitrite replacer? Food Engineering, 
53(10), 130.
Binkerd, E. F. and Kolari, O. E. (1975). The history and use of nitrate and nitrite in the 
curing of meat. Food and Cosmetics Toxicology, 13, 655–661.
Blot, W. J., Henderson, B. E. and Boice, J. D., Jr. (1999). Childhood cancer in relation 
to cured meat intake: Review of the epidemiological evidence. Nutrition and 
Cancer, 34, 111–118.
Cross, C. K. and Ziegler, P. (1965). A comparison of the volatile fractions from cured 
and uncured meat. Journal of Food Science, 30, 610–614.
Dziezak, J. D. (1986). Preservatives: Antioxidants. Food Technology, 40(9), 94–97, 
100–102.
Flores, J. and Toldrá, F. (1993). Curing. In: Macrae, R., Robinson, R. K. and Sadlor, M. J. 
(eds.) Encyclopedia of Food Science, Food Technology and Nutrition. London, UK: 
Academic Press, pp. 1277–1282.
Fox, J. B., Jr. (1974). Role of cure accelerators. In: Proceedings of the Meat Industry 
Research Conference. Arlington, VA, American Meat Institute Foundation, 17–21.
Glória, M. B. A., Barbour, J. F. and Scanlan, R. A. (1997). Volatile nitrosamines in fried 
bacon. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 45, 1816–1818.
Haldane, J. (1901). The red colour of salted meat. Journal of Hygiene, 1, 115–122.
Jackson, A. L., Sullivan, G. A., Charlwit K., Sebranek, J. G. and Dickson, J. S. (2011). 
Survival and growth of Clostridium perfringens in commercial no-nitrate-or-
nitrite-added (natural and organic) frankfurters, hams, and bacon. Journal of 
Food Protection, 74, 410–416.
Jensen, L. B. (1953). Man’s Foods: Nutrition and Environments in Food Gathering Times 
and Food Producing Times. Champaign, IL: Garrard Press.
Kostyla, A. S. and Clydesdale, F. M. (1978). The psychophysical relationships 
between color and flavor. CRC Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 
10, 303–321.
Ledward, D. A. (1992). Colour of raw and cooked meat. In: Johnston, D. W., Knight, 
M. K. and Ledward, D. A. (eds.) The Chemistry of Muscle-Based Foods. Cambridge, 
UK: The Royal Society of Chemistry, pp. 128–144.
Livingston, D. J. and Brown, W. D. (1981). The chemistry of myoglobin and its reac-
tions. Food Technology, 35, 244–252.
Loeppky, R. N. (1994). Nitrosamine and N-nitroso compound chemistry and bio-
chemistry. In: Loeppky, R. N. and Michejda, C. J. (eds.) Nitrosamines and Related 
N-Nitroso Compounds: Chemistry and Biochemistry. Washington, DC: American 
Chemical Society, pp. 1–18.
Nakatani, N. (1997). Antioxidants from spices and herbs. In: Shahidi, F. (ed.) Natural 
Antioxidants: Chemistry, Health Effects, and Applications. Champaign, IL: AOCS 
Press, pp. 64–75.
National Academy of Sciences (NAS). (1982). Alternatives to the Current Use of Nitrite 
in Foods. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Palmin, V., Fedorova, T., Prizenko, V. and Loginova, O. (1975). The manufacture of 
nitrosohaemochromogen and its application as meat product colorant. Myasnaya 
Industriya SSSR, 2, 40–41.
Palmin, V. V. and Prizenko, V. K. (1974). Stabilization of colour of cured meat using 
nitric oxide. Izvestia Vysshikh Uchebnykh Zavedenii. Pishchevaya Teknologiya, 
3, 51–53.

531
Processing of Nitrite-Free Cured Meats
Palmin, V. V., Prizenko, V. K., Fedorova, T. A. and Loginova, O. A. (1973). Some 
aspects of colour formation in meat products. In Proceedings of the 19th European 
Meeting of Meat Research Workers, Part IV. Paris, France, 1457–1472.
Pegg, R. B. (1993). Development of nitrite-free meat curing systems. PhD thesis, 
Memorial University, St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada.
Pegg, R. B. and Shahidi, F. (1990). Effects of myoglobin and nitrite or preformed 
cooked cured-meat pigment concentrations on the colour of cooked meats. 
In Paper presented at the 33rd Annual Conference of the Canadian Institute of Food 
Science and Technology, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
Pegg, R. B. and Shahidi, F. (2000). Nitrite Curing of Meat: The N-Nitrosamine Problem and 
Nitrite Alternatives. Trumbull, CT: Food & Nutrition Press.
Peters, J. M., Preston-Martin, S., London, S. J., Bowman, J. D., Buckley, J. D. and 
Thomas, D. C. (1994). Processed meats and risk of childhood leukaemia 
(California, USA). Cancer Causes and Control, 5, 195–202.
Polenske, E. (1891). Über den Verlust, welchen das Rindfleisch an Nährwerth 
durch das Pökeln erleidet, sowie über die Veränderungen Salpeter-haltiger 
Pökellaken. Mitteilungen aus dem chemischen Laboratorium des Kaiserlichen 
Gesundheitsamtes. Arbeitslosigkeit Gesundh Amt, 7, 471–474.
Preussmann, R. and Stewart, B. W. (1984). N-nitroso carcinogens. In: Searle, C. E. (ed.) 
Chemical Carcinogens (2nd Ed., vol. 2). Washington, DC: American Chemical 
Society, pp. 643–838.
Rhodehamel, E. J. and Pierson, M. D. (1990). Sodium hypophosphite inhibition of the 
growth of selected Gram negative foodborne pathogenic and spoilage bacteria. 
Journal of Food Protection, 53, 56–63.
Sebranek, J. G. (1979). Advances in the technology of nitrite use and consideration of 
alternatives. Food Technology, 33(7), 58–62, 93.
Sebranek, J. G. (2010). Basic curing ingredients. In: Tarté, R. (ed.) Ingredients in Meat 
Products. New York, NY: Springer Science, pp. 274–289.
Sebranek, J. G. and Bacus, J. N. (2007). Cured meat products without direct addition 
of nitrate and nitrite: What are the issues. Meat Science, 77, 136–147.
Sebranek, J. G., Jackson-Davis, A. L., Myers, K. L. and Lavieri, N. A. (2012). Beyond 
celery and starter culture: Advances in natural/organic curing processes in the 
United States. Meat Science, 92(3), 267–273.
Senanayake, N. (2013). Green tea extract: Chemistry, antioxidant properties and food 
applications—A review. Journal of Functional Foods, 5, 1529–1541.
Shahidi, F. (1989). Flavor of cooked meats. In: Teranishi, R., Buttery, R. G. and Shahidi, 
F. (eds.) Flavor Chemistry: Trends and Developments. Washington, DC: American 
Chemical Society, pp. 188–201.
Shahidi, F. (2016). Oxidative stability and shelf-life of meat and meat products. In: 
Hu, M. and Jacobsen, C. (eds.) Evaluation of Oxidative Stability and Shelf-life of 
Oils/Fats and Oil/Fat-Containing Foods. Champaign, IL: AOCS Press, pp. 373–389.
Shahidi, F. and Pegg, R. B. (1991a). Effect of the preformed cooked cured-meat pig-
ment (CCMP) on color parameters of muscle foods. Journal of Muscle Foods, 2, 
297–304.
Shahidi, F. and Pegg, R. B. (1991b). Encapsulation of the pre-formed cooked cured-
meat pigment. Journal of Food Science, 56, 1500–1504, 1518.
Shahidi, F. and Pegg, R. B. (1991c). Novel synthesis of cooked cured-meat pigment. 
Journal of Food Science, 56, 1205–1208.

532
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Shahidi, F. and Pegg, R. B. (1991d). Safety and sensory aspects of nitrite alternatives 
in meat curing. Canadian Chemical News, 43(2), 12–15.
Shahidi, F. and Pegg, R. B. (1992). Nitrite-free meat curing systems: Update and 
review. Food Chemistry, 43, 185–191.
Shahidi, F. and Pegg, R. B. (1993). Powdered cooked cured-meat pigment which is a 
non-nitrite meat preservative. US Patent 5,230,915.
Shahidi, F. and Pegg, R. B. (1995a). Proteinaceous food product containing stabilized 
cooked cured-meat pigment. US Patent 5,443,852.
Shahidi, F. and Pegg, R. B. (1995b). Stabilized cooked cured-meat pigment. US Patent 
5,425,956.
Shahidi, F., Pegg, R. B. and Saleemi, Z. O. (1995). Stabilization of meat lipids with 
ground spices. Journal of Food Lipids, 2, 145–153.
Shahidi, F., Pegg, R. B. and Sen, N. P. (1993). Novel nitrite-free processed meats. In: 
Ali, R. and Barlow, P. J. (eds.) Impact of Food Research on New Product Development. 
Karachi, Pakistan: University of Karachi, pp. 221–245.
Shahidi, F., Pegg, R. B. and Sen, N. P. (1994). Absence of volatile N-nitrosamines in 
cooked nitrite-free cured muscle foods. Meat Science, 37, 327–336.
Shahidi, F., Rubin, L. J., Diosady, L. L., Chew, V. and Wood, D. F. (1984). Preparation of 
dinitrosyl ferrohemochrome from hemin and sodium nitrite. Canadian Institute 
of Food Science and Technology Journal, 17, 33–37.
Shahidi, F., Rubin, L. J., Diosady, L. L., Kassam, N. and Li Sui Fong, J. C. (1986). Effect 
of sequestering agents on lipid oxidation in cooked meats. Food Chemistry, 21, 
145–152.
Shahidi, F., Rubin, L. J., Diosady, L. L. and Wood, D. F. (1985). Preparation of the 
cooked cured-meat pigment, dinitrosyl ferrohemochrome, from hemin and 
nitric oxide. Journal of Food Science, 52, 564–567.
Shahidi, F., Rubin, L. J. and Wood, D. F. (1987a). Control of lipid oxidation in cooked 
ground pork with antioxidants and dinitrosyl ferrohemochrome. Journal of Food 
Science, 52, 564–567.
Shahidi, F., Rubin, L. J. and Wood, D. F. (1987b). Control of lipid oxidation in cooked 
meats by combinations of antioxidants and chelators. Food Chemistry, 23, 151–157.
Shahidi, F., Rubin, L. J. and Wood, D. F. (1988). Stabilization of meat lipids with nitrite-
free curing mixtures. Meat Science, 22, 73–80.
Sindelar, J. J., Cordray, J. C., Sebranek, J. G. Love, J.A. and Ahn, D.U. (2007a). Effects of 
varying levels of vegetable juice powder and incubation time on colour, residual 
nitrate and nitrite, pigment, pH, and trained sensory attributes of ready-to-eat 
uncured ham. Journal of Food Science, 72(6), 388–395.
Sindelar, J. J., Cordray, J. C., Sebranek, J. G., Love, J. A. and Ahn, D. U. (2007b). Effects 
of vegetable juice powder concentration and storage time on some chemical 
and sensory quality attributes of uncured, emulsified cooked sausages. Journal 
of Food Science, 72(5), 324–332.
Sindelar, J. J., Cordray, J. C., Sebranek, J. G., Love, J. A. and Ahn, D. U. (2007c). 
Investigating quality attributes and consumer acceptance of uncured, no nitrate/
nitrite-added commercial hams, bacons, and frankfurters. Journal of Food Science, 
72(8), 551–559.
Sofos, J. N. and Busta, F. F. (1980). Alternatives to the use of nitrite as an antibotulinal 
agent. Food Technology, 34, 244–251.

533
Processing of Nitrite-Free Cured Meats
Stevanovi´c        , M., Zlender, B., Abram, V. and Kumperger, U. (1997). The influence of pork 
muscle’s type and addition of pigment CCMP on the colour of meat emulsion 
coagulates. In: Bass, J. (ed.), Proceedings of the 43rd International Congress of Meat 
Science and Technology. Auckland, New Zealand, July 27–August 1. Hamilton, NZ: 
Rice Printers, pp. 462–463.
Sweet, C. W. (1975). Additive composition for reduced particle size meats in the cur-
ing thereof. US Patent 3,899,600.
Toldrá, F. and Flores, M. (1998). The role of muscle proteases and lipases in flavor 
development during the processing of dry-cured ham. CRC Critical Reviews in 
Food Science and Nutrition, 38, 331–352.
Townsend, W. E. and Olson, D. G. (1987). Cured meats and cured meat products pro-
cessing. In: Price, J. F. and Schweigert, B. S. (eds.) The Science of Meat and Meat 
Products (3rd Ed.). Trumbull, CT: Food & Nutrition Press, pp. 431–456.
Tricker, A. R. and Preussmann, R. (1991). Carcinogenic N-nitrosamines in the diet: 
Occurrence, formation, mechanisms and carcinogenic potential. Mutation Research, 
259, 277–289.
Valentão, P., Fernandes, E., Carvalho, F., Andrade, P. B., Seabra, R. M. and Bastos, 
M. L. (2002). Antioxidative properties of cardoon (Cynara cardunculus L.) infu-
sion against superoxide radical, hydroxyl radical, and hypochlorous acid. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 50, 4989–4993.
Wood, D. S., Collins-Thompson, D. L., Usborne, W. R. and Picard, B. (1986). An evalu-
ation of antibotulinal activity in nitrite-free curing systems containing dinitrosyl 
ferrohemochrome. Journal of Food Protection, 49, 691–695.
Yun, J. J. (1984). Alternative Meat Curing System: Flavour and Oxidative Stability. MASc. 
thesis, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
Yun, J., Shahidi, F., Rubin, L. J. and Diosady, L. L. (1987). Oxidative stability and fla-
vour acceptability of nitrite-free meat-curing systems. Canadian Institute of Food 
Science and Technology Journal, 20, 246–251.


535
17
Proteomic Tools for Improved 
Processing of Dry-Cured Meats
Leticia Mora and Fidel Toldrá
17.1 Introduction
Dry-cured meats are characterized by a typical flavor, color, and texture that 
make them a high-quality product that has been consumed for centuries in 
many countries. The processing of such types of dry-cured meats is very 
long, lasting a few months for dry-fermented sausages or several months 
or even years in the case of dry-cured ham (Toldrá, 2012a). There are sev-
eral biochemical mechanisms taking place, proteolysis through the action 
of endogenous muscle peptidases the most relevant. The enzymes involved 
are endopeptidases, mainly cathepsins and calpains, which are able to 
degrade sarcoplasmic and myofibrillar proteins and generate polypeptides 
CONTENTS
17.1 Introduction ................................................................................................535
17.2 Muscle Proteolytic System ........................................................................536
17.2.1 Endopeptidases ..............................................................................537
17.2.2 Exopeptidases .................................................................................537
17.3 Microbial Proteolytical System ................................................................538
17.3.1 Endopeptidases ..............................................................................540
17.3.2 Exopeptidases .................................................................................541
17.4  Traditional Techniques for the Follow-Up of Proteolysis in 
Dry-Cured Meats .......................................................................................542
17.5 Proteomics in Dry-Cured Ham Approaches .........................................543
17.5.1 From Traditional Proteomics to Peptidomics ............................545
17.5.2 Applications of Peptidomics in Dry-Cured Ham .....................545
17.5.2.1 Identification of Bioactive Peptides ..............................548
17.5.2.2  Label-Free Relative Quantitation to Determine 
Differences between Dry-Cured Hams .......................549
17.5.3 Data Analysis .................................................................................550
References .............................................................................................................552

536
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
that are further hydrolyzed into smaller peptides and free amino acids by 
exopeptidases (Toldrá, 2002; Toldrá and Flores, 1998).
A good control of proteolysis is of primary importance in order to produce a 
product that is consistent, regular, and high quality. Muscle and/or microbial 
proteases are mainly responsible for the proteolytical changes and thus, a good 
knowledge of their properties and mode of action is essential for a controlled pro-
teolysis (Toldrá, 2012b). The proteolysis phenomena involving muscle and micro-
bial proteases and their resulting products, and the latest proteomic tools available 
for the study of proteolysis in dry-cured meats, are presented in this chapter.
17.2 Muscle Proteolytic System
Skeletal muscle contains a good number of enzymes involved in multiple meta-
bolic pathways. Some of the most important enzymes are related to protein 
changes. Endopeptidases (calpains and cathepsins) are responsible for protein 
breakdown, tri- and dipeptidylpeptidases (DPP) are involved in the generation 
of small tri- and dipeptides, and finally, aminopeptidases and carboxypepti-
dases release free amino acids (Toldrá, 2012b). A general scheme of the pro-
teolytical chain is shown in Figure 17.1. Most of these enzymes remain very 
active in postmortem muscle, playing important roles in proteolysis, and thus, 
Calpains, cathepsins, microbial proteinases
Tripeptidylpeptidases
Aminopeptidases
Chemical reactions
Dipeptidylpeptidases
Myofibrillar and sarcoplasmic proteins
Protein fragments
Tripeptides
Dipeptides
Free amino acids
Volatile compounds
FIGURE 17.1
General scheme of the proteolytical chain in dry-cured meats.

537
Proteomic Tools for Improved Processing of Dry-Cured Meats
they have an important relevance for the development of meat quality. Some of 
these peptidases, with optimal acid pH, are located in organules like lysosomes 
while others are bound to membranes or free in the cytosol (Haard, 1990).
17.2.1 Endopeptidases
There are three important groups of endopeptidases, or proteinases: cathepsins, 
calpains, and proteasome. Cathepsins B, D, H, and L are located in lysosomes. 
They are very small in size, with molecular masses within the range 20–40 
kDa, that allow them to penetrate into the myofibrillar structure and hydro-
lyze important proteins like myosin and troponins that experience important 
changes during dry curing (Toldrá, 1998). Optimal pH for cathepsins B and L 
is around 6.0, for cathepsin H near 6.8, and for cathepsin D in the range 3.0–5.0 
(Toldrá and Flores, 1998). Cathepsins are very active and have high stability 
in long processed meat products (Toldrá and Etherington, 1988). The second 
group of proteinases are two calpains, also known as calcium-activated neutral 
proteinases, calcium-dependent proteases, or calcium-activated factor. Both cal-
pains are located in the cytosol but mainly in the z-line area and differ in their 
Ca2+ requirement for activation, 50–70 μM of Ca2+ for calpain I or μ-calpain and 
1–5 mM for calpain II or m-calpain. They have an optimal neutral pH, around 
7.5, but their activity decreases rapidly at acid pH values such as those found in 
dry-fermented sausages. The stability is very poor for calpain I and rather poor 
for calpain II, which may exhibit some activity after a few weeks (Koohmaraie 
et al., 1987). Calpains have been considered the major contributors to meat ten-
derization (Lawrie and Ledward, 2006) even though in recent years it has been 
also attributed to the action of other muscle proteolytic enzymes (Ouali et al., 
2006; Kemp et al., 2010). The third group is the proteasome complex, a large pro-
tease with multiple catalytic sites, is the third group of proteases. This enzyme 
is able to exhibit different activities like chymotrypsin-like activity, trypsin-like 
activity, and peptidyl-glutamyl hydrolyzing activity (Coux et al., 1995). The 20S 
proteasome may have a role in tenderness because of its ability to degrade myo-
fibrils, specially M and z lines, but this activity is only exhibited at high pH 
values, far from those found in dry-cured meats (Ouali and Sentandreu, 2002). 
The mode of action for these enzymes is shown in Figure 17.2.
17.2.2 Exopeptidases
Two important groups of muscle exopeptidases are tripeptidylpeptidases 
(TPP) and dipeptidylpeptidases (DPP). TPP I and II, with optimal activity at 
acid and neutral pH, respectively, are able to hydrolyze different tripeptides 
from the amino termini of peptides and proteins. DPP I and II have optimal 
acid pH while DPP III and IV have optimal pH around 7.8–8.0 (Sentandreu 
and Toldrá, 1998, 2000, 2001a,b). Dipeptidases are enzymes able to hydrolyze 
dipeptides and their names can vary depending on the preference for certain 
amino acids. Aminopeptidases, which have large molecular masses, are able 
to release a free amino acid from the amino terminus of peptides and proteins. 

538
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Arginyl, alanyl, pyroglutamyl, leucyl, and methionyl aminopeptidases are the 
most important aminopeptidases in skeletal muscle. All of them are active 
at neutral or basic pH. Alanyl and methionyl aminopeptidases have a wide 
spectrum of activity while arginyl aminopeptidase, or aminopeptidase B, is 
only able to hydrolyze arginine and lysine. A minor role is expected for leucyl 
and pyroglutamyl aminopeptidases due to their optimal basic pH (Toldrá 
et al., 2000).
There are two carboxypeptidases, both located in the lysosomes, with opti-
mal activity at acid pH. They generate free amino acids from the carboxyl 
termini of peptides and proteins. Carboxypeptidase B has a wide spectrum 
of activity against any terminal amino acid but carboxypeptidase A is more 
specific for hydrophobic amino acids (Barrett et al., 2004). The mode of action 
of these proteases against different substrates is shown in Figure 17.2 and the 
substrate preferences are given in Table 17.1.
17.3 Microbial Proteolytical System
The proteolytic system is essential for a number of cellular processes involved 
in major physiological processes like use of proteins to supply free amino 
acids as nutrients and gene regulation (Pritchard and Coolbear, 1993). The 
mechanisms for proteolytic breakdown of proteins by microbial enzymes are 
similar to those previously described for muscle enzymes (see Figures 17.1 and 
17.2). These enzymes are also endopeptidases or proteinases and peptidases. 
Endopeptidases
Lys-Ala-Arg-Leu-Gly-His-Gly-Phe-.....
Tripeptidylpeptidases
Dipeptidylpeptidases
X-Pro-dipeptidylpeptidases
General aminopeptidases
Arginyl aminopeptidases
Carboxypeptidases
Ala-Ala-Phe-Leu-Tyr-Phe-Gly-Leu-….
Ala-Ala-Lys-Phe-Arg-Ala-Trp-Tyr-….
Gly-Pro-Lys-Arg-Tyr-Ala-Arg-Lys-….
Tripeptidases
Ala-Ala-Phe
Ala-Arg
Dipeptidases
Ala-Arg-Ala-Tyr-Leu-Gly-His-Phe-….
Lys-Ala-Arg-Tyr-Leu-Gly-His-Phe-….
…..-Phe-Leu-Tyr-Ala-Arg-Phe-Arg-Leu
FIGURE 17.2
Example of peptide bond hydrolysis by different types of peptidases.

539
Proteomic Tools for Improved Processing of Dry-Cured Meats
Endopeptidases or proteinases are predominantly extracellular and peptidases 
are located inside the cell. Extracellular proteinases may be bound either to the 
cell wall or to the cell membrane (Visser, 1993). In this way, the mode of action 
may substantially differ if using whole cells or only cell-free extracts. In the 
case of whole cells, the amino acid and peptide transport system is necessary 
to supply the cells with the amino acids required for growth (Tan et al., 1993). 
The cell wall-associated proteolytic activity is the first enzyme to degrade pro-
teins. The generated peptides are then transported into the cell where they are 
further degraded by different peptidases like tri- and dipeptidases, DPP, and 
aminopeptidases, to small peptides and free amino acids (Bockelmann, 1995). 
Many microorganisms have been used as starters for fermented meats. Some 
TABLE 17.1
Main Muscle Exopeptidases: Location and Substrate Preferences
Enzyme
EC Number
Location
Substrates
Optimal 
pH Range References
DPP I
EC 3.4.14.1
Lysosome
Ala-Arg-peptide, 
Gly-Arg-peptide
5.0–6.0
Sentandreu 
& Toldrá 
(2000)
DPP II
EC 3.4.14.2.
Lysosome
Gly-Pro-peptide
5.0–6.0
Sentandreu 
& Toldrá 
(2001a)
DPP III
EC 3.4.14.4.
Cytosol
Arg-Arg-peptide, 
Ala-Arg-peptide
7.5–8.0
Sentandreu 
& Toldrá, 
(1998)
DPP IV
EC 3.4.14.5. Membrane
Gly-Pro-peptide
7.5–8.0
Sentandreu 
& Toldrá 
(2001b)
TPP I
EC 3.4.14.9.
Lysosome
Gly-Pro-Phe-peptide
Ala-Ala-Phe-peptide
3.0–5.0
Toldrá (2002)
TPP II
EC 3.4.14.10.
Cytosol
Gly-Pro-Phe-peptide
Ala-Ala-Phe-peptide
6.5–7.5
Toldrá (2002)
Alanyl 
aminopeptidase
EC 3.4.11.14.
Cytosol
Ala-peptide, amino 
acids-peptide
6.0–7.0
Flores et al. 
(1996)
Arginyl 
aminopeptidase
EC 3.4.11.6.
Cytosol
Arg-peptide, 
Lys-peptide
6.0–7.0
Flores et al. 
(1993)
Methionyl 
aminopeptidase
EC 3.4.11.18.
Cytosol
Met-peptide, Ala-
peptide, Lys-peptide, 
Leu-peptide
7.0–7.5
Flores et al. 
(2000)
Leucyl 
aminopeptidase
EC 3.4.11.1.
Cytosol
Leu-peptide
9.0
Toldrá et al. 
(2012b)
Pyroglutamyl 
aminopeptidase
EC 3.4.19.3.
Cytosol
Pyroglu-peptide
8.0–8.5
Toldrá et al. 
(2012b)
Carboxypeptidase A
EC 3.4.16.1.
Lysosome
Peptide-hydrophobic 
amino acids
5.0–5.5
Barrett et al. 
(2004)
Carboxypeptidase B
EC 3.4.18.1.
Lysosome
Peptide-amino acid
5.0–5.5
Barrett et al. 
(2004)
DPP, dipeptidylpeptidases; TPP, tripeptidylpeptidases.

540
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
of the most important are Lactobacillus sakei, Lactobacillus curvatus, Lactobacillus 
carnosus, Lactobacillus plantarum, Kocuria varians, Staphylococcus xylosus, and the 
yeast Debaryomices hansenii (Toldrá, 2004, 2012a). Lactic acid bacteria constitute 
a group of microorganisms widely used in food fermentation. Even though 
the proteolytic system from dairy lactic acid bacteria has been well character-
ized, limited information is available on meat Lactobacilli.
17.3.1 Endopeptidases
Lactic acid bacteria have some endopeptidases or proteinases associated to the 
cell envelope. These proteinases are responsible for initial breakdown of pro-
teins into oligopeptides. Several in vitro assays have been performed to elucidate 
the hydrolysis of sarcoplasmic and myofibrillar meat proteins when incubated 
with whole cells and cell-free extracts from different Lactobacilli like L. sakei, 
L. curvatus, L. plantarum, and L. carnosus. The hydrolysis of myofibrillar proteins 
is rather poor for all the assayed strains (Fadda et al., 1999a,b; Sanz et al., 1999a,b). 
These in vitro observations agree with other reports that bacterial proteinases 
are less effective than muscle proteinases in hydrolyzing myofibrillar proteins 
(Molly et al., 1997). However, these Lactobacilli strains are able to hydrolyze sar-
coplasmic proteins, especially L. plantarum and L. casei, which show the stron-
gest degradation (Sanz et al., 1999b). The substrate specificity is broad and the 
proteinase activity appears to be extracellularly located, which is in agreement 
to the existence of a single cell wall-associated proteinase in dairy lactic acid 
bacteria, which is responsible for initial caseins hydrolysis (Kunji et al., 1996).
The peptide profiles of the sarcoplasmic and myofibrillar extracts after 
incubation with these strains show the generation of a large number of 
hydrophylic peptides. This generation increased under the combined action 
of whole cells and cell-free extracts. The generation of hydrophilic peptides 
is important because they are correlated to desirable cured-meat flavors 
whereas hydrophobic peptides are correlated to bitterness (Aristoy and 
TABLE 17.2
Main Purified Exopeptidases in Lactobacillus sakei: Biochemical Similarity and 
Substrate Preferences
Enzyme
Biochemical 
Similarity
Activation
Substrates
Optimal 
T (°C)
Optimal 
pH
Reference
Major aminopeptidase
Pep L
Ca2+, Sn2+, 
Mg2+, Ba2+, 
Mn2+
Leu-peptide, 
Ala-peptide
37
7.5
Sanz and 
Toldrá (1997)
Arginine 
aminopeptidase
Pep N like
Reducing 
agents, salt
Arg-peptide, 
Lys-peptide
37
5.0
Sanz and 
Toldrá (2002)
X-prolyl-
dipeptidylpeptidase
Pep X
X-Pro-peptides, 
Ala-Pro-
peptide
55
7.5
Sanz and 
Toldrá (2001)
Dipeptidase
Pep V
Met-Ala
45
7.8
Montel et al. 
(1995)
Tripeptidase
Pep T
Ala-Ala-Ala
40
7.0
Sanz et al. (1998)

541
Proteomic Tools for Improved Processing of Dry-Cured Meats
Toldrá, 1995; Henriksen and Stahnke, 1997). Some hydrophobic peptides are 
generated although in minor amounts.
An endopeptidase, known as protease B, has been purified from D. hansenii, 
a yeast typically found in meat. This protease is active at neutral–basic pH 
(see Table 17.2) and has homology with proteinase B (PrB) from Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae (Bolumar et al., 2005). It is able to hydrolyze sarcoplasmic proteins 
when using in vitro assays confirming previous reports incubating sarco-
plasmic proteins with whole D. hansenii cells and cell-free extracts (Santos 
et al., 2001). However, this enzyme is inactivated at acid pH, reducing the 
expectatives for an important role in meat fermentation where pH may easily 
reach pH 5.0 or even lower.
17.3.2 Exopeptidases
There are important exopeptidases in L. sakei, the most prevalent species 
in European sausages (see Table 17.3). (1) The major or general aminopepti-
dase, which has an optimal neutral pH (around 7.5) and is similar to PepL 
from Lactobacillus delbrueckii. This aminopeptidase has a broad range of 
activity against amino acids, especially alanine and leucine, but is unable 
to hydrolyze basic residues (Sanz and Toldrá, 1997). (2) The arginine ami-
nopeptidase, which has optimal acid pH, is activated by salt, and has a 
preference for basic residues like arginine and lysine (Sanz and Toldrá, 
2002). No similar enzymes have been purified from dairy lactic acid bac-
teria. (3) A dipeptidase with an optimal basic pH, a broad specificity 
against dipeptides except those containing Pro or Gly at the N-terminus, 
and similarity to PepV characterized in other lactic acid bacteria (Montel 
et al., 1995). (4) A tripeptidase with optimal neutral pH, able to hydro-
lyze a wide spectrum of tripeptides except those with Pro in the second 
position; it is similar to PepT from lactococci (Sanz et al., 1998).  (5) An 
X-prolyl-dipeptidylpeptidase, which has optimal neutral pH, the ability 
to hydrolyze X-Pro dipeptides from the amino terminus from different 
peptides, and similarity to PepX from dairy lactic acid bacteria (Sanz and 
Toldrá, 2001). The addition of cell-free extracts from L. sakei, L. curvatus, 
TABLE 17.3
Main Purified Peptidases in Debaryomices Hansenii: Homology to Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae Peptidases and Substrate Preferences
Enzyme
Molecular 
Mass 
(kDa)
Homology to 
S. cerevisiae 
Peptidases
Activation
Substrates
Optimal T 
(°C)
Optimal 
pH
Reference
Protease B
430
PrB
–
Sarcoplasmic 
proteins
37
8.0
Bolumar et al. 
(2005)
Prolyl 
aminopeptidase
370
–
–
Pro-peptide
45
7.5
Bolumar et al. 
(2003a)
Arginyl 
aminopeptidase
101
ApY
Ca2+, Mg2+, 
Co2+
Arg-peptide, 
Lys-peptide
37
7.0
Bolumar et al. 
(2003b)

542
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
and L. casei to myofibrillar and sarcoplasmic proteins gave a net increase 
in free amino acids. The increases were especially significant for glu-
tamic acid, alanine and leucine for L. sakei, glutamic acid and alanine for 
L. curvatus, and arginine and glutamic acid for L. casei (Fadda et al., 1999b; 
Sanz et al., 1999a,b). However, this increase was negative when using 
L. plantarum probably due a lower exopeptidase activity or a higher intra-
cellular metabolic activity for amino acid degradation (Fadda et al., 1999a).
In the case of yeasts, like D. hansenii, there are also several exopeptidases 
(see Table 17.3): (1) prolyl aminopeptidase, which has an optimal neutral 
pH, restricted to the hydrolysis of Pro at the amino terminus of peptides 
(Bolumar et al., 2003a) and (2) an arginyl aminopeptidase, with an opti-
mal neutral pH, maximum specificity for basic residues like arginine and 
lysinee, and homology to ApY from S. cerevisiae (Bolumar et al., 2003b). 
Experiences in vitro with whole cells and cell-free extracts of D. hansenii 
have shown that they are able to hydrolyze sarcoplasmic proteins under 
similar conditions to those found during fermented sausage processing, 
generating several hydrophilic and hydrophobic peptides and free amino 
acids. The highest generation rates were observed when using whole cells 
(Santos et al., 2001).
17.4  Traditional Techniques for the Follow-Up 
of Proteolysis in Dry-Cured Meats
For many decades, proteolysis has been followed up through the use of 
several techniques like sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel elec-
trophoresis (SDS-PAGE), two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DGE), 
free solution conjugate electrophoresis (FSCE), size-exclusion chroma-
tography (SEC), ion exchange chromatography (IEC), reversed-phase 
high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC), and more recently, 
hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC). These techniques 
have been used to study proteolysis and to separate and identify the pro-
teins and major generated fragments from complex mixtures like those 
found in dry-cured meats as well as the analysis of free amino acids after 
their derivatization (Lawrie and Ledward, 2006). This has allowed the 
interpretation of major findings related to peptides generation and the 
accumulation of released free amino acids (Toldrá, 2012a). An example 
of the key role of small peptides and free amino acids released and the 
enzymes involved during the processing of dry-cured meats and its con-
tribution to flavor are shown in Table 17.4. However, there were problems 
in the identification of  the type of peptides generated and their sequences 

543
Proteomic Tools for Improved Processing of Dry-Cured Meats
that has been solved with the availability of powerful proteomics tools, as 
will be described in next sections.
17.5 Proteomics in Dry-Cured Ham Approaches
Traditionally, proteomics has been used to identify proteins from a mix or 
an extract, obtaining the characterization of the protein profile of the sample. 
The most frequently used strategy has been the separation of the proteins 
TABLE 17.4
Main Enzymatic Routes for the Generation of Small Peptides and Free Amino 
Acids during the Processing of Dry-Cured Meats and their Contributions to Flavor
Compounds
Enzymes Involved
Contribution to Flavor
Tripeptides
Muscle tripeptidyl peptidases
Taste will depend on the 
specific amino acid 
composition
Dipeptides
Muscle and microbial 
dipeptidylpeptidases
Taste will depend on the 
specific amino acid 
composition
Phenylalanine, tyrosine, 
tryptophane, methionine, 
leucine, valine, and 
isoleucine
Muscle methionine and alanyl 
aminopeptidases
Major aminopeptidase from 
Lactobacillus sakei
Bitter taste will increase as 
the concentration of these 
amino acids arise
Generation of volatile 
branched-chain aldehydes 
(from Leu, Val, and Ile) that 
contribute to aroma
Alanine, serine, proline, 
glycine, and hydroxyproline
Muscle methionine and alanyl 
aminopeptidases
Major aminopeptidase from 
L. sakei
Sweet taste will depend on 
the final concentration
Proline
Prolyl aminopeptidase from 
Debaryomices hansenii
Slight bitterness reduction
Glutamic and aspartic acids
Muscle methionine and alanyl 
aminopeptidases
Major aminopeptidase from 
L. sakei
Taste enhancement, slight 
acid taste
Lysine and arginine
Muscle aminopeptidase B
Arginine aminopeptidase from 
L. sakei and arginyl 
aminopetidase from D. hansenii
Aged cured taste
Source: Adapted from Toldrá, F., Dry-Cured Meat Products, Food and Nutrition Press, Trumbull, 
CT, 2002; Toldrá, F., Food Processing: Principles and Applications, Blackwell Publishing, 
Ames, IA, 2004; Toldrá, F., Food Biochemistry and Food Processing, Blackwell Publishing, 
Ames, IA, 2012a.

544
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
using SDS-PAGE and the subsequent digestion of the isolated protein with 
specific proteases like trypsin that specifically cleaves the protein on the 
C-terminal side of the basic amino acids arginine and lysine. The peptides 
obtained after the digestion of the protein are analyzed by mass spectrom-
etry, achieving a list of peak masses. This experimental mass profile is 
matched against the theoretical masses obtained from the in silico digestion 
of the protein and included in the databases. This strategy is named protein 
mass fingerprint (PMF) and the results are given as a report where identified 
proteins are ranked according to the number of peptide masses matching 
their sequence within a given mass error tolerance. To identify a protein it is 
necessary that the masses of a certain number of fragments match with the 
theoretical peptide masses contained in the protein databases. This result is 
accepted if the data passes a statistical probability threshold of being a cor-
rect match (Figure 17.3).
The PMF approach has been used different times in dry-cured ham stud-
ies. Regarding the use of this approach in meat-derived matrices, 2D SDS-
PAGE and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass 
spectrometry (MALDI-ToF MS) analysis were used to study the myofibrillar 
and water-soluble fraction of raw ham muscles and dry-cured hams with 
different ripening times (Di Luccia et al., 2005). The two-dimensional maps 
showed the progressive disappearance of actin, tropomyosin, and myosin 
light chains during ripening. Some of the sarcoplasmic proteins in water 
extracts from pork meat markedly decreased in amount or disappeared 
totally during ripening. The most interesting bands were digested using 
trypsin enzyme and subsequently analyzed by MALDI-ToF MS. Two frag-
ments of myosin heavy chain and a new form of actin were identified in 
the myofibrilar fraction whereas α- and β-tropomyosin were detected in the 
water-soluble protein fraction.
Sarcoplasmic proteins undergoing proteolysis during the ripening of prod-
ucts were also identified by MALDI-ToF MS using the PMF approach after 
2D AUT-PAGE/SDS electrophoresis (acetic acid-urea-triton polyacrylamide 
gel in the first dimension and sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel in 
the second dimension). This resulted in the identification of thirteen sarco-
plasmic proteins and the technique showed higher resolution in comparison 
MS/MS ion search
Peptide mass fingerprint
MS
2D SDS-PAGE
Protein
pI
MW
MS2
FIGURE 17.3
Scheme of a typical proteomics approach with a previous SDS-PAGE separation of the protein 
of interest. SDS-PAGE, sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.

545
Proteomic Tools for Improved Processing of Dry-Cured Meats
to standard 2D IPG/SGS-PAGE as well as an easier interpretation of the 
2D maps (Picariello et al., 2006).
Despite the advantage of using these approaches for a better understand-
ing of the disappearance of proteins, the sequences corresponding to the 
hydrolysis products were not analyzed in any of these studies. The major 
difficulty in the study of naturally generated peptides resides is the small 
size of these fragments that cannot be trypsin digested. This fact gives dou-
ble difficulty, the small size of the generated peptides that are sometimes at 
the limit of some standard mass spectrometry techniques, and the impos-
sibility of controlling the hydrolysis, with the consequence being a complex 
mixture of peptides from different proteins with unspecific cleavage sites. In 
this sense, it is essential to use advanced proteomic techniques such as mass 
spectrometry in tandem to elucidate the sequence of these small peptides 
(see Figure 17.3), as it allows for faster and more reliable identification of the 
sequences.
17.5.1 From Traditional Proteomics to Peptidomics
Peptidomics is the area of science focused on the comprehensive character-
ization of peptides present in a biological sample by studying their struc-
ture, composition, interactions, and properties. It uses similar methods as 
proteomics, although the analysis of peptides requires an analytical and 
experimental adaptation of the strategy to follow in comparison to proteins. 
Peptidomics has become an essential tool in food science in order to study 
the biological activity, functional properties, product authenticity and ori-
gin, allergenicity, and sensory properties of the peptides (Minkiewicz et al., 
2008). Thus, peptidomic approaches constitute the methodologies of choice to 
identify the specific sequences generated from myofibrillar and sarcoplasmic 
proteins in dry-cured ham. Thus, peptides from the myofibrillar proteins 
titin (Gallego et al., 2015), myosin light chain (Mora et al., 2011), troponin T 
(Mora et al., 2010), LIM domain-binding protein 3 (Gallego et al., 2014), and 
actin (Sentandreu et al., 2007), as well as sarcoplasmic proteins creatine 
kinase (Mora et al., 2009), glycolytic enzymes (Mora et al., 2011a), myoglobin 
(Mora and Toldrá, 2012), and ubiquitin (Mora et al., 2015a) were described 
using MS/MS analysis with electrospray ionization quadrupole (ESI-Q)/ToF 
and MALDI-ToF/ToF mass spectrometers. In this sense, Table 17.5 shows the 
number of peptides that have been sequenced in dry-cured ham including 
their respective protein of origin.
17.5.2 Applications of Peptidomics in Dry-Cured Ham
Dry-cured ham is a high-quality product with a very long ripening time, 
reaching in certain cases up to 24 months of processing. The time of curing 
together with genetics and feed of the animal are main factors determining 
its final economical value.

546
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 17.5
Naturally Generated Peptides (in Number) by Respective Protein of Origin during the Processing of Dry-Cured Ham Identified Using 
Mass Spectrometry in Tandem
Protein Name
Accession 
Number
Number of 
Peptides
Analysis
Search Engine
Database
Reference
Small peptides (2, 3, 
and 4 amino acids)
–
–
Edman degradation
–
–
Sentandreu and Toldrá 
(2007)
Actin
NP_001161267
4
MALDI-ToF
Qtrap
Mascot
UniProt
Sentandreu et al. (2007)
Myosin light chain 1 
(MLC 1)
ABK55642
9
137
MALDI-ToFn
ESI-LC-Q/ToF
Mascot
Mascot
NCBInr
NCBInr
Mora et al. (2009, 
2011a)
Titin
AAD00528
O97771
5
320
MALDI-ToFn
ESI-LC-Q/ToFn
ESI-LC-Q/ToF
Mascot
Mascot
NCBInr
Uniprot
Mora et al. (2009)
Gallego et al. (2015)
Creatine kinase (CK)
NP_001123421
58
MALDI-ToFn
ESI-LC-Q/ToF
Mascot
NCBInr
Mora et al. (2009)
Slow troponin T (TnT)
Q75ZZ6
2
MALDI-ToF/ToF
Mascot
NCBInr
Mora et al. (2010)
Fast troponin T (TnT)
BAD15381
25
MALDI-ToF/ToF
Mascot
NCBInr
Mora et al. (2010)
Myosin light chain 2 
(MLC 2)
NP_001006592
88
nESI-LC-Q/ToF
Mascot
NCBInr
Mora et al. (2011a)
Glycogen 
phosphorylase 
(PYGM)
ABF81977
2
nESI-LC-Q/ToF
Mascot
Paragon
NCBInr
UniProt
Mora et al. (2011b)
Glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase 
(GAPDH)
ABI29187
8
nESI-LC-Q/ToF
Mascot
Paragon
NCBInr
UniProt
Mora et al. (2011b)
Phosphoglycerate 
kinase 1 (PGK)
NP_001093402
4
nESI-LC-Q/ToF
Mascot
Paragon
NCBInr
UniProt
Mora et al. (2011b)
(Continued)

547
Proteomic Tools for Improved Processing of Dry-Cured Meats
TABLE 17.5 (Continued)
Naturally Generated Peptides (in Number) by Respective Protein of Origin during the Processing of Dry-Cured Ham Identified Using 
Mass Spectrometry in Tandem
Protein Name
Accession 
Number
Number of 
Peptides
Analysis
Search Engine
Database
Reference
Phosphoglycerate 
mutase 2 (PGAM)
CAD89670
7
nESI-LC-Q/ToF
Mascot
Paragon
NCBInr
UniProt
Mora et al. (2011b)
Enolase (ENO)
NP_001037992
18
nESI-LC-Q/ToF
Mascot
Paragon
NCBInr
UniProt
Mora et al. (2011b)
Piruvate kinase 3 
isoform 2 (PK)
XP_001929120
2
1
nESI-LC-Q/ToF
Edmandegradation
Mascot
Paragon
–
NCBInr
UniProt
–
Mora et al. (2011b)
Lactate dehydrogenase 
(LDH)
P0039
4
nESI-LC-Q/ToF
Mascot
Paragon
NCBInr
UniProt
Mora et al. (2011b)
LIM domain-binding 
(LIM)
F1SEN8
107
nESI-LC-Q/ToF
Mascot
UniProt
Gallego et al. (2013)
Myoglobin (MYO)
NP_999401
11
nESI-LC-Q/ToF
Mascot
NCBInr
Mora and Toldrá (2012)
Ubiquitin-60S (UBI)
P63053
68
nESI-LC-Q/ToF
Mascot
UniProt
Mora et al. (2015b)
ESI, electrospray ionization quadrupole (ESI-Q); MALDI/ToF, matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight; nESI-LC-Q, nano-electrospray 
ionization/liquid chromatography quadrupole.

548
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Peptidomics have also been used to characterize proteolysis related to food 
processes such as curing or fermentation (Sforza et al., 2012), to determine 
peptide biomarkers of time of processing or food quality (Gallego et al., 2016), 
and to establish differences between genotypes in high-value meat-derived 
products (Mora et al., 2016). Different empirical and in silico approaches have 
also been used to identify naturally generated bioactive peptides in dry-
cured ham. In this sense, peptides showing antihypertensive, antioxidant, 
and antimicrobial activities were reported (Escudero et al., 2012, 2013a,b). 
Figure 17.4 shows a scheme of main applications of peptidomics in dry-cured 
ham samples.
The use of these approaches in dry-cured ham offers many advantages 
allowing the advance of meat science by both adding extra value to the prod-
uct with the presence of natural bioactive peptides and controlling the time 
of curing and thus the final quality of dry-cured hams to prevent fraudulent 
activities or accidental mislabeling.
17.5.2.1 Identification of Bioactive Peptides
Several bioactive peptides exerting antihypertensive, antioxidant, and anti-
microbial activities have been identified in Spanish dry-cured ham. The 
identification was done after several isolation steps using different chro-
matographic separations such as SEC or RP-HPLC. From the list of iden-
tified peptides in the most active fraction, some of them were selected as 
potentially bioactive according to their length, amino acid composition, and 
amino acid location in the sequence (Pihlanto-Leppälä, 2001), and their activ-
ity was confirmed in vitro.
Regarding the antihypertensive activity, the most active fractions and 
peptides assayed in vitro were also tested in vivo for their antihypertensive 
activity using spontaneous hypertensive rats (SHR). In this respect, fractions 
obtained from SEC corresponding to molecular masses lower than 1700 Da 
showed the most intense antihypertensive activity with a decrease in systolic 
Bioactive
peptides
Valorization
Authentication
Biomarkers of
time of curing
Genotype
differentiation
Proteolysis
characterization
Peptidomics
in dry-cured ham
FIGURE 17.4
Main applications of peptidomics in dry-cured ham.

549
Proteomic Tools for Improved Processing of Dry-Cured Meats
blood pressure (SBP) of 38.38 mmHg in such SHR rats after eight hours of 
ingestion (Escudero et al., 2012), whereas peptide AAATP with an in vitro IC50 
value of 100 μM showed a decrease in SBP of 25.62 mmHg after eight-hour 
administration in SHR (Escudero et al., 2013a). In Parma dry-cured ham, the 
gastrointestinal digestion of 18 and 24 months of curing samples resulted in 
the identification of peptides LGL and SFVTT with IC50 values of 145 and 395 
μM, respectively (Dellafiora et al., 2015). More recently, a peptide extract from 
Iberian dry-cured ham showed a significant decrease in SBP of 12 mmHg after 
eight hours of ingestion in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR). The analy-
sis resulted in the identification of 2632 sequences of peptides containing the 
previously described angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)-inhibitory frag-
ments PPK (Pro-Pro-Lys), PAP (Pro-Ala-Pro), and AAP (Ala-Ala-Pro) repeated 
a total of 322, 302, and 119 times, respectively (Mora et al., 2015a).
Regarding antioxidant activity, Jinhua ham and Xuanwei ham from China 
have been described to show antioxidant activity. The sequence GKFNV 
was presented as the main peptide playing a key role as a scavenger of free 
radicals in a Jinhua ham extract (Zhu et al., 2013), whereas the tetrapeptide 
DLEE was identified in Xuanwei ham as one of the key peptides responsible 
for the observed antioxidant activity, showing a 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydra-
zyl (DPPH) radical scavenging activity of 74.45% at a concentration of 0.5 
mg/mL (Xing, et al., 2016). In a recent study, different antioxidant peptides 
from Jinhua ham were isolated and identified such as the sequences DLEE, 
GKFNV, and LPGGGHGDL, which were tested using DPPH radical scaveng-
ing and hydroxyl radical scavenging assays (Zhu et al., 2016). In this sense, 
Escudero et al. (2013b) reported that the water-soluble extract of Spanish dry-
cured ham contained a large amount of potentially antioxidant peptides. 
This fact was confirmed with the identification of the peptide SNAAC with 
an IC50 value of 75.2 μM in a DPPH radical scavenging assay and 205 μM in 
ferric-reducing antioxidant power assays (Mora et al., 2014).
Regarding the antimicrobial activity, Listeria monocytogenes is an important 
concern in dry-cured ham products after slicing due to its high resistance. 
Recently, a novel antilisterial peptide with sequence RHGYM was identified 
in Spanish dry-cured ham after 10 months of curing showing an MIC value 
of 6.25 mM (Castellano et al., 2016).
17.5.2.2  Label-Free Relative Quantitation to Determine 
Differences between Dry-Cured Hams
In peptidomics, the study of peptides often includes their relative quantita-
tion with labeled or label-free methods. In this sense, labeling methodolo-
gies provide the most accurate quantitative values, but their use involves 
costly labeling reagents and multistep experimental protocols. In contrast, 
label-free methods are a simple, versatile, reliable, and cost-effective alterna-
tive. Thus, the use of peak intensity in peptide quantitation is based on the 
correlation existing between peak areas of peptides with the concentration 

550
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
of the protein where peptides come from, allowing an accurate and pre-
cise evaluation of changes in protein abundance from sample to sample 
(Zhu et al., 2010).
Peptide quantitation using a label-free approach based on peptidomics 
results is very useful to detect significant differences between dry-cured 
ham samples through the generated peptides during hydrolysis as well as 
to evaluate the main peptides and proteins responsible for these differences. 
Different approaches based on the relative quantitation of peptides using a 
label-free methodology have been developed to determine biomarkers of the 
time of curing (Gallego et al., 2016), to differentiate genetics in high-value 
meat-derived products (Mora et al., 2016), as well as to establish the degree of 
posttranslational modifications as oxidation occurred during the processing.
17.5.2.2.1 Biomarkers of the Time of Curing
Time of curing in dry-cured ham is one of the factors determining its final 
quality as longer processing times are associated with a more intense pro-
teolysis and higher generation of aroma and flavor. Differences obtained 
in the relative quantification of generated peptides during the processing 
of dry-cured ham determine that peptides obtained from the degradation 
of myosin light chain 1 protein were mainly responsible for the observed 
differences during the last stages of curing. In this sense, two peptides in 
particular were identified as potential biomarkers of nine months of curing 
dry-cured ham (Gallego et al., 2016). These results were obtained using prin-
cipal component analysis (PCA) statistics as indicated in Figure 17.5.
17.5.2.2.2 Differences between Genotypes
The genotype of the pig used in the preparation of dry-cured ham gives 
extra value to the final product. In this respect, Iberian ham is a product of 
excellence well valuated for its intramuscular fat and final characteristics 
of flavor. The use of a peptidomic approach permitted study of the differ-
ences between three different genotypes in the final peptide profile of dry-
cured ham (Mora et al., 2016). In this case, the most influential peptides were 
derived from myosin light chain I, creatine kinase, myoglobin, troponin T, 
and myosin heavy chain 7. This study proved the differences in the action 
of endogenous enzymes depending on genetics that resulted in a different 
peptide profile at the end of the processing period.
17.5.3 Data Analysis
In proteomics, the identification of peptides is mostly carried out using data-
base search approaches. This type of data analysis can also be used for the 
direct analysis of peptides naturally generated from endogenous enzymes 
(Fricker et al., 2006; Geho et al., 2006; Hardt et al., 2005a,b; Villanueva et al., 
2006) although the appropriate choice of the search parameters and sequence 
database is very important for the successful application of this methodology. 

551
Proteomic Tools for Improved Processing of Dry-Cured Meats
0.25
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Density
0.2
0.15
p [1]
t [1]
PAPAPAPAPAPAPPKE
PAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEEKID
AAAPAPAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEE
APAPAPAPAPAPPKEE
AAPAPAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEEKID
APAPAPAPAPPKEEIDLS
PAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEE
PAPAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEEKID
PAPAPAPAPAPPKE
APAPAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEEKID
APAPAPAPAPPKE APAPAPAPAPAPAPAPP
PAPAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEEKI
APAPAPAPPKEEKI
APAPAPAPAPAPPKEEKID
VKKPAAAAAPAPAPAPAPAPAPAPPKE
PAPAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEEK
PAPAPAPAPAPAPAPPKE
PAPAPAPAPPKEEKID
PAPAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEEKIDLS APAPAPAPPKE
PAPAPAPAPAPAKPKEEKID
APAPAPAPAPAPPKEEK
AAPAPAPAPAPAPAPAPPKE
PAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEEKI
APAPAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEEKI
PAPAPAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEE
APAPAPAPAPPKEE
APAPAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEE
PAPAPAPAPAPAPPKEEK
VKKPAAAAAPAPAPAPAPAPAPAPP
p [2]
t [2]
0.1
0.05
0
–0.05
0.2
0.1
0
–0.1
–0.2
–0.3
0.3
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
10
0
9 m
0 m
2 m
3.5 m
6.5 m
5 m
–10
–20
(a)
(b)
–30
20
15
FIGURE 17.5
(a) Principal component analysis (PCA) score plot to assess the variance among the naturally 
generated peptides at different times of dry-cured ham processing. (b) PCA loading plot show-
ing peptides identified at nine months of curing from myosin light chain 1 protein. Reprinted 
from Journal of Proteomics, 147, Gallego et al., Peptidomics as a tool for quality control in dry-
cured ham processing, 98–107, Copyright 2016, with permission from Elsevier.

552
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
In fact, database searching of nontryptic peptides is less effective due to the 
lack of charge localization at the N and C termini of the naturally gener-
ated peptides. The uses of nonspecific enzymes as well as the error tolerant 
option to search the unmatched spectra considering possible modifications 
are some of the parameters to take into account in the Mascot MS/MS Ions 
Search when naturally generated peptides are studied.
The most widely used search engines are Mascot (http://www.matrixscience.
com/search_form_select.html), SEQUEST (http://fields.scripps.edu/sequest/), 
Phenyx (http://www.ionsource.com/functional_reviews/Phenyx/phenyx 
-web.htm), MassWiz (Yadav et al., 2011), Hydra (Lewis et al., 2012), and the 
free software OMSSA (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Web/Newsltr/V14N2/) 
and X!Tandem (http://www.thegpm.org/tandem/), but there are more soft-
ware packages designed to identify the most likely peptide sequence to match 
a MS/MS spectrum. Mascot from matrixscience (http://www.matrixscience 
.com/) is the most widely used software but the choice of its search parameters 
requires some user expertise. There are many available databases, but UniProt 
and NCBInr are the most commonly used in the identification of meat-derived 
peptides. Currently, UniProtKB/TrEMBL contains 77,483,538 sequence entries, 
comprising 25,974,169,949 amino acids, and it is considered the best annotated 
database although it is important to consider that it is nonredundant so it is 
ideal for PMF searches, where the loss of one or two peptides is not very impor-
tant. For MS/MS searches, the NCBInr database is a better choice. This database 
is large (94 million entries approximately), comprehensive, and nonidentical.
The use of peptidomic approaches in the field of processed meat prod-
ucts such as dry-cured ham has permitted a better understanding of the 
proteolytic phenomena during its processing through the study of the gen-
erated peptides. This also results in an improved value through the identifi-
cation of bioactive peptides and better control of quality parameters such as 
time of curing or genotypes. What is more, future aims using peptidomics 
could apply the obtained information to drive the proteolysis process toward 
improvements of the final value and quality of the product as well as the 
development of a new generation of improved processed meat products.
References
Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (1995). Isolation of flavor peptides from raw pork meat 
and dry-cured ham. In: Charalambous, G. (ed.) Food Flavors: Generation, Analysis 
and Process Influence. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Elsevier Science Publishers 
BV, pp. 1323–1344.
Barrett, A. J., Rawlings, N. D. and Woessner, J.F. (eds.) (2004). Handbook of Proteolytic 
Enzymes (2nd Ed.). Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Elsevier/Academic Press, 
pp. 831–833, 1923–1929.

553
Proteomic Tools for Improved Processing of Dry-Cured Meats
Bockelmann, W. (1995). The proteolytic system of starter and non-starter bacteria: 
Components and their importance for cheese ripening. International Dairy 
Journal, 5, 977–994.
Bolumar, T., Sanz, Y., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (2003a). Purification and charac-
terization of a prolyl aminopeptidase from Debaryomyces hansenii. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 69, 227–232.
Bolumar, T., Sanz, Y., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (2003b). Purification and properties 
of an arginyl aminopeptidase from Debaryomyces hansenii. International Journal 
of Food Microbiology, 86, 141–151.
Bolumar, T., Sanz, Y., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (2005). Protease B from Debaryomyces 
hansenii. Purification and biochemical properties. International Journal of Food 
Microbiology, 98, 167–177.
Castellano, P., Mora, L., Escudero, E., Vignolo, G., Aznar, R. and Toldrá, F. (2016). 
Antilisterial peptides from Spanish dry-cured hams: Purification and identifica-
tion. Food Microbiology, 59, 133–141.
Coux, O., Tanaka, T. and Goldberg, A. (1995). Structure and function of the 20S and 
26S proteasomes. Annual Review of Biochemistry, 65, 801–847.
Dellafiora, L., Paolella, S., Dall’Asta, C., Dossena, A., Cozzini, P. and Galaverna, G. 
(2015). Hybrid in silico/in vitro approach for the identification of angiotensin 
I converting enzyme inhibitory peptides from parma dry-cured ham. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 63(28), 6366–6375.
Di Luccia, A., Picariello, G., Cacace, G. et al. (2005). Proteomic analysis of water solu-
ble and myofibrillar protein changes occurring in dry-cured hams. Meat Science, 
69(3), 479–491.
Escudero, E., Aristoy, M. C., Nishimura, H., Arihara, K. and Toldrá, F. (2012). 
Antihypertensive effect and antioxidant activity of peptide fractions extracted 
from Spanish dry-cured ham. Meat Science, 91(3), 306–311.
Escudero, E., Mora, L., Fraser, P. D., Aristoy, M. C., Arihara, K. and Toldrá, F. (2013a). 
Purification and identification of antihypertensive peptides in Spanish dry-
cured ham. Journal of Proteomics, 78, 499–507.
Escudero, E., Mora, L., Fraser, P. D., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (2013b). Identification 
of novel antioxidant peptides generated in Spanish dry-cured ham. Food 
Chemistry, 138, 1282–1288.
Fadda, S., Sanz, Y., Vignolo, G., Aristoy, M. C., Oliver, G. and Toldrá, F. (1999a). 
Hydrolysis of pork muscle sarcoplasmic proteins by Lactobacillus curvatus and 
Lactobacillus sake. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 65, 578–584.
Fadda, S., Sanz, Y., Vignolo, G., Aristoy, M. C., Oliver, G. and Toldrá, F. (1999b). 
Characterization of muscle sarcoplasmic and myofibrillar protein hydrolysis 
caused by Lactobacillus plantarum. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 65, 
3540–3546.
Flores, M., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (1993). HPLC purification and characteriza-
tion of porcine muscle aminopeptidase B. Biochimie, 75, 861–867.
Flores, M., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (1996). HPLC purification and characteriza-
tion of soluble alanyl aminopeptidase from porcine skeletal muscle. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 44, 2578–2583.
Flores, M., Marina, M. and Toldrá, F. (2000). Purification and characterization of a 
soluble methionyl aminopeptidase from porcine skeletal muscle. Meat Science, 
56, 247–254.

554
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Fricker, L. D., Lim, J., Pan, H. and Che, F. Y. (2006). Peptidomics: Identification 
and quantification of endogenous peptides in neuroendocrine tissues. Mass 
Spectrometry Reviews, 25(2), 327–344.
Gallego, M., Mora, L., Fraser, P. D., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (2014). Degradation of 
LIM domain-binding protein 3 during Spanish dry-cured ham processing. Food 
Chemistry, 149, 121–128.
Gallego, M., Mora, L., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (2015). Titin-derived peptides as 
processing time markers in dry-cured ham. Food Chemistry, 167, 326–339.
Gallego, M., Mora, L. and Toldrá, F. (2016). Peptidomics as a tool for quality control in 
dry-cured ham processing. Journal of Proteomics, 147, 98–107.
Geho, D. H., Liotta, L. A., Petricoin, E. F., Zhao, W. and Araujo, R. P. (2006). The 
amplified peptidome: The new treasure chest of candidate biomarkers. Current 
Opinion in Chemical Biology, 10(1), 50–55.
Haard, N. F. (1990). Enzymes from food myosystems. Journal of Muscle Foods, 1, 
293–338.
Hardt, M., Thomas, L. R., Dixon, S. E. et al. (2005a). Toward defining the human 
parotid gland salivary proteome and peptidome: Identification and charac-
terization using 2D SDS-PAGE, ultrafiltration, HPLC, and mass spectrometry. 
Biochemistry, 44(8), 2885–2899.
Hardt, M., Witkowska, H. E., Webb, S. et al. (2005b). Assessing the effects of diurnal 
variation on the composition of human parotid saliva: Quantitative analysis of 
native peptides using iTRAQ reagents. Analytical Chemistry, 77(15), 4947–4954.
Henriksen, A. P. and Stahnke, L. H. (1997). Sensory and chromatographic evaluations 
of water soluble fraction from dried sausages. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 45, 2679–2684.
Kemp, C. M., Sensky, P. L., Bardsley, R. G., Buttery, P. J. and Parr, T. (2010). Tenderness: 
An enzymatic view. Meat Science, 84, 248–256.
Koohmaraie, M., Seideman, S. C., Schollmeyer, J. E., Dutson, T. R. and Grouse, J. D. 
(1987). Effect of postmortem storage on Ca2+ dependent proteases, their inhibi-
tor and myofibril fragmentation. Meat Science, 19, 187–196.
Kunji, E. R. S., Fang, G., Jeronimus-Stratingh, C. M., Bruins, A. P., Poolman, B. and 
Konings, W. N. (1996). The proteolytic systems of lactic acid bacteria. Antonie 
van Leeuwenhoek, 70, 187–221.
Lawrie, R. A. and Ledward, D. A. (2006). Lawrie’s Meat Science (7th Ed). Cambridge, 
UK: Woodhead Publishing.
Lewis, S., Csordas, A., Killcoyne, S. et al. (2012). Hydra: A scalable proteomic search 
engine which utilizes the Hadoop distributed computing framework. BMC 
Bioinformatics, 13, 324.
Minkiewicz, P., Dziuba, J., Darewicz, M., Iwaniak, A., Dziuba, M. and Nałęcz, D. 
(2008). Food peptidomics. Food Technology and Biotechnology, 46(1), 1–10.
Molly, K., Demeyer, D. I., Johansson, G., Raemaekers, M., Ghistelinck, M. and Geenen, I. 
(1997). The importance of meat enzymes in ripening and flavor generation in dry 
fermented sausages. First results of a European project. Food Chemistry, 54, 539–545.
Montel, M. C., Seronine, M. P., Talon, R. and Hebraud, M. (1995). Purification and char-
acterization of a dipeptidase from Lactobacillus sake. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 61, 837–839.
Mora, L., Calvo, L., Escudero, E. and Toldrá, F. (2016). Differences in pig genotypes 
influence the generation of peptides in dry-cured ham processing. Food Research 
International, 86, 74–82.

555
Proteomic Tools for Improved Processing of Dry-Cured Meats
Mora, L., Escudero, E., Arihara, K. and Toldrá, F. (2015a). Antihypertensive effect of 
peptides naturally generated during Iberian dry-cured ham processing. Food 
Research International, 78, 71–78.
Mora, L., Escudero, E., Fraser, P. D., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, F. (2014). Proteomic 
identification of antioxidant peptides from 400 to 2500 Da generated in Spanish 
dry-cured ham contained in a size-exclusion chromatography fraction. Food 
Research International, 56, 68–76.
Mora, L., Gallego, M., Aristoy, M. C., Fraser, P. D. and Toldrá, F. (2015b). Peptides 
naturally generated from ubiquitin-60S ribosomal protein as potential biomark-
ers of dry-cured ham processing time. Food Control, 48, 102–107.
Mora, L., Sentandreu, M. A., Fraser, P. D., Toldrá, F. and Bramley, P. M. (2009). 
Oligopeptides arising the degradation of creatine kinase in Spanish dry-cured 
ham. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 57, 8982–8988.
Mora, L., Sentandreu, M. A. and Toldrá, F. (2010). Identification of small troponin T 
peptides generated in dry-cured ham. Food Chemistry, 123, 691–697.
Mora, L., Sentandreu, M. A. and Toldrá, F. (2011a). Intense degradation of myosin 
light chain isoforms in Spanish dry-cured ham. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 59, 3884–3892.
Mora, L. and Toldrá, F. (2012). Proteomic identification of small (<2000 Da) myoglobin 
peptides generated in dry-cured ham. Food Technology and Biotechnology, 50(3), 
343–349.
Mora, L., Valero, M. L., Del Pino, M. M. S., Sentandreu, M. A. and Toldrá, F. (2011b). 
Small peptides released from muscle glycolytic enzymes during dry-cured ham 
processing. Journal of Proteomics, 74, 442–450.
Ouali, A., Herrera-Méndez, C. H., Coulis, G. et al. (2006). Revisiting the conversion 
of muscle into meat and the underlying mechanisms. Meat Science, 74, 44–58.
Ouali, A. and Sentandreu, M. A. (2002). Overview of muscle peptidases and their 
potential role in meat texture development. In: Toldrá, F. (ed.) Research Advances 
in the Quality of Meat and Meat Products. Trivandrum, India: Research Signpost, 
pp. 33–63.
Picariello, G., De Martino, A., Mamone, G. et al. (2006). Proteomic study of muscle 
sarcoplasmic proteins using AUT-PAGE/SDS-PAGE as two-dimensional gel 
electrophoresis. Journal of Chromatography B: Analytical Technology Biomedical Life 
Sciences, 833(1), 101–108.
Pihlanto-Leppälä, A. (2001). Bioactive peptides derived from bovine whey proteins: 
Opioid and ACE-inhibitory peptides. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 1, 
347–356.
Pritchard, G. G. and Coolbear, T. (1993). The physiology and biochemistry of the pro-
teolytic system of lactic acid bacteria. FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 12, 179–206.
Santos, N. N., Santos, R. C., Sanz, Y., Bolumar, T., Aristoy, M.-C. and Toldrá, F. 
(2001). Hydrolysis of muscle sarcoplasmic proteins by Debaryomyces hansenii. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 68, 199–206
Sanz, Y., Fadda, S., Vignolo, G., Aristoy, M. C., Oliver, G. and Toldrá, F. (1999a). 
Hydrolytic action of Lactobacillus casei CRL 705 on pork muscle sarcoplas-
mic and myofibrillar proteins. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 47, 
3441–3448.
Sanz, Y., Fadda, S., Vignolo, G., Aristoy, M. C., Oliver, G. and Toldrá, F. (1999b). 
Hydrolysis of muscle myofibrillar proteins by Lactobacillus curvatus and 
Lactobacillus sake. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 53, 115–125.

556
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Sanz, Y., Mulholland, F. and Toldrá, F. (1998). Purification and characterization of a 
tripeptidase from Lactobacillus sake. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 46, 
349–353.
Sanz, Y. and Toldrá, F. (1997). Purification and characterization of an aminopeptidase 
from Lactobacillus sake. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 45, 1552–1558.
Sanz, Y. and Toldrá, F. (2001). Purification and characterization of an X-prolyl-
dipeptidyl peptidase from Lactobacillus sake. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 67, 1815–1820.
Sanz, Y. and Toldrá, F. (2002). Purification and characterization of an arginine ami-
nopeptidase from Lactobacillus sakei. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 68, 
1980–1987.
Sentandreu, M. A., Armenteros, M., Calvete, J. J., Ouali, A., Aristoy, M. C. and Toldrá, 
F. (2007). Proteomic identification of actin-derived oligopeptides in dry-cured 
ham. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 55(9), 3613–3619.
Sentandreu, M. A. and Toldrá, F. (1998). Biochemical properties of dipeptidylpepti-
dase III purified from porcine skeletal muscle. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry, 46, 3977–3984.
Sentandreu, M. A. and Toldrá, F. (2000). Purification and biochemical properties of 
dipeptidylpeptidase I from porcine skeletal muscle. Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry, 48, 5014–5022.
Sentandreu, M. A. and Toldrá, F. (2001a). Importance of dipeptidylpeptidase II in 
postmortem pork muscle. Meat Science, 57, 93–103.
Sentandreu, M. A. and Toldrá, F. (2001b). Dipeptidylpeptidase IV from porcine skele-
tal muscle: Purification and biochemical properties. Food Chemistry, 75, 159–168.
Sentandreu, M. A. and Toldrá, F. (2007.) Oligopeptides hydrolysed by muscle dipep-
tidylpeptidases can generate angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitory dipep-
tides. European Food Research and Technology, 224, 785–790.
Sforza, S., Cavatorta, V., Lambertini, F., Galaverna, G., Dossena, A. and Marchelli, 
R. (2012). Cheese peptidomics: A detailed study on the evolution of the oli-
gopeptide fraction in Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese from curd to 24 months of 
aging. Journal of Dairy Science, 95(7), 3514–3526.
Tan, P. S. T., Poolman, B. and Konings, W. S. (1993). Proteolytic enzymes of Lactococcus 
lactis. Journal of Dairy Research, 60, 269–286.
Toldrá, F. (1998). Proteolysis and lipolysis in flavour development of dry-cured meat 
products. Meat Science, 49, S101–S110.
Toldrá, F. (2002). Dry-Cured Meat Products. Trumbull, CT: Food and Nutrition Press, 
pp. 7–134.
Toldrá, F. (2004). Meat: Fermented meats. In: Scott Smith, J. and Hui, Y. H. (eds.) Food 
Processing: Principles and Applications. Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing, 399–415.
Toldrá, F. (2012a). Biochemistry of fermented meat. In: Simpson, B. K., Nollet, L. M. 
L., Toldrá, F., Benjakul, S., Paliyath, G. and Hui, Y.H. (eds.) Food Biochemistry and 
Food Processing (2nd Ed.). Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 331–343.
Toldrá, F. (2012b). Biochemistry of processing meat and poultry. In: Simpson, B. K., 
Nollet, L. M. L., Toldrá, F., Benjakul, S., Paliyath, G. and Hui, Y.H. (eds.) Food 
Biochemistry and Food Processing (2nd Ed.). Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 
303–316.
Toldrá, F., Aristoy, M. C. and Flores, M. (2000). Contribution of muscle aminopepti-
dases to flavor development in dry-cured ham. Food Research International, 33, 
181–185.

557
Proteomic Tools for Improved Processing of Dry-Cured Meats
Toldrá, F. and Etherington, D. J. (1988). Examination of cathepsins B, D, H and L activ-
ities in dry cured hams. Meat Science, 23, 1–7.
Toldrá, F. and Flores, M. (1998). The role of muscle proteases and lipases in flavor 
development during the processing of dry-cured ham. CRC Critical Reviews in 
Food Science and Nutrition, 38, 331–352,
Villanueva, J., Martorella, A. J., Lawlor, K. et al. (2006). Serum peptidome patterns that 
distinguish metastatic thyroid carcinoma from cancer-free controls are unbiased 
by gender and age. Molecular and Cellular Proteomics, 5(10), 1840–1852.
Visser, S. (1993). Proteolytic enzymes and their relation to cheese ripening. Journal of 
Dairy Science, 76, 329–350.
Xing, L. J., Hu, Y. Y., Hu, H. Y., Ge, Q. F., Zhou, G. H. and Zhang, W. G. (2016). 
Purification and identification of antioxidative peptides from dry-cured 
Xuanwei ham. Food Chemistry, 194, 951–958.
Yadav, A. K., Kumar, D. and Dash, D. (2011). MassWiz: A novel scoring algorithm with 
target-decoy based analysis pipeline for tandem mass spectrometry. Journal of 
Proteome Research, 10(5), 2154–2160.
Zhu, W., Smith, J. W. and Huang, C. M. (2010). Mass spectrometry-based label-free 
quantitative proteomics. Journal of Biomedicine and Biotechnology, 840518, 6 pages.
Zhu, C. Z., Zhang, W. G., Zhou, G. H., Xu, X. L., Kang, Z. L. and Yin, Y. (2013). 
Isolation and identification of antioxidant peptides from jinhua ham. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 61, 1265−1271.
Zhu, C. Z., Zhang, W. G., Zhou, G. H. and Xu, X. L. (2016). Identification of anti-
oxidant peptides of Jinhua ham generated in the products and through the 
simulated gastrointestinal digestion system. Journal of the Science of Food and 
Agriculture, 96, 99–108.


559
18
The Use of Bacteriocins against 
Meat-borne Pathogens
Carmen A. Campos, Marcela P. Castro, 
María E. Cayre, and Franco P. Rivas
18.1  Introduction. Microbial Flora Associated 
with Meat and Meat Products
Meat and meat products are very perishable foods since they have a high 
content of proteins and other nutrients. Therefore, microbial growth of spoil-
age and foodborne pathogens can occur at all stages of the production chain 
including slaughter, preparation, storage, and distribution. Moreover, lipid 
oxidation and autolytic enzymatic reactions also contribute to the spoil-
age process leading to economic losses (Dave and Ghaly, 2011). The main 
pathogenic microorganisms that represent major hazards in meat and meat 
CONTENTS
18.1  Introduction. Microbial Flora Associated with Meat and Meat 
Products .......................................................................................................559
18.2  Application of Bacteriocin and/or Bacteriocinogenic Cultures to 
Improve the Microbial Safety of Meat Products ...................................563
18.2.1 Raw Meat Products ........................................................................564
18.2.2 Cooked and Cured-Cooked Meat Products ...............................567
18.2.3 Fermented Sausage Meat Products .............................................571
18.3  Bacteriocins and New Preservation Technologies to Increase the 
Safety of Meat and Meat Products ..........................................................575
18.3.1 High Hydrostatic Pressure ...........................................................575
18.3.2 Active Packaging ............................................................................577
18.4  Problems to Overcome for the Successful Application of 
Bacteriocins in Meat and Meat Products ................................................579
18.4.1 Interaction with Meat Components and/or Additives .............579
18.4.2 Appearance of Resistant Strains ..................................................582
18.5  Overview of Actual Industrial Application and Regulatory Aspects ....584
References .............................................................................................................585

560
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
products are Salmonella spp., Listeria monocytogenes, Escherichia coli O157:H7, 
Clostridium botulinum, Clostridium perfringens, Campylobacter jejuni, Yersinia 
enterocolítica, and Staphylococcus aureus. Unless products are preserved and 
handled properly, these microorganisms could grow in the food and/or pro-
duce toxins provoking illnesses in consumers.
Particularly, the growth of pathogenic flora is a public health issue. Accord-
ing to fresh reports of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC), the main foodborne illness outbreaks were caused by norovirus, 
Salmonella, E. coli, and L. monocytogenes (CDC, 2015). Herein, the main charac-
teristics of foodborne pathogens related to meat are described.
Salmonella spp. are facultative anaerobic Gram-negative rods that belong 
to the Enterobacteriaceae family. These bacteria are able to grow in adverse 
environmental conditions such as refrigerated temperatures and pH values 
of 4.5 or lower (depending on the strain), and they have the ability to tolerate 
moderate NaCl levels and heat (D Aoust, 1997). The mentioned characteris-
tics raise concerns about the effectiveness of conservation factors needed to 
avoid Salmonella growth even in fermented foods. Salmonella is a widespread 
bacterium in the food chain. In the case of the meat industry, poultry prod-
ucts are the main reservoirs of Salmonella among other meats in many coun-
tries. This trend has been growing due to (1) intense animal husbandry 
practices, (2) the difficulty in controlling salmonellae spread into the produc-
tion chain, and (3) the selection of resistant strains due to widespread use of 
antibiotic. To highlight the importance of this bacterium as a pathogen, it can 
be mentioned that a large outbreak of Salmonella infections in 2010 caused 
nearly 2000 illnesses. Some of the infections were from food origin. The food 
commodities most often implicated were beef (13%), dairy (12%, nearly all 
unpasteurized), fish (12%), and poultry (11%) (CDC, 2015).
According to the microbiological criteria for foodstuffs established by the 
Commission Regulation (EC, No 2073/2005), in minced meat and meat prep-
arations intended to be eaten raw, Salmonella spp. must be absent in 10 g. In 
the case of minced meat and meat preparations intended to be eaten cooked, 
Salmonella spp. must be absent in 25 g.
L. monocytogenes represents the Listeria species most commonly associated 
with illness in animals and humans. As a facultative pathogenic saprotroph, 
L. monocytogenes can live in soil and decaying vegetation, but in an animal or 
human host, it can cause severe disease in immune-depressed individuals 
(Orsi et al., 2011). The majority of the infections caused by L. monocytogenes 
are of foodborne origin (Swaminathan and Gerner-Smidt, 2007). Ingestion 
of contaminated food being the source of infection, governments and food 
safety agencies worldwide have taken serious measurements to reduce the 
occurrence of L. monocytogenes in the food production chain. The pathogen 
is psychrotrophic and can support adverse conditions such as refrigera-
tion temperature, low pH, and high salt concentrations (Ahmed et al., 2015). 
L. monocytogenes can be found in a wide range of meat and meat products 
such as beef, pork, minced meat, smoked, and fermented sausages and ham. 

561
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
In most circumstances, it involves surface contamination (Rocourt and Cos-
sart, 1997). Major listeriosis outbreaks have been related to contaminated 
ready-to-eat (RTE) meat and poultry products (Georgaras et al., 2006). In the 
United States, the average annual incidence was 0.92 cases/100,000 popula-
tion for 2009–2011 (CDC, 2015). Furthermore, 1600 illnesses and 260 deaths 
were due to listeriosis (Scallan et al., 2011). In RTE foods intended for infants 
and for special medical purposes, L. monocytogenes must be absent in 25 g 
(EC, No 2073/2005). While a population of 100 colony forming units (CFUs)/g 
in RTE foods unable to support L. monocytogenes growth at the time of con-
sumption is not considered a risk in some countries, the U.S. regulation 
demands zero tolerance for this type of food. In recent decades, food pro-
cessing industries have made considerable progress in reducing the preva-
lence of Listeria in plants and, consequently, a decrease in the incidence of the 
illness was observed.
E. coli O157:H7 causes hemorrhagic colitis and hemolytic uremic syndrome 
(HUS), the latter being the most severe foodborne illness. The bacterium is 
found in cattle, and undercooked meat is the most frequent vehicle of trans-
mission (Doyle et al., 1997). In the case of meat products, E. coli O157:H7 
must be absent in 65 g of product (EC, No 2073/2005). In 2013, 12 out of 73 
outbreaks caused by this bacterium had bovine meat and products thereof 
as the main food vehicles, followed by vegetables, juices, and cheese (Euro-
pean Food Safety Authority [EFSA], 2015). In order to control this pathogen 
growth in RTE foods, proper sanitation, cooking, refrigeration at appropriate 
temperatures, and prevention of cross-contamination are useful tools (Ray 
and Bhunia, 2014).
S. aureus is a Gram-positive coccus with the ability to grow at adverse 
environmental conditions, and therefore it is present in many foods where 
other microorganisms do not grow. This bacterium is present in healthy 
humans and animals. Food is contaminated by contact with the aforemen-
tioned sources. Some strains produce enterotoxins and they are associated 
with food intoxication. The enterotoxigenic strains can produce serologi-
cally different enterotoxins that differ in stability and toxicity. The rate of 
toxin production depends on growth rate and cell concentration. In general, 
the toxin can be detected when the population is higher than 107 CFU/g. 
Foods containing the enterotoxin produce severe vomiting and gastroenteri-
tis. Foods implicated in the intoxication include ham, corned beef, salami, 
bacon, barbecued meat, salad dressings, and cheese. In order to reduce the 
incidence of Staphylococcus intoxication, it is necessary to apply measures to 
reduce the bacterial population; in this sense, the addition of preservatives 
can be useful. Furthermore, the acquisition of antibiotic resistance by some 
strains requires special attention. This trend increases the role of S. aureus as 
a public health concern bacterium (Teramoto et al., 2016).
C. botulinum is a spore-forming, Gram-positive, anaerobic bacterium 
widely distributed in the environment and in the intestinal tract of animals. 
There are different types with different physiological characteristics but all 

562
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
produce neurotoxins. Control of foodborne botulism relies on: (1) thermal 
destruction of spores, (2) inhibition of bacterial growth, and (3) inhibition 
of spore germination. The increased consumption of RTE minimally pro-
cessed foods packaged in modified atmosphere free of oxygen is of special 
concern, since the preservation factors applied do not assure the inhibition 
of C. botulinum growth (Dods and Austin, 1997). The incorporation of a pres-
ervation factor with antibotulinal activity is a must in the mentioned type 
of foods.
C. perfringens is also a spore-forming Gram-positive anaerobic bacterium 
which produces different toxins, type A being the more involved in food poi-
soning. The bacterium is present in the environment, yet meat and poultry 
are considered the most common food vehicles. Its growth in food is affected 
by water activity, pH, and curing agents. Therefore, these are the relied-upon  
factors to control C. perfringens growth and to inhibit the germination of 
spores (McClane, 1997).
Ca. jejuni is an enteric Gram-negative nonsporulating, microaerophilic bac-
terium. It can enter the food through fecal material from animals or indi-
rectly from sewage or contaminated water. Albeit Ca. jejuni has been very 
frequently isolated from raw meats, it can also be found in milk, vegetables, 
eggs, mushrooms, and clams. In addition, it is considered the most com-
mon causative agent of gastroenteritis worldwide (Ray and Bhunia, 2014). 
Outbreaks result from the consumption of raw milk and improperly cooked 
chicken and turkey products. According to Melo et al. (2013), poultry meat 
is the main disseminator of Ca. jejuni. The Panel on Biological Hazards pre-
sented by EFSA (2010) revealed a high prevalence of Campylobacter spp. in 
poultry meat, with alarming rates in Europe (of 10 carcasses, 8 were con-
taminated). There were approximately 200,000 cases of campylobacteriosis 
in Europe during 2013 (EFSA, 2015).
Y. enterocolitica is one of the three pathogenic species of the genus Yersinia. 
It is a Gram-negative nonspore-forming and facultative anaerobic psychro-
troph that causes gastroenteritis. Approximately 100,000 cases of yersinosis 
are reported annually in the United States and 90% of them are originate in 
food. Y. enterocolítica is found in the environment; however, pork products 
are the most frequently reported source. Good sanitation during handling 
and processing and adequate heat treatment are important to prevent infec-
tion (Ray and Bhunia, 2014). Furthermore, addition of a preservation factor 
with activity against this pathogen can be useful to increase the safety of 
refrigerated meats.
From data previously mentioned, it can be seen that meat and meat prod-
ucts available at the markets nowadays can stand the growth of pathogenic 
bacteria and that it is necessary to improve the safety of these products. More-
over, consumers demand more fresh tasty foods, free of chemical additives, 
and with a longer shelf life. The application of new preservation methods is 
the foundation for the satisfaction of these modern demands. In this context, 
biopreservation has received increasing attention, since it is a natural way 

563
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
for controlling the shelf life and safety of meat and meat products. In Sec-
tion 18.2, the application of biopreservation strategies, particularly the use of 
bacteriocins to control meatborne pathogens, is discussed.
18.2  Application of Bacteriocin and/or Bacteriocinogenic to  
Improve the Microbial Safety of Meat Products
Biopreservation refers to the extended shelf life and improvement of the 
microbial safety of food products using their natural microflora or their 
metabolites (Stiles, 1996). Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are the main tool for bio-
preservation of meat and meat products since they comprise the normal flora 
of these goods and because of their ability to provide metabolic products 
with antimicrobial effect against spoilage and pathogenic bacteria as bacte-
riocins (Gialamas et al., 2010). Bacteriocins are ribosomally synthesized pep-
tides or small proteins with antimicrobial activity, produced by bacteria. The 
use of bacteriocins in meat products has been extensively investigated since 
they have been proven to be highly effective against microbial agents caus-
ing food poisoning, mainly against the opportunistic psychrotroph food-
borne pathogen L. monocytogenes (Zhu et al., 2005).
Strategies for meat product biopreservation including bacteriocins com-
prise the use of different approaches:
1. The inoculation of the meat products with bacteriocinogenic viable 
strains, as protective cultures, with consequent in situ production of 
bacteriocin. Lücke (2000) defined protective cultures as those added 
to meat products in order to inhibit pathogens or extend shelf life 
without changing their sensory profile. These can be applied either 
by surface inoculation or mixed with the food, and produce anti-
bacterial substances during storage, fermentation, and/or ripening. 
The appropriate application of protective cultures must be based on 
the careful selection of well-adapted safe strains that can grow and 
possess the ability to produce enough bacteriocins to inhibit spe-
cific pathogenic or spoilage microorganisms on the conditions pre-
vailing in the meat environment (Vermeiren et al., 2004; Vesković  
Morač anin et al., 2014).
2. The use of purified or semipurified bacteriocins preparations, obtai-
ned by ex situ production, incorporated into meat as food additives. 
In this case, the bacteriocin dosage is precise and predictable but its 
application is limited by regulations on food additives. To date nisin 
is the only bacteriocin that has been approved for commercial use 
in many countries. One drawback of the direct application of bacte-
riocins to a food matrix is that activity loss arises over time because 
of enzymatic degradation and interactions with food components 

564
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
such as proteins and lipids (see details in Section 18.4.1). Further-
more, bacteriocins produced ex situ can be applied in the form of 
immobilized preparations, where a partially purified bacteriocin is 
bound to a carrier. This strategy helps to protect the bacteriocin and 
represents a valuable tool to overcome the negative effects of certain 
food components and potential enzyme inactivation.
3. The development of innovative bioactive packaging with the direct 
incorporation of bacteriocin or bacteriocin-producing strains into 
polymeric matrices. The advantage of incorporating them in films 
is that the bacteriocins are localized at the food surface—where the 
microbial growth is mostly found—giving more functionality to the 
biopreservation process (Coma, 2008).
The aforementioned strategies are continuously evolving and being evalu-
ated in order to control spoilage and pathogenic microorganisms in meat and 
meat products. However, the outgrowth of surviving or bacteriocin-resistant 
bacteria after prolonged incubation points out that bacteriocins should not 
be the only preservative principle used in meat. Indeed, they should be part 
of a system with multiple preservative principles, so-called “hurdles” (Hart-
mann et al., 2011).
18.2.1 Raw Meat Products
Pathogenic species such as S. aureus, L. monocytogenes, C. perfringens, 
Ca. jejuni, Y. enterocolitica, and enteropathogenic bacteria such as E. coli and 
Salmonella spp. can contaminate fresh meat during every step of the produc-
tion and marketing chain, leading to loss of quality and potential public 
health problems (Nychas et al., 2008; Solomakos et al., 2008). In order to 
improve the safety of raw meats, the use of bacteriocins and bacteriocino-
genic strains is presented herein as an additional hurdle to inhibit and/or 
inactivate pathogens.
In spite of the studies published by a number of authors on the use of nisin 
as an antimicrobial in raw meat (Thomas et al., 2000), its use in this matrix 
is still a matter of controversy. The high dose (750 UI/g) required to be effec-
tive, hence, its cost, low solubility at meat pH values, uneven distribution, 
and lack of stability make nisin the least-desired option for the biopreserva-
tion of raw meat. Nevertheless, nisin showed good performance when it was 
combined with other antimicrobial agents, such as organic acids, chelating 
agents, and lysozyme, and/or vacuum-packaging or modified atmosphere 
packaging (MAP). The application of nisin + the aforementioned treatments 
before manufacturing or packaging of the product enhanced the inactivation 
of pathogens and spoilage bacteria—L. monocytogenes, Brochothrix thermos-
phacta, and E. coli O157:H7. (Gálvez et al., 2007; Aymerich et al., 2008; Jun-
cioni de Arauza et al., 2009). Furthermore, the joint use of nisin with new 

565
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
preservation methods, namely irradiation, high pressure, active packaging, 
etc., has given effective alternatives to the meat industry. These methods are 
further described in Section 18.3.
In addition, other bacteriocins have shown antimicrobial activity in raw 
meat. Nieto-Lozano et al. (2006) reported that use of the pediocin (50, 1000, 
and 5000 AU mL–1) from Pediococcus acidilactici (Chr. Hansen Laboratories) on 
the surface of raw meat pork was effective for inhibition of L. monocytogenes 
at 4°C and 15°C. A bacteriostatic effect on C. perfringens was observed only 
when the meat treated with 5000 AU mL–1 of the bacteriocin was stored at 
4°C. Hartmann et al. (2011) tested cell-free culture supernatants (CFS) of dif-
ferent antagonistic bacterial strains containing class IIa bacteriocins, namely 
leucocin A, leucocin B, mundticin L, pediocin PA-1, sakacin A, and sakacin X 
for their ability to inhibit L. monocytogenes in ground beef at 4°C. Taking into 
account the minimal effective concentration (MEC), defined as the minimal 
concentration of CFS that resulted in a reduction of L. monocytogenes below 
the detection limit, pediocin PA-1 and sakacin A resulted in a more effective 
meat environment.
The effects of pentocin 31-1, a bacteriocin produced by Lactobacillus pentosus 
31-1, on microbiological counts, physicochemical change, and sensory qual-
ity of chill-stored nonvacuum-tray-packaged pork meat was investigated by 
Zhang et al. (2010). Results from samples treated with 80 AU mL–1 of pentocin 
confirmed that the shelf life of the product could be extended. In addition, 
good sensory characteristics of the final product were preserved.
The strain Weissella paramesenteroides J1 produces a bacteriocin called BacJ1. 
The analysis of the N-terminal sequence of this active peptide revealed 
no significant similarity to currently available antimicrobial peptides as 
informed by Chakchouk-Mtibaa et al. (2014). The effect of BacJ1 on Salmo-
nella Typhimurium ATCC14028 growth in turkey escalope was evaluated. 
The addition of bacteriocin, at a final concentration of 400 AU/g, led to a 
rapid reduction in the number of S. Typhimurium ATCC14028 during stor-
age at 4°C.
The in situ bacteriocin production by potential protective cultures has been 
also evaluated in the preservation of raw meats. The abilities of Sakacin-A 
producer Lactobacillus sakei Lb706 to control the growth of L. monocytogenes 
in vacuum-packaged lamb during 12 weeks storage at –1.5°C was investi-
gated by Jones et al. (2009). In this work, lamb samples were coinoculated 
with L. monocytogenes and Lb. sakei Lb706 (0.3 and 3000 CFU cm–2) or Lb. sakei 
Lb706b (bacteriocin-negative variant). Results obtained showed that, albeit 
both Lb. sakei Lb706 and its nonbacteriocinogenic analog predominated in 
the flora of lamb meat, significant levels of L. monocytogenes inhibition were 
obtained in packs inoculated with the bacteriocin-producing strain. This fact 
highlighted that the antilisterial effect was predominantly because of bacte-
riocin activity, rather than other mechanisms. Moreover, the extent to which 
L. monocytogenes was inhibited by Lb. sakei Lb706 varied with the size of the 
inoculum: the higher the size the better the inhibition.

566
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Another bacteriocinogenic strain, Lactobacillus curvatus CRL705, evidenced 
its biopreservative potential in vacuum-packaged fresh meat stored at chilled 
temperatures (Castellano et al., 2008). This strain produces two bacteriocins: 
lactocin 705 with antilisterial activity and lactocin AL705 active against 
closely related LAB and B. thermosphacta. Furthermore, the live culture of 
Lb. curvatus CRL705 sprayed onto the surface of the meat disc (106 UFC cm–2) 
showed to be similarly effective in preventing the growth of B. thermosphacta 
and Listeria innocua as the use of synthetic lactocin 705 (2.8 μmol L–1) and 
purified lactocin AL705 (6400 AU mL–1) during storage of vacuum-packaged 
fresh meat at 2°C (Castellano and Vignolo, 2006). Besides, Castellano et al. 
(2010) demonstrated that the organoleptic quality of inoculated beef steaks 
was not negatively affected by the surface spraying of Lb. curvatus CRL705 
compared to the noninoculated samples.
The combined application of different class IIa bacteriocins produced 
by LAB has proved to be an effective strategy to enhance the antilisterial 
activity in raw meats. Dortu et al. (2008) evaluated the effect of Lb. sakei 
CWBI-B1365, a sakacin G producer, Lb. curvatus CWBI-B28, which produces 
sakacin P, and their combination on the survival and growth of L. monocy-
togenes in raw beef and chicken stored at 5°C in sealed bags during 21 days. 
The meats were surface-inoculated with L. monocytogenes and 106 CFU g–1 
of Lb. sakei CWBI-B1365, Lb. curvatus CWBI-B28, or a combination of both 
strains at 5 × 105 CFU/g each. While in beef, the joint use of both bacte-
riocinogenic strains did not represent an advantage in the reduction of 
L. monocytogenes numbers compared to the sole use of the individual strains 
in poultry meat, only the strains in combination inhibited the growth of 
the pathogen throughout the storage period. Similarly, the combination of 
Lb. curvatus CWBI-B28wt (sakacin P producer) and P. acidilactici H (pedio-
cin Ac/H producer) resulted in more effective control of L. monocytogenes in 
raw pork meat than individual use of Lb. curvatus CWBI-B28wt (Kouakou 
et al., 2008, 2010).
Apart from Lb. sakei and Lb. curvatus, other bacteriocinogenic species—pro-
ducing class IIa and IIb bacteriocins—have been tested as protective cultures 
in raw meats. As an illustration, Enterococcus faecium PCD71 and Leuconos-
toc pseudomesenteroides PCK18—which possess multiple enterocin genes—
showed antilisterial activity (Maragkoudakis et al., 2009; Carlini et al., 2010). 
The strain Ec. faecium PCD71 has been evaluated as a potential protective 
culture against L. monocytogenes in chicken meat under domestic refrigera-
tion, and it was observed that the growth of the pathogenic microorganism 
was adversely affected by the presence of the protective cultures without 
any detrimental effect on biochemical parameters related to spoilage of the 
chicken meat (Maragkoudakis et al., 2009). On the other hand, the use of 
Ln. pseudomesenteroides PCK 18 as a protective culture combined with MAP 
was able to control the growth of L. monocytogenes in fresh suckling-lamb 
meat when the differences between them are around 2 log CFU/g (Osés et al., 
2015) and chicken meat burgers (Melero et al., 2012).

567
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
As a closing remark, growth control of Gram-negative pathogens in raw 
meats by means of bacteriocinogenic protective culture is more compli-
cated since bacteriocins are not normally active against these microorgan-
isms. However, the combination of protective cultures and chelating agents 
could favor bacteriocin effectiveness. For instance, reduction in the count of 
E. coli O157:H7 and indigenous coliforms was observed in frozen ground-
beef patties under temperature abuse (5°C) in the presence of bacteriocino-
genic Lb. curvatus CRL705 combined with nisin productor Lactococcus lactis 
CRL1109 and Na2EDTA (48 mM) (Castellano et al., 2011). Although several 
studies have reported Gram-negative pathogen inhibition by LAB protec-
tive cultures of species as feared as E. coli O157:H7, S. Typhimurium, and 
Ca. jejuni, these cultures were comprised of more than one bacterial strain, 
and it is uncertain whether the inhibition could be attributed to the bacterio-
cins themselves or not. Such is the case of protective culture on lamb (Jones 
et al., 2010), poultry meat products (Melero et al., 2013), and beef (Chaillou et 
al., 2014). In these studies, the nature of the inhibitory effect was not attrib-
uted to a bacteriocin in particular; consequently, the inhibitory effect has not 
been completely elucidated. Other inhibitory mechanisms or their combina-
tion would probably be responsible for the reported results.
18.2.2 Cooked and Cured-Cooked Meat Products
Sliced cooked and cured meats are one of the most consumed RTE food 
products around the world. The two major reasons that fuel the demand for 
such products are convenience and good acceptance by consumers. During 
preparation and sale, cooked meat products can be contaminated by patho-
genic bacteria causing illness in consumers if infective doses are reached 
at the time of consumption (Garrido el al., 2009; Norrung and Buncic, 2008; 
Gudbjornsdottir et al., 2004; Gombas et al., 2003; EFSA, 2007). Epidemiologi-
cal and microbiological studies have identified cross-contamination (dur-
ing preparation and sale) and subsequent bacterial growth (during storage) 
as the main causes of RTE food contamination and illnesses. Cooked meat 
products are likely to be contaminated after processing due to recontamina-
tion events during handling at retail points. Particularly, slicing machines 
and cutting utensils are recognized as important vehicles of contamination 
of cooked meat products both at factory and sale points (Pérez-Rodríguez 
et al., 2007, 2010; Vorst et al., 2006). Hence, several outbreaks have been asso-
ciated to contaminated slicing machines (Public Health Agency of Canada 
[PHAC], 2008). Improper food handling practices have been most related to 
distribution and sale of RTE products (Lues and Van Tonder, 2007) and, espe-
cially, to small establishments such as delicatessen and butchery premises. 
Various studies have suggested that foods handled in small- and medium-
sized establishments (SMEs) are associated with lower microbiological qual-
ity than large-sized establishments (Norrung and Buncic, 2008; Violaris et al., 
2008). Deficient education programs, financial constraints, and insufficient 

568
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
food safety awareness can influence significantly poorer hygiene in SMEs 
(Violaris et al., 2008).
L. monocytogenes is well adapted to survival on equipment and in produc-
tion facilities and the occurrence of this microorganism in cooked meat prod-
ucts is known to be connected with cross-contamination after heat treatment 
(Bredholt et al., 1999). Heat survivors appear to be the main cause of contami-
nation (Samelis and Metaxopoulos, 1999). Listeria spp. and L. monocytogenes 
survived in ham and other tumbled meats cooked in boilers at core tem-
peratures below 70°C and in traditional Greek country-style sausages heated 
to 65°C–68°C. In contrast, Listeriae did not survive in samples heated to 
72°C–75°C (Samelis and Metaxopoulos, 1999; Mataragas et al., 2003). Hence, 
the maintenance of the cold chain is an effective means to prevent micro-
bial growth in food products. However, psychrotrophic pathogens such as 
L. monocytogenes can overcome this hurdle due to their capacity to grow at 
refrigerated storage conditions, reaching infective doses at consumption.
Furthermore, L. monocytogenes and other Listeria spp. contaminate most 
areas where raw materials are being processed and colonize certain equip-
ment which are not made from stainless steel or are not disinfected properly 
(Stiles, 1996).
Cooked cured meat products are sensitive to spoilage. The low salt content 
(2.0% in water phase), a pH value above 6.0, and a water activity higher than 
0.95 are only small hurdles in terms of inhibiting the growth of psychro-
trophic pathogens like L. monocytogenes. After cooking, the normal flora of 
the product, consisting of LAB, is too low to protect the products against 
the growth of pathogens (Pérez-Rodríguez et al., 2010). Since these products 
are heated to a temperature of 65°C–75°C, most vegetative cells are killed 
and postheat treatment recontamination determines their shelf life (Borch 
et al., 1996). Ham and ham-like products are contaminated to a great extent 
during tumbling since the need to operate tumblers continuously does not 
enable their proper cleaning and disinfection on a daily basis (Samelis and 
Metaxopoulos, 1999). Not only product handling after cooking plus slicing 
prior to packaging recontaminates these products with about 0.5–2-log CFU/g 
of total bacteria, but also the psychrotrophic pathogen L. monocytogenes can 
be found as a result of postcontamination (Uyttendaele et al., 1999; Samelis 
et al., 2000).
Several authors reported that the population of Listeriae decreased when 
cooked meat products had been inoculated with bacteriocinogenic LAB, 
probably due to the production of bacteriocin. Several authors have reported 
the antilisterial effect of bacteriocinogenic LAB strains as bioprotective cul-
tures in cooked meat products. Lb. sakei CTC494, sakacin K producer, dimin-
ished the number of Listeria from an initial inoculum of 2 × 102 CFU/g to 
2 most probable number (MPN)/g in cooked ham after seven days of stor-
age at 7°C (Hugas et al. 1998). Mataragas et al. (2003) showed that two LAB 
had an antagonistic effect on L. innocua growth in sliced cooked cured pork 
under vacuum conditions. At the beginning of storage (7th day), L. innocua 

569
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
population increased, from 3.5 to 3.9 log10 CFU/g and to 4.4 log10 CFU/g in the 
presence of Leuconostoc mesenteroides L124 and Lb. curvatus L442, respectively. 
After this initial increase, the number of the listeriae population decreased 
until the end of storage, with final population numbers of 2.5 and 2.9 log10 
CFU/g, respectively. The reduction of the listeriae population was the same 
(1.5 log10 CFU/g) for both LAB strains. In the presence of Ln. mesenteroides 
L153 (bac–), L. innocua increased by 1 log10 CFU/g, from 3.3 to 4.0 log10 CFU/g 
at the end of storage. In the samples inoculated with L. innocua, the popula-
tion reached 7.3, 4 log10 CFU/g more than the initial number. When the bac-
teriocins were present, listeriae population reduced by 1 log10 CFU/g on the 
third day of storage and on the fourteenth day the population was below the 
enumeration limit. In the noninoculated samples, Listeria was not detected 
during storage, reflecting good hygiene during the production of meat prod-
uct. The results showed that bacteriocins were able to inhibit L. innocua.
Mathieu et al. (1994) and Hanlin et al. (1993) studied the use of a combi-
nation of two bacteriocins to provide greater antibacterial activity against 
L. monocytogenes and other Gram-positive bacteria and their spores. This 
study demonstrated that Ln. mesenteroides L124 and Lb. curvatus L442 have 
several attributes as potential protective organisms against listeriae. Since 
the listeriae can grow or survive under vacuum or modified atmosphere, 
respectively, at low temperatures and the two bacteriocinogenic LAB strains 
grow rapidly because they are well adapted to growth in the meat products 
and they can reduce the listeriae numbers, they can be either employed as 
biopreservatives or as starter cultures with antilisterial properties in meat 
products. Additionally, their bacteriocins have a bactericidal effect on the 
listeriae growth and could be used to improve meat safety (Mataragas et al., 
2003).
The results obtained by Kouakou et al. (2008) with samples of cooked pork 
meat showed that when samples were treated with Lb. curvatus CWBI-B28wt, 
the Listeria CFU count dropped to an undetectable level by the end of week 
1 and remained at that low level until the end of week 2, at which point 
regrowth occurred. When samples were treated with cell-adsorbed bacte-
riocin, the count dropped similarly but remained at an undetectable level 
from the end of week 1 until the end of the experiment (28 days). In parallel, 
untreated controls, the Listeria CFU count increased three-fold in the course 
of the experiment. Bacteriocin activity was higher in samples treated with 
cell-adsorbed bacteriocin (4500–2000 AU/g) than in samples treated with the 
bacteriocin-producing strain (2000–1000 AU/g).
Rivas et al. (2014) evaluated the inhibition of L. innocua on the surface of 
cooked pork using the strain Lb. curvatus ACU-1 isolated from artisanal 
dry sausages manufactured in Argentina, which produces the bacteriocin 
sakacin Q. The pork meat slices were immersed for five minutes in differ-
ent suspensions (pH 6.5) containing the bacteriocin-producing strain alone 
and/or with bacteriocin. Bacteriocin production in situ significantly reduced 
counts of Listeria (approximately 5-log cycles at the end of the trial), while 

570
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
the antilisterial activity decreased after three weeks when the pathogen was 
only inoculated with the bacteriocin. A larger effect was achieved by the 
combination of the producer strain together with bacteriocin. However, the 
greatest effect was accomplished by using freeze-dried bacteriocin.
Jacobsen et al. (2003) reported that the use of living cells of Leuconostoc 
carnosum 4010 was better than the partially purified leucocin 4010 in prevent-
ing the growth of L. monocytogenes in pork saveloys. In the control batch, Listeria 
grew up to 107 CFU/g, whereas in batches with the bacteriocin producer strain, 
the counts never exceeded 10 CFU/g during the four weeks of storage at 10°C.
A study by Scannell et al. (2000) on keeping the quality of fresh pork 
sausage found that lacticin and nisin exhibited better antimicrobial action 
against Gram-positive organisms than sodium metabisulfite. The combina-
tion of organic acids with either of these bacteriocins enhanced their anti-
microbial activity against L. innocua and Salmonella Kentucky and was even 
more effective against C. perfringens. This study also suggested that lacticin 
combined with sodium lactate or sodium citrate can be used as an alterna-
tive preservative of fresh pork sausage since it gave lower total aerobic plate 
counts throughout storage than sodium metabisulfite.
Pediocin is produced by P. acidilactici or Pediococcus pentosaceus and has 
been shown to be effective against L. monocytogenes and other Gram-positive 
pathogens on meat surfaces (Coma, 2008). Pediocin has generally recog-
nized as safe (GRAS) status in certain food applications (Juneja et al., 2012). 
Research on some meat products indicated that pediocins (especially pedio-
cin PA-1) could be more effective than nisin especially when used in com-
bination with nisin, lysoszyme, organic acids, sodium dodecyl sulfate, or 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (Hugo and Hugo, 2015).
In the experiment of Ananou et al. (2010a), AS-48 effectively inhibited 
L. monocytogenes in cooked ham in a concentration-dependent way at 5°C and 
15°C. Nevertheless, even at the higher concentration used (60 μg/g), it was 
not possible to avoid the regrowth of Listeria after 15–30 storage days at 5°C. 
They attributed the lower effectiveness of AS-48 in cooked ham compared 
to brain–heart infusion (BHI) broth to a higher retention of the bacteriocin 
molecules by meat and fat components, to a slower diffusion, and also to 
the irregular distribution of the bacteriocin molecules and the bacterium in 
the meat matrix with a higher dry matter content compared to liquid media. 
Also, results from bacteriocin extraction experiments revealed that bacterio-
cin levels in the meat decreased markedly after day 7, which could explain 
regrowth of surviving bacteria. Other previous experiments carried out by 
these authors in a sausage model demonstrated that it was necessary to apply 
450 AU/g (40 μg/g) to a meat mixture to maintain Listeria below detection 
level from six to nine days of incubation at 20°C (Ananou et al., 2005).
Regarding the effect of the bacteriocin AS-48 on S. aureus in cooked ham, 
a slight inhibitory effect was observed. On the contrary, in vegetable sauces, 
the bacteriocin showed an antistaphylococci effect (Ananou et al., 2010a). 
Furthermore, the mentioned effect was lower compared to previous results 

571
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
obtained in liquid media for AS-48 (Ananou et al., 2004; Muñoz et al., 2007) 
reinforcing the suggestion that interaction of AS-48 with food components 
can interfere with its efficacy.
Another pathogen of concern in cooked RTE foods is C. botulinum and 
the spores produced by this microorganism, even under refrigerated stor-
age conditions. Okereke and Montville (1991) demonstrated that LAB can 
produce bacteriocins at refrigeration temperatures and that the bacteriocins 
produced by Lc. lactis, Lactobacillus plantarum, and P. pentosaceus are inhibi-
tory against proteolytic and nonproteolytic C. botulinum spores. Rodgers 
et al. (2003) have demonstrated the inhibition of nonproteolytic C. botulinum 
with the bacteriocinogenic LAB Lactobacillus rhamnosus, Lc. lactis, Ec. faecium, 
and P. pentosaceus at refrigerated temperatures, as demonstrated by spot-on-
the-lawn tests (Kostrzynska and Bachand, 2006).
Nieto-Lozano et al. (2010) found that the treatment of frankfurters with 
5000 bacteriocin unit/mL of the pediocin PA-1 had an inhibitory effect 
against L. monocytogenes CECT4031 after storage for 60 days at 4°C. Thus, 
counts of this target bacteria strain were 8 × 105 CFU/g after 60 days in con-
trol samples but only 8 × 103 CFU/g in treated samples. There were significant 
differences between both treatments for samples stored at 4°C, whereas the 
inhibitory effect was only 0.6-log cycles (not significant) for samples stored at 
15°C after 30 days. Moreover, counts of C. perfringens CECT376 were reduced 
by 2-log cycles in the pediocin-treated frankfurters after storage at 10°C for 
60 days. They found significant differences between the samples stored at 
10°C and the control, whereas only a small inhibitory effect (only 0.8-log 
cycles; not significant) was observed in samples stored at 15°C after 30 days 
compared with the control. These results have shown the inhibitory effect of 
the pediocin-producing strain and the pediocin PA-1 itself against L. monocy-
togenes CECT4031 and C. perfringens CECT376. Inhibition of the target bacte-
rial strains varied with temperature and was greater in refrigerated products.
Reuterin is a broad spectrum antimicrobial substance produced by Lac-
tobacillus reuteri during fermentation of glycerol. Reuterin was found capa-
ble of significantly decontaminating cooked pork contaminated with E. coli 
O157:H7 and L. monocytogenes (El-Ziney et al. 1999). Kuleasan and Cakmakei 
(2002) also found that the application of reuterin to the surface of sausage 
significantly reduced the growth of L. monocytogenes.
18.2.3 Fermented Sausage Meat Products
The applied manufacturing processes can mainly lead to two distinct groups 
of fermented meat products: (1) dry sausages (i.e., pepperoni, Genoa salami, 
dry salami, etc.) and (2) semidry sausages (summer sausage, Lebanon bologna, 
cervelat, etc.). Whereas dry sausages require lower temperatures and a longer 
manufacturing process, semidry sausages have a longer shelf-stable life due to 
their low Aw. Having unfavorable environmental conditions—low pH, low Aw, 
and salts, among others—does not prevent the growth of pathogenic bacteria 

572
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
such as E. coli, Salmonella spp., L. monocytogenes, S. aureus, and C. perfringens 
(Benito et al., 2007; Ferreira et al., 2007). As Enterobacteriaceae are common 
contaminants of meat, they can be detected in fermented substrates in dif-
ferent counts depending on the initial microbial load of raw material, type 
of sausage, and ripening process (Casquete et al., 2012). Bacterial numbers 
decline persistently under the conditions of ripening, an essential process to 
inhibit food pathogens such as Salmonella, Shigella, or E. coli. Yet, Moore (2004) 
reported the survival of Salmonella and E. coli in this type of product. The use 
of selected LAB as protective cultures stands as an effective extra hurdle to 
increase food safety of dry-fermented products without increasing the content 
of chemical additives. The most regularly identified LAB species in tradition-
ally fermented sausages are Lb. sakei, Lb. curvatus, and Lb. plantarum (Aymerich 
et al., 2006b; Talon et al., 2008; Urso et al., 2006a). Many strains belonging to 
these species are bacteriocin producers, hence their application seems not be a 
drawback for the processing and/or production of these products.
New bioprotective cultures for food fermentation purposes can be selected 
by means of three steps: (1) isolation and selection of bacteriocinogenic LAB 
from endogenous microbiota, (2) assessment of antibiotic resistance and pro-
duction of biogenic amines, and (3) evaluation of technological features, such 
as acidification profile, proteolytic and lipolytic activities, etc. (Lücke, 2000; 
Aymerich et al., 2006b).
Several bacteriocin-producing LAB species, including Lactobacillus, Lacto-
coccus, Pediococcus, and Enterococcus spp., have been evaluated for improve-
ment of microbial safety of fermented meat products. These species can be 
applied as starter cultures or as adjunct cultures. In the latter, the bacteriocin 
producer does not need to contribute to the fermentation; besides, it does not 
interfere with the function of the starter, which of course needs to be insensi-
tive to the bacteriocin (Gálvez et al., 2007). Below are some examples of the 
applications implemented during the last 10 years.
Pediocin-producing strains have been used in fermented meat products 
to improve the quality and safety of these products. Nieto Lozano et al. 
(2010) evaluated the inhibitory effect of the P. acidilactici MCH14, a pediocin-
producing strain, in Spanish dry-fermented sausages using L. monocytogenes 
as the target bacteria strain. Inhibition of the pathogen by the bacterioci-
nogenic P. acidilactici MCH14 was effective in the product, the counts being 
reduced by 2-log cycles compared to the control. In another study, Albano 
et al. (2009) analyzed the ability of P. acidilactici HA-6111-2, a producer of 
pediocin PA-1, to inhibit a cocktail of L. innocua strains during production 
and shelf life of “Alheira,” a traditional naturally fermented meat sausage 
typical of Trás-os-Montes (Portugal). The results demonstrated that P. acidi-
lactici HA-6111-2 has several attributes as a potential bioprotective organism: 
It is able to inhibit L. innocua in “Alheiras” during storage, has a good capac-
ity for colonization of meat, and produces sufficient amounts of bacteriocin. 
Furthermore, no significant antibiotic resistance was detected and a trained 
panel considered the treated product as sensorially acceptable.

573
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
Successful applications of Lb. curvatus strains as biopreservatives in fer-
mented meat products have been published. Benkerroum et al. (2005) used 
the bacteriocin-producing strains Lc. lactis subsp. lactis LMG21206 and Lb. cur-
vatus LBPE as adjunct cultures for sausage fermentations to control the occur-
rence and survival of L. monocytogenes. In this study, a commercial starter 
culture (Bel’meatTM SL-25) not inhibitory to L. monocytogenes was mixed (1:1) 
with each of the two lyophilized bacteriocinogenic strains to obtain starters 
active against the pathogen. The effectiveness of these Bac+ starters was eval-
uated in dry-fermented sausages experimentally contaminated with a mix-
ture of four different strains of L. monocytogenes (102–103 CFU/g). The results 
showed that both strains caused a decrease in cell counts. However, the Lb. 
curvatus strain resulted in more efficient pathogen control, reducing Listeria 
counts to below the detectable limit after four hours of fermentation. Recently, 
Casaburi et al. (2016) informed on the suitability of bacteriocinogenic Lb. cur-
vatus 54M16 to be used as starter culture for sausage fermentation. This strain 
produces multiple bacteriocins as confirmed by molecular mass spectrom-
etry analysis and N-terminal amino acid sequencing, with activity against 
L. monocytogenes, Bacillus cereus, and the meat spoilage organism B. thermo-
sphacta. Microbiological, physiochemical, and sensorial evaluation of inocu-
lated samples during sausage fermentation showed that the use of Lb. curvatus 
54M16 might contribute to increase the quality and safety of the traditionally 
fermented sausages prepared without antimicrobial additives.
Based on the capacity to produce several bacteriocins, meatborne Lb. sakei 
is another strain tested in the biopreservation of fermented meat products. 
Antilisterial activity was reported for bacteriocinogenic Lb. sakei CTC494 in 
fermented sausages (Ravyts et al., 2008), Lb. sakei strains 1155 in Croatian 
traditionally fermented sausages (Zdolec et al., 2007), and a bacteriocin pro-
ducer Lb. sakei in fermented sausages from four European countries (Drosi-
nos et al., 2006). The Lb. sakei strain (sakacin P producer), originally isolated 
from naturally fermented sausages, was evaluated as a starter culture by 
Urso et al. (2006b). The strain was able to grow in conditions used in the pro-
duction line and colonized rapidly the ecosystem. A high number of isolates, 
capable of producing sakacin P, were isolated after the third day of fermenta-
tion and persisted throughout the course of the fermentation. Moreover, total 
bacterial count and fecal enterococci showed a rapid decrease at the end of 
the fermentation; in addition, the sensory evaluation panelists preferred the 
sausages produced with the Lb. sakei when compared to a fermented sausage 
produced with a commercial starter. Similarly, Gao et al. (2014) analyzed the 
use of bacteriocinogenic Lb. sakei C2 in the production of Chinese fermented 
sausages. This strain can produce a bacteriocin, named after sakacin C2 (Gao 
et al., 2010), with a broad inhibitory spectrum which has certain probiotic 
potential (Gao et al., 2012). Results obtained showed that Lb. sakei C2 could 
quickly colonize the meat matrix, effectively control spoilage and pathogenic 
microorganisms, and decrease the content of lipid oxidation products and 
nitrite, while improving the sensory characteristics of final products.

574
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
The use of enterococci as starter cultures or cocultures has been studied 
not only for their organoleptic properties, but also for their negative effect 
on food pathogens because of the production of enterocins (Khan et al., 
2010). Rubio et al. (2013) examined the bioprotective effect of three bacterio-
cinogenic, nonaminogenic, and nonvirulent Enterococcus strains (Ec. faecium 
CTC8005, Enterococcus devriesei CTC8006, and Enterococcus casseliflavus 
CTC8003) against L. monocytogenes and S. aureus in the elaboration of Spanish 
fuets (low-acid fermented sausages) when applied alone, or in combination 
with an high hydrostatic pressure (HHP) treatment (600 MPa for 5 minutes at 
15°C) after ripening. The inoculated strains, monitored by random amplifica-
tion of polymorphic DNA by polymerase chain reaction (RAPD-PCR), were 
able to grow, survive, and dominate the endogenous enterococci population. 
Ec. devriesei CTC8006 and Ec. faecium CTC8005 predominantly inhibited the 
growth during the ripening process. S. aureus was not affected by the strains. 
The application of HHP treatment (600 MPa for 5 minutes) at the end of the 
ripening period (day 21) promoted a decrease of 1-log unit in the counts of 
S. aureus and increased the antilisterial effect. From these results, the authors 
concluded that the combination of the bacteriocinogenic strain Ec. faecium 
CTC8005 as a bioprotective starter culture with an HHP treatment—applied 
after ripening—could be recommended in order to produce low-risk, high-
quality low-acid fermented sausages.
In addition to the in situ production, purified or semipurified bacterio-
cins have also been explored as preservatives in fermented meat products. 
In Turkish fermented sausage (sucuk) contaminated with L. monocytogenes 
ATCC 7644 at a concentration of 106 CFU/g, the addition of 50 and 100 μg/g 
commercial nisin resulted in effective control of L. monocytogenes since 
counts were reduced during storage and no surviving cells were detected at 
day 25 and 20, respectively (Hampikyan and Ugur, 2007). In another study, 
semipurified bacteriocins, homologous to sakacins P and X from Lb. curvatus 
MBSa2, were incorporated into the batter for production of salami contami-
nated with L. monocytogenes (104–105 CFU/g). The bacteriocins caused 2-log 
and 1.5-log reductions in the counts of the pathogen in the product after 10 
and 20 days, respectively (de Souza Barbosa et al., 2015).
Furthermore, the application of enterocins resulted in effective control 
of some pathogens in low-acid fermented sausages. Ananou et al. (2010b) 
reported that the use of enterocin AS-48 (148 AU/g) applied as an additive in 
the formulation of fuet caused a drastic 5.5-log CFU/g decrease in L. monocy-
togenes and a significant reduction for Salmonella enterica at the end of ripen-
ing (10 days) but did not affect S. aureus. On the other hand, Jofré et al. (2009) 
applied the enterocins A and B (2000 AU/g) in raw sausages spiked with 
3-log CFU/g of Salmonella, L. monocytogenes, and S. aureus. Both enterocins 
caused a fast reduction in the counts of L. monocytogenes, while S. aureus was 
not inhibited. On the other hand, Salmonella was more affected by the endog-
enous hurdles associated with the ripening process. Regarding the last two 
studies using enterocins, it can be concluded that neither the enterocin AS-48 

575
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
nor the enterocins A and B could control the growth S. aureus in low-acid 
fermented sausages.
18.3  Bacteriocins and New Preservation Technologies to 
Increase the Safety of Meat and Meat Products
Application of bacteriocins in foods is performed as a part of the hurdle tech-
nology. The latter takes advantage of the possible synergistic action between 
stress factors, which allows the use of a lower concentration of antimicrobial 
agents and/or the application of milder treatments.
Many antimicrobials have been used in combination with bacteriocins in 
order to inhibit the spoilage flora and decrease the risk of pathogens. There is 
a trend to select antimicrobials from natural sources and to use GRAS com-
pounds as previously mentioned. Some examples of the use of bacteriocins 
are presented in Table 18.1. Nisin is mainly applied—in combination with 
antimicrobials—for the preservation of meat and meat products.
Many new preservation technologies have been proposed in order to 
increase food safety without damaging sensory and nutritional properties. 
Among them, active packaging systems and HHP are the most relevant and 
innovative techniques for raw meat and meat products.
18.3.1 High Hydrostatic Pressure
HHP has probably been the most investigated technology in recent decades. 
This preservation method is able to destroy microbial vegetative cells and 
inactivate enzymes without changing sensory and nutritional characteris-
tics of the food. It has been applied at a commercial scale for the production 
of some products (Ananou et al., 2010b). Since some foodborne pathogens 
can survive after the application of mild HHP, its use in combination with 
bacteriocins has been explored. Different studies demonstrated that HHP 
treatment sensibilize Gram-negative bacterial cells to nisin action, suggest-
ing that HHP and nisin can be a useful combination of stress factors.
Regarding meat products, effectiveness of HHP and bacteriocins has been 
evaluated mostly in ham and in low-acid fermented sausages. Jofré et al. 
(2008) studied the effect of a HHP at 600 MPa in combination with nisin, 
lactate, or both on the growth of L. moncytogenes, Salmonella, and S. aureus in 
sliced cooked ham at refrigeration temperatures. It was found that the joint 
use of HHP and nisin and the storage at 6ºC reduced Salmonella and L. mono-
cytogenes population to less than 10 CFU/g and reduced S. aureus population 
to 2.4 CFU/g for three months. Hereu et al. (2012) evaluated the effect of nisin 
application (directly applied or through active packaging) combined with 
HHP (600 MPa for 5 minutes) on the behavior of L. monocytogenes CTC1034 
onto the surface of RTE sliced dry-cured ham stored for 60 days at 8°C. It was 

576
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
observed that the presence of nisin increased the inactivation induced by 
HHP when the bacteriocin was applied directly on the surface of ham. Liu 
et al. (2012) evaluated the effect of HHP (200 and 400 MPa for 10 minutes) 
and enterocin (256 and 2560 AU/g) on the inhibition of L. monocytogenes and 
Salmonella enteriditis inoculated in cooked sliced ham at 4ºC. Results obtained 
showed that the most effective treatment from microbiological and sensorial 
points of view was achieved with the combination of 400 MPa HHP and 2560 
AU/g enterocin.
The slightly fermented sausages exhibit a moderate decrease in pH, and 
therefore pathogens such as L. monocytogenes, S. aureus, and Salmonella spp. 
may be able to survive. To increase the safety of these products, the com-
bined use of enterocins and HHP was satisfactorily evaluated. For example, 
TABLE 18.1
Compilation of the Use of Bacteriocins in Combination with Antimicrobials for the 
Preservation of Meat and Meat Products
Bacteriocin
Producer
Form of Application
Antimicrobial—
Other Hurdles
Product—Target 
Microrganisms
Reference
Carnocin
Carnobacterium 
piscicola
Meat batter
Chitosan
Refrigeration
Pork sausages—
Aerobic flora, Listeria 
innocua
Roller et al. (2002)
Nisin
Meat batter
Potassium lactate, 
high hydrostatic 
pressure
Refrigeration
Cooked ham—
Listeria monocytogenes
Staphylococcus aureus
Salmonella enterica 
serovars
Jofré et al. (2008)
Nisin
mixing
Sodium chloride
Refrigeration
Raw buffalo meat 
mince—
Listeria monocytogenes
Pawar et al. (2000)
Nisin mixing
Thyme essential 
oil
Refrigeration
Minced beef—
Escherichia coli O157:H7
Solomakos et al. 
(2008)
Nisin mixing
Sodium chloride, 
sodium acetate 
and lactate, hop 
alpha acids
Refrigeration
Meat model system—
Listeria monocytogenes
Dominic Dussault 
et al. (2016)
Nisin mixing
Grape seed extract
Edible film
Refrigeration
Turkey frankfurter—
Listeria monocytogenes
Theivendran et al. 
(2006)
Nisin mixing
EDTA and 
lysozyme
Ham and bologna—
Aerobic flora
Gill and Holley 
(2000)
Nisin mixing
Sodium lactate, 
sodium diacetate
Ham steaks—
Listeria monocytogenes
Ye et al. (2008)
Nisin mixing
Oregano essential 
oil
Minced sheep meat—
Salmonella Enteritidis
Govaris et al. 
(2010)

577
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
the application of a HHP treatment at the end of the ripening or its combina-
tion with enterocins A and B proved to be necessary to decrease the levels 
of Salmonella and L. monocytogenes, respectively, to <1-log CFU/g at the end 
of storage. It must be remarked that the ability of S. aureus to tolerate hur-
dles such as curing salts, low water activity, enterocins, and HHP (400 MPa) 
suggests the need of higher intensity HHP treatments to obtain safe low-
acid fermented sausages (Jofré et al., 2009). Furthermore, enterocin AS-48 
(148 AU/g) applied alone can be slightly effective against Salmonella at the 
end of ripening but very effective for the inhibition of L. monocytogenes in 
low-acid fermented sausages. The combination of this bacteriocin with HHP 
treatment improved the inhibition of Salmonella. However, neither enterocin 
AS-48 nor HHP treatment inhibits S. aureus growth (Ananou et al., 2010b).
The aforementioned trends suggest that the combined use of HHP and 
bacteriocins provides a useful tool to control L. monocytogenes and Salmonella 
during the storage of RTE meat products. But control of S. aureus needs the 
application of other stress factors.
18.3.2 Active Packaging
Active packaging systems are based on the inclusion of active compounds—
mainly antimicrobials—into the packaging, with the aim of improving qual-
ity and extending food shelf life. There are different ways to incorporate 
the active compounds: (1) by addition into a pad placed in the package from 
which the volatile agent is released, (2) by inclusion into the packaging film 
during its manufacture, (3) by coating the packaging with a matrix carrying 
the active compound, and (4) by using an active compound possessing film-
forming ability (Coma, 2008; Campos et al., 2011). These strategies have been 
intensively studied in recent years, edible films and coatings being the most 
developed ones (Campos et al., 2011).
Inclusion of the active compound into the packaging instead of its addi-
tion into the food has been proposed as an efficient way to prevent surface 
microbial growth. Meat from healthy animals is sterile and microorganims 
are present at the external surface. For this reason, the presence of an anti-
microbial where microbial growth happens can be effective using a smaller 
antimicrobial amount. Furthermore, a controlled released from the external 
surface to the food can assure the presence of the antimicrobial in the food 
during storage. This strategy is very useful to prevent the loss of antimicro-
bial activity due to the reaction or binding of the antimicrobial with food 
components or other additives.
A compilation of the use of bacteriocins in active packaging systems for 
the preservation of meat and meat products is shown in Table 18.2. As can be 
observed, nisin is the most selected bacteriocin to be included within anti-
microbial films. The latter were mainly edible and formed by proteins and 
polysaccharydes. Most of the studies have been conducted to address the inhi-
bition of L. monocytogenes in processed meats. It must be stressed that for a 

578
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
successful inhibition of postprocess contamination, the release of the bacte-
riocin into the food must be controlled in order to have enough inhibitory 
amount at the surface of the food throughout the storage. The rate of release 
depends on the characteristics of the film and the food. For example, Massani 
TABLE 18.2
Compilation of the Use of Bacteriocins in Active Packaging Systems for the Preser-
vation of Meat and Meat Products
Bacteriocin—
Polymer Carrier—
Other Hurdles 
Applied
Product—Target 
Microrganism
Reference
Nisin
Whey protein isolate—
organic acids, and 
natural extracts 
Refrigeration
Turkey frankfurter—
Listeria monocytogenes, 
E. coli O157:H7, and 
Salmonella Typhimurium
Gadang et al. 
(2008)
Nisin
Soy protein film—with 
grape seed extract or 
green tea extract
Refrigeration
Turkey frankfurters—
Listeria monocytogenes
Theivendran 
et al. (2006)
Nisin
Zein protein film
Refrigeration
Ready-to-eat chicken—
Listeria monocytogenes
Janes et al. 
(2002)
Nisin
Bacterially produced 
cellulose film
Refrigeration
Frankfurters—
Listeria monocytogenes
Nguyen et al. 
(2008)
Nisin
Alginate films and 
beads
Refrigeration
Beef—
Staphylococcus aureus
Millette et al. 
(2007)
Nisin
Sodium alginate film
Refrigeration
Ham slices, frankfurters—
Listeria monocytogenes
Kapetanakou 
et al. (2016)
Enterocins A and 
B, sakacin K, 
nisin A
Perforated polypropyl-
ene, polyamide and 
nonperforated 
polypropylene—natu-
ral preservatives
Refrigeration
Cooked ham—
Salmonella spp
Jofré et al. 
(2008)
Nisin
Gelatin film
Refrigeration
Turkey bologna—
Listeria monocytogenes
Min et al. (2010)
Pediocin
Cellulose acetate films
Refrigeration
Sliced ham—
Listeria innocua, Salmonella 
spp
Santiago-Silva 
et al. (2009)
Lactocin 705 and 
lactocin AL705
Cryovac® synthetic film, 
Agroprotein film
Refrigeration
Wieners—
Listeria innocua
Massani et al. 
(2014)
Nisin Z
Pullulan films—
natural preservatives
Refrigeration
Fresh and processed 
meats—
Salmonella Typhimurium 
and Salmonella Enteriti-
dis, Listeria monocyto-
genes, E. coli O157:H7
Pattanayaiying 
et al. (2015)

579
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
et al. (2014) observed that after 45 days of storage, the activity of lactocin 705 
and lactocin AL705 added to a multilayer synthetic film and to a wheat gluten/
starch film was lost in the case of the multilayer syntethic film but was present 
in the edible film. Both films were used to wrap wieners, and they exhibited a 
bacteriostatic effect on L. innocua until the fourth week of storage at 5ºC.
Inclusion of a bacteriocin in a film can modify the physical properties of the 
film. As an example, addition of pediocin to a cellulose acetate matrix caused 
an increment on film thickness and on the maximum force needed for rupture. 
These results could be attributed to a possible interaction between pediocin 
and the cellulosic matrix which became more rigid (Santiago-Silva et al., 2009).
The combined use of bacteriocins with other preservatives and their inclu-
sion in an edible film can be useful to inhibit several pathogens. For example, 
Pattanayaiying et al. (2015) reported that pullulan films with the inclusion of 
a mixture of nisin Z and lauric arginate were effective to control the growth 
of Salmonella spp., L. monocytogenes, S. aureus, and E. coli O157:H7 in vacuum-
packaged, refrigerated fresh, and RTE muscle foods.
Results discussed herein show that bacteriocins incorporated into films 
represent a promising tool to control foodborne pathogens in meat products.
18.4  Problems to Overcome for the Successful Application 
of Bacteriocins in Meat and Meat Products
Bacteriocin application appears to be a laudable aim for preserving food; 
however, it could also be a double-edged sword. The antimicrobial activity 
of bacteriocins is uneven and unpredictable, as it depends on a vast array of 
chemical and physical conditions of foods together with factors involving the 
inherent microbiota and the target microorganisms. Processing conditions, 
spontaneous cell loss of the bacteriocin producer bacteria, phage infection 
of the cell, and the presence of competitive microorganisms in the medium 
can interfere with the bacteriocin production by LAB (da Silva Sabo et al., 
2014). Furthermore, the bacteriocin effectiveness would also be affected by 
the presence of bacteriocin-resistant microorganisms, enzymes (namely pro-
teases), occurrence of oxidation–reduction reactions, interaction with con-
stituents of the food formula (fats, proteins, surfactants, for instance) and 
diffusion restraints due to high salt concentration. In addition, the presence 
of nitrate and nitrite and low water activity can lead to inadequate distribu-
tion of the bacteriocin throughout the food product (Alves et al., 2015).
18.4.1 Interaction with Meat Components and/or Additives
From a physicochemical point of view, meat and meat products exhibit 
a structure that comprises the presence of tissues, and hydrocolloids 
and lipids which contribute to the viscous, gelled, or emulsified feature 

580
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
of the product. According to Wilson et al. (2002), food structure is one of 
the growth constraints that microorganisms find on foods—together with 
storage conditions, food composition, and presence of additives. Food 
structure not only modifies water mobility and distribution of solutes 
such as acidulants, water activity depressors, and preservatives, but also 
affects the mobility of microorganisms (Brocklehurst et al., 1993; Castro 
et al., 2003; Wimpenny et al., 1995). On account of close spatial distribution, 
microorganisms grow as colonies—rather than planktonically—compet-
ing for nutrients and oxygen; in addition, their metabolic end products can 
be accumulated near colonies affecting growth (Wilson et al., 2002). These 
considerations must be taken into account when using a protective culture 
destined to produce the bacteriocin in situ. Meat tissue consists of long, thin, 
parallel cells arranged into fiber bundles which are surrounded by elastin 
fibers. Its surface comprises the simplest physical arrangement affecting 
the growth of microorganisms. As the aqueous phase is structured among 
the network of meat fibers and the crevices of the surrounded tissue, micro-
organisms are immobilized and constrained to grow as colonies. This fact 
limits nutrient diffusion and produces depletion of oxygen and accumu-
lation of protons beneath the colony; this results in local changes in the 
concentration of substrates and acidic metabolic end-products, which leads 
to decreasing growth rates. Hence, the effectiveness of bacteriocinogenic 
LAB for the biopreservation of meat and meat products critically depends 
on interactions with meat constituents (mainly fat, proteins, and endog-
enous enzymes), and the distribution of bacteriocin molecules within the 
food. Unfortunately, little information has been recorded on this topic, the 
meat matrix being an unexplored field in this matter. Conversely, many are 
the studies conducted on cheese matrices that successfully depicted the 
interaction issue. As an illustration, when nisin is produced in situ, bacteria 
are entrapped in the cheese and grow as colonies (Jeanson et al., 2011). To 
be effective after being released, nisin has to migrate (Aly et al., 2011) and 
reach the target colonies. All these steps can fairly be compared to those 
found in meat products.
Additionally, the use of bacteriocins, i.e., purified and concentrated extracts, 
as biopreservatives in meat and meat products faces several limitations 
resulting from random interactions. For instance, application of nisin in 
meat products may deal with phospholipid emulsifiers and other food com-
ponents, poor solubility at pH above 6.0, and inactivation by formation of a 
nisin-glutathione adduct. Nevertheless, this inactivation is lower in cooked 
meats due to the loss of free sulfhydryl groups during cooking as a result of 
the reaction of glutathione with proteins (Stergiou et al., 2006).
With the limitations for nisin application in meats as a biopreservative, a 
search for alternative sources of biopreservative agents is necessary. In this 
sense, Rivas et al. (2014) assessed antilisterial activity of sakacin Q produced 
by Lb. curvatus ACU-1 on the surface of cooked pork meat. As a preliminary 
attempt to find out whether this bacteriocin adsorbs to food matrices, fat 

581
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
and meat particles (cubes bounded by squared faces of approximately 1 cm2) 
were added to the CFS of the bacteriocinogenic culture (50 mL). Periodically, 
samples were withdrawn to measure bacteriocin activity in the superna-
tant. Antimicrobial activity of sakacin Q was halved in the presence of both 
food matrices (fat and meat tissues), which could be attributed to bacteriocin 
adsorption to them. Though the remaining concentration was approximately 
400 AU mL−1 at the end of the trial (after 24 hours) in both tissues, it was still 
effective against L. innocua ATCC 33090. The authors attributed this phenom-
enon to adsorption of the bacteriocin to fat and meat particles. Hydropho-
bic sites of bacteriocins are prone to establishing unspecified unions to the 
hydrophobic surface of fat particles (Holzapfel et al., 1995). As an illustration, 
fat in the bulk of CFS from Lb. sakei CTC 494 caused a great loss of bacteriocin 
activity (Leroy and De Vuyst, 2005). Regardless of being bound to the food 
matrix, part of the bacteriocin sakacin Q could exert its antimicrobial activ-
ity. This fact was supported by a simple qualitative assay: small pieces of 
meat and fat, which were subjected to the aforementioned procedure, were 
placed onto BHI agar seeded with L. innocua. Inhibition halos recorded after 
incubation of the plates suggested that the adsorption of the bacteriocin to fat 
and meat tissues did not hinder its antimicrobial activity.
Furthermore, Kouakou et al. (2009) found that high-fat content meat antag-
onizes the antilisterial effect of bacteriocinogenic Lb. curvatus CWBI-B28wt 
in pork meat systems. The unsatisfactory effect of bacteriocin-producing 
strains in situ is due to hydrophobic interactions of the bacteriocins with 
fat. However, several factors regarding the type of bacteriocin may interfere 
with its activity. While some bacteriocins—like nisin—associate reversibly 
with fat and have a stabilizing effect on the fat–water interface, preserving 
their antilisterial effect (Bani-Jaber et al., 2000), other bacteriocins—like saka-
cin P—bind tightly to lipids in the food matrix and lose their antimicrobial 
activity (Aasen et al., 2003).
On the other hand, endogenous proteases may lead to a pathogen rebound 
after a certain amount of storage time since proteolytic degradation of bacte-
riocin can proceed at the end of the culture. Kouakou et al. (2009) observed 
this listerial rebound; they attributed it also to the presence of nitrites. It has 
been suggested that this nitrite-triggered repression of bacteriocin produc-
tion is due to interference of salt molecules with binding of the induction 
factor to its receptor (Nilsen et al., 1998). Other authors suggested different 
mechanisms such as direct interference of nitrite with the action of bacte-
riocin through binding to its pathogen-targeting pole (Dykes and Hastings, 
1998; Ennaharet al., 2000) and enhancement of listeria resistance through 
nitrite-induced stress (Gravesen et al., 2002).
As a whole, in situ bacteriocin production for the biopreservation of meat 
and meat products should be conducted with a technologically competent 
strain—capable of producing higher levels of bacteriocins—in order to over-
come the adverse effects on bacteriocin effectiveness that may occur in some 
situations.

582
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
18.4.2 Appearance of Resistant Strains
The development of bacteriocin resistance (BacR) might hinder bacteriocin 
application in food preservation. Moreover, an undesirable consequence of 
an extended use of natural antimicrobials such as nisin in food might be 
cross-resistance to clinically used antibiotics in foodborne pathogens such 
as L. monocytogenes.
Most LAB bacteriocins impair the overall integrity of the cytoplasmic 
membrane by pore formation. Moreover, nisin and related lantibiotics use 
the membrane-bound peptidoglycan precursor lipid II as a docking mol-
ecule for pore formation and, thus, cell wall synthesis is inhibited. Target 
microorganisms may become in some measure resistant to the pore-forming 
bacteriocins. The resistance may be transient or remain stable. Changes in 
the membrane composition and fluidity and polysaccharide production are 
examples of resistance mechanisms toward nisin (Martínez and Rodríguez, 
2005). While in nisin-resistant mutants of L. monocytogenes an altered gene 
expression was detected, resistance to class IIa bacteriocins has been related 
to the absence of one of the components of the mannose transport system 
(Naghmouchi et al., 2007).
A word of caution must be taken toward this topic since arguments depicted 
by researchers devoted to these investigations rely on specific antibiotics 
and pathogen strains. On the one hand, Martínez and Rodríguez (2005) 
suggested that the development of nisin resistance in L. monocytogenes 
would not hamper antibiotic therapy towards listeriosis based on β-lactam 
treatment. As found in their study, nisin-resistant strains were more sus-
ceptible to β-lactams than the wild types; indeed, a higher sensitivity has 
been frequently correlated to enhanced nisin resistance in L. monocytogenes 
(Gravesen et al., 2001). On the other hand, Naghmouchi et al. (2006) found 
an increased resistance of all L. monocytogenes bacteriocin-resistant vari-
ants to several antibiotics, which target different cellular sites. All variants 
were more resistant to ampicillin, bacitracin, chloramphenicol, vancomy-
cin, and kanamycin than was the wild-type strain. These authors proposed 
that increased resistance to these antibiotics may indicate that the compo-
sitional changes in the cell wall fraction of variants selected by exposure to 
bacteriocin can also confer protection to other inhibitory substances such as 
antibiotics.
It is well known that Gram-negative bacteria have natural resistance to nisin 
due to the presence of the outer membrane; however, the use of chelating 
agents, such as EDTA, allows for their sensitization. Nevertheless, Salmonella 
can alter the composition and the structure of their lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 
layer in response to changes in environmental conditions, diminishing their 
sensitivity to bacteriocins, such as nisin. Prudêncio et al. (2015) demonstrated 
and characterized tolerance to nisin combined with EDTA in S. Typhimurium 
cultured under specific conditions of temperature and pH. In this study, it 
was presumed that the modifications related to the tolerance phenotype of 

583
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
nisin combined with EDTA possibly involve changes in the phospholipid 
acyl chains, in the sugar content of LPS, and in the peptidoglycan present in 
the cell wall. Arguably, these findings demonstrate the importance of better 
understanding the behavior of the cells treated with nisin and EDTA, espe-
cially due to widespread use of this bacteriocin in food preservation.
Resistance to a bacteriocin may extend to other bacteriocins within the 
same class or even in other classes (Naghmouchi et al., 2007). As an illustra-
tion, Kaur et al. (2013) determined that resistance to a bacteriocin extended 
to other bacteriocins within the same class, e.g., Pediocin 34, conferred cross-
resistance to Enterocin FH 99 (class IIa bacteriocins) but not to nisin (class I). 
The acquirement of resistance to bacteriocins can significantly affect physi-
ological activity, alter cell-envelope lipid composition, and modify the antibi-
otic susceptibility/resistance profile of L. monocytogenes. An interesting work 
conducted by Macwana and Muriana (2012) took full advantage of this fact, 
proposing a practical system for grouping LAB bacteriocins based on their 
mode of action as determined by changes in inhibitory activity to spontane-
ously acquired BacR. Bacteriocin sensitive wild-type L. monocytogenes 39–2, 
sensitive to five bacteriocins produced by three genera of LAB: pediocin PA-1 
and pediocin Bac3 (Pediococcus), lacticin FS97 and lacticin FS56 (Lactococcus), 
and curvaticin FS47 (Lactobacillus). Spontaneous BacR derivative of L. mono-
cytogenes 39–2 obtained by selective recovery against lacticin FS56 provided 
complete resistance to the bacteriocin made by Lc. lactis FS56. The lacticin 
FS56-resistant strain of L. monocytogenes 39–2 was also cross-resistant to cur-
vaticin FS47 and pediocin PA-1, but not to lacticinFS97 or pediocin Bac3. A 
spontaneous mutation that renders a strain cross-resistant to different bacte-
riocins indicates that they share a common mechanism of resistance due to 
similar modes of action of the bacteriocins. Furthermore, these authors also 
proved that mixtures of bacteriocins of different modes of action provided 
greater inhibition than mixtures of bacteriocins of the same mode of action. 
This methodical approach to classify bacteriocins into functional groups 
based on mechanism of resistance (i.e., mode of action) could be used for 
identifying the best mixture of bacteriocins for use as biopreservatives.
In conclusion, the occurrence of bacteriocin-resistant variants of meatborne 
pathogens, mainly L. monocytogenes and Salmonella spp., became evident in 
the last decade (Naghmouchi et al., 2006, 2007; Collins et al., 2010; Macwana 
and Muriana, 2012; Kaur et al., 2013). Knowledge of the features of classes I 
and IIa bacteriocin-resistant variants and the conditions that prevent their 
emergence will help to determine optimal conditions for bacteriocin applica-
tions in foods and minimize the incidence of resistance. Since bacteriocins 
are regarded as potential tools for biopreservation, more study is needed to 
determine the distribution of BacR phenomena among microorganisms that 
cause food spoilage and among foodborne pathogens, especially L. monocy-
togenes. In addition, the relationship between acquiring resistance to bacte-
riocins and the pathogenicity of singly or multiply resistant L. monocytogenes 
remains to be elucidated.

584
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
18.5  Overview of Actual Industrial Application 
and Regulatory Aspects
In spite of the GRAS status that many (bacteriocinogenic) protective cul-
tures already have, only two LAB bacteriocins, i.e., nisin and pediocin PA-1, 
have been authorized for the biopreservation of foods. Nisin is commercially 
available as a dried concentrated powder called Nisaplin (Danisco, Copen-
hagen, Denmark) and was admitted into the European food additive list in 
the early 1980s, where it was assigned the number E234 (EEC, 1983). In 1988, 
nisin received GRAS status from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
(Federal Register, 1988), and is the only bacteriocin that has been approved 
by the World Health Organization for use as a food preservative (Sobrino-
López and Martín-Belloso, 2008). Pediocin PA-1 is marketed as a bacterio-
cin-containing fermentate powder, namely ALTA®2351 (Kerry Bioscience, 
Carrigaline, Co. Cork, Ireland) (Mills et al., 2011).
The authority under which a given bacteriocin will be regulated for use in 
food will depend on the foods in which it is used and the purpose for which 
it is used. International regulatory agencies have different criteria concern-
ing doses and food applications. For instance, an additional suitability 
assessment by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Food Safety and 
Inspection Service (FSIS) is required for bacteriocins used in meat products. 
According to the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius (2013), nisin—named as 
INS 234 by this international organization—application in meats comprise 
RTE products, such as hot dogs and smoked sausages, 25 ppm being the high-
est suggested concentration within the products. These regulations take into 
account that nisin should be part of a multiple hurdle system where sodium 
lactate or diacetate are added and aid the preservation. When talking about 
nisin incorporation to a product, FAO/WHO experts consider that there is 
an extra challenge for the meat industry: the equipment and the technology 
necessary for the suitable packaging of the product, since the extensive use 
of nisin implies external application immediately before packaging.
On the other hand, protective cultures from LAB have been included in the 
manufacturing process of many RTE meat products; the legislation treat them 
as food additives. The way they have to be incorporated, their concentration, 
and shelf life of the final products are regulated by many international pub-
lic health organisms. The determination that specific strains of Carnobacte-
rium maltaromaticum are GRAS—on the basis of scientific procedures—can 
be found as one example from the FDA Federal Register (62 FR 18937–18964, 
2004). Cb. maltaromaticum strains CB1, CB2, CB3LV17, UAL26, ATCC 35586, 
and ATCC43225 for use in RTE and fresh comminuted processed meat prod-
ucts, at a maximum inoculation concentration of l × l04 CFU/g, are meant 
to be used as inhibitors of L. monocytogenes. Furthermore, commercial pro-
tective cultures are already marketed, comprised of a mixture of several 

585
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
bacteriocinogenic cultures. For instance, the DuPont™ Danisco® protective 
culture called HOLDBAC® Listeria can be added to semidry-cured meats 
and cooked and fresh ground meats to inhibit the growth of the aforemen-
tioned pathogen.
In addition to the information given, the reader is invited to read Aymerich 
et al. (2006), since neither regulations nor legislation related to biopreserva-
tion of meat and meat products have been substantially changed in the last 
decade.
References
Aasen, I. M., Markussen, S., Moretro, T., Katla, T., Axelsson L. and Naterstad, L. 
(2003). Interactions of the bacteriocin sakacin P and nisin with food constituents. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 87, 35–43.
Ahmed, O. M., Pangloli, P., Hwang, C. A. et al. (2015). The occurrence of Listeria mono-
cytogenes in retail ready-to-eat meat and poultry products related to the levels of 
acetate and lactate in the products. Food Control, 52, 43–48.
Albano, H., Pinho, C., Leite, D. et al. (2009). Evaluation of a bacteriocin-producing 
strain of Pediococcus acidilactici as a biopreservative for “Alheira”, a fermented 
meat sausage. Food Control, 20, 764–770.
Alves, V. F., Martinez, R. C. R., Lavrador, M. A. S. and De Martinis, E. C. P. (2006). 
Antilisterial activity of lactic acid bacteria inoculated on cooked ham. Meat Sci-
ence, 74, 623–627.
Aly, S., Floury, J., Famelart, M. H. et al. (2011). Nisin quantification by ELISA allows 
the modeling of its apparent diffusion coefficient in model cheeses. Journal of 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 59, 9484–9490.
Ananou, S., Baños, A., Maqueda, M., Martínez-Bueno, M., Gálvez, A. and Valdivia, 
E. (2010a). Effect of combined physico-chemical treatments based on enterocin 
AS-48 on the control of Listeria monocytogenes and Staphylococcus aureus in a 
model cooked ham. Food Control, 21, 478–486.
Ananou, S., Garriga, M., Jofré, A. et al. (2010b). Combined effect of enterocin AS-48 
and high hydrostatic pressure to control food-borne pathogens inoculated in 
low acid fermented sausages. Meat Science, 84, 594–600.
Ananou, S., Maqueda, M., Martínez-Bueno, M., Gálvez, A. and Valdivia, E. (2005). 
Control of Staphylococcus aureus in sausages by enterocin AS-48. Meat Science, 
71, 549–556.
Ananou, S., Valdivia, E., Martínez-Bueno, M., Gálvez, A. and Maqueda, M. (2004). 
Effect of combined physico-chemical preservatives on enterocin AS-48 activ-
ity against the enterotoxigenic Staphylococcus aureus CECT 976 strain. Journal of 
Applied Microbiology, 97, 48–56.
Aymerich, T., Garriga, M., Jofré, A., Martín, B. and Monfort, J. M. (2006a). The use 
of bacteriocins against meat-borne pathogens. In: Nollet, L. M. L. and Toldra, 
F. (eds.) Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Chapter 15. New York, NY: 
Taylor & Francis Group LLC, pp. 371–399.

586
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Aymerich, T., Martín, B., Garriga, M., Vidal-Carou, M. C., Bover-Cid, S. and Hugas, 
M. (2006b). Safety properties and molecular strain typing of lactic acid 
bacteria from slightly fermented sausages. Journal of Applied Microbiology,  
100, 40–49.
Aymerich, T., Picouet, P. A. and Monfort, J. M. (2008). Decontamination technologies 
for meat products. Meat Science, 78, 114–129.
Bani-Jaber, A., McGuire, J., Ayres, J. W. and Daeschel, M. A. (2000). Efficacy of the 
antimicrobial peptide nisin in emulsifying oil in water. Journal of Food Science, 
65, 502–506.
Benito, M. J., Martín, A., Aranda, E., Pérez-Nevado, F., Ruiz-Moyano, S. and Córdoba, 
M. (2007). Characterization and selection of autochthonous lactic acid bacteria 
isolated from traditional Iberian dry-fermented salchichón and chorizo sau-
sages. Journal of Food Science, 72, 193–201.
Benkerroum, N., Daoudi, A., Hamraoui, T. et al. (2005). Lyophilized preparations 
of bacteriocinogenic Lactobacillus curvatus and Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis as 
potential protective adjuncts to control Listeria monocytogenes in dry-fermented 
sausages. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 98, 56–63.
Blanco Massani, M., Molina, V., Sanchez, M., Renaud, V., Eisenberg, P. and Vignolo, 
G. (2014). Active polymers containing Lactobacillus curvatus CRL705 bacterio-
cins: Effectiveness assessment in Wieners. International Journal of Food Micro-
biology. 178, 7–12.
Borch, E., Kant-Muermans, M. and Blixt, Y. (1996). Bacterial spoilage of meat and 
cured meat products. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 33, 103–120.
Bredholt, S., Nesbakken, T. and Holck, A. (1999). Protective cultures inhibit growth 
of Listeria monocytogenes and Escherichia coli O157:H7 in cooked, sliced, vacuum-
and gas-packaged meat. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 53, 43–52.
Brocklehurst, T. F., Parker, M. L., Gunning, P. A. and Robins, M. M. (1993). Microbiol-
ogy of emulsions: Physicochemical aspects. Lipid Technology, 83–88.
Campos, C. A., Gerschenson, L. N. and Flores, S. K. (2011). Development of edible 
films and coatings with antimicrobial activity. Food and Bioprocess Technology, 
4(6), 849–875.
Carlini, N., Mogna, L., and Strozzi, G. P. (2010). Reducing foodborne pathogens in 
the food chain by the use of protective and probiotic cultures. In J. Rovira (Ed.), 
How to Improve the Food Safety of My Products? Madrid, Spain: International 
Marketing & Communication, pp. 73–88.
Casaburi, A., Di Martino, V., Ferranti, P., Picariello, L. and Villani, F. (2016). Techno-
logical properties and bacteriocins production by Lactobacillus curvatus 54M16 
and its use as starter culture for fermented sausage manufacture. Food Control, 
59, 31–45.
Casquete, R., Benito, M. J., Martín, A., Ruiz-Moyano, S., Aranda, E. and Córdoba, 
M. G. (2012). Microbiological quality of salchichón and chorizo, traditional 
Iberian dry-fermented sausages from two different industries, inoculated with 
autochthonous starter cultures. Food Control, 24, 191–198.
Castellano, P., Belfiore, C., Fadda, S. and Vignolo, G. (2008). A review of bacteriocino-
genic lactic acid bacteria used as bioprotective cultures in fresh meat produced 
in Argentina. Meat Science, 79, 483–499.
Castellano, P., Belfiore, C. and Vignolo, G. (2011). Combination of bioprotective 
cultures with EDTA to reduce Escherichia coli O157:H7 in frozen ground-beef 
patties. Food Control, 22, 1461–1465.

587
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
Castellano, P., González, C., Carduza, F. and Vignolo, G. (2010). Protective action of 
Lactobacillus curvatus CRL 705 on vacuum-packaged raw beef. Effect on sensory 
and structural characteristics. Meat Science, 85, 394–401.
Castellano, P. and Vignolo, G. (2006). Inhibition of Listeria innocua and Brochothrix ther-
mosphacta in vacuum-packaged meat by addition of bacteriocinogenic Lactobacillus 
curvatus CRL705 and its bacteriocins. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 43, 194–199.
Castro, M. P., Garro, O., Gerschenson, L. N. and Campos, C. A. (2003). Interaction 
between potassium sorbate, oil and Tween 20 on the growth and inhibition of 
Z. bailii in model salad dressings. Journal of Food Safety, 23, 47–59.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2015). Centers for disease control and 
prevention, outbreak surveillance data. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/food-
safety/outbreaks/investigating-outbreaks/index.html (accessed January 2015).
Chaillou, S., Christieans, S., Rivollier, M., Lucquin, I., Champomier-Vergès, M. C. and 
Zagorec, M. (2014). Quantification and efficiency of Lactobacillus sakei strain mix-
tures used as protective cultures in ground beef. Meat Science, 97, 332–338.
Chakchouk-Mtibaa, A., Elleuch, L., Smaoui, S. et al. (2014). Characterization of the bac-
teriocin BacJ1 and its effectiveness for the inactivation of Salmonella typhimurium 
during turkey escalope storage. Food Chemistry, 152, 566–572.
Codex Alimentarius. (2013). FAO/OMS. Secretariat of the Codex Alimentarius Commis-
sion. Roma, Italia. Available at http://www.fao.org/3/a-i3243s.pdf.
Collins, B., Curtis, N., Cotter, P. D., Hill, C. and Ross, R. P. (2010). The ABC transporter 
AnrAB contributes to the innate resistance of Listeria monocytogenesto nisin, bac-
itracin, and various β-lactam antibiotics. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, 
54, 4416–4423.
Coma, V. (2008). Bioactive packaging technologies for extended shelf life of meat-
based products. Meat Science, 78, 90–103.
D Aoust, J. I. (1997). Salmonella species. In: Doyle, M. P., Beuchat, L. R. and Montville, 
T. J. (eds.) Food Microbiology. Fundamentals and Frontiers. Washington, DC: ASM 
Press, pp. 129–158.
da Silva Sabo, S., Vitolo, M., Domínguez González, J. M. and Pinheiro de Souza 
Oliveira, R. (2014). Overview of Lactobacillus plantarum as a promising bacterio-
cin producer among lactic acid bacteria. Food Research International, 64, 527–536.
Dave, D. and Ghaly, A. E. (2011). Meat spoilage mechanisms and preservation tech-
niques: A critical review. American Journal of Agricultural and Biological Sciences, 
6(4), 486–510.
de Souza Barbosa, M., Todorov, S. D., Ivanova, I., Chobert, J-M., Haertle, T. and Gom-
bossy de Melo Franco, B. D. (2015). Improving safety of salami by application of 
bacteriocins produced by an autochthonous Lactobacillus curvatus isolate. Food 
Microbiology, 46, 254–262.
Dods, K. L. and Austin, J. W. (1997). Clostridium botulinum. In: Doyle, M. P., Beuchat, 
L. R. and Montville, T. J. (eds.) Food Microbiology. Fundamentals and Frontiers. 
Washington, DC: ASM Press, pp. 288–304.
Dominic Dussault, D., Vu, K. D. and Lacroix, M. (2016). Development of a model 
describing the inhibitory effect of selected preservatives on the growth of Liste-
ria monocytogenes in a meat model system. Food Microbiology, 53, 115–121.
Dortu, C., Huch, M., Holzapfel, W. H., Franz, C. M. A. P. and Thonart, P. (2008). Anti-
listerial activity of bacteriocin-producing Lactobacillus curvatus CWBI-B28 and 
Lactobacillus sakei CWBI-B1365 on raw beef and poultry meat. Journal of Applied 
Microbiology, 47, 581–586.

588
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Doyle, M. P., Zhao, T., Meng, J. and Zhao, S. (1997). Escherichia coli O157:H7. In: Doyle, 
M. P., Beuchat, L. R. and Montville, T. J. (eds.) Food Microbiology. Fundamentals 
and Frontiers. Washington, DC: ASM Press, pp. 171–191.
Drosinos, E. H., Mataragas, M., Vesković -Morač anin, S., Gasparik-Reichardt, J., 
Hadžiosmanović , M. and Alagić , D. (2006). Quantifying nonthermal inac-
tivation of Listeria monocytogenes in European fermented sausages using bac-
teriocinogenic lactic acid bacteria or their bacteriocins: A case study for risk 
assessment. Journal of Food Protection, 69, 648–2663.
Dykes, G. A. and Hastings, J. W. (1998). Fitness costs associated with class IIa bacterio-
cin resistance in Listeria monocytogenes B73. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 26, 1–5.
EC, European Parliament and Council of the European Community. (2005). Commis-
sion Regulation (EC) No 2073/2005 of 15 November 2005 on microbiological 
criteria for foodstuffs. Official Journal of the European Union, L338, 1–26. Brussels, 
Belgium.
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). (2007). The community summary report of 
trends and sources of zoonoses, zoonotic agents, antimicrobial resistances and 
foodborne outbreaks in the European Union in 2006. EFSA Journal, 130, 3−352. 
Available at http://www.efsa.europa.eu/cs/BlobServer/DocumentSet/Zoon-
report2006en,0.pdf?ssbinary=true (accessed October 2009).
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). (2010). Analysis of the baseline survey on 
the prevalence of Campylobacter in broiler batches and of Campylobacter and 
Salmonella on broiler carcasses in the EU, 2008. European Food Safety Author-
ity, Italy. EFSA Journal, 8, 3, 1503.
El-Ziney, M. G., van den Temple, T., Debevere, J. and Jakobsen, M. (1999). Application 
of reuterin produced by Lactobacillus reuteri 12002 for meat decontamination 
and preservation. Journal of Food Protection, 62, 257–261.
Ennahar, S., Sashihara, T., Sonomoto, K. and Ishizaki, A. (2000). Class IIa bacteriocins: 
Biosynthesis, structure and activity. FEMS Microbiology Reviews, 24, 85–106.
European Commission. (EEC). (1983). Commission Directive 83/463/EEC 22 of July 
introducing temporary measures for the designation of certain ingredients in 
the labeling of foodstuffs for sale to the ultimate consumer. Official Journal of 
European Communities, L255, 1–6.
European Food Safety Authority. (2015). The European Union summary report on 
trends and sources of zoonoses, zoonotic agents and food-borne outbreaks in 
2013. European Food Safety Authority Journal, 2015(13), 3991. Available at http://
ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications/Publications/EU-summary-report-trends-
sources-zoonoses-2013.pdf.
Federal Register. (1988). Nisin preparation: Affirmation of GRAS status as a direct 
human food ingredient. Federal Register, 53, 11247–11251.
Ferreira, V., Barbosa, J., Silva, J. et al. (2007). Chemical and microbiological charac-
terization of “Salpicão de Vinhais” and “Chouriça de Vinhais”: Traditional dry 
sausages produced in the North of Portugal. Food Microbiology, 24, 618–623.
Gadang, V. P., Hettiarachchy, N. S., Johnson, M. G. and Owens, C. (2008). Evaluation 
of antibacterial activity of whey protein isolate coating incorporated with nisin, 
grape seed extract, malic acid, and EDTA on a Turkey frankfurter system. Jour-
nal of  Food Science, 73, M389–M394.
Gálvez, A., Abriouel, H., López, R. L. et al. (2007). Bacteriocin-based strategies for 
food biopreservation. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 120, 51–70.

589
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
Gao, Y., Jia, S., Gao, Q. and Tan, Z. (2010). A novel bacteriocin with a broad inhibitory 
spectrum produced by Lactobacillus sake C2, isolated from traditional Chinese 
fermented cabbage. Food Control, 21, 76–81.
Gao, Y., Li, D. and Liu, X. (2014). Bacteriocin-producing Lactobacillus sakei C2 as starter 
culture in fermented sausages. Food Control, 35, 1–6.
Gao, Y., Li, D., Liu, S. and Liu, Y. (2012). Probiotic potential of L. sake C2 isolated from 
traditional Chinese fermented cabbage. European Food Research and Technology, 
234, 45–51.
Garrido, V., Vitas, A. I. and García-Jalón, I. (2009). Survey of Gisteria monocytogenes in 
ready-to-eat products: Prevalence by brands and retail establishments for expo-
sure assessment of listeriosis in Northern Spain. Food Control, 20, 986−991.
Georgaras, I., Panagiotis, N., Skandamis, N. et al. (2006). Post-processing application 
of chemical solutions for control of Listeria monocytogenes, cultured under dif-
ferent conditions on commercial smoked sausage formulated with and without 
lactate-sodium diacetate. Food Microbiology, 23, 762–771.
Gialamas, H., Zinoviadou, K., Biliaderis, C. and Koutsoumanis, K. (2010). Develop-
ment of a novel bioactive packaging based on the incorporation of Lactobacillus 
sakei into sodium-caseinate films for controlling Listeria monocytogenes in foods. 
Food Research International, 43, 2402–2408.
Gill, A. O. and Holley, R. A. (2000). Inhibition of bacterial growth on ham and bologna 
by lysozyme, nisin and EDTA. Food Research International, 33, 83–90.
Gombas, D. E., Chen, Y., Clavero, R. S. and Scott, V. N. (2003). Survey of Listeria mono-
cytogenes in ready-to-eat foods. Journal of Food Protection, 66, 459−469.
Govaris, A., Solomakos, N., Pexara, A. and Chatzopoulou, P. S. (2010). The antimicro-
bial effect of oregano essential oil, nisin and their combination against Salmo-
nella Enteritidis in minced sheep meat during refrigerated storage. International 
Journal of Food Microbiology, 137, 175–180.
Gravesen, A., Axelsen, A., da Silva, J. M., Hansen, T. B. and Knøchel, S. (2002). Fre-
quency of bacteriocin resistance development and associated fitness costs in Lis-
teria monocytogenes. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 68, 756–764.
Gravesen, A., Sorensen, K., Aarestrup, F. M. and Knochel, S. (2001). Spontaneous 
nisin-resistant Listeria monocytogenes mutants with increased expression of a 
putative penicillin-binding protein and their sensitivity to various antibiotics. 
Microbial Drug Resistance, 7, 127–135.
Gudbjornsdottir, B., Suihko, M. L., Gustavsson, P. et al. (2004). The incidence of Listeria 
monocytogenes in meat, poultry and seafood plants in the Nordic countries. Food 
Microbiology, 21, 217−225.
Hampikyan, H. and Ugur, M. (2007). The effect of nisin on L. monocytogenes in Turkish 
fermented sausages (sucuks). Meat Science, 76, 327–332.
Hanlin, M. B., Kalchayanand, P. B. and Ray, B. (1993). Bacteriocins of lactic acid bac-
teria in combination have greater antibacterial activity. Journal of Food Protection, 
56, 252–255.
Hartmann, H. A., Wilke, T. and Erdmann, R. (2011). Efficacy of bacteriocin-containing 
cell-free culture supernatants from lactic acid bacteria to control Listeria monocy-
togenes in food. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 146, 192–199.
Hereu, A., Bover-Cid, A., Garriga, M. and Aymerich, T. (2012). High hydrost atic pres-
sure and biopreservation of dry-cured ham to meet the Food Safety Objectives 
for Listeria monocytogenes. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 154, 107–112.

590
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Holzapfel, W. H., Geisen, R. and Schillinger, U. (1995). Biological preservation of foods 
with reference to protective cultures, bacteriocins and food-grade enzymes. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 24, 343–362.
Hugas, M., Pages, F., Garriga, M. and Monfort, J. M. (1998). Application of the bacte-
riocinogenic Lactobacillus sakei CTC494 to prevent growth of Listeria in fresh and 
cooked meat products packed with different atmospheres. Food Microbiology, 
15(6), 639–650.
Hugo, C. J. and Hugo, A. (2015). Current trends in natural preservatives for fresh 
sausage products. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 45, 12–23.
Jacobsen, T., Budde, B. B. and Koch, A. G. (2003). Application of Leuconostoc carno-
sum for biopreservation of cooked meat products. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 
95(2), 242–249.
Janes, M. E., Kooshesh, S. and Johnson, M. G. (2002). Control of Listeria monocyto-
genes on the surface of refrigerated, ready-to-eat chicken coated with edible 
zein film coatings containing nisin and/or calcium propionate. Journal of  Food 
Science, 67, 2754–2757.
Jeanson, S., Chadoeuf, J., Madec, M. N. et al. (2011). Spatial distribution of bacte-
rial colonies in a model cheese. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 77(4), 
1493–1500.
Jofré, A., Aymerich, T. and Garriga, M. (2009). Improvement of the food safety of low 
acid fermented sausages by enterocins A and B and high pressure. Food Control, 
20, 179–184.
Jofré, A., Garriga, M. and Aymerich, T. (2008). Inhibition of Salmonella sp., Listeria 
monocytogenes and Staphylococcus aureus in cooked ham by combining antimi-
crobials, high hydrostatic pressure and refrigeration. Meat Science, 78, 53–59.
Jones, R., Wiklund, E., Zagorec, M. and Tagg, J. (2010). Evaluation of stored lamb 
bio-preserved using a three-strain cocktail of Lactobacillus sakei. Meat Science, 86, 
955–959.
Jones, R., Zagorec, M., Brightwell, G. and Tagg, J. (2009). Inhibition by Lactobacillus 
sakei of other species in the flora of vacuum packaged raw meats during pro-
longed storage. Food Microbiology, 26, 876–881.
Juncioni de Arauza, L., Faustino Jozala, A., GavaMazzola, P. and Vessoni Penna, T. C. 
(2009). Nisin biotechnological production and application: A review. Trends in 
Food Science and Technology, 20, 146–154.
Juneja, V. K., Dwivedi, H. P. and Yan, X. (2012). Novel natural food antimicrobials. 
Annual Reviews in Food Science and Technology, 3, 381–403.
Kaur, G., Singh T. P. and Malik, R. K. (2013). Antibacterial efficacy of Nisin, Pediocin 
34 and Enterocin FH99 against Listeria monocytogenes and cross resistance of its 
bacteriocin resistant variants to common food preservatives. Brazilian Journal of 
Microbiology, 44(1), 63–71.
Kapetanakou, A. E., Karyotis, D. and Skandamis, P. N. (2016). Control of Listeria 
monocytogenes by applying ethanol-based antimicrobial edible films on ham 
slices and microwave-reheated frankfurters. Food Microbiology, 54, 80–90.
Khan, H., Flint, S. and Yu, P.-L. (2010). Enterocins in food preservation. International 
Journal of Food Microbiology, 141, 1–10.
Kostrzynska, M. and Bachand, A. (2006). Use of microbial antagonism to reduce 
pathogen levels on produce and meat products: A review. Canadian Journal of 
Microbiology, 52, 1017–1026.

591
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
Kouakou, P., Ghalfi, H., Destain, J., Duboisdauphin, R., Evrard P. and Thonart, P. 
(2008). Enhancing the antilisterial effect of Lactobacillus curvatus CWBI-B28 in 
pork meat and cocultures by limiting bacteriocin degradation. Meat Science, 80, 
640–648.
Kouakou, P., Ghalfi, H., Destain, J., Dubois-Dauphin, R., Evrard, P. and Thonart, P. 
(2009). Effects of curing sodium nitrite additive and natural meat fat on growth 
control of Listeria monocytogenes by the bacteriocin-producing Lactobacillus cur-
vatus strain CWBI-B28. Food Microbiology, 26, 623–628.
Kouakou, P., Ghalfi, H., Dortu, C., Evrard, P. and Thonart, P. (2010). Combined use 
of bacteriocin-producing strains to control Listeria monocytogenes regrowth 
in raw pork meat. International Journal of Food Science and Technology, 45, 
937–943.
Kuleasan, H. and Cakmakei, M. L. (2002). Effect of reuterin produced by Lactobacillus 
reuteri on the surface of sausages to inhibit the growth of Listeria monocytogenes 
and Salmonella spp. Nahrung, 46, 408–410.
Leroy, F. and De Vuyst, L. (2005). Simulation of the effect of sausage ingredients and 
technology on the functionality of the bacteriocin-producing Lactobacillus sakei 
CTC 494 strain. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 100, 141–152.
Liu, G., Wang, Y., Gui, M., Zheng, H., Dai, R. and Li, P. (2012). Combined effect of high 
hydrostatic pressure and enterocin LM-2 on the refrigerated shelf life of ready-
to-eat sliced vacuum-packed cooked ham. Food Control, 24, 64–71.
Lücke, F. K. (2000). Utilization of microbes to process and preserve meat. Meat Science, 
56, 105–115.
Lues, J. F. R. and Van Tonder, I. (2007). The occurrence of indicator bacteria on hands 
and aprons of food handlers in the delicatessen sections of a retail group. Food 
Control, 18, 326−332.
Macwana, S. and Muriana, P. M. (2012). Spontaneous bacteriocin resistance in Listeria 
monocytogenes as a susceptibility screen for identifying different mechanisms of 
resistance and modes of action by bacteriocins of lactic acid bacteria. Journal of 
Microbiological Methods, 88, 7–13.
Maragkoudakis, P. A., Mountzouris, K. C., Psyrras, D. et al. (2009). Functional proper-
ties of novel protective lactic acid bacteria and application in raw chicken meat 
against Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella enteritidis. International Journal of 
Food Microbiology, 130, 219–226.
Martínez, B. and Rodríguez, A. (2005). Antimicrobial susceptibility of nisin resistant 
Listeria monocytogenes of dairy origin. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 252, 67–72.
Mataragas, M., Drosinos, E. H. and Metaxopoulos, J. (2003). Antagonistic activity of 
lactic acid bacteria against Listeria monocytogenes in sliced cooked cured pork 
shoulder stored under vacuum or modified atmosphere at 4 ± 2°C. Food Micro-
biology, 20, 259–265.
MCClane, B. A. (1997). Clostridium perfringens. In: Doyle, M. P., Beuchat, L. R. and 
Montville, T. J. (eds.) Food Microbiology. Fundamentals and Frontiers. Washington, 
DC: ASM Press, pp. 305–326.
Melero, B., Diez, A. M., Rajkovic, A., Jaime, I. and Rovira, J. (2012). Behaviour of 
non-stressed and stressed Listeria monocytogenes and Campylobacter jejuni cells 
on fresh chicken burger meat packaged under modified atmosphere and inoc-
ulated with protective culture. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 158, 
107–112.

592
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Melero, B., Vinuesa, R., Diez, A. M., Jaime, I. and Rovira, J. (2013). Application of 
protective cultures against Listeria monocytogenes and Campylobacter jejuni in 
chicken products packaged under modified atmosphere. Poultry Science, 92, 
1108–1116.
Melo, R. T., Nalevaiko, P. C., Mendonça, E. P. et al. (2013). Campylobacter jejuni strains 
isolated from chicken meat harbour several virulence factors and represent a 
potential risk to humans. Food Control, 33, 227–231.
Millette, M., Le Tien, C., Smoragiewicz, W. and Lacroix, M. (2007). Inhibition of Staph-
ylococcus aureus on beef by nisin-containing modified alginate films and beads. 
Food Control, 18, 878–884.
Mills, S., Stanton, C., Hill, C. and Ross, R. P. (2011). New developments and applica-
tions of bacteriocins and peptides in foods. Annual Review of Food Science and 
Technology, 2, 299–329.
Min, B. J., Han, I. Y. and Dawson, P. L. (2010). Antimicrobial gelatin films reduce Liste-
ria monocytogenes on turkey bologna. Poultry Science, 89, 1307–1314.
Moore, J. E. (2004). Gastrointestinal outbreaks associated with fermented meats. Meat 
Science, 67, 565–568.
Muñoz, A., Ananou, S., Gálvez, A. et al. (2007). Inhibition of Staphylococcus aureus in 
dairy products by enterocin AS-48 produced in situ and ex situ: Bactericidal 
synergism with heat. International Dairy Journal, 17, 760–769.
Naghmouchi, K., Drider, D., Kheadr, E., Lacroix, C., Prévost, H. and Fliss, I. (2006). 
Multiple characterizations of Listeria monocytogenes sensitive and insensitive 
variants to divergicin M35, a new pediocin-like bacteriocin. Journal of Applied 
Microbiology, 10, 29–39.
Naghmouchi, K., Kheadr, E., Lacroix, C. and Fliss, I. (2007). Class I/Class IIa bacte-
riocin cross-resistance phenomenon in Listeria monocytogenes. Food Microbiology, 
24, 718–727.
Nguyen, V. T., Gidley, M .J. and Dykes, G. A. (2008). Potential of a nisin-containing 
bacterial cellulose film to inhibit Listeria monocytogenes on processed meats. 
Food Microbiology, 25, 471–478.
Nieto-Lozano, J. C., Reguera-Useros, J. I., Peláez-Martínez, M. C. and Hardisson de 
la Torre, A. (2006). Effect of a bacteriocin produced by Pediococcus acidilactici 
against Listeria monocytogenes and Clostridium perfringens on Spanish raw meat. 
Meat Science, 72, 57–61.
Nieto-Lozano, J. C., Reguera-Useros, J. I., Peláez-Martínez, M. C., Sacristán-Pérez-
Minayo, G., Gutiérrez-Fernández, A. J. and Hardisson de la Torre, A. (2010). The 
effect of the pediocin PA-1 produced by Pediococcus acidilactici against Listeria 
monocytogenes and Clostridium perfringens in Spanish dry-fermented sausages 
and frankfurters. Food Control, 21, 679–685.
Nilsen, T., Nes, I. F. and Holo, H. (1998). An exported inducer peptide regulates bac-
teriocin production in Enterococcus faecium CTC 492. Journal of Bacteriology, 180, 
1848–1854.
Norrung, B. and Buncic, S. (2008). Microbial safety of meat in the European Union. 
Meat Science, 78, 14−24.
Nychas, G. J. E., Skandamis, P. N., Tassou, C. C. and Koutsoumanis, K. P. (2008). Meat 
spoilage during distribution. Meat Science, 78, 77–89.
Okereke, A. and Montville, T. J. (1991). Bacteriocin-mediated inhibition of Clostridium 
botulinum spores by lactic acid bacteria at refrigeration and abuse temperatures. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 57, 3423–3428.

593
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
Orsi, R. H., den Bakker, H. C. and Wiedmann, M. (2011). Listeria monocytogenes lin-
eages: Genomics, evolution, ecology, and phenotypic characteristics. Interna-
tional Journal of Medical Microbiology, 301, 79–96.
Osés, S., Diez A., Gómez, E., et al. (2015). Control of Escherichia coli and Listeria mono-
cytogenes in suckling-lamb meat evaluated using microbial challenge tests. Meat 
Science, 110, 262–269.
Pattanayaiying, R.  H-Kittikun, A. and Cutter, C. N. (2015). Incorporation of nisin Z 
and lauric arginate into pullulan films to inhibit foodborne pathogens associ-
ated with fresh and ready-to-eat muscle foods. International Journal of Food 
Microbiology, 207, 77–82.
Pawar, D. D., Malik, S. V. S., Bhilegaonkar, K. N. and Barbuddhe, S. B. (2000). Effect of 
nisin and its combination with sodium chloride on the survival of Listeria mono-
cytogenes added to raw buffalo meat mince. Meat Science, 56, 215–219.
Pérez-Rodríguez, F., Castro, R., Posada-Izquierdo, G. D. et al. (2010). Evaluation of 
hygiene practices and microbiological quality of cooked meat products during 
slicing and handling at retail. Meat Science, 86, 479–485.
Pérez-Rodríguez, F., van Asselt, E. D., García-Gimeno, R. M., Zurera, G. and Zwieter-
ing, M. H. (2007). Extracting additional risk managers information from a risk 
assessment of Listeria monocytogenes in deli meats. Journal of Food Protection, 70, 
1137−1152.
Prudêncio, C. V., Vanetti, M. C. D. and Prieto, M. (2015). Tolerance of Salmonella 
enteric serovar Typhimurium to nisin combined with EDTA is accompanied by 
changes in cellular composition. Food Research International, 69, 281–288.
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2008). Listeria Monocytogenes Outbreak. 
Available at http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/alert-alerte/listeria/listeria_2008-
eng.php (accessed October 2009).
Ravyts, F., Barbuti, S., Frustoli, M. A. et al. (2008). Competitiveness and antibacte-
rial potential of bacteriocin-producing starter cultures in different types of fer-
mented sausages. Journal of Food Protection, 71, 1817–1827.
Ray, B. and Bhunia, A. (2014). Fundamental Food Microbiology. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press/Taylor & Francis.
Rivas, F. P., Castro, M. P., Vallejo, M., Marguet, E. and Campos, C. A. (2014). Sakacin 
Q produced by Lactobacillus curvatus ACU-1: Functionality characterization and 
antilisterial activity on cooked meat surface. Meat Science, 97(4), 475–479.
Rocourt, J. and Cossart, P. (1997). Listeria monocytogenes. In: Doyle, M. P., Beuchat, 
L. R. and Montville, T. J. (eds.) Food Microbiology. Fundamentals and Frontiers. 
Washington, DC: ASM Press, pp. 337–352.
Rodgers, S., Peiris, P. and Casadei, G. (2003). Inhibition of nonproteolytic Clostridium 
botulinum with lactic acid bacteria and their bacteriocins at refrigeration tem-
peratures. Journal of Food Protection, 66, 674–678.
Roller, S., Sagoo, S., Board, R. et al. (2002). Novel combinations of chitosan, carnocin and 
sulphite for the preservation of chilled pork sausages. Meat Science, 62, 165–177.
Rubio, R., Bover-Cid, S., Martín, B., Garriga, M. and Aymerich, T. (2013). Assessment 
of safe enterococci as bioprotective cultures in low-acid fermented sausages 
combined with high hydrostatic pressure. Food Microbiology, 33, 158–165.
Samelis, J., Kakouri, A. and Rementzis, J. (2000). Selective effect of the product type 
and the packaging conditions on the species of lactic acid bacteria dominating 
the spoilage microbial association of cooked meats at 4°C. Food Microbiology, 
17, 329–340.

594
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Samelis, J. and Metaxopoulos, J. (1999). Incidence and principal sources of Listeria 
spp. and Listeria monocytogenes contamination in processed meats and a meat 
processing plant. Food Microbiology, 16, 465–477.
Santiago-Silva, P., Soares, N. F .F., Nóbrega, J. E. Júnior, M. A. W. Barbosa, K. B. F., 
Volp, A. C. P., Zerdas, E. R. M. A. and Würlitzer, N. J. (2009).Antimicrobial effi-
ciency of film incorporated with pediocin (ALTAÒ 2351) on preservation of 
sliced ham. Food Control, 20, 85–89.
Scallan, E., Hoekstra, R. M., Angulo, F. J. et al. (2011). Food borne illness acquired in 
the United States—Major pathogens. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 17, 7–15.
Scannell, A. G. M., Ross, R. P., Hill, C. and Arendt, E. K. (2000). An effective lacticin 
biopreservative in fresh pork sausage. Journal of Food Protection, 63, 370–375.
Sobrino-López, A. and Martín-Belloso, O. (2008). Use of nisin and other bacteriocins 
for preservation of dairy products. International Dairy Journal, 18, 329–343.
Solomakos, N., Govaris, A., Koidis, P. and Botsoglou, N. (2008). The antimicrobial 
effect of thyme essential oil, nisin and their combination against Listeria monocy-
togenes in minced beef during refrigerated storage. Food Microbiology, 25, 120–127.
Stergiou, V. A., Thomas, L. V. and Adams, M. R. (2006). Interactions of nisin with 
glutathione in a model protein system and meat. Journal of Food Protection, 69, 
951–956.
Stiles, M. E. (1996). Biopreservation by lactic acid bacteria. Anton van Leeuwenhoek, 70, 
331–345.
Swaminathan, B. and Gerner-Smidt, P. (2007). The epidemiology of human listeriosis. 
Microbes Infections, 9, 1236–1243.
Talon, R., Leroy, S., Lebert, I. et al. (2008). Safety improvement and preservation of 
typical sensory qualities of traditional dry fermented sausages using autoch-
thonous starter cultures. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 126, 227–234.
Teramoto, H., Salaheen, S. and Biswas, D. (2016). Contamination of post-harvest poul-
try products with multidrug resistant Staphylococcus aureus in Maryland-Wash-
ington DC metro area. Food Control, 65, 132–135.
Theivendran, S., Hettiarachchy, N. S. and Johnson, M. G. (2006). Inhibition of Listeria 
monocytogenes by nisin combined with grape seed extract or green tea extract 
in soy protein film coated on turkey frankfurters. Journal of Food Science, 71(2), 
39–44.
Thomas, L. V., Clarkson, M. R. and Delves-Broughton, J. (2000). Nisin. In: Naidu, A. S. 
(ed.) Natural Food Antimicrobial Systems. Boca Raton, FL: CRC-Press, 463–524.
Urso, R., Comi, G. and Cocolin, L. (2006a). Ecology of lactic acid bacteria in Italian 
fermented sausages: Isolation, identification and molecular characterization. 
Systematic and Applied Microbiology, 29, 671–680.
Urso, R., Rantsiou, K., Cantoni, C., Comi, G. and Cocolin, L. (2006b). Technologi-
cal characterization of a bacteriocin-producing Lactobacillus sakei and its use in 
fermented sausages production. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 110, 
232–239.
Uyttendaele, M., De Troy, P. and Debevere, J. (1999). Incidence of Listeria monocyto-
genes in different types of meat products on the Belgian retail market. Interna-
tional Journal of Food Microbiology, 53(1), 75–80.
Vermeiren, L., Devlieghere, F. and Debevere, J. (2004). Evaluation of meat born lactic 
acid bacteria as protective cultures for the biopreservation of cooked meat prod-
ucts. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 96, 149–164.

595
The Use of Bacteriocins against Meat-borne Pathogens
Vesković  Morač anin, S. M., Ðukić , D. A. and Memiši, N. R. (2014). Bacteriocins pro-
duced by lactic acid bacteria—A review. Acta periodica technologica, 45, 271–283.
Violaris, Y., Bridges, O. and Bridges, J. (2008). Small businesses—Big risks: Current 
status and future direction of HACCP in Cyprus. Food Control, 19, 439−448.
Vorst, K. L., Todd, E. C. D. and Ryser, E. T. (2006). Transfer of Listeria monocytogenes 
during mechanical slicing of turkey, bologna, and salami. Journal of Food Protec-
tion, 69, 619−626.
Wilson, P. D. G., Brocklehurst, T. F., Arino, S. et al. (2002). Modelling microbial growth 
in structured foods: Towards a unified approach. International Journal of Food 
Microbiology, 73, 275–289.
Wimpenny, J. W. T., Leistner, L., Thomas, L. V., Mitchell, A. J., Katsaras, K. and Peetz, 
P. (1995). Submerged bacterial colonies within food and model systems: Their 
growth, distribution and interactions. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 
28, 299–315.
Ye, M., Meetoo, H. and Chen, H. (2008). Control of Listeria monocytogenes on ham 
steaks by antimicrobials incorporated into chitosan-coated plastic films. Food 
Microbiology, 25, 260–268.
Zdolec, N., Hadziosmanovic, M., Kozacinski, L. et al. (2007). Protective effect of Lac-
tobacillus sakei in fermented sausages. Archiv furLebensmittelhygiene, 58, 152–155.
Zhang, J., Liu, G., Li, P. and Qu, Y. (2010). Pentocin 31-1, a novel meat-borne bacte-
riocin and its application as biopreservative in chill-stored tray-packaged pork 
meat. Food Control, 21, 198–202.
Zhu, M., Du, M., Cordray, J. and UkAhn, D. (2005). Control of Listeria monocytogenes 
contamination in ready-to-eat meat products. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Sci-
ence and Food Safety, 4, 34–42.


597
19
Functionalities of Meat Bacterial Starters
Régine Talon and Sabine Leroy
19.1 Introduction
The production of fermented foods is one of the oldest food processing tech-
nologies known to man. Of course, these processes were first artisanal in 
nature. Today, even though some of these traditional processes remain in use, 
large-scale industrial processes have been developed. The advent of retail-
ing and mass marketing required the availability of products with consistent 
quality and safety. For many fermented foods, thus for fermented meat prod-
ucts, the characterization of microorganisms responsible for the fermentation, 
toward the end of the nineteenth century, led to the development of starter cul-
tures. This development had a major impact on the process and contributed to 
ensuring consistency of the product and reliability of fermentation. Research 
on starter cultures continued to advance at a very impressive rate and con-
siderable knowledge was developed to manipulate and control these bacteria.
CONTENTS
19.1 Introduction ................................................................................................597
19.2 Bacterial Starter Cultures and Competitiveness ...................................598
19.3 Protective Cultures ....................................................................................599
19.4 Starters and Sensory Quality ...................................................................600
19.4.1 Texture .............................................................................................601
19.4.2 Color .................................................................................................601
19.4.3 Flavor ...............................................................................................602
19.4.3.1 Carbohydrate Catabolism ..............................................603
19.4.3.2 Protein Hydrolysis ..........................................................603
19.4.3.3 Amino Acid Catabolism.................................................604
19.4.3.4 Lipid Hydrolysis ..............................................................605
19.4.3.5 Fatty Acid Oxidation ......................................................605
19.4.3.6 Formation of Esters .........................................................606
19.5 Probiotic Cultures ......................................................................................606
19.6 Conclusion ..................................................................................................608
References .............................................................................................................608

598
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
The original and primary purpose of fermentation was to ensure shelf life 
and microbiological safety of the products. Thus, the research on starter cul-
tures was mainly focused on their protective effect. Then as many preser-
vation technologies were developed, fermented meats were manufactured 
because of their unique flavor, aroma, and texture. Beside preservation and 
safeguard as objectives of fermentation, the role of starter cultures in the 
sensory quality of fermented products was questioned. Finally, other aspects 
such as wholesomeness and acceptability have become increasingly impor-
tant and valued features to consumers. In this context, probiotic cultures for 
production of fermented sausages were investigated.
19.2 Bacterial Starter Cultures and Competitiveness
Most fermented sausages formulated with nitrate and/or nitrite are pro-
duced with a starter culture, generally consisting of lactic acid bacteria (LAB) 
and coagulase negative staphylococci (CNS) (Hammes, 2012; Table 19.1). 
Lactobacillus sakei, Lactobacillus curvatus, and Lactobacillus plantarum (mainly 
in Europe) and Pediococcus pentosaceus and Pediococcus acidilactici (mainly 
TABLE 19.1
Most Currently Used Bacteria in Meat Fermentation with Published Genomes
Species
References
Lactobacillus curvatus CRL705
AGBU01000000, Hebert et al. (2012)
Lactobacillus plantarum JDM1
CP001617, Zhang et al. (2009)
L. plantarum ST-III
CP002222, Wang et al. (2011)
L. plantarum NC8
AGRI01000000, Axelsson et al. (2012)
L. plantarum ZJ316
CP004082, Li et al. (2013)
Lactobacillus sakei 23 K
CR936503, Chaillou et al. (2005)
L. sakei LS25
ASTI00000000, McLeod et al. (2013)
Pediococcus acidilactici MA18/5M
AGKB00000000, Barreau et al. (2011)
P. acidilactici D3
AQGT00000000, Sturino et al. (2013)
Pediococcus pentosaceus ATCC 25745
CP000422, Makarova et al. (2006)
P. pentosaceus IE-3
CAHU01000001 to CAHU01000091, 
Midha et al. (2012)
P. pentosaceus SL4
CP006854, Dantoft et al. (2013)
Staphylococcus carnosus subsp. carnosus TM300
AM295250, Rosenstein et al. (2009)
S. carnosus subsp. utilis LTH 7013
LAIU00000000, Müller et al. (2015)
Staphylococcus equorum Mu2
CAJL01000001 to CAJL01000030, 
Irlinger et al. (2012)
S. equorum KS1039
CP013114, Jeong et al. (2016)
Staphylococcus xylosus SMQ-121
CP008724, Labrie et al. (2014)
S. xylosus C2a
LN554884, Vermassen et al. (2014, 2015)

599
Functionalities of Meat Bacterial Starters
in North America) are the starters most currently used for their fermenta-
tive role in sausage manufacturing (Talon et al., 2004). Staphylococcus xylosus 
and Staphylococcus carnosus are widely used for their involvement in color 
and aroma development (Talon et al., 2002). Staphylococcus equorum is more 
and more often mentioned in dry-fermented sausages (Mauriello et al., 2004; 
Leroy et al., 2010). It is also used as a commercial starter culture. In general, 
the starters are inoculated at 106 viable germs/g of product.
Research on starter cultures continued to advance at a very impressive rate 
through the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. The sequencing of genomes 
of some of the species used as starters (Table 19.1), and consequently, the 
development of postgenomics studies (transcriptomic, proteomic) either in 
vitro or in situ have provided basic knowledge on their adaptation to the meat 
environment and their main functionalities.
These genomic studies have revealed that L. sakei have a metabolic rep-
ertoire that may contribute to their adaptation to meat including nucleo-
tide scavenging, catabolism of arginine, and the use of heme and nonheme 
iron sources (Chaillou et al., 2005; Duhutrel et al., 2010; Nyquist et al., 2011; 
Rimaux et al., 2011, 2012). This species was shown to be able to cope with 
cold temperatures, salt, changing redox, and oxygen levels (Marceau et al., 
2004; Chaillou et al., 2005; Nyquist et al., 2011). Comparative genome anal-
ysis revealed that L. curvatus CRL705 and L. sakei 23K strains were highly 
similar (Hebert et al., 2012). L. plantarum is a versatile species that can use a 
broad range of fermentable carbon sources (Molenaar et al., 2005). The use of 
nucleotides as an alternative energy source appears to be a common feature 
in CNS including S. carnosus, S. xylosus, and S. equorum (Janssens et al., 2014) 
while the use of arginine either by arginine deiminase or arginase pathway 
varied among the species as well as the strains (Sànchez Mainar et al., 2014). 
The ability to cope with osmotic stress is well known for staphylococci. Nine 
systems for osmoprotectant transport or biosynthesis were identified in 
the genome of S. carnosus (Rosenstein et al., 2009) and the overexpression 
of genes involved in transport and synthesis of osmoprotectants and Na+/
H+ extrusion were evidenced in S. xylosus in a salted meat model (Vermas-
sen et al., 2016). S. xylosus was also shown to be able to cope with nitrosative 
stress generated by nitrate and nitrite in a meat model by modulating the 
expression of genes involved in iron homeostasis and antioxidant defense 
(Vermassen et al., 2014).
19.3 Protective Cultures
The use of bacterial starter cultures with protective effects can enhance the 
safety of meat products and prevent potential foodborne microbial hazards. 
Strategies using a biopreservation approach are investigated to “naturally” 
control the growth of pathogenic and spoilage microorganisms. Rapid growth 

600
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
and production of acids by bacterial meat starter cultures are important for 
sensory qualities of fermented sausages and for controlling undesirable bac-
teria. LAB can inhibit the growth of these microorganisms by a variety of 
antimicrobial agents such as organic acids, bacteriocins, and the competition 
for nutrients in the product (Granly Koch, 2004). Organic acids including lac-
tic and acetic acids are produced during the fermentation process. These acids 
under their undissociated form at low pH exert strong antagonistic effects 
particularly against Gram-negative bacteria (Holzapfel, 2002).
The main LAB used as meat starter cultures can inhibit pathogenic and 
spoilage bacteria by bacteriocins production. Bacteriocins are heterogeneous 
groups of peptides and proteins, and the majority produced by LAB belong 
to two categories: the lanthionine-containing lantibiotics (class I) and the 
nonlanthionine-containing lantibiotics (class II) (De Vuyst and Leroy, 2007; 
Vignolo et al., 2015). L. sakei strains can produce several sakacins and lactocin 
S while L. curvatus strains produce sakacin P, curvacin, several curvaticins, 
and lactocins, which are active against LAB, Clostridium, Listeria monocyto-
genes, and Enterococcus (Vignolo et al., 2015). L. plantarum synthesize plan-
taricin active against LAB and Li. monocytogenes while pediococci produce 
pediocins with a large spectrum of inhibition against other LAB, Clostridium, 
Li. monocytogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus, and propionibacteria 
(Vignolo et al., 2015). However, the role of bacteriocins in meat products 
appears to be limited because they are often bound to the matrix, and could 
be degraded by tissue proteases and inhibited by sodium nitrite and sodium 
chloride (Verluyten et al., 2003; Leroy et al., 2015). Nevertheless, in various 
sausages, a 1.5–2.5-log reduction of Li. monocytogenes was obtained by the 
presence of bacteriocin-producing strains belonging to P. acidilactici, L. sakei, 
L. plantarum, and L. curvatus species. These bacteria could be used alone or in 
combination (Vignolo et al., 2015).
Few works mentioned the production of bacteriocins by CNS and only 
two concerned CNS used as starter cultures. One strain of S. xylosus iso-
lated from Italian sausages not only produced an inhibitory substance active 
against Li. monocytogenes on a solid medium but also in Naples-type sau-
sages in which a 2-log reduction of Li. monocytogenes was measured (Villani 
et al., 1997). One strain of S. equorum was found to produce a macrocyclic 
peptide antibiotic, called micrococcin, which is a substance exhibiting a bac-
teriostatic effect on a variety of Gram-positive bacteria, and in particular 
Li. monocytogenes (Carnio et al., 2000).
19.4 Starters and Sensory Quality
Sausages are made with minced meat and fat, mixed with salt and spices, 
often inoculated with starter cultures, stuffed into casings, and then ripened 

601
Functionalities of Meat Bacterial Starters
and dried. During the combined, consecutive, and interactive changes that 
take place during fermentation and drying, the specific color, texture, and 
flavor of the sausages are developed. Starter cultures are involved in the 
development of these different attributes.
19.4.1 Texture
During chopping, salt solubilizes muscle proteins (mainly myosin), which 
on the drop in pH during fermentation coagulate and form a gel surround-
ing the fat and meat particles that is stabilized during drying (Demeyer and 
Toldrá, 2004). A pH of 5.3 is required for coagulation at the often-used salt 
concentration of 3% (Talon et al., 2004). Acidification by LAB during fermen-
tation produces two opposing effects on gel strength: coagulation and the 
induction of proteolysis of the myosin by cathepsin D, lowering its contribu-
tion to gel strength (Demeyer and Toldrá, 2004).
19.4.2 Color
The typical cured meat color is associated with the formation of the nitroso-
myoglobin, which results from a series of reactions involving the formation 
of nitrogen oxide (NO) and its reaction with myoglobin producing nitrosyl-
ated pigments, which yield a red color (Hammes, 2012).
The substrate added to produce NO could be nitrate or nitrite. Nitrite acts 
as a very reactive oxidant and is reduced to NO immediately after prepa-
ration of the sausage mix. The reduction of nitrite to NO is favored by the 
acidification caused by LAB. The use of nitrate involves bacterial reduction 
to nitrite carried out by the nitrate reductase of CNS (Sànchez Mainar and 
Leroy, 2015). There is heterogeneity in the capacity of the CNS to reduce 
nitrate, but high nitrate reductase activity is found for the strains belonging 
to the three species used as starters (Mauriello et al., 2004; Gøtterup et al., 
2007). Furthermore, S. carnosus and S. xylosus are able to reduce nitrite in 
ammonia (Hammes, 2012). The nitrite and nitrate reductases of S. carnosus 
are well characterized. They are encoded by the nir and nar operons, respec-
tively (Rosenstein et al., 2009). These operons are similar in the S. xylosus C2a 
genome (Vermassen et al., 2014).
Safety considerations in meat fermentation relate to the use of nitrate and 
nitrite based on their potential to form nitrosamines with carcinogenic prop-
erty (Hammes, 2012). An alternative to these additives could be the exploita-
tion of the nitric oxide synthase (NOS) activity generating NO from arginine 
catabolism. NOS-like enzymes were identified from several Gram-positive 
bacteria (Crane et al., 2010). Up to now, the nos gene has been identified in 
many CNS but the NOS activity has been only characterized in Staphylococcus 
aureus (Sapp et al., 2014). The contribution of the NOS activity of CNS to the 
color development in meat remains to be demonstrated.

602
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Discoloration of cured meat can be observed by the formation of peroxide. 
This default can be avoided by the catalase activity of CNS that protects the 
color (Talon et al., 2004).
19.4.3 Flavor
Flavor is one of the most important properties in sausage. It covers the taste, 
aroma, and odor of the product, and its perception depends on the texture 
of the product. A large variety of compounds are likely to contribute to the 
desired aroma and taste of fermented sausages. Some of them are added to 
sausage mix such as salt, constituents of spices, and smoke. Others result 
from the catabolism of carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids from tissue and 
microbial enzyme reactions and chemical reactions (Figure 19.1). It is still 
difficult to distinguish between tissue enzymes and microbial enzymes, and 
Flavor formation 
Carbohydrate
catabolism  
Lactic acid
Volatile acids  
Peptides
Amino acids   
Salt 
Lipid hydrolysis
Fatty acids
oxidation  
Pepper
Garlic
Salt   
Alcohols 
Aldehydes 
Esters 
Ketones 
Volatile acids 
Sulfured compounds
Terpens
Allylic sulfides
Allylic thiols   
Protein
hydrolysis  
Amino acids
degradation  
Taste 
Aroma
FIGURE 19.1
Formation of important flavor compounds in fermented sausages. (Data from Stahnke, L. H., 
in Toldrá, F. [ed.], Research Advances in Quality of Meat and Meat Products. Trivandrum, Research 
Signpost, 2002; Talon, R. et al., in Toldrá, F. [ed.], Research Advances in Quality of Meat and Meat 
Products. Trivandrum: Research Signpost, 2002; Flores, M. and Olivares, A., Handbook of Fer-
mented Meat and Poultry, 2015, pp. 217–225. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.)

603
Functionalities of Meat Bacterial Starters
also to determine the origin of certain compounds. (For reviews in this field, 
see Ravysts et al., 2012; Talon and Leroy, 2014; Cocconcelli and Fontana, 2015; 
Flores and Olivares, 2015; Leroy et al., 2016.)
19.4.3.1 Carbohydrate Catabolism
The acid taste is an important component of the overall taste of fermented 
meat products, sought in the northern process, whereas it may be rejected 
in the southern process. It is positively correlated with lactate and acetate 
contents (Demeyer and Toldrá, 2004; Lücke, 2000). In 100 g of dry material, 
lactic acid is present in the range of 0.4–2.8 g in various sausages such as Bel-
gian, Italian, Norwegian, Spanish, and Swedish types (Stahnke, 2002). Many 
factors influence lactic acid production. The most important factors are tem-
perature, type and amount of carbohydrates, and LAB (Leroy et al., 2015).
L. sakei, L. curvatus, and L. plantarum, the most common starters used in 
meat, produce l- and d-lactate by metabolizing the carbohydrates added 
to the mixture (glucose, sucrose, etc.) via the homofermentative pathway 
(Axelsson, 2004). Pediococcus also degrades glucose via the homofermentative 
pathway (Josephsen and Jespersen, 2004). Some lactobacilli such as L. sakei 
ferment pentoses via the heterolactic pathway producing lactate and acetate 
(Champomier-Vergès et al., 2002).
The genomes of S. carnosus and S. xylosus are well equipped with func-
tions involved in various sugar degradation pathways such as glucose and 
ribose occurring in the meat or added to the batter (Rosenstein et al., 2009; 
Vermassen et al., 2016). S. xylosus produced mainly acetate as an end product 
and simultaneously metabolized glucose and lactate in a meat model supple-
mented with glucose (Vermassen et al., 2016). Acetate contributes to acidic 
taste and also plays an important role in sausage aroma by providing a hint 
of vinegar. In excess, however, it can lead to a pungent, sour taste. This odor 
is higher in northern than in southern sausages (Talon et al., 2002).
The buttery or dairy product aroma of certain sausages is related to the pres-
ence of diacetyl and acetoin, which may result from the metabolism of pyruvate 
by staphylococci. S. xylosus and S. equorum produced more diacetyl and acetoin 
than S. carnosus (Sondergaard and Stahnke, 2002). The production of these com-
pounds was dependant on the curing ingredients (Olesen et al., 2004a,b).
19.4.3.2 Protein Hydrolysis
During sausage ripening, both the soluble (sarcoplasmic) and insoluble 
proteins (myofibrillar) are hydrolyzed into smaller proteins and peptides 
(Hughes et al., 2002; López et al., 2015). Their breakdown is mainly due to 
endogenous enzymes but bacteria are involved in this degradation. LAB 
indirectly contributed to proteolysis by reducing the pH, which increases 
cathepsin D activity (Fadda et al., 2010). L. plantarum, L. curvatus, and L. sakei 
have been reported to make a remarkably hydrolytic contribution to the 

604
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
initial hydrolysis of sarcoplasmic proteins when whole cells, or whole cells 
combined with cell free extracts (CFEs), are used as an enzyme source (Fadda 
et al., 2010). The starter cultures (P. pentosaceus plus S. xylosus or L. sakei plus 
S. carnosus) influenced the proteolytic activity and the release of amino acids 
in sausages (Aro Aro et al., 2010; Hughes et al., 2002).
The degradation of peptides into amino acids in sausage results in micro-
bial and tissue activities, but great differences in the content of amino acids 
were noticed (Beriain et al., 2000; Aro Aro et al., 2010; Hughes et al., 2002; 
López et al., 2015). High peptidases and aminopeptidases activities on 
sarcoplasmic or myofibrillar extracts have been observed in L. plantarum, 
L. curvatus, and L. sakei strains from meat (Fadda et al., 2010). A compari-
son between L. sakei and L. curvatus showed that these two species harbored 
three similar peptide transport systems and 19 genes encoding peptidases 
(Freiding et al., 2011). S. xylosus grown in a meat model overexpressed genes 
involved in peptide transport and peptidases (Vermassen et al., 2016).
Peptides and amino acids have an important influence on meat flavor 
development (Hughes et al., 2002). Hydrophilic peptides are associated with 
desirable flavor while hydrophobic peptides give rise to off-flavor. Although 
the intrinsic sensory potential of amino acids is disputed, their role as pre-
cursors of aroma compounds is obvious (Leroy et al., 2016).
19.4.3.3 Amino Acid Catabolism
Amino acids can be transformed into amines, ammonia, or various com-
pounds. Some of them have aromatic properties such as methyl aldehydes, 
-acids, and -alcohols.
Given its contribution to the increase in pH observed during drying, 
ammonia could also influence the sensory properties of compounds and the 
metabolic reactions (Flores and Olivares, 2015). Ammonia production is par-
ticularly evident in sausages with a long drying phase such as southern-type 
sausages (Demeyer et al., 2000).
Amino acids, in particular, branched-chain amino acids (leucine, iso-
leucine, and valine), aromatic amino acids (phenylalanine, tyrosine, and 
tryptophan), and sulfured amino acids (methionine), are catabolized into 
aldehydes, alcohols, and acids, which play an important role in acquir-
ing flavor (Stahnke, 2002; Flores and Olivares, 2015). With the exception of 
dimethyldisufide, which confers a putrid odor, 2- or 3-methyl butanol with 
fermented fruit odors, 2- or 3-methyl butanal, and 2-methyl propanal with 
malt and cacao odors and phenyl-alcohol, -aldehyde, -acid with floral and 
honey notes are important in terms of aroma (Stahnke, 2002; Flores and Oli-
vares, 2015). Acids confer an animal and cheese note on products (Stahnke, 
2002; Flores and Olivares, 2015).
The catabolism of amino acids could involve the Strecker reaction that 
could occur due to the high amino acid content and the low water activity 
values (Flores and Olivares, 2015). Nonetheless, the production of methyl-

605
Functionalities of Meat Bacterial Starters
aldehydes, -acids, and -alcohols in sausage is modulated by the starter cul-
tures and, in particular, by staphylococci such as S. carnosus, S. xylosus, and 
S. equorum (Sondergaard and Stahnke, 2002; Stravopoulou et al., 2015). The 
catabolism of branched-chain amino acids by staphylococci is influenced by 
various parameters such as temperature, salt, nitrate, nitrite, and pH (Olesen 
and Stahnke, 2003; Olesen et al., 2004a,b; Tjener et al., 2004). The branched-
chain amino acid aminotransferase involved in the first step of this catab-
olism from S. carnosus has been characterized (Madsen et al., 2002). The 
pathway leading to the synthesis of the methyl compounds from the catabo-
lism of leucine has been identified in S. xylosus (Beck et al., 2004). S. xylosus 
overexpressed several genes involved in this pathway during its growth in a 
meat model (Vermassen et al., 2016).
LAB have restricted aromatic potential. Under laboratory conditions, L. sakei, 
L. plantarum, L.curvatus, and P. acidilactici only weakly degrade leucine, mainly 
into α -ketoisocaproate, a molecule with no odor (Larrouture. et al., 2000). 
Strains of L. curvatus and L. sakei lacked known aminotransferases specific for 
branched-chain amino acids and aromatic amino acids (Freiding et al., 2011).
19.4.3.4 Lipid Hydrolysis
Lipolysis in dry sausages releases free fatty acids with chain length between 
16 and 18 carbon atoms and is, to a great extent, of endogenous origin with 
triglyceride lipases and phospholipases (Talon et al., 2004). Staphylococci 
could contribute to lipolysis. In S. xylosus, two lipases have been identified 
(Mosbah et al., 2005; Sakinc et al., 2005). Most strains of these species had 
lipolytic activity on pork fat while few strains of S. equorum had this capacity 
(Mauriello et al., 2004). The strain S. carnosus TM300 was devoid of gene cod-
ing lipase (Rosenstein et al., 2009) and S. carnosus strains appeared unable to 
hydrolyze pork fat (Casaburi et al., 2005).
Short-chain fatty acids have a taste of sour cheese. However, the longer the 
chain, the weaker the sensory characteristics are (Flores and Olivares, 2015). 
In fact, fatty acids are mainly precursors of aroma molecules.
19.4.3.5 Fatty Acid Oxidation
Fatty acid oxidation results in numerous compounds, which belong to six 
families: alkanes, alkenes, aldehydes, alcohols, ketones, and acids. Although 
the production of these compounds in sausages is low—in the order of ppm—
their low sensory threshold, except for alkanes and alkenes which are odor-
less, means that they have a real effect (Flores and Olivares, 2015). Oxidation 
of fatty acids can be either chemical (peroxidation) or enzymatic (β -oxidation).
Peroxidation is affected by many factors such as oxygen content, the presence 
of pro-oxidative compounds (NaCl, metals) or antioxidative compounds (nitrite, 
spices), and the amount of unsaturated lipids. Staphylococci via their antioxi-
dant properties contribute to the regulation of oxidation (Talon et al., 2004). 

606
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Under laboratory conditions, S. xylosus and S. carnosus limited the oxidation 
of linoleic and linolenic unsaturated fatty acids (Talon et al., 2000). The cata-
lase and superoxide dismutase (SOD) activities of S. carnosus have been char-
acterized (Barrière et al., 2001a). Mutants deficient in SOD or catalase activity 
of S. xylosus were less efficient than the wild type in limiting the oxidation of 
unsaturated fatty acids (Barrière et al., 2001b,c). The presence of nitrate and 
nitrite in a meat model generated a nitrosative stress and S. xylosus responded 
to this stress by the regulation of 12 genes involved in protection and detoxifi-
cation mechanisms (Vermassen et al., 2014). Among these genes, three encode 
catalases revealing that the S. xylosus strain C2a has three distinct catalases. 
The S. carnosus strain TM300 has two catalases (Rosenstein et al., 2009). Some 
strains of S. xylosus and S. equorum have been reported as having two catalases 
(Blaiotta et al., 2010). In addition, in the S. xylosus strain C2a, the genes ahpC 
encoding alkyl hydroperoxide reductase and trxB encoding thioredoxin reduc-
tase were upregulated (Vermassen et al., 2014). All these genes encode enzymes 
involved in H2O2 detoxification or conferring resistance to other reactive oxy-
gen species (Gaupp et al., 2012).
Methyl ketones have been identified in sausages and could arise from 
incomplete β -oxidation of fatty acids. In this case, intermediate CoA esters 
can be freed; they are successively converted into α -ketoacid via thioesterase 
activity and then into methyl-ketone and secondary alcohol via decarboxyl-
ase and dehydrogenase action. Engelvin et al. (2000) have shown that inter-
mediates were freed during the β -oxidation cycle in S. carnosus. They also 
reported thioesterase activity in this strain. Fadda et al. (2003) have high-
lighted the presence of β -decarboxylase activity in S. carnosus. These results 
suggest that S. carnosus may produce ketones via this pathway.
19.4.3.6 Formation of Esters
Esters are present in fermented meat products and their aromatic character-
istics contribute to the fruity note of the products (Stahnke, 2002). Most of the 
esters in sausages are ethyl esters. Their production depends on the presence 
of ethanol and different acids (from two to eight carbon atoms) as well as on 
technological factors and microorganisms.
Esters could be of chemical origin as they are found in dry raw ham with 
a low bacterial count. However, they can also be of bacterial origin. In sau-
sages, esters are associated with the presence of S. xylosus or S. carnosus 
strains (Stahnke, 2002).
19.5 Probiotic Cultures
The relationship between certain foods and their health benefits has allowed 
the development of the concept of functional food as a food or food ingredient 

607
Functionalities of Meat Bacterial Starters
with positive effects on host health. In this context, attention has been directed 
toward probiotics, which are defined as living microorganisms that beneficially 
affect the health of the host when ingested in adequate amounts (Arihara, 2015).
Utilization of probiotic bacteria is one of the criteria for the development of 
healthier meat products. This possibility has been discussed in several papers 
(Työppönen et al., 2003; Kröckel, 2006; De Vuyst et al., 2008; Arihara, 2015).
The first approach was to consider the probiotic species originating from 
isolates from the intestinal tract. This ecological niche is the natural habi-
tat for Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus acidophilus, and Lactobacillus rhamnosus 
(Arihara, 2015). Lactobacillus casei may also be found in the microbiota of the 
oral cavity, in various fermented foods, and in spoiled foods (Kröckel, 2006). 
Foremost, these probiotic bacteria must survive in sausages. Indeed, their 
viability could be affected by various factors including the process, the acidi-
fication, the additives, and the competition with starter cultures (De Vuyst 
et al., 2008). The potentiality of the six probiotic species belonging to the 
L. acidophilus group was investigated for their application in meat fermenta-
tion. Among them, Lactobacillus gasseri was the most appropriate; it grew in 
the sausage model and decreased the pH during fermentation, however it 
was sensitive to sodium chloride and nitrite (Arihara, 2015). L. rhamnosus and 
Lactobacillus paracasei subsp. paracasei were able to carry out the fermentation 
as the commercial L. sakei starter culture suggesting that intestinal Lactoba-
cillus could be used for developing probiotic starter cultures in fermented 
sausages (Arihara, 2015). Pidcock et al. (2002) showed that nontraditional 
meat starter (NTMS) cultures survived in salami throughout fermentation 
and maturation. These NTMS cultures included one strain of L. acidophilus, 
two of L. paracasei, one of Lactobacillus spp, and one of Bifidobacterium lactis. 
Furthermore, the addition of these NTMS cultures in conjunction with the 
commercial meat starter increased the safety of Hungarian salami. Similarly, 
three probiotic strains of L. rhamnosus and one of L. plantarum were studied 
for their capacity to act as main fermenting bacteria in sausage manufactur-
ing (Erkkilä et al., 2001a,b). These lactic bacteria decreased the pH from 5.6 
to 4.9 or 5.0 and produced a flavor profile similar to that produced by com-
mercial lactic meat starter cultures. Microencapsulation has been shown to 
protect a probiotic L. reuteri strain during sausage manufacturing (Muthu-
kumarasamy and Holley, 2006). From all of these studies, it seems possible 
to successfully use probiotics as starter cultures for dry-fermented sausages, 
as there were no significant technological and sensorial differences between 
the sausages fermented by probiotic or nonprobiotic strains.
A second approach was to consider the LAB used as starters as potential 
probiotics. Their main requirements are acid and bile tolerance, safety in 
use, and clinical documentation of health effects (De Vuyst et al., 2008; Ari-
hara, 2015). Considering the criteria of acid and bile tolerance, Erkkilä and 
Petäjä (2000) screened eight commercial meat starter cultures for their poten-
tial probiotic use. One strain of L. sakei and one of P. acidilactici had the best 
survival capacities under acidic conditions and high concentration of bile 

608
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
salts. The selection of potentially probiotic lactobacilli from Greek fermented 
sausages (Papamanoli et al., 2003) and Italian fermented sausages (Pennac-
chia et al., 2004) was realized. Twenty-four strains of L. curvatus and seven 
of L. plantarum isolated from the Greek products were resistant to 0.3% bile 
salts. Strains of L. plantarum and L. casei from Italian sausages were found to 
be potentially usable in the future as probiotic starter cultures for the manu-
facture of novel fermented sausages.
The question of usefulness of probiotics in meat products is still in debate. 
The proof of a beneficial effect should be based on sound studies performed 
with the probiotics in the meat matrix as it is consumed. Mahoney and Hen-
riksson (2003) investigated if a salami batter inoculated with a meat starter 
culture, a probiotic (L. acidophilus), or a mixture of both reduced the gastroin-
testinal colonization and virulence of Li. monocytogenes in mice. Consumption 
of salami fermented with the mixture reduced fecal levels of the pathogen by 
2.5-log units compared to a reduction of 1.0- and 1.5-log units by the starter 
and L. acidophilus, respectively. The amount of sausage prepared with pro-
biotic that must be ingested to confer the claimed beneficial health effect to 
consumer is still unknown. Only one study states that a daily consumption of 
50 g of sausage, fermented with L. paracasei, by human volunteers modulates 
their immune system (Jahreis et al., 2002). Further studies on the relationship 
between the consumption of probiotic sausage and human health are needed.
19.6 Conclusion
The exploitation of data on bacterial genomes of technological interest offer 
new research opportunities by revealing properties that could explain their 
adaptation to the meat environment, their interaction with a specific sub-
strate, and their competitiveness. This increasing basic knowledge will lead 
to the development of bacterial meat starter cultures that exhibit protective 
and probiotic properties as well as achieving the required technological and 
sensory tasks in the fermented sausages.
References
Arihara, K. (2015). Probiotics. In: Toldrá, F. (ed.) Handbook of Fermented Meat and 
Poultry (2nd Ed.). Chichester, West Sussex, UK: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 155–160.
Aro Aro, J. M., Nyam-Osor, P., Tsuji, K., Shimada, K. I., Fukushima, M. and Sekikawa, 
M. (2010). The effect of starter cultures on proteolytic changes and amino acid 
content in fermented sausages. Food Chemistry, 119, 279–285.
Axelsson, L. (2004). Lactic acid bacteria: Classification and physiology. In: Salminer, 
S., Ouwehand, A. and Von Wright, A. (eds.) Lactic Acid Bacteria: Microbiology and 
Functional Aspects (3rd Ed.). New York, NY: Marcel Dekker.

609
Functionalities of Meat Bacterial Starters
Axelsson, L., Rud, I., Naterstad, K. et al. (2012). Genome sequence of the naturally 
plasmid-free Lactobacillus plantarum strain NC8 (CCUG 61730). Journal of Bacte-
riology, 194, 2391–2392.
Barreau, G., Tompkins, T. A. and de Carvalho, V. G. (2011). Draft genome sequence of 
probiotic strain Pediococcus acidilactici MA18/5M. Journal of Bacteriology, 194, 901.
Barrière, C., Brückner, R. and Talon, R. (2001b). Characterization of the single super-
oxide dismutase of Staphylococcus xylosus. Applied and Environmental Microbiol-
ogy, 67, 4096–4104.
Barrière, C., Centeno, D., Lebert, A., Leroy-Sétrin, S., Berdagué, J. L. and Talon, R. 
(2001c). Roles of superoxide dismutase and catalase of Staphylococcus xylosus in 
the inhibition of linoleic acid oxidation. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 201, 181–185.
Barrière, C., Leroy-Sétrin, S. and Talon, R. (2001a). Characterization of catalase and 
superoxide dismutase in Staphylococcus carnosus 833 strain. Journal of Applied 
Microbiology, 91, 514–519.
Beck, H. C., Hansen, A. M. and Lauritsen, F. R. (2004). Catabolism of leucine to 
branched-chain fatty acids in Staphylococcus xylosus. Journal of Applied Microbiol-
ogy, 96, 1185–1193.
Beriain, M. J., Lizaso, G. and Chasco, J. (2000). Free amino acids and proteolysis 
involved in salchichon processing. Food Control, 1, 41–47.
Blaiotta, G., Fusco, V., Ercolini, D., Pepe, O. and Coppola, S. (2010). Diversity of 
Staphylococcus species strains based on partial kat (catalase) gene sequences and 
design of a PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism assay for identifi-
cation and differentiation of coagulase-positive species (S. aureus, S. delphini, 
S. hyicus, S. intermedius, S. pseudintermedius, and S. schleiferi subsp. coagulans). 
Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 48, 192–201.
Carnio, M. C., Holtzel, A., Rudolf, M., Henle, T., Jung, G. and Scherer, S. (2000). The 
macrocyclic peptide antibiotic micrococcin P(1) is secreted by the food-borne 
bacterium Staphylococcus equorum WS 2733 and inhibits Listeria monocytogenes on 
soft cheese. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 66, 2378–2384.
Chaillou, S., Champomier-Vergès, M. C., Cornet, M. et al. (2005). Complete genome 
sequence of the meat-born lactic acid bacterium Lactobacillus sakei 23K. Nature 
Biotechnology, 23, 1527–1533.
Champomier-Vergès, M. C., Chaillou, S., Cornet, M. and Zagorec, M. (2002). Lactoba-
cillus sakei: Recent developments and future prospects. Research in Microbiology, 
153, 115–123.
Casaburi, A., Blaiotta, G., Mauriello, G., Pepe, O. and Villani, F. (2005). Technological 
activities of Staphylococcus carnosus and Staphylococcus simulans strains isolated 
from fermented sausages. Meat Science, 71, 643–650.
Cocconcelli, P. S. and Fontana, C. (2015). Starter cultures: Bacteria. In: Toldra, F. (ed.) 
Handbook of Fermented Meat and Poultry (2nd Ed.). Chichester, West Sussex, UK: 
John Wiley & Sons, pp. 117–127.
Crane, B., Sudhamasu, J. and Pantel, B. (2010). Bacterial nitric oxide synthases. Annual 
Review of Biochemistry, 79, 445–470.
Dantoft, S. H., Bielak, E. M., Seo, J.-G., Chung, M.-J. and Jensen, P. R. (2013). Complete 
genome sequence of Pediococcus pentosaceus strain SL4. Genome Announcements, 
1, e01106–e01113.
Demeyer, D., Raemaekers, M., Rizzo, A. et al. (2000). Control of bioflavour and safety 
in fermented sausages: First results of a European project. Food Research Interna-
tional, 33, 171–180.

610
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Demeyer, D. and Toldrá, F. (2004). Fermentation. In: Devine, C. and Dikeman, M. 
(eds.) Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 467–474.
De Vuyst, L., Falony, G. and Leroy, F. (2008). Probiotics in fermented sausages. Meat 
Science, 80, 75–78.
De Vuyst, L. and Leroy, F. (2007). Bacteriocins from lactic acid bacteria: Production, 
purification, and food applications. Journal of Molecular Microbiology and Biotech-
nology, 13, 194–199.
Duhutrel, P., Bordat, C., Wu, T. D., Zagorec, M., Guerquin-Kern, J. L. and Champo-
mier-Vergès, M. C. (2010). Iron sources used by the non pathogenic lactic acid 
bacterium Lactobacillus sakei as revealed by electron energy loss spectroscopy 
and secondary-ion mass spectrometry. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 
76, 560–565.
Engelvin, G., Féron, G., Perrin, C., Molle, D. and Talon, R. (2000). Identification of 
beta-oxidation and thioesterase activities in Staphylococcus carnosus 833 strain. 
FEMS Microbiology Letters, 190, 115–120.
Erkkilä, S. and Petäjä, E. (2000). Screening of commercial meat starter cultures at low 
pH and in the presence of bile salts for potential probiotic use. Meat Science, 55, 
297–300.
Erkkilä, S., Petäjä, E., Eerola, S., Lilleberg, L., Mattila-Sandholm, T. and Suihko, M. 
L. (2001a). Flavour profiles of dry sausages fermented by selected novel meat 
starter cultures. Meat Science, 58, 111–116.
Erkkilä, S., Suihko, M. L., Eerola, S., Petaja, E. and Mattila-Sandholm, T. (2001b). Dry 
sausage fermented by Lactobacillus rhamnosus strains. International Journal of Food 
Microbiology, 64, 205–210.
Fadda, S., Leroy-Sétrin, S. and Talon, R. (2003). Preliminary characterization of 
β -decarboxylase activities in Staphylococcus carnosus 833, a strain used in sau-
sage fermentation. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 228, 143–149.
Fadda, S., López, C. and Vignolo, G. (2010). Role of lactic acid bacteria during meat 
conditioning and fermentation: Peptides generated as sensorial and hygienic 
biomarkers. Meat Science, 86, 66–79.
Flores, M. and Olivares, A. (2015). Flavor. In: Toldrá, F. (ed.) Handbook of Fermented 
Meat and Poultry (2nd Ed.). Chichester, West Sussex, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 
pp. 217–225.
Freiding, S., Gutsche, K. A., Ehrmann, M. A. and Vogel, R. F. (2011). Genetic screen-
ing of Lactobacillus sakei and Lactobacillus curvatus strains for their peptidolytic 
system and amino acid metabolism, and comparison of their volatilomes in a 
model system. Systematic and Applied Microbiology, 34, 311–320.
Gaupp, R., Ledala, N. and Somerville, G. A. (2012). Staphylococcal response to oxida-
tive stress. Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology, 2, 33.
Gøtterup, J., Olsen, K., Knöchel, S., Tjener, K., Stahnke, L. H. and Møller, J. K. S. (2007). 
Relationship between nitrate/nitrite reductase activities in meat associated 
staphylococci and nitrosylmyoglobin formation in a cured meat model system. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 120, 303–310.
Granly Koch, A. (2004). Biopreservation. In: Devine, C. and Dikeman, M. (eds.) Ency-
clopedia of Meat Sciences. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 68–74.
Holzapfel, W. H. (2002). Appropriate starter culture technologies for small-scale fer-
mentation in developing countries. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 75, 
197–212.

611
Functionalities of Meat Bacterial Starters
Hammes, W. P. (2012). Metabolism of nitrate in fermented meats: The characteristic 
feature of a specific group of fermented foods. Food Microbiology, 29, 151–156.
Hebert, E. M., Saavedra, L., Taranto, M. P. et al. (2012). Genome sequence of the bac-
teriocin-producing Lactobacillus curvatus strain CRL705. Journal of Bacteriology, 
194, 538–539.
Irlinger, F., Loux, V., Bento, P. et al. (2012). Genome sequence of Staphylococcus equo-
rum subsp. equorum Mu2, isolated from a French smear-ripened cheese. Journal 
of Bacteriology, 194, 5141–5142.
Jahreis, G., Vogelsang, H., Kiessling, G., Schubert, R., Bunte, C. and Hammes, W. P. 
(2002). Influence of probiotic sausage (Lactobacillus paracasei) on blood lipids and 
immunological parameters of healthy volunteers. Food Research International, 35, 
133–138.
Janssens, J., Van de Mijnsbrugge, A., Sànchez Mainar, M., Bazarini, T., De Vuyst, L. 
and Leroy, F. (2014). The use of nucleosides and arginine as alternative energy 
sources by coagulase negative staphylococci in view of meat fermentation. Food 
Microbiology, 39, 53–60.
Jeong, D. W., Na, H., Ryu, S. and Lee, J. H. (2016). Complete genome sequence of 
Staphylococcus equorum KS1039 isolated from Saeu-jeotgal, Korean high-salt-
fermented seafood. Journal of Biotechnology, 219, 88–89.
Hughes, M. C., Kerry, J. P., Arendt, E. K., Kenneally, P. M., McSweeney, P. H. H. and 
O’Neill, E. E. (2002). Characterization of proteolysis during the ripening of 
semi-dry fermented sausages. Meat Science, 62, 205–216.
Josephsen, J. and Jespersen, L. (2004). Starters cultures and fermented products. In: 
Hui, Y. H., Meunier-Goddik, L., Hansen, A. S. et al. (eds.) Handbook of Food and 
Beverage Fermentation Technology. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, pp. 23–49.
Kröckel, L. (2006). Use of probiotic bacteria in meat products. Fleischwirtschaft, 86, 
109–113.
Labrie, S. J., El Haddad, L., Tremblay, D. M. et al. (2014). First complete genome 
sequence of Staphylococcus xylosus, a meat starter culture and a host to propagate 
Staphylococcus aureus phages. Genome Announcements, 2, e00671–e00714.
Larrouture, C., Ardaillon, V., Pépin, M. and Montel, M. C. (2000). Ability of meat 
starter cultures to catabolize leucine and evaluation of the degradation products 
by using an HPLC method. Food Microbiology, 17, 563–570.
Leroy, S., Giammarinaro, P., Chacornac, J. P., Lebert, I. and Talon, R. (2010). Biodiversity 
of indigenous staphylococci of naturally fermented dry sausages and manufactur-
ing environments of small-scale processing units. Food Microbiology, 27, 249–301.
Leroy, F., Goudman, T. and De Vuyst, L. (2015). The influence of processing param-
eters on starter cultures performance. In: Toldrá, F. (ed.) Handbook of Fermented 
Meat and Poultry (2nd Ed.). Chichester, West Sussex, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 
pp. 169–175.
Leroy, S., Vermassen, A. and Talon, R. (2016). Staphylococcus: Occurrence and proper-
ties. In: Cabalerro, B., Finglas, P. M. and Toldrá, F. (eds.) Encyclopedia of Food and 
Health, vol. 5. Oxford: Academic Press, pp. 140–145.
Li, X., Gu, Q., Lou, X. et al. (2013). Complete genome sequence of the probiotic Lacto-
bacillus plantarum strain ZJ316. Genome Announcements, 1, e00094–e00113.
López, C., Bru, E., Vignolo, G. and Fadda, S. (2015). Identification of small peptides 
arising from hydrolysis of meat proteins in dry fermented sausages. Meat Sci-
ence, 104, 20–29.

612
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Lücke, F. K. (2000). Utilization of microbes to process and preserve meat. Meat Science, 
56, 105–115.
Madsen, S. M., Beck, H. C., Ravn, P., Vrang, A., Hansen, A. M. and Israelsen, H. (2002). 
Cloning and inactivation of a branched-chain-amino-acid aminotransferase 
gene from Staphylococcus carnosus and characterization of the enzyme. Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology, 68, 4007–4014.
Mahoney, M. and Henriksson, A. (2003). The effect of processed meat and meat starter 
cultures on gastrointestinal colonization and virulence of Listeria monocytogenes 
in mice. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 84, 255–261.
Makarova, K., Slesarev, A., Wolf, Y. et al. (2006). Comparative genomics of the lactic 
acid bacteria. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103, 15611–15616.
Marceau, A., Zagorec, M., Chaillou, S., Méra, T. and Champomier-Vergès, M. C. 
(2004). Evidence for the involvement of at least six proteins in Lactobacillus sakei 
adaptation to cold temperature and addition of NaCl. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 70, 7260–7268.
Mauriello, G., Casaburi, A., Blaiotta, G. and Villani, F. (2004). Isolation and techno-
logical properties of coagulase negative staphylococci from fermented sausages 
of Southern Italy. Meat Science, 67, 149–158.
McLeod, A., Brede, D. A., Rud, I. and Axelsson, L. (2013). Genome sequence of Lacto-
bacillus sakei subsp. sakei LS25, a commercial starter culture strain for fermented 
sausage. Genome Announcements, 1, e00475–e00513.
Midha, S., Ranjan, M., Sharma, V. et al. (2012). Genome sequence of Pediococcus pento-
saceus strain IE-3. Journal of Bacteriology, 194, 4468.
Molenaar, D., Bringel, F., Schuren, F. H., de Vos, W. M., Siezen, R. J. and Kleerebezem, 
M. (2005). Exploring Lactobacillus plantarum genome diversity by using microar-
rays. Journal of Bacteriology, 187, 6119–6127.
Mosbah, H., Sayari, A., Mejdoub, H., Dhouib, H. and Gargouri, Y. (2005). Biochemi-
cal and molecular characterization of Staphylococcus xylosus lipase. Biochemica 
Biophysica Acta General Subjects, 1723, 282–291.
Müller, A., Huptas, C., Wenning, M., Schmidt, H. and Weiss, A. (2015). Draft genome 
sequence of Staphylococcus carnosus subsp. utilis LTH 7013, isolated from South 
Tyrolean Ham. Genome Announcements, 3, e00456–e00515.
Muthukumarasamy, P. and Holley, R. A. (2006). Microbial and sensory quality of dry 
fermented sausages containing alginate-microencapsulated Lactobacillus reuteri. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 111, 164–169.
Nyquist, O. L., McLeod, A., Brede, D. A., Snipen, L., Aakra, Å. and Nes, I. F. (2011). 
Comparative genomics of Lactobacillus sakei with emphasis on strains from 
meat. Molecular Genetics and Genomics, 285, 297–311.
Olesen, P. T., Meyer, A. S. and Stahnke, L. (2004a). Generation of flavour compounds 
in fermented sausages—The influence of curing ingredients, Staphylococcus 
starter culture and ripening time. Meat Science, 66, 675–687.
Olesen, P. T. and Stahnke, L. (2003). The influence of precultivation parameters on the 
catabolism of branched-chain amino acids by Staphylococcus xylosus and Staphy-
lococcus carnosus. Food Microbiology, 20, 621–629.
Olesen, P. T., Stahnke, L. and Talon, R. (2004b). Effect of ascorbate, nitrate and nitrite 
on the amount of flavour compounds produced from leucine by Staphylococcus 
xylosus and Staphylococcus carnosus. Meat Science, 68, 193–200.

613
Functionalities of Meat Bacterial Starters
Papamanoli, E., Tzanetakis, N., Litopoulou-Tzanetaki, E. and Kotzekidou, P. (2003). 
Characterization of lactic acid bacteria isolated from a Greek dry-fermented 
sausage in respect of their technological and probiotic properties. Meat Science, 
65, 859–867.
Pennacchia, C., Ercolini, D., Blaiotta, G., Pepe, O., Mauriello, G. and Villani, F. (2004). 
Selection of Lactobacillus strains from fermented sausages for their potential use 
as probiotics. Meat Science, 67, 309–317.
Pidcock, K., Heard, G. M. and Henriksson, A. (2002). Application of nontraditional 
meat starter cultures in production of Hungarian salami. International Journal of 
Food Microbiology, 76, 75–81.
Ravysts, F., De Vuyst, L. and Leroy, F. (2012). Bacterial diversity and functionalities in 
food fermentations. Engineering in Life Sciences, 12, 356–367.
Rimaux, T., Rivière, A., Illeghems, K., Weckx, S., De Vuyst, L. and Leroy, F. (2012). 
Expression of arginine deiminase pathway genes in Lactobacillus sakei is strain 
dependant and is affected by the environmental pH. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 78, 4874–4883.
Rimaux, T., Vrancken, G., Vuylsteke, B., De Vuyst, L. and Leroy, F. (2011). The pen-
tose moiety of adenosine and inosine is an important energy source for the 
fermented-meat starter culture Lactobacillus sakei CTC 494. Applied and Environ-
mental Microbiology, 77, 6539–6550.
Rosenstein, R., Nerz, C., Biswas, L. et al. (2009). Genome analysis of the meat starter 
culture bacterium Staphylococcus carnosus TM300. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 45, 811–822.
Sànchez Mainar, M. and Leroy, F. (2015). Process-driven bacterial community dynam-
ics are key to cured meat colour formation by coagulase negative staphylococci 
via nitrate reductase or nitric oxide synthase activities. International Journal of 
Food Microbiology, 212, 60–66.
Sànchez Mainar, M., Weckx, S. and Leroy, F. (2014). Coagulase negative staphylo-
cocci favour arginine conversion into ornithine despite a widely present poten-
tial for nitric oxide synthase activity. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 80, 
7741–7751.
Sapp, A. M., Mogen, A. B., Almand, E. A. et al. (2014). Contribution of the nos-pdt 
operon to virulence phenotypes in methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. 
PLOS ONE, 9(10), e108868. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108868.
Sakinc, T., Woznowski, M., Ebsen, M. and Gatermann, S. G. (2005). The surface asso-
ciated protein of Staphylococcus saprophyticus is a lipase. Infection and Immunity, 
73, 6419–6428.
Sondergaard, A. K. and Stahnke, L. (2002). Growth and aroma production by Staphy-
lococcus xylosus, S. carnosus and S. equorum: A comparative study in model sys-
tems. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 75, 99–109.
Stahnke, L. H. (2002). Flavour formation in fermented sausage. In: Toldrá, F. (ed.) 
Research Advances in Quality of Meat and Meat Products. Trivandrum, India: 
Research Signpost, pp. 193–223.
Stravopoulou D. A., Borremans, W., De Vuyst, L., De Smet, S. and Leroy, F. (2015). 
Amino acid conversions by coagulase negative staphylococci in a rich medium: 
Assessment of inter- and intraspecies heterogeneity. International Journal of Food 
Microbiology, 212, 34–40.

614
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Sturino, J. M., Rajendran, M. and Altermann, E. (2013). Draft genome sequence of the 
pediocin-encoding biopreservative and biocontrol strain Pediococcus acidilactici 
D3. Genome Announcements, 1, e00208–e00213.
Talon, R., Leroy-Sétrin, S. and Fadda, S. (2002). Bacterial starters involved in the qual-
ity of fermented meat products. In: Toldrá, F. (ed.) Research Advances in Quality 
of Meat and Meat Products. Trivandrum, India: Research Signpost, pp. 175–191.
Talon, R., Leroy-Sétrin, S. and Fadda, S. (2004). Dry fermented sausages. In: Hui, Y. H., 
Meunier-Goddik, L., Hansen, A. S. et al. (eds.) Handbook of Food and Beverage 
Fermentation Technology. New York, NY: Marcel Dekker, pp. 397–416.
Talon, R. and Leroy, S. (2014). Fermented meat products and the role of starter cul-
tures. In: Batt, C. A. and Tortorello, M. L. (eds.) Encyclopedia of Food Microbiology, 
vol. 1. Oxford: Elsevier, Academic Press, pp. 870–874.
Talon, R., Walter, D. and Montel, M. C. (2000). Growth and effect of staphylococci and 
lactic acid bacteria on unsatured free fatty acid. Meat Science, 54, 41–47.
Tjener, K., Stahnke, L. H., Andersen, L. and Martinussen, J. (2004). The pH-unrelated 
influence of salt, temperature and manganese on aroma formation by Staphylo-
coccus xylosus and Staphylococcus carnosus in a fermented meat model system. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 97, 31–42.
Työppönen, S., Petäjä, E. and Mattila-Sandholm, T. (2003). Bioprotectives and probiot-
ics for dry sausages. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 83, 233–244.
Verluyten, J., Messens, W. and De Vuyst, L. (2003). The curing agent sodium nitrite, 
used in the production of fermented sausages, is less inhibiting to the bacterio-
cin-producing meat starter culture Lactobacilluscurvatus LTH 1174 under anaero-
bic conditions. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 69, 3833–3839.
Vermassen, A., de La Foye, A., Loux, V., Talon, R. and Leroy, S. (2014). Transcriptomic 
analysis of Staphylococcus xylosus in the presence of nitrate and nitrite in meat 
reveals its response to nitrosative stress. Frontiers in Microbiology, 5, 691, 1–15.
Vermassen, A., Dordet-Frisoni, E., de La Foye, A. et al. (2016). Adaptation of Staphy-
lococcus xylosus to nutrients and osmotic stress in a salted meat model. Frontiers 
in Microbiology, 7, 87, 1–17.
Vignolo, G., Castelano, P. and Fadda, S. (2015). Bioprotective cultures. In: Toldrá, F. 
(ed.) Handbook of Fermented Meat and Poultry (2nd Ed.). Chichester, West Sussex, 
UK: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 129–137.
Villani, F., Sannino, L., Moschetti, G. et al. (1997). Partial characterization of an antag-
onistic substance produced by Staphylococcus xylosus 1E and determination of 
the effectiveness of the producer strain to inhibit Listeria monocytogenes in Italian 
sausages. Food Microbiology, 14, 555–566.
Wang, Y., Chen, C., Ai, L. et al. (2011). Complete genome sequence of the probiotic 
Lactobacillus plantarum ST-III. Journal of Bacteriology, 193, 313–314.
Zhang, Z. Y., Liu, C., Zhu, Y. Z. et al. (2009). Complete genome sequence of Lactobacillus 
plantarum JDM1. Journal of Bacteriology, 191, 5020–5021.

615
20
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
Joseph G. Sebranek and Terry A. Houser
CONTENTS
20.1 Introduction ................................................................................................ 616
20.2 Definitions................................................................................................... 617
20.3 History ......................................................................................................... 618
20.4 Purposes ...................................................................................................... 619
20.5 Applications ................................................................................................620
20.6 Gases Used in Map Systems .....................................................................620
20.6.1 Carbon Dioxide .............................................................................. 621
20.6.2 Nitrogen ..........................................................................................623
20.6.3 Oxygen ............................................................................................ 624
20.6.4 Carbon Monoxide ..........................................................................625
20.6.5 Dynamic Headspace Changes in MAP Systems .......................626
20.7 Product Characteristics Following Map Applications .........................627
20.7.1 Fresh (Raw) Meat ...........................................................................627
20.7.1.1 High-Oxygen MAP .........................................................627
20.7.1.2 High-Carbon-Dioxide MAP ..........................................629
20.7.1.3 MAP with Carbon Monoxide ........................................629
20.7.2 Cooked and Cured-and-Cooked Meat Products .......................629
20.8 Comparisons of Map with VP for Meat and Poultry ............................630
20.8.1 Vacuum versus MAP for Fresh Meat ..........................................630
20.8.2 Vacuum versus MAP Packaging of Cooked and  
Cured-and-Cooked Meat Products .............................................631
20.8.3 Effects of High-Carbon-Dioxide MAP ........................................632
20.9 Packaging Films and Film Properties .....................................................632
20.9.1 Exterior Film Materials .................................................................633
20.9.1.1 Nylon .................................................................................633
20.9.1.2 Polyester............................................................................633
20.9.1.3 Polypropylene ..................................................................633
20.9.2 Barrier Film Materials ...................................................................633
20.9.2.1 Ethylene Vinyl Alcohol ...................................................633
20.9.2.2 Polyvinylidene Chloride ................................................634
20.9.3 Sealant Materials ............................................................................634
20.9.3.1 Polyethylenes ...................................................................634
20.9.3.2 Ethylene Vinyl Acetate ...................................................634

616
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
20.1 Introduction
Modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) for meat and poultry products is 
a food preservation concept that is far from new. However, the develop-
ment of plastic films in the 1960s (Siegel, 2010a) made it possible to eas-
ily and cheaply enclose meat products in clear films and to incorporate 
preservative gases with the closed atmosphere to improve product shelf 
life and appearance. This has allowed the successful commercialization 
of MAP. Prior to the development of flexible films, carbon dioxide (CO2) 
gas was recognized as a preservative agent for meat and poultry for well 
over 100 years (Rao and Sachindra, 2002), and consequently, use of carbon 
dioxide gas in MAP has been studied extensively (Brooks, 1933; Clark 
and Lentz, 1969; Gill and Tan, 1980; McMillin, 2008). Various other gases 
including nitrogen, oxygen, and carbon monoxide (CO) have been stud-
ied more recently as MAP technology for meat and poultry products has 
continued to develop (Kropf, 2004). The current use of MAP for commer-
cial applications has become commonplace because more and more meat 
and poultry products are processed in centralized facilities followed by 
transportation over increasingly long distances. As a result, it has become 
critical for the industry to increase the shelf life of meat and poultry 
products as much as possible in order to consistently deliver wholesome, 
high-quality products to consumers. Consumers demand, and have come 
to expect, fresh-like, high-quality food products, and the role of pack-
aging systems such as MAP has become increasingly important to meet 
20.9.4 Rigid Materials ...............................................................................634
20.9.4.1 Polyvinyl Chloride ..........................................................634
20.9.4.2 Polystyrene ......................................................................634
20.10 Effects of MAP on Pathogens in Meat and Poultry .............................635
20.10.1 Salmonella spp. ..............................................................................635
20.10.2 Yersinia enterocolitica .....................................................................635
20.10.3 Escherichia coli O157:H7 ...............................................................635
20.10.4 Campylobacter jejuni ......................................................................636
20.10.5 Staphylococcus aureus ....................................................................636
20.10.6 Clostridium botulinium ..................................................................636
20.10.7 Clostridium perfringens .................................................................637
20.10.8 Bacillus cereus ................................................................................637
20.10.9 Listeria monocytogenes ...................................................................637
20.11 MAP as a Component in the Hurdle Concept .....................................638
20.12 AP Components........................................................................................638
20.13 Leakers and Package Integrity ...............................................................640
20.14 Regulatory Issues .....................................................................................640
20.15 Conclusions ...............................................................................................641
References .............................................................................................................642

617
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
consumer expectations. New developments in flexible film properties and 
new technology for gas handling and packaging equipment have facili-
tated the development of an increasingly sophisticated body of scientific 
knowledge about MAP systems.
There are several distinct advantages to MAP technology for meat and 
poultry products. Use of gases such as carbon dioxide will slow the growth 
of many microorganisms and, therefore, extend the microbiological shelf life 
of fresh (raw) meat products. Gases can also be used to slow some of the 
chemical and biochemical processes that are responsible for product dete-
rioration, and this will also contribute to improved shelf life (Summo et al., 
2016; Bao and Ertbjerg, 2015).
One of the recent developments in MAP technology that has contrib-
uted to further improvements in shelf life for meat and poultry is the 
case-ready option for retail packages. Retail-ready products that are 
packaged in centralized facilities under controlled, highly sanitary con-
ditions will have a reduced number of contaminating microorganisms, 
and because there is no opportunity for subsequent contamination, bac-
terial numbers will remain low for a longer period of time. In addition 
to the advantage of time for transport over longer distances, increased 
shelf life typically means less wasted products at the retail level because 
there are less throwaways due to spoilage. MAP also offers a significant 
opportunity to improve product appearance. Attractive meat color, for 
example, can be maintained longer and even dramatically improved in 
some cases, with MAP gases. Package purge (free water inside the pack-
age) is reduced by MAP compared with vacuum, and product appearance 
is improved as a result. Finally, the use of trays and rigid containers to 
provide a headspace for gases also offers opportunity for attractive visual 
displays of the products inside the packages.
There are also some potential disadvantages to MAP systems. Packaging 
costs may be greater than other systems, though a longer product shelf life 
and less waste can more than pay the difference. Specialized equipment and 
worker training may also be necessary and, if so, represent increased time 
and money commitments though, again, the return on these investments is 
most often positive.
20.2 Definitions
MAP has been defined as a process whereby a perishable product is 
placed in a barrier film package, air is removed by vacuum or flushing, 
and the package is filled with a predetermined gas or mixture of gases 
with a composition different than air, followed by sealing of the pack-
age (Kropf, 2004; McMillin, 2008). Simply put, this means that MAP is a 

618
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
packaging technique that utilizes an atmosphere modified to be differ-
ent from air. It is important to note that MAP atmospheres for meat and 
poultry, particularly raw meat and poultry, are dynamic and will change 
with time. The gas or gas mixture used in the packages will change as a 
result of product and microbial metabolism, absorption of gases by the 
product and, in some cases, by limited diffusion of gases through the 
barrier film. Controlled atmosphere packaging (CAP), on the other hand, 
is a similar packaging concept but one in which the gas atmosphere is 
kept relatively constant during the package life. For meat and poultry, 
this usually means very complete evacuation of the package, very high-
barrier packaging film, and a means of maintaining the gas composition, 
often by utilizing a compound or component that will slowly generate the 
desired gases to maintain the target composition. Active packaging (AP) 
is yet another packaging concept in which the package actively modi-
fies conditions during storage. Examples of this concept include packages 
with oxygen, odor or moisture absorbers, carbon dioxide emitters, and 
packaging films that release antimicrobial compounds and other sub-
stances during storage.
Vacuum packaging (VP), commonly used for fresh, raw meat and poultry, 
is simply the removal of air prior to sealing the product in a barrier film. 
However, in reality, for fresh meat this is a form of MAP because muscle and 
microbial metabolism will utilize residual oxygen to produce carbon dioxide 
and the net result is a modified atmosphere that achieves significant shelf-
life extension due to both decreased oxygen and increased carbon dioxide 
concentrations. MAP is distinguished from VP by the headspace that allows 
introduction of a much larger volume of gases to the package, and by elimi-
nation of the physical pressure on the product that occurs with vacuum.
20.3 History
The use of carbon dioxide as a preservative for meat was suggested as 
early as in 1882 and was further developed for long-range shipments 
of meat from Australia and New Zealand to Great Britain in the 1930s 
(Dixon and Kell, 1989). By the 1950s, researchers were investigating the 
relationships between carbon dioxide concentrations, product shelf life, 
and product quality. It was determined that fresh meat was likely to dis-
color when high concentrations of carbon dioxide were used, and rec-
ommendations of an upper limit of about 20%–25% were common for 
red meat species (beef, pork, and lamb). Nitrogen was typically added to 
exclude oxygen in atmospheres that included increased carbon dioxide. 
In the 1970s and 1980s, the use of oxygen in MAP to achieve attractive 
meat color was studied, and it was demonstrated that high oxygen levels 

619
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
(40% or more) would help to overcome the discoloration of high carbon 
dioxide concentration (Bartkowski et al., 1982). The combination has been 
shown to achieve an improved color and shelf life but there have been 
concerns for oxidized odor and taste as a result of the high-oxygen atmo-
sphere (Kropf, 2004; Bao and Ertbjerg, 2015). More recently, use of carbon 
monoxide for MAP packaging of fresh meat has been commercialized. 
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved master-bag 
packaging with 0.4% carbon monoxide for fresh meat in 2002 (U.S. FDA, 
2002), and in 2004, extended this approval to retail case-ready packaging 
(U.S. FDA, 2004). However, approval of carbon monoxide is not universal 
around the world with only Australia and New Zealand in addition to the 
United States allowing its use.
20.4 Purposes
The primary purpose of MAP systems for meat and poultry products is 
to achieve a longer shelf life in order to meet the demands of distribution 
over increasingly greater distances. Improved shelf life for distribution 
can be achieved in two general ways: first, by packaging of large primal 
cuts in either vacuum or MAP for transportation, followed by fabrica-
tion and repackaging at or near the retail location, or second, by MAP 
packaging of fully case-ready units which are then shipped to the retail 
location. A variation of the case-ready packaging approach is to use a 
large master package with MAP technology to enclose several case-ready 
units which are then removed from the master package for retail display. 
In each case, shelf life is improved over simple overwrap packaging. Shelf 
life, however, is not a simple issue. The predominant concern for shelf 
life is bacterial growth, which is most often the limiting factor. However, 
an attractive color is also a critical component in the determination of 
shelf life and products must be capable of providing an attractive color for 
retail display. For fresh, raw meat, desirable color may be developed and 
retained by the packaging system during distribution or may be allowed 
to develop later in display. These two approaches require very different 
packaging systems in order to achieve the same color end point for fresh 
meat. For cooked and for cured-and-cooked meat products, packaging is 
more critical for color preservation than for color development. Conse-
quently, MAP systems for these two types of cooked products are gener-
ally similar. In addition to reduced microbial growth and extended color 
life, shelf life also includes product quality attributes such as odor, flavor, 
and texture. Minimal change in these attributes from what is typical for 
freshly harvested or further processed products is an important objective 
of MAP systems.

620
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Finally, MAP systems have been studied both for concerns about, and con-
tributions to, product safety. There has been concern in the past that sup-
pression of spoilage microorganisms in anaerobic conditions might result in 
growth of pathogens, especially in case of temperature abuse. More recently, 
MAP systems have been studied as a means of improving the impact of vari-
ous other product preservation treatments. This “hurdle concept” would 
mean that MAP might be most valuable for improving product safety when 
combined with other antimicrobial treatments.
20.5 Applications
Applications of MAP systems for meat and poultry products include use of 
a variety of gases, depending on the product being packaged. In addition, 
gas blends in a variety of ratios are also utilized to meet different product 
needs. For example, fresh meat primals may be packaged in a blend of car-
bon dioxide and nitrogen because at least 20%–25% carbon dioxide is nec-
essary to impact bacterial growth and extend shelf life. For retail display 
of fresh meat, however, MAP packaging may include high levels of oxygen 
(up to 80%) with carbon dioxide or sometimes nitrogen for the balance. The 
purpose of oxygen is color development. Carbon monoxide at 0.3%–0.5% 
may also be included, where permitted, for color development of fresh 
meat and, in this case, because color is more stable with carbon monoxide, 
carbon dioxide can be included at greater concentrations to improve micro-
bial inhibition. Nitrogen gas is commonly used at 100% in MAP applica-
tions for cooked and cured-and-cooked meat products where the microbial 
load is very low and exclusion of oxygen is the most critical concern for 
shelf life. Further, MAP systems can take the form of a master pack (large 
package overwrap of several smaller packages) or stand-alone small units 
(typically retail-ready packages) (Siegel, 2010b). The master-pack approach 
typically utilizes a high-barrier bag for the outer package, which contains 
the desired atmosphere, and films with relatively high permeability for the 
smaller units. The case-ready pack approach will use high-barrier films for 
the final package in order to retain the MAP gas mixture, which is placed 
inside the package.
20.6 Gases Used in Map Systems
The three most common gases used for MAP are carbon dioxide, nitrogen, 
and oxygen. All of these are present in the air that is removed from the 

621
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
package initially, but the ratio of these gases is considerably different in MAP 
applications compared to the ambient atmosphere. Air is composed of about 
0.03% carbon dioxide, 78% nitrogen, and 21% oxygen. In MAP systems, how-
ever, ambient air is typically replaced by gas mixtures that are much higher 
in one or more of these gases.
In addition to these three gases, carbon monoxide at levels of 0.3%–0.5% 
has been used in some MAP systems for fresh meat because of the unique 
effects that carbon monoxide has on the formation and stability of an attrac-
tive red meat color. The noble gases (helium, argon, xenon, and neon) have 
also been studied for use in MAP systems because they are very inert and 
serve well as filler gases. These gases are used in some MAP systems for 
food products (Mullan and McDowell, 2003; Heinrich et al., 2016). However, 
there is no scientific advantage to the noble gases over the use of nitrogen for 
meat and poultry, and there is very little, if any, use of these gases for meat 
and poultry packaging.
20.6.1 Carbon Dioxide
Carbon dioxide is a colorless gas with a slightly pungent odor (Mullan and 
McDowell, 2003). The gas dissolves readily in water and will produce car-
bonic acid (H2CO3) in solution (Jakobsen and Bertelsen, 2002), reducing the 
solution pH. A pH change in meat held under a high-carbon-dioxide atmo-
sphere is typically observed despite the relatively high buffering capacity of 
meat.
The centerpiece of MAP systems for fresh meat has long been carbon 
dioxide because of the ability of this gas to inhibit a wide range of micro-
organisms. Carbon dioxide is most effective for inhibition of gram-negative 
bacteria that grow rapidly on fresh meat. Consequently, carbon dioxide 
is considered the primary antimicrobial agent in MAP systems. Carbon 
dioxide has been shown to increase both the lag phase of growth and the 
generation time of affected microorganisms, but the mechanism by which 
carbon dioxide achieves microbial inhibition is not entirely clear. Certainly, 
the replacement of oxygen by carbon dioxide will help to suppress growth of 
aerobic organisms. However, it has been most frequently suggested that the 
primary antimicrobial effect of carbon dioxide is due to its ability to penetrate 
bacterial membranes and alter the interior pH of cells, thus affecting cellu-
lar metabolic processes (Dixon and Kell, 1989). The effect of carbon dioxide 
on meat pH is well recognized and may, by itself, contribute to the inhibi-
tion of microbial growth that has been observed. Even though the amount 
of carbonic acid formed from carbon dioxide is relatively small (~2%) at the 
normal pH range of meat, it has been reported that meat pH can decline as 
much as 0.35 pH units in a carbon dioxide atmosphere (Daniels et al., 1985; 
Tan and Gill, 1982). In addition to the pH effect, it has also been reported 
that carbon dioxide inhibited substrate uptake by microbial cells. Substrate 
limitation is another potential explanation of the inhibitory effect of carbon 

622
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
dioxide on bacteria (Farber, 1991). Other theories on the antimicrobial action 
of carbon dioxide include the direct inhibition of enzymes and changes in 
the basic properties of proteins (Dixon and Kell, 1989). While the mechanism 
of action of carbon dioxide that results in bacterial inhibition is not entirely 
understood, it is clear that carbon dioxide is an effective antimicrobial agent.
The effectiveness of carbon dioxide as an antimicrobial agent is usually 
considered to be a function of the concentration of the gas in the package 
headspace but several researchers have suggested that the concentration of 
carbon dioxide in the product may be more indicative of inhibitory effective-
ness (Devlieghere et al., 2001; Jakobsen and Bertelsen, 2004). The effectiveness 
of carbon dioxide atmospheres on bacterial growth has been reported to be 
greater for products with low initial bacterial contamination (Gill and Tan, 
1980; Krause et al., 2003). This may be the result of carbon dioxide extend-
ing the lag phase of bacterial growth for a bacteriostatic effect rather than a 
bacteriocidal effect.
Carbon dioxide is highly soluble in meat and aqueous solutions. The solu-
bility of carbon dioxide in water is about 30 times greater than the solubility 
of oxygen and about 60 times greater than the solubility of nitrogen (Gill, 
1988). Solubility in the water phase means that carbon dioxide dissolves 
readily in lean meat tissue. Because carbon dioxide has a linear molecular 
structure (O=C=O) with little polarity, the gas is even more soluble in non-
polar solvents than in water. Consequently, carbon dioxide is also readily 
soluble in fats, and is more soluble in fats than oxygen or nitrogen. Thus, car-
bon dioxide is highly soluble in both lean and fat tissues of meat and poul-
try products. The solubility of carbon dioxide gas in meat is great enough 
that when a large volume of the gas is used in meat package headspace, the 
gas concentration in the headspace will decline very significantly and will 
continue to do so until a product saturation point or equilibrium is reached 
(Daniels et al., 1985). The amount of gas absorbed can be great enough to 
cause collapse of the package. Typically, package collapse results in an unat-
tractive appearance and can be so extreme that the package appears to have 
been sealed under vacuum; consequently, it is recommended that the amount 
of carbon dioxide used in MAP for fresh meat be applied in the amount that 
will not collapse the package. Including an inert, filler gas such as nitrogen is 
effective for preventing package collapse. However, several factors can influ-
ence carbon dioxide solubility in meat tissue. For example, fat content, water 
content, pH, and temperature are product factors that affect carbon dioxide 
absorption (Gill, 1988; Jakobsen and Bertelsen, 2002; Mullan and McDowell, 
2003; Zhao et al., 1995) while gas partial pressure and the ratio of headspace 
volume-to-meat volume are package factors that are important.
The solubility of carbon dioxide increases with decreasing temperature 
and it has been noted that the antimicrobial activity of carbon dioxide is 
considerably greater at temperatures below 10°C, compared with tempera-
tures of 15°C or higher (Devlieghere et al., 2001). The solubility of carbon 
dioxide in meat has also been reported to change by as much as 35% for 

623
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
each unit change in pH (Kropf, 2004). The relationships between tempera-
ture, gas pressure, gas volume, absorbed carbon dioxide, pH changes, and 
penetration of microbial cells by the gas are complex, but are likely to be a 
very important part of the shelf-life extension achieved by carbon dioxide 
in MAP systems. These factors were studied in a multifactorial experiment 
to determine the relative impact of each factor on the amounts of carbon 
dioxide absorbed by ground pork samples (Jakobsen and Bertelsen, 2002). 
The results of this study suggested that the gas partial pressure and the gas 
headspace-to-meat volume ratio were the most important factors. If more 
than 30% carbon dioxide was used, a volume of at least 2 L of gas/kg of meat 
was necessary to prevent package collapse. For volume ratios greater than 
2 L:kg, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide was most predictive of the 
amount of absorbed gas. The product factors of fat/lean composition, pH, 
and temperature did not have as great an impact on absorption of carbon 
dioxide as gas partial pressure and volume.
Package atmospheres that contain relatively low levels of carbon dioxide 
(less than 30%) seldom result in package collapse because the proportion 
of total headspace gas absorbed is relatively small (Jakobsen and Bertelsen, 
2004). In some cases, carbon dioxide concentrations have been observed to 
increase in the headspace of packages with less than 30% initially due to gen-
eration of carbon dioxide from muscle or microbial metabolism of residual 
oxygen. Excessive carbon dioxide in package headspace can be an issue in 
ground meat packages when carbon dioxide is used to chill the ground meat 
prior to packaging. Excess carbon dioxide “snow” remaining in the meat will 
volatilize in the package, causing an initial swelling followed by extreme 
package collapse when the carbon dioxide is slowly absorbed by the meat. 
It has been observed that products that have absorbed significant amounts 
of carbon dioxide may show evidence of physical disruption including vis-
ible pores and fissures following cooking. The physical disruption appears 
to result from volatilization of the absorbed gas when heat is applied (Bruce 
et al., 1996). Sørheim et al. (2004) reported greater cooking losses from ground 
beef stored in 100% carbon dioxide, and observed fissures in the product fol-
lowing cooking.
20.6.2 Nitrogen
Nitrogen is an inert gas that is colorless, odorless, and tasteless (Mullan and 
McDowell, 2003). The gas is nonflammable, has a lower density than air, and 
has a low solubility in water and fat. Nitrogen can affect meat product shelf 
life indirectly because when nitrogen is used to completely displace oxygen, 
the atmosphere will not allow growth of aerobic microorganisms. Because 
aerobic organisms are the fastest growing organisms normally present on 
fresh meat and poultry, preventing aerobic growth will improve shelf life. 
However, nitrogen has no direct effect on microbial growth and, conse-
quently, has no impact on anaerobic bacteria. The low solubility of nitrogen 

624
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
is advantageous for use as a filler gas with carbon dioxide to prevent package 
collapse that can occur when carbon dioxide is absorbed by the product. 
Nitrogen gas, usually 100%, is most often used for flush-and-fill packages 
of cooked, cured meats, particularly sliced items where slice adhesion is to 
be prevented. In these packages, oxygen must be reduced to 0.5% or less for 
good cured color stability (Møller et al., 2000). For uncured, cooked products, 
exclusion of oxygen is critical to suppression of rancidity and flavor losses. 
It is important to remember that fully cooked products, either cured or 
uncured, will typically have low microbial numbers and prevention of flavor 
changes during storage is often more critical to shelf life of these products 
than microbial inhibition. The use of 100% nitrogen can extend shelf life of 
the products by preventing the chemical changes and flavor losses induced 
by exposure to oxygen. Carbon dioxide is seldom used for packaging these 
products because microbial control has been achieved by other means.
20.6.3 Oxygen
Oxygen is a colorless, odorless gas that has relatively low solubility in water, 
supports combustion (is explosive), and is very reactive with a wide variety 
of biological compounds (Mullan and McDowell, 2003). Oxygen is involved 
in many of the deteriorative reactions in food systems that result in serious 
losses of quality. These reactions include fat oxidation, rancidity develop-
ment, browning reactions, and pigment oxidation. The principle role of oxy-
gen in packaging of meat and poultry is for development and maintenance 
of the cherry-red color that is considered essential to display of fresh meat 
(Kropf, 2004). The red oxymyoglobin pigment develops readily in normal 
atmospheric oxygen pressure but an elevated oxygen concentration of 65%–
80% in MAP helps to form a deeper layer of oxymyoglobin pigment on the 
product surface that will extend the time during which the color appears 
attractive (Siegel, 2010b). However, because oxygen will also promote growth 
of rapidly proliferating, aerobic microorganisms, oxygen in MAP systems 
for fresh meat is usually combined with 20%–25% carbon dioxide to achieve 
improved microbial control (Siegel, 2010b). High-oxygen MAP systems with 
carbon dioxide will achieve a greater shelf life for fresh meat than conven-
tional (atmospheric) aerobic packages but will not match the shelf life of 
vacuum-packaged products under similar conditions.
It should be noted that fresh meat is particularly susceptible to discoloration 
by low levels of oxygen. A partial oxygen pressure in the range of 5–10 mm 
of mercury (normal atmospheric partial pressure of oxygen is 159.2 mmHg) 
will rapidly convert the myoglobin pigment in meat to metmyoglobin, which 
is brown. Further, even very low levels of residual oxygen in MAP packages of 
fresh meat will result in at least some metmyoglobin. The meat tissue will utilize 
metmyoglobin reducing capacity to convert metmyoglobin back to myoglobin, 
but if this occurs, the subsequent reducing capacity is lessened, and the meat 
color may not be as stable in later display. Because of this, it is recommended 

625
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
that, for fresh meat MAP systems that exclude oxygen, residual oxygen should 
not be more than 0.01% (100 parts per million [ppm]) after packaging, and 
essentially zero within 24 hours following packaging (Solomon, 2004).
Atmospheric or greater concentration of oxygen results in an attractive red 
color for fresh red meat, whereas complete elimination of oxygen (i.e., VP) 
prevents color deterioration so that later exposure to oxygen will allow for-
mation of attractive color. A poorly flushed package, a poorly sealed package, 
or one that has been subjected to inadequate vacuum is likely to discolor 
quickly if low levels of oxygen are present. Low levels of oxygen can also be 
a problem in cooked or cured-and-cooked meats where color fading and ran-
cidity may result. In this case, 0.5% or less oxygen in package atmospheres 
is recommended. The problems of excess residual oxygen are sometimes 
solved by using oxygen scavengers or absorbers to react with any residual 
oxygen that may remain in a package. Packets containing iron powders are 
most often used for this and can be frequently found in packages of highly 
oxygen-susceptible products such as dried snack sticks and jerky (Siegel, 
2010a). Use of oxygen scavengers also extends into the concept of AP systems 
where oxygen absorbers and other atmosphere modifiers are used to keep 
the package atmosphere constant.
20.6.4 Carbon Monoxide
Carbon monoxide is a colorless, odorless, tasteless gas that is flammable 
and highly reactive (Mullan and McDowell, 2003). Carbon monoxide has 
low solubility in water but is soluble in some organic solvents. It binds 
very strongly to blood hemoglobin and muscle myoglobin. The binding to 
hemoglobin is the basis for concerns about human toxicity and exposure 
when working with carbon monoxide because the carbon monoxide dis-
places oxygen on hemoglobin and prevents oxygen transport in the blood-
stream. While exposure to high concentrations of carbon monoxide can 
be fatal, low level exposure is not harmful (Krause et al., 2003). Concern 
about toxicity and human exposure, however, is one reason why carbon 
monoxide has not been universally used for meat and poultry packaging. 
On the other hand, carbon monoxide is not uncommon for treatment of 
fish, particularly tuna. In this case, carbon monoxide is applied as a single 
gas or as a component of what is termed “tasteless smoke” to improve the 
color stability of tuna.
The reaction between carbon monoxide and myoglobin also results in a 
strong bond between them, similar to that for hemoglobin, and this bond 
is about 1000-fold stronger than the bond between oxygen and myoglobin 
(Siegel, 2010b). A beneficial result of this reaction is a stable, bright red meat 
color that is visibly undistinguishable from the cherry-red meat color pro-
duced by oxygen. The color induced by carbon monoxide, however, due to 
the strong attraction between carbon monoxide and myoglobin, is much 
more stable than that resulting from oxygen and can last for several weeks 

626
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
as opposed to several days for oxymyoglobin color. Because of the color 
stability, there are several commercial applications of low levels of carbon 
monoxide for MAP packaging. Research has demonstrated that concentra-
tions of 0.3%–0.5% carbon monoxide in MAP are adequate to result in sta-
ble, attractive meat color and that at these concentrations, no human hazard 
exists. The US FDA approved use of 0.4% carbon monoxide for meat packag-
ing in 2002, and categorized carbon monoxide as a Generally Recognized As 
Safe (GRAS) substance when used as described for MAP (U.S. FDA, 2002).
A distinct advantage of the meat color stability resulting from carbon mon-
oxide in MAP is that discoloration from elevated levels of carbon dioxide is 
no longer a problem. Consequently, greater concentration of carbon dioxide 
can be introduced to improve microbial control without affecting color. Com-
mercial packaging applications typically combine carbon monoxide with up 
to 60% carbon dioxide but research has shown that carbon dioxide at concen-
trations as high as 99.5% will not result in discoloration when combined with 
0.5% carbon monoxide (Krause et al., 2003). However, excessive absorption 
of carbon dioxide by the meat tissue precludes use of carbon dioxide at such 
high concentrations.
The highly stable meat color resulting from carbon monoxide, however, 
does not require continuous exposure to carbon monoxide gas. For example, 
it has been reported that exposure of beef to 5%–100% carbon monoxide for 
up to 24 h, followed by VP, resulted in bright red color for several weeks 
(Jayasingh et al., 2001). This approach would allow exposure of meat cuts 
to carbon monoxide in a central facility followed by VP for distribution and 
retail display.
Another approach, which has been utilized for commercial applications of 
carbon monoxide in the United States (U.S. FDA, 2002), is to package retail 
fresh meat in a permeable film, then enclose the retail package with a large 
master package containing a low (0.4%) level of carbon monoxide combined 
with carbon dioxide (30%) and nitrogen (69.6%). Retail packages are then 
removed from the master package for retail display.
One of the issues that has been raised relative to use of carbon monoxide 
for stabilizing meat color is a concern that the color might be too stable, result-
ing in good color even after microbiological spoilage. However, research has 
demonstrated that the combined use of low carbon monoxide with high-
carbon dioxide levels to suppress bacterial growth and spoilage circumvents 
this concern (Hunt et al., 2004).
20.6.5 Dynamic Headspace Changes in MAP Systems
Because MAP systems, by definition, are a onetime modification of the 
package atmosphere during packaging, all subsequent metabolic and chem-
ical activities that occur within the package are likely to change the atmo-
sphere by consuming some gases and emitting others. In the case of fresh 
meat, muscle respiration is still an active process that consumes residual 

627
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
oxygen to produce carbon dioxide. Microbial metabolism is also commonly 
recognized as a source of oxygen depletion and carbon dioxide emission 
(Jakobsen and Bertelsen, 2002). Other factors that contribute to changes in 
the gas composition of MAP atmospheres include absorption of gases by the 
product and permeability of the packaging film (Zhao et al., 1995). Muscle 
respiration generally is most important during the early stages of package 
storage while muscle enzyme and metabolic systems are most active (Dan-
iels et al., 1985). Clearly, the amount of carbon dioxide emitted by respiration 
will be dependent upon the initial amount of oxygen available. Microbial 
effects on the atmospheric gas composition become more pronounced dur-
ing the later stages of storage, when growth of microorganisms becomes 
more extensive. Absorption of gases by the product generally reaches equi-
librium early, during the first 12–72 h after packaging (Jakobsen and Ber-
telsen, 2004). Change in the MAP atmosphere resulting from gas exchange 
through the package film is usually very slow with high-barrier films, but 
will be affected by factors such as the partial pressure of gases inside and 
outside the package, environmental temperature, and package film thick-
ness.
20.7 Product Characteristics Following Map Applications
Because the objectives of MAP systems for various meat and poultry prod-
ucts are different, the use of different gases and gas blends have been devel-
oped. Thus, the effects of MAP systems on product characteristics can vary 
considerably depending on the gases used and the product involved. Fresh 
meat MAP systems, for example, are vastly different than those for cooked 
or cured-and-cooked products.
20.7.1 Fresh (Raw) Meat
As discussed earlier, fresh meat MAP systems can range from atmospheres 
utilizing high oxygen concentrations to those using high carbon dioxide lev-
els. Atmospheres containing high levels of either oxygen or carbon dioxide 
usually are balanced with nitrogen. Some package atmospheres will also 
incorporate carbon monoxide.
20.7.1.1 High-Oxygen MAP
Case-ready MAP packages that utilize high oxygen levels for color devel-
opment of fresh red meat most often utilize a gas blend of about 70%–80% 
oxygen and 20%–30% carbon dioxide. This combination results in a deeper-
than-usual layer of red oxymyoglobin on the product surface for improved 

628
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
color life and improved shelf life, both of which are increased about three-fold 
over that of conventional overwrapped aerobic packages (Kropf, 2004; Siegel, 
2010b). The color advantages of high-oxygen packaging are generally real-
ized best in those red meats that have a high concentration of muscle pig-
ment.
Comparison of beef packaged in a high-oxygen (80% oxygen: 20% carbon 
dioxide) atmosphere with beef packaged in a low-oxygen (80% nitrogen: 20% 
carbon dioxide) atmosphere has demonstrated that the high-oxygen atmo-
sphere can be expected to result in significantly longer color life (Seyfert 
et al., 2004a). High-oxygen packaging of pork has also been demonstrated to 
achieve increased color life and consumer acceptability (Buys, 2004). While 
color and microbial shelf life are usually improved by high-oxygen–carbon 
dioxide combinations over conventional aerobic packaging, there have been 
reports of increased lipid oxidation in meat packaged in high-oxygen atmo-
spheres (Spanos et al., 2016). The increased lipid oxidation induced by high-
oxygen packaging has been shown to be effectively reduced by the use of 
antioxidants, particularly rosemary extract. Addition of rosemary extract 
enhanced lipid stability in beef patties (Sánchez-Escalante et al., 2001; Lund 
et al., 2007, Brooks et al., 2008) and in ground chicken meat (Keokamnerd 
et al., 2008), both of which were packaged in 80% oxygen atmospheres. The 
oxidative environment of high-oxygen packaging has also been observed to 
result in reduced meat tenderness due to reduced protein hydrolysis during 
aging and to increased protein cross-linking (Clausen et al., 2009; Bao and 
Ertbjerg, 2015).
Exposure of beef to high-oxygen atmospheres has been observed to result 
in “premature browning” when the beef is cooked (Seyfert et al., 2004b). 
Premature browning occurs when cooked beef turns brown at lower-than-
usual cooking temperatures. The result is a well-done appearance in meat 
that is heated to medium doneness (71.1°C internal) or less. Research has 
shown that premature browning can occur in ground beef at cooked tem-
peratures as low as 49°C (John et al., 2004). The concern arising from this 
observation is for microbial safety because many consumers use cooked 
color as an indicator of the temperature achieved during cooking (done-
ness). Ground beef patties stored in an 80% oxygen atmosphere have been 
observed to result in premature browning in nearly 100% of the patties eval-
uated (John et al., 2004).
Another problem sometimes observed with high-oxygen packaging of 
bone-in meat cuts is discoloration of bone marrow, sometimes called black 
bone. The problem results from disruption of red blood cells in the bone 
marrow during cutting of the bone, followed by exposure to high levels of 
oxygen. It has been demonstrated that the problem can be avoided by reduc-
ing oxygen in the package to less than 100 ppm or by including 0.4% CO in 
a MAP system (Mancini et al., 2005). The use of an ascorbic acid solution 
applied to cut bone surfaces has been reported to also prevent bone discolor-
ation (Raines et al., 2006; Grobbel et al., 2006).

629
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
20.7.1.2 High-Carbon-Dioxide MAP
Packaging with elevated carbon dioxide is sometimes referred to as a low- 
or ultralow-oxygen system (Kropf, 2004). This is because, to be capable of 
good fresh meat color development later when the products are exposed to 
oxygen, a high-carbon-dioxide atmosphere must exclude as much oxygen as 
possible. This means that, in addition to adding carbon dioxide at levels of 
20%–30% or more to the atmosphere for microbial inhibition, it is also critical 
to eliminate oxygen as completely as possible. Even though fresh meat will 
metabolize residual oxygen and thereby remove the oxygen from the atmo-
sphere, this activity will consume some of the inherent reducing capacity of 
the muscle and subsequent color life is likely to be lessened. Residual oxy-
gen typically ranges from about 0.1% to 1.0% or more in MAP packages and 
this is enough to impact color longevity in retail displays. Because of this, 
addition of oxygen absorbers to packages can be advantageous. The use of 
oxygen absorbers, for example, has been reported to improve the subsequent 
color stability of pork cuts first stored in a 100% carbon dioxide atmosphere 
to a level comparable to high-oxygen packaged products (Buys, 2004).
20.7.1.3 MAP with Carbon Monoxide
Fresh meat products packaged with carbon monoxide demonstrate dra-
matically improved color stability. For example, comparison of ground beef, 
beef steaks, and pork chops packaged in 0.4% CO/60% CO2/40% N2 or 70% 
O2/30% CO2 showed that the carbon monoxide atmosphere extended the 
color life three to seven days longer than that of the high-oxygen atmosphere 
(Sørheim et al., 1999). Pork chops packaged in 0.5% CO/70% CO2/29.5% N2 
were reported to have desirable color after 36 days of storage at 3°C while 
conventionally overwrapped packages showed color losses after seven days 
of storage (Krause et al., 2003). Including carbon monoxide in MAP for bone-
in meat cuts has been shown to prevent the bone discoloration that often 
occurs in high-oxygen MAP systems (Mancini et al., 2005).
One of the concerns for carbon monoxide packaging systems has been 
the potential for color to outlast microbial spoilage. This could be the case 
considering the length of color life observed in relation to microbial num-
bers (Sørheim et al., 1999). Because consumers utilize color as an indicator of 
microbial quality, it is important that sanitation, good manufacturing prac-
tices, and additional microbial inhibitors, such as carbon dioxide, be consid-
ered when color stability is extended with carbon monoxide.
20.7.2 Cooked and Cured-and-Cooked Meat Products
Because cooked items such as sliced roast beef and turkey, and cured-and-
cooked products like sliced ham and dry sausage, are normally low in bacte-
rial numbers, the principle concerns for spoilage during storage are flavor 

630
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
and color deterioration. Changes in both flavor and color in these products 
are most often due to chemical oxidation rather than microbial growth, so 
exclusion of oxygen from the package is the principle objective for maximiz-
ing the shelf life of these products. A study of several factors affecting cured 
ham color in a package atmosphere of 20% carbon dioxide/80% nitrogen 
suggested that residual oxygen, nitrite concentration, degree of illumination, 
headspace volume, and film permeability to oxygen were all important for 
color stability (Møller et al., 2003). However, headspace volume relative to 
product volume was found to be among the most important because of the 
effect of volume on total oxygen content in the headspace. A second study 
of color stability for cured ham with similar MAP atmospheres included a 
range of headspace:product volume ratios and included low levels (up to 
1.5%) of oxygen. Results of this study confirmed the importance of elimi-
nating residual oxygen as much as possible for cured color stability and 
showed that the absolute oxygen content (the product of volume and con-
centration) was more important than concentration alone (Nannerup et al., 
2004). Although 100% nitrogen is the most common atmosphere used for 
cured meats, carbon dioxide is included in some commercial applications. 
However, because fading of cured meat pigment is sensitive to oxygen there 
has been some question about the effects of carbon dioxide on cured meat 
color as well. A recent study of the stability of cured meat pigment to both 
autoxidation and photooxidation in the presence of 5%, 20%, and 30% car-
bon dioxide atmospheres (Summo et al., 2016) reported that autoxidation was 
decreased by carbon dioxide, which might have implications for reducing 
rancidity and off-flavor development in MAP systems. Other researchers 
have also reported reduced lipid oxidation in the presence of carbon diox-
ide atmospheres. Photooxidation, however, which, in the presence of oxygen, 
is the most important reaction contributing to cured meat color losses, was 
unaffected by carbon dioxide (Møller et al., 2005). Consequently, either 100% 
nitrogen or carbon dioxide/nitrogen blends can be used for MAP applica-
tions involving cooked or cured-and-cooked meat and poultry products.
20.8 Comparisons of Map with VP for Meat and Poultry
20.8.1 Vacuum versus MAP for Fresh Meat
Because VP is used a great deal for meat and poultry products and is, in 
reality, a form of modified atmosphere, a consideration of VP in relation to 
MAP is appropriate. VP is a simple process whereby product is packaged 
“in a high barrier package from which air is removed . . .” (Rao and Sachin-
dra, 2002). As described earlier, for fresh meat, a vacuum package typically 
becomes a carbon-dioxide-enhanced package because residual oxygen is 

631
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
converted to carbon dioxide by muscle and microbial respiration. The carbon 
dioxide concentration in vacuum packages of fresh meat typically reaches 
10%–20% of the gases present (Tewari et al., 1999). Much of the antimicrobial 
impact of VP on shelf life of fresh meat has been credited to the production 
of carbon dioxide rather than to the removal of oxygen. For cooked or cured-
and-cooked meats, there is very little formation of carbon dioxide after pack-
aging because respiration is not active. In this case, VP is used because the 
exclusion of oxygen for control of chemical changes is the most critical factor 
for shelf life of these products. Microbial growth is less of a concern as long 
as microbial recontamination after cooking is restricted.
VP of fresh meat has typically been restricted to distribution of wholesale 
cuts because the dark purple color of vacuum-packaged red meat is unac-
ceptable for retail display. Color is not as critical for poultry meat depending 
on the amount of pigment present (white vs. dark poultry meat) because color 
change is not as great. VP of beef, pork, lamb, and poultry will extend the 
shelf life of products by several folds over that of aerobic packaging (Siegel, 
2010b). Similar to MAP, the actual shelf life achieved for a specific product is 
very dependent on the meat species, film permeability, initial microbial load, 
and storage temperature. The two most critical factors for VP are the micro-
bial load at time of packaging and the storage temperature. For MAP, the gas 
atmosphere must be considered in addition to microbial load and tempera-
ture. VP has also been used commercially for storage of beef to achieve “wet 
aging” for tenderization and flavor development, though MAP has been 
shown to be equally effective for this application as well (Lee et al., 1996).
In addition to a lack of attractive color, VP for fresh meat typically results 
in the separation of a small amount of free water from the product. The sepa-
rated water or purge forms a pool on the product surface beneath the pack-
age film, and in corners and creases of the package film. Purge occurs from 
the physical pressure of the external atmosphere on the surface of the prod-
uct under vacuum, and results in product weight loss when the package is 
opened. Purge in vacuum-packaged cooked and cured-and-cooked products 
is also common, especially those products that have additional water added 
during manufacturing. The physical pressure of VP on product surfaces is 
also a disadvantage for sliced products where the pressure can cause slices to 
stick together. These effects of physical pressure on the product surface can 
be avoided by the use of MAP systems.
20.8.2  Vacuum versus MAP Packaging of Cooked and 
Cured-and-Cooked Meat Products
Both VP and MAP are widely used for cooked and cured-and-cooked prod-
ucts. Because exclusion of oxygen is the most important consideration for these 
products, the two packaging systems can function equally well for preserving 
color, suppressing microbial spoilage, and extending shelf life (Siegel, 2010a,b). 
The principle difference between applications of VP or MAP for cooked and 

632
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
cured-and-cooked products results from the production of purge and adhesion 
of slices that can result from VP but that are largely avoided by MAP.
20.8.3 Effects of High-Carbon-Dioxide MAP
Because carbon dioxide is the active antimicrobial agent in both VP and 
MAP, there has been significant interest in utilizing increased concentrations 
of this gas in MAP systems. This has not been feasible in the past for fresh 
meat because of the discoloration that occurs at more than about 30% carbon 
dioxide. However, the research with carbon monoxide in MAP has shown 
that as much as 99.5% carbon dioxide will not cause discoloration if 0.5% car-
bon monoxide is included for color stability (Krause et al., 2003), though this 
concentration typically results in extreme package collapse. Consequently, it 
has been suggested that increased carbon dioxide concentrations, within the 
limits that avoid package collapse, could be used for both fresh and cooked 
cured-and-cooked products to further improve the shelf life.
Because high-carbon-dioxide atmospheres can affect meat pH and result 
in increased carbon dioxide absorbance by the meat tissue, a variety of qual-
ity changes of meat in high-carbon-dioxide atmospheres have been studied. 
One of the visual observations reported for meat stored in 40% carbon diox-
ide or more was development of pores between muscle bundles after cooking 
(Bruce et al., 1996). The pore development was observed for beef packaged in 
carbon dioxide for three days and for beef repackaged in vacuum for three 
days after 48 hours in a carbon dioxide atmosphere. It was suggested that the 
pores were formed by evolution of dissolved carbon dioxide induced by heat 
during cooking. The development of pores and fissures as well as changes in 
pH could cause product quality changes, particularly for protein function-
ality and product texture. It has been reported that when ground beef was 
stored in atmospheres containing 20%–100% carbon dioxide, reduced cook-
ing yield of 1%–3% resulted (Sørheim et al., 2004).
20.9 Packaging Films and Film Properties
The development of flexible films with a wide array of strength and barrier 
properties has allowed MAP applications to reach their full potential. Currently 
available films offer a range of oxygen and moisture barriers, shrinking proper-
ties, sealing characteristics, smoke and/or color transfer options, shirred or roll 
stock, cook-in and retort capability, and a variety of print and color options.
The majority of flexible packaging films used for meat and poultry are 
based on nylon, polyester, or polypropylene to provide basic strength. Most, 
if not all, MAP packages consist of multiple layers of several plastic films 
combined by coextrusion, lamination, or coating treatments to create the 

633
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
desired blend of film properties for control of moisture and gas permeability 
and for heat-sealing properties. There are no single films that provide all 
the properties needed for effective MAP systems. Flexible packaging film 
materials can be generally categorized as exterior materials, barrier materi-
als, sealants, or rigid materials (Dawson, 2010; Siegel, 2010a). The following 
discussion briefly addresses properties of some of the basic individual films 
that might be used in MAP packaging. This is by no means a comprehensive 
list or discussion and more details can be obtained from the references listed.
20.9.1 Exterior Film Materials
20.9.1.1 Nylon
Nylon or polyamides are widely used for strength and are resistant to punc-
ture, abrasion, and tearing (Mullan and McDowell, 2003; Dawson, 2010; 
Siegel, 2010a). The toughness of nylon means that it is often used as a com-
ponent of fresh meat pouches where puncture resistance and strength are 
important. Nylon is generally difficult to heat seal and will be combined 
with other films that provide sealing ease. Because of the strength and rigid-
ity, this film is often part of thermoformed base packs for MAP applications.
20.9.1.2 Polyester
Polyesters are condensation polymers, polyethylene terephthalate, with a 
wide range of properties. These films are heat resistant (Dawson, 2010; Siegel, 
2010a) so they may not seal well. Polyester is often used for barrier pouches 
and lids for tray packs where strength is needed without flexing since they 
are prone to flex cracking. Polyester can be metallized with aluminum to 
provide an exceptional barrier to oxygen and may be used this way as part 
of the package for highly oxygen-sensitive products.
20.9.1.3 Polypropylene
Polypropylene applications for MAP systems are most often found in rigid 
base trays. This material is a good water vapor barrier but a poor gas barrier 
so combinations with high gas barrier films are likely (Mullan and McDow-
ell, 2003; Dawson, 2010; Siegel, 2010a). This film has a high heat tolerance but 
can be heat sealed, though shrinkage when sealing can be an issue.
20.9.2 Barrier Film Materials
20.9.2.1 Ethylene Vinyl Alcohol
This film is generally laminated between two or more films when used for 
MAP to protect it from moisture. The film has good gas barrier properties 
when dry but must be protected from moisture to retain its barrier properties 

634
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
(Mullan and McDowell, 2003; Dawson, 2010; Siegel, 2010a). The film is often 
coextruded with nylon and other films for fresh meat applications.
20.9.2.2 Polyvinylidene Chloride
Polyvinylidene chloride is a flexible film that is a superior barrier for water 
vapor, gases, and odors (Mullan and McDowell, 2003; Dawson, 2010; Siegel, 
2010a). This film is best known by the trade name of Saran®. The film is heat 
sealable, highly shrinkable when heated, and commonly used in combined 
films. Heat-shrink packages may include monolayer films of polyvinylidene 
chloride but the film is most often used in coextrusions with multiple layers 
of other flexible film materials.
20.9.3 Sealant Materials
20.9.3.1 Polyethylenes
Polyethylenes are commonly used in multiple layer package films primarily 
for heat-sealing properties. The film melts at relatively low temperature (~20°C) 
and welds to itself readily, thus forming effective seals. The film is not a good 
barrier and requires combination with other films for any significant MAP bar-
rier package (Mullan and McDowell, 2003; Dawson, 2010; Siegel, 2010a).
20.9.3.2 Ethylene Vinyl Acetate
This film is relatively weak but has a low initial heat-sealing temperature as well 
as a wide window of heat-sealing temperatures, which makes it a very effec-
tive sealant. Consequently, ethylene vinyl acetate is used primarily for its heat-
sealing properties (Mullan and McDowell, 2003; Dawson, 2010; Siegel, 2010a).
20.9.4 Rigid Materials
20.9.4.1 Polyvinyl Chloride
Polyvinyl chloride is a material that can be softened and formed relatively 
easily by heat. Consequently, it is often used for thermoformed structures 
such as base trays (Mullan and McDowell, 2003; Dawson, 2010; Siegel, 2010a). 
The film is not a good gas barrier so combinations with barrier films are usu-
ally necessary for MAP applications.
20.9.4.2 Polystyrene
Polystyrene is relatively low cost with good stiffness. It is not transparent 
and does not have good moisture or gas barrier properties so other films 
need to be included to provide necessary oxygen and/or moisture barrier 
properties (Siegel, 2010a).

635
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
20.10 Effects of MAP on Pathogens in Meat and Poultry
Elevated concentrations of carbon dioxide have been shown to have an 
inhibitory effect on several pathogenic microorganisms. As a result, MAP 
systems have the potential to increase the safety of meat and poultry prod-
ucts. Because meat and poultry products are normally chilled, psychrotro-
phic pathogens are of greatest concern. However, temperature abuse can 
also give rise to those pathogens that grow at warmer temperatures.
There are several pathogens of concern to meat and poultry. These include 
Salmonella spp., Yersinia enterocolitica, Escherichia coli O157:H7, Campylobacter 
jejuni, Staphylococcus aureus, Clostridium botulinum, Clostridium perfringens, 
Bacillus cereus, and Listeria monocytogenes.
20.10.1 Salmonella spp.
Salmonella-caused illnesses are classified as infections, meaning that live 
organisms must be ingested to cause illness. This organism is quite sensi-
tive to heat; consequently most cases of salmonellosis result from under-
cooked meat, poultry, or eggs (Knabel, 1995; Baer et al., 2013). A review 
of several studies suggests that high-carbon-dioxide (60% to 100%) MAP 
can slow the growth of Salmonella compared to aerobic packaging but the 
organism will survive in the carbon dioxide environment and may grow 
when exposed to more favorable conditions. At best, MAP with high carbon 
dioxide may offer partial inhibition of Salmonella but temperature control 
and adequate cooking are still required to assure safety, and addition of 
antimicrobial treatments may be necessary if this organism is a concern 
(Sukumaran et al., 2016).
20.10.2 Yersinia enterocolitica
Y. enterocolitica is a facultative anaerobe and can grow well in the absence 
of oxygen (Knabel, 1995; Baer et al., 2013). Yersiniosis is an infection fre-
quently resulting from undercooked meat, most often pork. Several studies 
have reported that high-carbon-dioxide atmospheres will slow the growth 
of Y. enterocolitica but there are reports that this pathogen can grow even 
under a 100% carbon dioxide atmosphere. Adequate cooking, rather than 
MAP, provides assurance of safety from this pathogen.
20.10.3 Escherichia coli O157:H7
There appears to be relatively little information on the effects of MAP sys-
tems on E. coli O157:H7 (Rao and Sachindra, 2002). This organism commonly 
contaminates raw meat, induces illness as an infection, and is easily killed 
by heat. It appears that E. coli O157:H7 is similar to Salmonella in that growth 

636
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
can be slowed by high-carbon-dioxide atmospheres as long as temperature 
is relatively low but the organism is largely unaffected by MAP gas atmo-
spheres (Heinrich et al., 2016).
20.10.4 Campylobacter jejuni
C. jejuni is classified as a microaerophilic organism (Baer et al., 2013) meaning 
that it prefers a small amount of oxygen but seems to be largely unaffected by 
carbon dioxide atmospheres. C. jejuni causes illnesses as a foodborne infec-
tion, meaning that a significant number of live organisms must be ingested 
to induce illness. The organism is very heat sensitive and does not compete 
well for growth against other microorganisms (Knabel, 1995). Studies on 
C. jejuni growth under a variety of atmospheres suggest that the absence 
of oxygen has a larger impact on this organism than the presence of high 
concentrations of carbon dioxide (Baer et al., 2013). C. jejuni is frequently 
associated with poultry and adequate cooking is the preferred method for 
assuring product safety.
20.10.5 Staphylococcus aureus
S. aureus is a pathogen that causes illness by producing a toxin during growth, 
resulting in what is considered a food poisoning rather than a food infection. 
However, because a relatively large number of organisms are needed for 
detectable levels of the enterotoxin, prevention of growth of this organism is 
important. There is evidence that high-carbon-dioxide atmospheres inhibit 
growth of S. aureus and, in some cases, reduce cell counts (Baer et al., 2013). 
It appears that low temperature is very important and may be synergistic 
with carbon dioxide concentrations to increase cell death rate of S. aureus. It 
may be that the greatly increased solubility of carbon dioxide that has been 
observed at lower temperatures plays a role in the greater antimicrobial 
impact on S. aureus at reduced temperatures.
20.10.6 Clostridium botulinium
C. botulinum is an anaerobic organism that produces a very potent toxin 
under conditions favorable to growth. Because ingestion of C. botulinum 
toxin frequently results in death, this organism is notorious for potential 
risk in low-acid foods packaged under anaerobic conditions. Several stud-
ies of the effects of MAP atmospheres on C. botulinum, especially with fish, 
have shown that this pathogen is largely unaffected by high-carbon-dioxide 
or nitrogen atmospheres. Fortunately, the incidence of C. botulinum on meat 
and poultry is typically very low. Further, refrigeration temperatures are 
normally sufficient to prevent toxin production. In fish products, where 
C. botulinum contamination is high, anaerobic modified atmospheres are not 
considered safe for refrigerated products (Baer et al., 2013).

637
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
20.10.7 Clostridium perfringens
C. perfringens also induces illness by producing a toxin, but unlike C. botulinum, 
this food poisoning is seldom fatal. This organism does not appear to be 
affected by high-carbon-dioxide atmospheres at warm temperatures (above 
20°C) but at lower temperatures (5°C or less) high carbon dioxide has been 
reported to prevent growth (Hardin, 2012). The general consensus seems to 
be that, similar to C. botulinum, preventing contamination and maintaining 
proper temperature control are more important than MAP for assuring con-
trol of this pathogen on meat and poultry.
20.10.8 Bacillus cereus
B. cereus is a toxin-producing pathogen that induces a food poisoning illness, 
but the illness is usually not fatal. While this pathogen is among the less-
common causes of foodborne illness from meat and poultry, it also seems 
to be the pathogen that is most susceptible to the antimicrobial effects of 
carbon dioxide atmospheres. Several studies have documented that B. cereus 
is inhibited by carbon dioxide even at 25°C (Baer et al., 2013). Carbon dioxide 
has been reported to be much more effective against B. cereus than nitrogen 
or anaerobic atmospheres.
20.10.9 Listeria monocytogenes
L. monocytogenes has become a major concern to the meat and poultry 
industry because this pathogen can grow at very low refrigerated tempera-
ture, and is widespread, very hardy, and very difficult to eradicate from 
food processing plants. Further, listeriosis is a foodborne infection that can 
result in a 20%–30% fatality rate in an outbreak (Devlieghere et al., 2001). 
The heat process used during production of fully cooked (71°C internal) 
products has been shown to eliminate L. monocytogenes from meat and 
poultry, but because L. monocytogenes is a common environmental contami-
nant, postcooking contamination, particularly during slicing and packag-
ing, is likely. Because fully cooked products are often eaten without further 
heating, this ready-to-eat (RTE) category of meat and poultry products has 
been the source of most listeriosis outbreaks (Hardin, 2012; Baer et al., 2013; 
Heinrich et al., 2016).
There have been conflicting reports on the effects of MAP atmospheres on 
L. monocytogenes. Studies with fresh beef reported that 100% carbon dioxide 
inhibited L. monocytogenes growth at 5°C but not at 10°C (Nissen et al., 2000). 
Other reports have suggested that carbon dioxide atmospheres will reduce 
L. monocytogenes counts only by about 1.5 log, meaning that additional anti-
microbial treatments should be included for adequate control of this patho-
gen (Saraiva et al., 2016).

638
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
20.11 MAP as a Component in the Hurdle Concept
Most microorganisms have been shown to be more resistant to change in a 
single environmental factor than to change in two or more environmental 
factors at the same time. As a result, sublethal levels of two or more treat-
ments can often be applied to create a total inhibitory effect or “hurdle” 
that the organism cannot overcome (Jay, 2000). This “hurdle” concept is fre-
quently credited to Dr. Luther Leistner of Germany who has been a strong 
proponent of this approach. The hurdle concept is being studied in many 
applications because it often allows reduced intensity of any one antimicro-
bial treatment while improving the overall antimicrobial protection.
The use of MAP as one component in the hurdle concept to add to a greater 
overall inhibition of spoilage or pathogenic microorganisms is very com-
patible with many other inhibitory treatments. Because MAP exerts poten-
tially inhibitory effects following processing and during storage, it is easy to 
include MAP as an “add-on” treatment to complement preservatives, thermal 
processes, high pressure processing, irradiation, and many other antimicro-
bial treatments. There have been several reports of MAP, as part of a hurdle 
concept, contributing to increased overall inhibition of microorganisms or 
improved product quality (Rao and Sachindra, 2002). For example, treatment 
of poultry carcasses with lactic acid or sorbate solutions combined with MAP 
increased the inhibition of spoilage and pathogenic microorganisms, respec-
tively (Gammariello et al., 2014). High pressure processing has been demon-
strated in multiple studies to be effective (Myers et al., 2013; Lavieri et al., 2014; 
Lerasle et al., 2014), and the use of bacteriophage in combination with MAP 
can provide control of pathogens like Salmonella (Sukumaran et al., 2016).
Combining a variety of treatments to achieve an adequate microbiological 
hurdle for safety and to retain product quality at the same time is a complex 
challenge and will require a great deal of product-specific research to har-
monize the effects of product and packaging treatments.
20.12 AP Components
While AP systems are generally considered separately from MAP, there are 
some elements of AP that are becoming important for improving the effec-
tiveness of MAP. The concept of AP is an interactive packaging system that 
modifies package conditions according to needs (Ozdemir and Floros, 2004). 
The AP concept includes a wide variety of potential package adjustment 
mechanisms including oxygen scavengers, flavor releasers, flavor absorb-
ers, moisture absorbers, time–temperature indicators, and films that contain 
antimicrobial agents (Siegel, 2010a).

639
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
Where AP and MAP are beginning to overlap is in the use of oxygen 
scavengers. It is clear that for anaerobic MAP systems applied to fresh meat, 
small amounts of oxygen are very detrimental (Kropf, 2004). It is also clear 
that it is time consuming to achieve very low oxygen levels during packag-
ing operations because vacuum and/or flush treatments must be extended 
to remove as much oxygen as possible. In some cases, products may be vac-
uumized or flushed multiple times. The addition of oxygen scavengers is 
advantageous, not only because they will remove small amounts of residual 
oxygen, but also because use of scavengers will permit faster packaging 
operations and greater production line speed.
Oxygen scavengers are also used in many RTE meat applications where 
flavor preservation is critical (Ozdemir and Floros, 2004). A good example is 
dried products such as jerky or sliced pepperoni. These products are usually 
packaged in a nitrogen atmosphere and will develop rancid flavors easily in 
the presence of small amounts of oxygen. An oxygen scavenger significantly 
increases the shelf life of these products from the quality standpoint. The 
oxygen scavengers are typically added to MAP systems as a small packet of 
iron powder that is oxidized to iron oxide when oxygen is absorbed (Siegel, 
2010a). In the United States, these packets must be labeled as “Do Not Eat” 
to prevent consumption by children or by accident. Recent developments in 
packaging have included the incorporation of oxygen scavengers into the 
packaging film. This alternative solves the potential problems associated 
with the iron packet on the inside of the package.
A second component of AP systems that may be effective in MAP appli-
cations is carbon dioxide emitters. Because high levels of carbon dioxide 
are important to antimicrobial effects, it might be useful for packaging 
systems to include the capability to generate more carbon dioxide after a 
package containing a high amount of carbon dioxide is sealed. However, this 
concept does not appear to be used a great deal for meat and poultry.
Packaging films that include antimicrobial compounds would be a pow-
erful complement for MAP systems to help control microorganisms and 
pathogens that tolerate MAP atmospheres. There has been a considerable 
amount of research on antimicrobial films and coatings including antibi-
otics and organic acids (Bhatia and Bharti, 2015; Clarke et al., 2016), bacte-
riophages (Gouvea et al., 2015), spice essential oils (Ahmed et al., 2016), and 
silver nanoparticles (Azlin-Hasim et al., 2015). In many cases, the properties 
of the film involved may be modified by the inclusion of the incorporated 
materials and would need to be taken into consideration for applications of 
this technology.
A final example of an AP innovation for meat products is the development 
in 2010 of a nitrite-containing film for fresh meat (Siegel, 2010b). This film, 
when used to vacuum package fresh meat, releases a very small quantity 
of nitrite when in contact with meat surfaces, which results in a bright red 
color from formation of nitric oxide myoglobin on the product surface while 
under vacuum. The color is visually indistinguishable from the red oxymyo-

640
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
globin color of fresh meat in oxygen atmospheres. The nitrite concentration 
is far too low (less than 10 ppm) to result in cured color when the product is 
cooked or to have an antimicrobial effect. In this case, the vacuum package 
provides the microbial control and shelf-life extension (Siegel, 2010b).
20.13 Leakers and Package Integrity
One of the minor disadvantages to MAP technology in comparison to VP for 
meat and poultry is that leaks and faulty seals are not as visibly obvious. If 
the integrity of the package and/or the seal is not intact, the gas atmosphere 
is likely to be lost very quickly and product safety and quality will be com-
promised, but the shape or form of the package may not change in the case of 
MAP the way it does with a vacuum package. Because the majority of MAP 
systems employ a heat-sealing operation, this step is a critical control point 
in the process and needs to be carefully monitored during production.
There are a variety of testing methods to check the integrity of MAP pack-
ages. These include immersion in water, compression of packages, and dye 
penetration as well as several others. (Smolander et al., 1997; Mullan and 
McDowell, 2003). Most of these methods are destructive and can be used to 
measure only selected packages. More recent developments in monitoring 
systems for package integrity have suggested that leak indicators should be 
an integral part of every package to be most effective. The use of oxygen 
sensors, for example, attached to the inside of the lid of packages of cooked 
chicken patties was reported to detect oxygen levels as low as 0.07%. These 
sensors were composed of a phase-fluorimetric membrane that was mea-
sured for phosphorescence intensity and phase shift (Smiddy et al., 2002).
20.14 Regulatory Issues
The use of carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and oxygen gases for MAP systems is 
common around the world for meat and poultry and for many other food 
products. Fish, fruits, vegetables, and dairy products are among the most 
common foods packaged in MAP. There are relatively few regulatory limits 
for the use of these three gases, though safety concerns for fish in anaerobic 
MAP systems have been expressed. Carbon monoxide, on the other hand, 
has not been permitted in many countries. The most substantial use was 
in Norway where 0.5% carbon monoxide was approved for use in 1985 and 
was utilized for over half of the retail packaging of fresh meat (Sørheim 
et al., 2001). However, because Norway moved to the European Union (EU) 

641
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
for commodity trade, use of carbon monoxide for red meat packaging in 
Norway was discontinued in 2004 to comply with EU regulations.
Because of a considerable amount of research demonstrating the advan-
tages of low carbon monoxide MAP, in February 2002, the US FDA approved 
use of 0.4% carbon monoxide for MAP used as part of a master-pack system 
(ActiveTech™ by Pactiv Corp. Pactiv LLC, Lake Forest, IL) (U.S. FDA, 2002). 
This system utilizes retail packages that have an oxygen-permeable film and 
are enclosed in a master pack with 0.4% carbon monoxide, 30% carbon diox-
ide, and 69.6% nitrogen. An oxygen scavenger is added to the master pack 
to eliminate residual oxygen and protect the product color for later retail 
display. The FDA categorized this use of carbon monoxide as a GRAS proce-
dure. Packaging systems utilizing carbon monoxide for master-pack applica-
tions similar to the Pactiv system have been approved for use in Australia 
and New Zealand as well (Sørheim et al., 2001). The FDA also, in July 2004, 
approved use of 0.4% carbon monoxide with carbon dioxide and nitrogen for 
MAP packaging of case-ready beef and pork (U.S. FDA, 2004). This approval 
was granted on behalf of Precept Foods, LLC, and utilizes the MAP atmo-
sphere for retail packages as opposed to a master pack (Siegel, 2010b).
While carbon dioxide, oxygen, and nitrogen enjoy widespread acceptance 
as components of MAP systems, carbon monoxide suffers from the percep-
tion of environmental toxicity. Even though the risk represented by the con-
centrations of carbon monoxide used in MAP systems is negligible (Sørheim 
et al., 2001; U.S. FDA, 2002, 2004), the perception of danger continues to limit 
potential applications of this gas.
20.15 Conclusions
An extensive amount of research and development has shown that MAP 
technology offers very significant improvements in preservation and safety 
of meat and poultry products. The meat industry is utilizing MAP technol-
ogy more and more as case-ready packaging of fresh meat becomes more 
widely adopted. Because case-ready packaging is done in centralized loca-
tions, the sanitation and temperature control is typically more consistent, 
and as a result, products not only achieve longer shelf life but are delivered 
to consumers with a more consistent quality. Utilization of MAP systems for 
cooked, RTE products has been in place for quite some time but is changing 
as new ways to use MAP for improved safety are being developed. This is an 
active area of current research because more information is needed on how 
MAP interacts with other inhibitory processes and ingredients for control of 
quality and safety.
It is important to realize that MAP is far from a stand-alone technology for 
preservation of meat and poultry products. The use of MAP is much more 

642
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
effective when the packaged product is of high microbial quality and when 
subsequent temperature is well controlled. For meat and poultry products, 
the mixture of gases used must be appropriate to the application and, for 
anaerobic MAP environments, residual oxygen must be removed as com-
pletely as possible. Additional considerations include use of appropriate 
films and materials for necessary barriers or permeability, adequate sealing 
of packages and monitoring for leakers, and attractive presentation to appeal 
to consumers. The use of MAP systems for meat and poultry has become 
widespread and, with the additional research and development currently 
underway, has great potential for even wider use in the future.
References
Ahmed, J., Hiremath, N. and Jacob, H. (2016). Antimicrobial, rheological, and thermal 
properties of plasticized polyactide films incorporated with essential oils to inhibit 
Staphyloccus aureus and Campylobacter jejuni. Journal of  Food Science, 81, E419–E429.
Azlin-Hasim, S. M., Cruz-Romero, C., Morris, M. A., Cummins, E. and Kerry, J. P. 
(2015). Effects of a combination of antimicrobial silver low density polyethylene 
nanocomposite films and modified atmosphere packaging on the shelf life of 
chicken breast filets. Food Packaging and Shelf Life, 4, 26–35.
Baer, A. A., Miller, M. J. and Dilger, A. C. (2013). Pathogens of interest to the pork 
industry: A review of research on interventions to assure food safety. Compre-
hensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 12, 183–217.
Bao, Y. and Ertbjerg, P. (2015). Relationship between oxygen concentration, shear 
force and protein oxidation in modified atmosphere packaged pork. Meat Sci-
ence, 110, 174–179.
Bartkowski, L., Dryden, F. D. and Marchello, J. A. (1982). Quality changes of beef 
steaks stored in controlled gas atmospheres containing high or low levels of 
oxygen. Journal of Food Protection, 45, 41–45.
Bhatia, S. and Bharti, A. (2015). Evaluating the antimicrobial activity of nisin, lyso-
zyme and ethylenediaminetetraacetate incorporated in starch based active food 
packaging film. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 52(6), 3504–3512.
Brooks, J. (1933). The effects of carbon dioxide on the color changes or bloom of lean 
meat. Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry, 52, 17–19.
Brooks, J. C., Alvarado, M., Stephens, T. P. et al. (2008). Spoilage and safety charac-
teristics of ground beef packaged in traditional and modified atmosphere pack-
ages. Journal of Food Protection, 71, 293–301.
Bruce, H. L., Wolfe, F. H., Jones, S. D. M. and Price, M. A. (1996). Porosity in cooked 
beef from controlled atmosphere packaging is caused by rapid CO2 evolution. 
Food Research International, 29, 189–193.
Buys, E. M. (2004). Colour changes and consumer acceptability of bulk packaged 
pork retail cuts stored under O2, CO2 and N2. Meat Science, 68, 641–647.
Clark, D. S. and Lentz, C. P. (1969). Use of carbon dioxide for extending shelf-life of pre-
packaged beef. Canadian Institute of Food Science and Technology Journal, 5(4), 175–178.

643
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
Clarke, D., Molinaro, S., Tyuftin, A., Bolton, D., Fanning, S. and Kerry, J. P. (2016). 
Incorporation of commercially-derived antimicrobials into gelatin-based films 
and assessment of their antimicrobial activity and impact on physical film prop-
erties. Food Control, 64, 202–211.
Clausen, I., Jakobsen, M., Ertbjerg, P. and Madsen, N. T. (2009). Modified atmosphere 
packaging affects lipid oxidation myofibrillar fragmentation index and eating 
quality of beef. Packaging Technology and Science, 22, 85–96.
Daniels, J. A., Krishnamurthi, R. and Rizvi, S. S. H. (1985). A review of effects of car-
bon dioxide on microbial growth and food quality. Journal of Food Protection, 48, 
532–537.
Dawson, P. L. (2010). Packaging. In: Owens, C. M., Alvarado, C. Z. and Sams, A. R. 
(eds.) Poultry Meat Processing (2nd Ed.). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 101–123.
Devlieghere, F., Geeraerd, A. H., Versyck, K. J., Vandewaetere, B., Van Impe, J. 
and Debevere, J. (2001). Growth of Listeria monocytogenes in modified atmo-
sphere-packed, cooked meat products: A predictive model. Food Microbiol-
ogy, 18, 53–66.
Dixon, N. M. and Kell, D. B. (1989). The inhibition by CO2 of the growth and metabo-
lism of micro-organisms. Journal of Applied Bacteriology, 67, 109–136.
Farber, J. M. (1991). Microbiological aspects of modified-atmosphere packaging—A 
review. Journal of Food Protection, 54, 58–70.
Gammariello, D., Incoronato, A. L., Conte, A. and Del Nobile, M. A. (2014). Use of 
sodium lactate and modified atmosphere packaging for extending the shelf life 
of ready-to-cook fresh meal. Packaging Technology and Science, 28, 101–112.
Gill, C. O. (1988). The solubility of carbon dioxide in meat. Meat Science, 22, 65–71.
Gill, C. O. and Tan, K. H. (1980). Effect of carbon dioxide on growth of meat spoilage 
bacteria. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 39, 317–319.
Gouvea, D. M., Mendonca, R. C. S., Soto, M. L. and Cruz, R. S. (2015). Acetate cellu-
lose film with bacteriophages for potential antimicrobial use in food packaging. 
LWT—Food Science and Technology, 63, 85–91.
Grobbel, J. P., Dikeman, M. E., Yancey, E. J., Smith, J. S., Kropf, D. H. and Milliken, 
G. A. (2006). Effects of ascorbic acid, rosemary, and Origanox™ in preventing 
bone marrow discoloration in beef lumbar vertebrae in aerobic and anaerobic 
packaging systems. Meat Science, 72, 47–56.
Hardin, M. (2012). Processed Meats Microbiology: Food Safety and Shelf Life Consider-
ations. Meat Processing Technology Series. Champaign, IL: American Meat Science 
Association.
Heinrich, V., Zunabovic, M., Nehm, L., Bergmair, J. and Kneifel, W. (2016). Influence 
of argon modified atmosphere packaging on the growth potential of strains of 
Listeria monocytogenes and Escherichia coli. Food Control, 59, 513–523.
Hunt, M. C., Mancini, R. A., Hachmeister, K. A. et al. (2004). Carbon monoxide in 
modified atmosphere packaging affects color, shelf life and microorganisms of 
beef steaks and ground beef. Journal of Food Science, 45, 45–52.
Jakobsen, M. and Bertelsen, G. (2002). The use of CO2 in packaging of fresh meats and 
its effect on chemical quality changes in the meat: A review. Journal of Muscle 
Foods, 13, 143–168.
Jakobsen, M. and Bertelsen, G. (2004). Predicting the amount of carbon dioxide 
absorbed in meat. Meat Science, 68, 603–610.
Jay, J. M. (2000). Modern Food Microbiology (6th Ed.). Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Pub-
lishers.

644
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Jayasingh, P., Cornforth, D. P., Carpenter, C. E. and Whittier, D. (2001). Evaluation 
of carbon monoxide treatment in modified atmosphere packaging or vacuum 
packaging to increase color stability of fresh beef. Meat Science, 59, 317–324.
John, L., Cornforth, D., Carpenter, D. E., Sørheim, O., Pettee, B. C. and Whittier, D. 
R. (2004). Comparison of color and thiobarbituric acid values of cooked ham-
burger patties after storage of fresh beef chubs in modified atmospheres. Journal 
of Food Science, 69, C608–C614.
Keokamnerd, T., Acton, J. C., Han, I. Y. and Dawson, P. L. (2008). Effect of commercial 
rosemary oleoresin preparations on ground chicken thigh meat quality pack-
aged in a high-oxygen atmosphere. Poultry Science, 87, 170–179.
Knabel, S. J. (1995). Foodborne illness: Role of home food handling practices. Food 
Technology, 49(4), 119–131.
Krause, T. R., Sebranek, J. G., Rust, R. E. and Honeyman, M. S. (2003). Use of carbon 
monoxide packaging for improving the shelf life of pork. Journal of Food Science, 
68, 2596–2603.
Kropf, D. H. (2004). Packaging/modified and controlled atmosphere. In: Jensen, 
W., Devine, C. and Dikeman, M. (eds.) Encyclopedia of Meat Sciences (1st Ed.). 
Oxford: Elsevier, pp. 962–969.
Lavieri, N. A., Sebranek, J. G., Cordray, J. C. et al. (2014). Effects of different nitrite 
concentrations from a vegetable source with and without high hydrostatic pres-
sure on the recovery of Listeria monocytogenes on ready-to-eat restructured ham. 
Journal of Food Protection, 77(5), 781–787.
Lee, M., Sebranek, J. G. and Parrish, F. C., Jr. (1996). Accelerated postmortem aging of 
beef utilizing electron-beam irradiation and modified atmosphere packaging. 
Journal of Food Science, 61, 133–136, 141.
Lerasle, M., Federighi, M., Simonin, H. et al. (2014). Combined use of modified atmo-
sphere packaging and high pressure to extend the shelf-life of raw poultry sau-
sage. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 23, 54–60.
Lund, M. N., Hviid, M. S. and Skibsted, L. H. (2007). The combined effect of anti-
oxidants and modified atmosphere packaging on protein and lipid oxidation in 
beef patties during chill storage. Meat Science, 76, 226–233.
Mancini, R. A., Hunt, M. C., Hachmeister, K. A., Kropf, D. H. and Johnson, D. E. 
(2005). Exclusion of oxygen from modified atmosphere packages limits beef rib 
and lumber vertebrae marrow discoloration during display and storage. Meat 
Science, 69, 493–500.
McMillin, K. W. (2008). Where is MAP going? A review and future potential of modi-
fied atmosphere packaging for meat. Meat Science, 80(1), 43–65.
Møller, J. K. S., Jakobsen, M., Weber, C. J., Mortinussen, T., Skibsted, L. H. and Ber-
telsen, G. (2003). Optimization of colour stability of cured ham during packag-
ing and retail display by a multifactorial design. Meat Science, 63, 169–175.
Møller, J. K. S., Jensen, J. S., Olsen, M. B., Skibsted, L. H. and Bertelsen, G. (2000). 
Effect of residual oxygen on color stability during chill storage of sliced pasteur-
ized ham packaged in modified atmosphere. Meat Science, 54, 399–405.
Møller, J. K. S., Nannerup, L. and Skibsted, L. H. (2005). Effect of carbon dioxide on 
autoxidation and photooxidation of nitrosylmyoglobin. Meat Science, 69, 71–78.
Mullan, M. and McDowell, D. (2003). Modified atmosphere packaging. In: Coles, R., 
McDowell, D. and Kirwan, M. J. (eds.) Food Packaging Technology. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press, pp. 303–331.

645
Modiﬁed Atmosphere Packaging
Myers, K., Montoya, D., Cannon, J., Dickson, J. S. and Sebranek, J. G. (2013). The 
effect of high hydrostatic pressure, sodium nitrite and salt concentration on the 
growth of Listeria monocytogenes on RTE ham and turkey. Meat Science, 93(2), 
263–268.
Nannerup, L. D., Jakobsen, M., Van den Berg, F., Jensen, J. S., Møller, J. K. S. and 
Bertelsen, G. (2004). Optimizing colour quality of modified atmosphere packed 
sliced meat products by control of critical packaging parameters. Meat Science, 
68, 577–585.
Nissen, H., Alvseike, O., Bredholt, S., Holck, A. and Nesbakken, T. (2000). Comparison 
between the growth of Yersinia enterocolitica, Listeria monocytogenes, Escherichia 
coli O157:H7 and Salmonella spp. in ground beef packed by three commercially 
used packaging techniques. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 59, 211–220.
Ozdemir, M. and Floros, J. D. (2004). Active food packaging technologies. Critical 
Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 44, 185–193.
Raines, C. R., Dikeman, M. E., Grobbel, J. P. and Yancey, E. J. (2006). Effects of ascorbic 
acid and Origanox™ in different packaging systems to prevent pork lumbar 
vertebrae discoloration. Meat Science, 74, 267–271.
Rao, D. N. and Sachindra, N. M. (2002). Modified atmosphere and vacuum packaging 
of meat and poultry products. Food Reviews International, 18, 263–293.
Sánchez-Escalante, A., Djenane, D., Torrescano, G., Beltrán, J. A. and Roncalés, P. 
(2001). The effects of ascorbic acid, taurine, carnosine and rosemary powder on 
colour and lipid stability of beef patties packaged in modified atmosphere. Meat 
Science, 58, 421–429.
Saraiva, C., Fontes, M. C., Patarata, L., Martins, C., Cadavez, V. and Gonzales-Barron, 
U. (2016). Modelling the kinetics of Listeria monocytogenes in refrigerated fresh 
beef under different packaging atmospheres. LWT—Food Science and Technology, 
66, 664–671.
Seyfert, M., Hunt, M. C., Mancini, R., Hachmeister, K. A., Kropf, D. H. and Unruh, 
J. A. (2004a). Accelerated chilling and modified atmosphere packaging affect 
colour and colour stability of injection-enhanced beef round muscles. Meat Sci-
ence, 68, 209–219.
Seyfert, M., Mancini, R. A. and Hunt, M. C. (2004b). Internal premature browning in 
cooked ground beef patties from high-oxygen modified-atmosphere packaging. 
Journal of Food Science, 69, C721–C725.
Siegel, D. G. (2010a). Packaging for Processed Meats. Meat Processing Technology Series. 
Champaign, IL: American Meat Science Association.
Siegel, D. G. (2010b). Retail Packaging for Fresh Meats. Meat Processing Technology Series. 
Champaign, IL: American Meat Science Association.
Smiddy, M., Papkovskaia, N., Papkovsky, D. B. and Kerry, J. D. (2002). Use of oxygen 
sensors for the non-destructive measurement of the oxygen content in modi-
fied atmosphere and vacuum packs of cooked chicken patties; impact of oxygen 
content on lipid oxidation. Food Research International, 35, 577–584.
Smolander, M., Hurme, E. and Ahvenainen, R. (1997). Leak indicators for modified 
atmosphere packages. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 8, 101–106.
Solomon, J. (2004). Eliminating oxygen. Meat and Poultry, 50(9), 38–41.
Sørheim, O., Nissen, H., Aune, T. and Nesbakken, T. (2001). Use of carbon monoxide 
in retail meat packaging. In Proceeding of the Reciprocal Meat Conference. Savoy, 
Illinois. American Meat Science Association, 47–51.

646
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Sørheim, O., Nissen, H. and Nesbakken, T. (1999). The storage life of beef and pork 
packaged in an atmosphere with low carbon monoxide and high carbon diox-
ide. Meat Science, 52, 157–164.
Sørheim, O., Ofstad, R. and Lea, P. (2004). Effects of carbon dioxide on yield, texture 
and microstructure of cooked ground beef. Meat Science, 67, 231–236.
Spanos, D., Torngren, M. A., Christensen, M. and Baron, C. (2016). Effect of oxygen 
level on the oxidative stability of two different retail pork products stored using 
modified atmosphere packaging (MAP). Meat Science, 113, 162–169.
Sukumaran, A. J., Nannapaneni, R., Kiess, A. and Sharma, C. S. (2016). Reduction 
of Salmonella on chicken breast fillets stored under aerobic or modified atmo-
sphere packaging by the application of lytic bacteriophage preparation Salmo-
Fresh™. Poultry Science, 95, 668–675.
Summo, C., Pasqualone, A., Paradiso, V. M., Centomani, I., Centoducati, G. and 
Caponio, F. (2016). Lipid degradation and sensory characteristics of ripened 
sausages packed in modified atmosphere at different carbon dioxide concentra-
tions. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 96, 262–270.
Tan, K. H. and Gill, C. O. (1982). Physiological basis of CO2 inhibition of a meat spoil-
age bacterium, Pseudomonas flourescens. Meat Science, 7, 9–17.
Tewari, G., Jayas, D. S. and Holley, R. A. (1999). Centralized packaging of retail meat 
cuts: A review. Journal of Food Protection, 62, 418–425.
U.S. FDA. (2002). Food and Drug Administration. Agency Response Letter GRAS 
Notice No. GRN 000083.
U.S. FDA. (2004). Food and Drug Administration. Agency Response Letter GRAS 
Notice No. GRN 000143.
Zhao, Y., Wells, J. H. and McMillin, K. W. (1995). Dynamic changes of headspace gases 
in CO2 and N2 packaged fresh beef. Journal of Food Science, 60, 571–575, 591.

647
21
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging 
Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
Brandon Guild, Hans Bernard Tee, and Loong-Tak Lim
21.1 Nanotechnology in Food
The meat industry comprises a large segment of the food industry in many 
developed countries, significantly contributing to the gross domestic prod-
uct (Barbut, 2015). Meat consumption is increasing around the world due to 
rising income levels and increased population growth. The United Nations 
Population Fund estimates the global population will reach 9 billion in the 
mid-2040s (UNDESA, 2015; Population Division, 2015). In developing coun-
tries, people tend to shift from a plant-based diet to a diet higher in meat as 
CONTENTS
21.1 Nanotechnology in Food ...........................................................................647
21.1.1 Spoilage Reactions in Fresh and Processed Meat ......................649
21.2 Nanotechnology-Based Meat Packaging Systems ................................650
21.2.1 Enhanced Barrier Using Nanoclay ..............................................651
21.2.2 Application of Nanoclay Composites in Meat Packaging .......653
21.2.3 Antimicrobial Active Packaging ..................................................654
21.2.3.1 Antimicrobial Ions ..........................................................658
21.2.3.2 Bacteriophage .................................................................. 661
21.2.3.3 Antimicrobial Proteins and Peptides ...........................663
21.2.4 Intelligent Packaging .....................................................................664
21.2.4.1 Colorimetric Indicators ..................................................667
21.2.4.2 Biosensors ........................................................................ 670
21.3 Nanostructured Edible Films and Coatings ........................................... 671
21.4 Societal Implications ..................................................................................675
21.4.1 Potential Risks ................................................................................ 676
21.4.2 Regulation ....................................................................................... 678
21.4.3 Public Acceptance .......................................................................... 679
21.5 Conclusion .................................................................................................. 679
References .............................................................................................................680

648
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
the society becomes more affluent (Barbut, 2015). As the demand for meat 
increases, there is a need to develop packaging technology that will meet 
the requirements of the modern meat processing industry, fulfill changing 
consumer preferences, and at the same time, address environmental and 
societal issues.
Nanotechnology is a rapidly growing field, which encompasses scientific 
and engineering phenomena observed at the nanoscale. By and large, nano-
materials are referring to those that have at least one dimension ranging 
between 1 and less than 100 nm. Growing research interest and advance-
ment in nanotechnology can be seen across many industries, such as automo-
biles, biomedical, and electronics. At nanoscale, properties such as melting 
point, fluorescence, electrical conductivity, magnetic permeability, chemical 
reactivity, and so on, change dramatically as compared to the larger bulk 
counterparts (Gupta, 2014). Due to recent advances in manufacturing tech-
nologies and atomic microscopy, it is now possible to manipulate and study 
nanomaterials more efficiently than ever, greatly facilitated by the commer-
cial exploitation of nanomaterials for various applications.
In the food industry, nanotechnologies have been applied in the formula-
tion of various products and packaging materials. For example, nanotech-
nology has been applied in the development of controlled release systems for 
flavors and antimicrobials in foods through nanoencapsulation (Figure 21.1). 
Applying nanotechnology in the manufacturing of food packaging can 
result in composite structures with enhanced material properties (Lim, 
2014). By virtue of their large modulus and crystalline structure, dispersing 
of nanoparticles within a thermoplastic matrix can form composite materials 
with an increased tortuous path for gas diffusion, resulting in enhanced bar-
rier properties. Surface modification of these rigid fillers for optimal disper-
sion in the polymer can also result in packaging structures with substantial 
mechanical reinforcement, providing potential opportunities for package 
lightweighting. Other means of improving protection is through the appli-
cation of surface coatings containing nanomaterials on conventional pack-
aging materials, for improving barrier properties. Figure 21.2 shows how 
nanomaterials can be incorporated in packaging material. For some pre-
Environmental trigger
(e.g., heat, gas, moisture)
 
 
Electrospinning
Bioactive dispersed in
polymer solution
Bioactive encapsulated in
nonwoven fiber
Bioactive released in response
to environmental trigger
Solvent
Bioactive
Polymer
solution
Electrospun polymer fiber
FIGURE 21.1
Schematic of the activated release of a bioactive agent from electrospun nonwoven membrane.

649
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
mium products, “intelligent” packaging features that enhance product 
traceability and those capable of communicating with consumers on actual 
product freshness will become more integral to meat package design. These 
meat-packaging advancements will increase the efficiency of supply chain 
management, improve food safety, reduce waste, and enhance brand and 
product protection.
In order to leverage nanotechnology for food packaging applications, 
developing an adequate regulatory framework will also be important for 
assessing the potential risks and benefits involved. This chapter discusses 
how nanotechnology can be used to improve the functions of meat packag-
ing, opportunities for using nanomaterials in enhancing material properties 
of meat packaging, and reviews selected examples in intelligent and edible 
packaging. In Section 21.4, the societal implications of using nanomaterials 
in meat packaging are discussed.
21.1.1 Spoilage Reactions in Fresh and Processed Meat
Color and microbiological count are the main factors that dictate the quality 
of meat products. Color is typically regarded as the first limiting factor in 
product shelf life. The red color of fresh meat produced via the oxygenation 
of deoxymyoglobin is a desirable trait for consumers shopping for fresh meat 
Filler
Functionalized surface
Activated surface
Untreated surface
(a)
(b)
(c)
Polymer solution
Applicator
Drying
Solvent
Polymer coating
Polymer
Extrusion
Mix nanofillers with polymer
Adding
nanomaterial
Mix nanofillers with polymer
FIGURE 21.2
Incorporation of nanomaterials by (a) coating, (b) surface functionalization, and (c) adding as 
a filler.

650
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
at retail. For cured and processed meats, the pink-red color is fixed by the 
conversion of myoglobin to nitrosomyoglobin in the presence of nitric oxide 
from nitrate. In both cases, inadequate packaging design or inappropriate 
storage temperature can compromise meat color. For fresh meat products, 
insufficient oxygen ingress will not allow for sufficient “blooming” of red 
coloration and may be perceived by consumers as expired product. In cured 
and processed meats, excess oxygen ingress can lead to microbial activ-
ity and discoloration due to the growth of spoilage microorganisms. The 
microflora of fresh and processed meat is diverse. Pathogens associated with 
meat include Campylobacter spp., Clostridium botulinum, verotoxigenic Esch-
erichia coli, Salmonella spp., Shigella spp., Listeria monocytogenes, and Yersinia 
enterocolitica (Gill and Gill, 2010). At chill temperatures, Pseudomonas and 
Lactobacillus strains that thrive under cold conditions can outcompete other 
microbes in aerobic and anaerobic conditions, respectively. Pseudomonas is 
most commonly implicated in the formation of the slimy, sticky appearance 
of old meat. When glucose in meat tissue is used up, Pseudomonas begins to 
degrade protein and metabolize amino acids, resulting in the formation of 
ammonia and other offensive volatiles. For meats packaged under modified 
atmosphere, the absence of O2 inhibits the growth of Pseudomonas and other 
aerobic strains, giving way to a microflora dominated by anaerobes and fac-
ultative anaerobes such as Bronchothrix thermosphacta, Enterobacteriaceae, 
Lactobacillus, and other lactic acid bacteria (Robertson, 2013).
21.2 Nanotechnology-Based Meat Packaging Systems
Typical packaging format for meat products are presented in Figure 21.3. The 
simplest package involves wrapping the meat product in flexible materials, 
such as laminated kraft paper, for temporary containment of meat products 
sold at retailers and butcher shops to facilitate consumer’s transportation. To 
enhance protection and facilitate product sales on the shelf, meat products 
(c)
(a)
(b)
(d)
FIGURE 21.3
Illustrations of meat packaging: (a) kraft/butcher paper, (b) expanded polystyrene foam tray 
with stretch film, (c) vacuum skin package, and (d) modified atmosphere packaging.

651
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
are often packaged in thermoformed plastic containers or foamed trays that 
are overwrapped with stretched film. To further extend the shelf life, more 
complicated packaging systems such as vacuum packaging and modified 
atmospheric packaging (MAP) are being used, in conjunction with refrigera-
tion or freezing. In each of these scenarios, the use of nanotechnology can 
lead to novel packaging designs that improve meat product quality.
21.2.1 Enhanced Barrier Using Nanoclay
Nanoclays, the most common type being montmorillonite (MMT), are lay-
ered silicates. The building block of MMT structure consists of two tetrahe-
dral sheets of silica that sandwich a central octahedral sheet of aluminum, 
iron, magnesium, or lithium hydroxides. Particles of MMT and other nano-
clays such as bentonite and kaolinite are available commercially. The use 
of nanoclay or MMT can allow for an enhanced barrier of meat packaging 
material when modified and dispersed in a compatible polymer, such as 
polyethylene (PE), to create a nanocomposite packaging film for meat prod-
ucts (Busolo and Lagaron, 2012). Polymer–clay nanocomposites can improve 
mechanical, barrier, and physical properties, and thermal stability of poly-
mer and biopolymer composite films due to the high surface area to volume 
ratio (Lim, 2014). Understanding the factors that affect the physical properties 
of nanocomposites is important in order to fully exploit nanomaterials for 
food packaging applications. Of great importance are nanoparticle–matrix 
and particle–particle interactions (Pukanski and Fekete, 1999). For instance, 
when 1 or 3 wt% MMT is incorporated into chitosan (a deacetylated deriva-
tive of chitin), water vapor permeability of MMT–chitosan composite film 
can be reduced by about 40% or 45%, respectively (Abdollahi et al., 2012). 
Tensile strength of the composite film created by these researchers increased 
significantly through the incorporation of MMT into chitosan up to 3 wt%, 
but adding more MMT beyond this point does not further improve the 
mechanical properties of the composite due to MMT particle aggregation. 
Improved mechanical properties can be achieved through surface modifica-
tion of nanoparticles that increases interfacial interaction between the nano-
material filler and matrix, as well as results in uniform dispersion of the 
fillers to form a coherent polymer network to optimize load transfer between 
the polymer matrix and the nanofillers (Islam et al., 2013). Other reinforc-
ing fillers for enhancing the material properties of packaging include carbon 
nanotubes as well as nanoparticles of silver, titanium oxide, silica, nanocal-
cium carbonate, hydroxyapatite, and nanocellulose crystals.
The use of MMT and other fillers in packaging thermoplastics can enhance 
barrier performance, which is important in preserving the shelf life of pro-
cessed meat products, particularly cooked ready-to-eat (RTE) products that 
are susceptible to color change and spoilage due to O2 ingress. For fresh meat 
products, it is important to have the optimal O2 concentration to maintain 
color and quality during the limited shelf life. In this regard, nanomaterials 

652
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
can be used to modify the barrier of a film or packaging material to have the 
necessary O2, CO2, and water vapor flow to ensure microbial growth and 
light-inducted photooxidation is minimized.
To enhance the material properties of packaging composite structure, the 
filler particles must be dispersed homogeneously in the polymer matrix by (1) 
in situ polymerization, (2) solution casting, or (3) melt processing. For in situ 
polymerization, the layered silicates are expanded with the monomers and the 
galleries of the silicate layers are being intercalated with the polymer chains 
as they grow during polymerization. By contrast, in solution casting, the poly-
mer is dissolved in a solvent to form a solution, the nanomaterial added, and 
the resulting mixture is cast onto a solid surface and the solvent is allowed to 
evaporate, forming a solidified film. Melt processing is more commonly used 
in the industry, where nanofillers are dispersed in the molten polymer during 
extrusion or compounding processes, followed by cooling to solidify the poly-
mer. Regardless of the method used, modification of the filler is often needed 
to promote its interaction with the polymer. For MMT, one of the strategies 
used to ensure its homogeneous distribution in thermoplastic is to modify 
the layered silicate with an organic surfactant. Native MMT is relatively more 
hydrophilic than typical thermoplastic polymers used in food packaging 
applications. To ensure the compatibility of the dispersed and continuous 
phases, organo-modified MMT is often used, where the clay is modified by 
exchanging the sodium, lithium, calcium cations within the gallery of the lay-
ered silicates with organic surfactants, such as trimethyl stearyl ammonium, 
octadecylamine, and methyl dihydroxyethyl hydrogenated tallow ammonium 
(Singala et al., 2012; Sengwa and Choudhary, 2012). The exchange of cations 
within MMT with surfactants allows polymer chains or monomers to inter-
calate into the galleries in the MMT. The enhanced mechanical strength and 
barrier properties of MMT nanocomposite, as compared with the neat poly-
mer, can be attributed to the MMT’s physical anchorage effects on the polymer 
molecules, which limit the segmental chain mobility. Moreover, by applying 
adequate shear during melt processing, the expanded MMT can be exfoli-
ated into separate silicate layers, the dispersion of which in a polymer matrix 
can increase the tortuous path of permeant molecules moving through the 
composite structure (Figure 21.4). Another study observed the effect four dif-
ferent surfactants had on their ability to modify MMT clay. Field-emission 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) results showed that the size of the dis-
persed poly(butylene succinate-co-adipate) (PBSA) phase was reduced with 
the addition of organoclay and the extent of this size reduction was dependent 
on interlayer spacing of the clay, in addition to enthalpic interaction between 
the clay surface and the poly(lactic acid) (PLA)–PBSA polymer blend (Ojijo 
et al., 2011). Dispersion of silicate layers in the blend matrix was also charac-
terized by x-ray diffraction. An improved adhesion between the continuous 
polymer phases and the fine morphology of the dispersed phase contributed 
to the improvement in the mechanical and thermal properties of the final com-
posites (Ojijo et al., 2011).

653
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
21.2.2 Application of Nanoclay Composites in Meat Packaging
Picouet et al. (2014) investigated the use of nanoclay to modify a polyamide 6 
(PA6)-multilayer film in vacuum-packed meat. The films were prepared via 
A/B/C/B/A structure. The outer layers (A) were composed of low-density 
polyethylene (LDPE) (LDPE Dow 410E), while the interlayer (C) was com-
posed of either commercial nanoclay modified polyamide or a standard PA6 
(Ultramid B36LN, BASF, Ludwigshafen, Germany). B layers were adhesives. 
The prototype films were prepared via cast film coextrusion at 38 rpm for 
the LDPE, 50 rpm for the polyamide, and 15 rpm for the adhesive. Vacuum-
aging of meat in the multilayer polyamide nanocomposite took place for 7, 
14, and 21 days at 2 ± 2°C in darkness. After each aging time, the 100 mm 
pieces of beef loin were cut into four slices in 20 mm thick, packed in MAP, 
and displayed using the same conditions as the nonaged meat slices, which 
were in a display case with 12 h exposure to fluorescent light and 12 h expo-
sure to darkness. It was found that reinforced PA6 films reduced the oxygen 
transmission rate by over 50%, as compared with the neat PA6 films at an 
equivalent thickness (Picouet et al., 2014).
Beatrice et al. (2010) reported enhanced barrier and mechanical proper-
ties of PA6 nanocomposites with organo-modified exfoliated MMT. They 
observed improved tensile mechanical properties with the addition of 5 wt% 
modified MMT in the PA6 nanocomposite film prepared by first compound-
ing PA6 with nanomaterial twin-screw extrusion, then processed into films 
by extrusion-blowing (Beatrice et al., 2010). Water vapor and oxygen perme-
ability rates of the nanocomposites containing 3% or 5% MMT were lower 
than the neat PA6 (Beatrice et al., 2010). In another study, Mohammad and 
Abolghasemi (2011) observed that O2 gas permeability through PA6 nano-
composite films decreased significantly by the addition of 3 wt% of modified 
sodium MMT clay.
The rising popularity of nanoclay fillers for food applications can be attrib-
uted to the relatively low cost of the raw materials and improvements to the 
O2 barrier that can be made for films for which the barrier would be other-
Tortuous diffusion path
FIGURE 21.4
Torturous diffusion path of a permeant molecule through a nanocomposite.

654
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
wise low. Concerning the costs of using MMT, though the cost of many MMT 
nanoclays can be high on a per-kilo basis, a relatively small amount, often less 
than 5 wt% in a film formulation, is required to achieve the desired effect. 
The wt% of MMT used in the formulation also substitutes a given amount 
of polymer of known cost, and the benefits to product shelf life imparted 
by using the MMT may further help to offset the cost increase. Future work 
should continue on evaluating the efficacy of MMT composite materials 
for modified atmosphere meat packaging under typical storage conditions 
encountered during distribution. Enhanced barrier and mechanical proper-
ties of nanocomposite over the neat polymer imply that less packaging mate-
rial could be used in meat packaging through the incorporation of nanoclays 
in the package structure, providing opportunities for weight reduction and 
cost savings. Commercially available nanoclay-based polymer films that 
may be advantageous for meat packaging are the Imperm® and Durethan® 
film series by Nanocor© and Lanxess©, respectively. These nanoclay-based 
polymers are transparent with improved stiffness and oxygen-scavenging 
ability (Pradhan et al., 2015). Imperm is made up of nylon and nanoclay with 
oxygen-scavenging properties. Durethan is a polyamide-based film which 
can be used as synthetic sausage casings (Flanagan and Singh, 2006). In con-
trast to the many benefits to performance imparted by MMT, one area of con-
cern for clay-based nanocomposites is the potential migration and toxicity of 
the dispersed nanomaterials—an important but seldom studied issue. These 
risks are addressed in Section 21.4.2 of this chapter.
21.2.3 Antimicrobial Active Packaging
Over the past 10–15 years, many studies incorporated antimicrobials and 
antioxidants such as organic acids, essential oils, and natural extracts into a 
variety of polymers to create active packaging for food. Active packaging is 
defined as “packaging in which subsidiary constituents have been deliber-
ately included in or on either the packing material or the package headspace 
to enhance the performance of the package system” (Robertson, 2013). Recent 
advances in this area have been focusing on exploiting the unique properties 
of nanomaterials. This section reviews some of the recent developments in 
nano- and micromaterial-enabled active packaging systems.
Thymol is a natural extract of thyme known to have antimicrobial effects on 
pathogens and spoilage organisms in meat products, as well as provide anti-
oxidant effects (Fratianni et al., 2010; Jayasena and Jo, 2013). The nanocomposite 
can be used as a carrier for gradual release of thymol from the composite matrix 
over time, allowing for enhanced preservation of foods for extended time. Elu-
cidating the release kinetic will be important when deploying such compounds 
in meat products to inhibit certain strains of spoilage and pathogenic microor-
ganisms, especially under typical refrigerated distribution and storage condi-
tions. Further research in developing food-grade solvent for the preparation of 
antimicrobial composites will be essential to ensure commercial viability.

655
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
In another study, MMT nanoclay and polyphenols extracted from brewery 
waste were incorporated into ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA) and LDPE films 
(Barbosa-Pereira et al., 2014). In beer production, surplus polyphenols cause 
excess haze and cloudiness. The removal of these polyphenols will improve 
the stability and shelf life of beers. Barbosa-Pereira et al. (2014) developed 
a method to remove the polyphenols using polyvinylpolypyrrolidone resin 
(PVPP) in a clarification step, producing a PVPP “sludge” with a high content 
of phenolic compounds such as flavonols, hydroxycinnamic, and hydroxy-
benzoic acids including gallic acid, caffeic acid, p-coumaric acid, and ferulic 
acid. Briefly, in their approach, the sludge from beer filtration was acidi-
fied to pH 1.5 with HCl (37%), followed by extraction of polyphenols using 
ethyl acetate (1:2 ratio) by stirring for 30 min at room temperature. Follow-
ing phase separation, the organic portion was collected via decanting and 
evaporated to dryness at 40°C under vacuum. These researchers added the 
dry phenolic extract to organo-modified MMT clay (Nanobioter® AE 21) at 
20 wt% level to create functionalized MMT. The functionalized nanoclays 
were then incorporated into EVA and LDPE films during extrusion, or the 
dry polyphenol powder was added directly into the polymer matrix of films 
during extrusion by dry compounding using a microcompounder (Haake 
MiniLab II Micro Compounder, Thermo Scientific, Germany) with a corotat-
ing twin-screw extruder operating at a speed of 150 rpm at 150°C for 6 min. 
The antimicrobial activity of the active films in this study was assessed by 
the ASTM E 2149-01 standard test method. EVA film with 6 wt% of free, 
unfunctionalized phenol extract was effective against E. coli after incubation 
for 48 h and throughout the entire incubation time for Staphylococcus aureus. 
All EVA-active films with MMT-functionalized phenolic extract showed anti-
microbial activity against S. aureus during incubation. Considering the over-
all bioactive migration and antimicrobial effects, EVA films appeared to be 
the more suitable type of film for incorporating the MMT-factionalized phe-
nolic extract and provided more favorable antimicrobial and antioxidative 
results than LDPE in this work (Barbosa-Pereira et al., 2014). An intriguing 
finding from this study was that the inclusion of the functionalized nano-
clays improved the effectiveness of the active packaging film, even though 
they contained lower amounts of natural extract (Barbosa-Pereira et al., 2014). 
These studies suggest there is an advantage in functionalizing MMT with 
low molecular weight antimicrobials such as phenolic compounds, and that 
nanoclay functionalization may facilitate their controlled release into in 
vitro systems.
Halloysite (HT) is a two-layered aluminosilicate nanotube with internal 
diameter of 20–50 nm and length up to 10 mm (Lvov et al., 2015). These nano-
tubes are cost-effective, widely available, durable, and possess high levels of 
mechanical strength and biocompatibility. They are of particular research 
interest due to the chemistry of the inner and outer surface of these nano-
tubes, and the possibilities of loading antimicrobial agents inside their core, 
thereby designing carrier systems to control their release for meat packaging 

656
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
applications. Recent research in this area has shown the ability of HT nano-
tubes to be used for controlled released bioactives and antimicrobials in food 
packaging systems (Boelter and Brandelli, 2016; Tornuk et al., 2015). The effec-
tiveness of active packaging films of linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE) 
with thymol-loaded HT for controlling discoloration, lipid oxidation, and 
E. coli O157:H7 growth in fermented sausage and fresh beef was investigated 
by Tornuk et al. (2015). Fresh beef color was maintained up to four days by 
active use of the nanocomposite films, while a bacteriostatic/bactericidal 
effect on E. coli O157:H7 in fresh beef was reported during a seven-day storage 
period (Tornuk et al., 2015). Reduced lipid oxidation for fermented sausage 
vacuum-packaged in active nanocomposite films was observed as well.
In a study by Boelter and Brandelli (2016), liposomes prepared with either 
soybean lecithin or Phospholipon® 90G (a pure phosphatidylcholine stabi-
lized with 0.1% ascorbyl palmitate supplied by Lipoid GMBH, Germany), 
with particle sizes ranging from 124 to 178 nm, showed that the Phospho-
lipon liposomes displayed greater stability than those prepared with soy-
bean lecithin. The researchers further loaded Phospholipon liposomes with 
1.0 mg/mL nisin into HT and dispersed into casein or gelatin at 0.5 g/L of HT 
to form composite films that had a smooth surface, but increase in roughness 
with increasing liposomes and HT contents. Both gelatin and casein nano-
composite films exhibited antimicrobial activity against L. monocytogenes in 
zone of inhibition tests performed on Brain–Heart Infusion agar plates pre-
viously inoculated with a swab submerged in a suspension of L. monocyto-
genes ATCC 7644 (Boelter and Brandelli, 2016). In another study, starch/HT/
nisin nanocomposite films were developed as active antimicrobial packag-
ing and tested on skimmed milk agar and on cheese (Meira et al., 2016). SEM 
of composite films revealed that all samples were homogeneous, but that 
aggregates appeared on film surfaces when a higher amount of nisin was 
added. Moreover, the addition of nisin decreased thermal stability of nano-
composites as compared with starch/HT films without nisin. The antimicro-
bial activity was tested against L. monocytogenes, C. perfringens, and S. aureus 
in skimmed milk agar and on Minas Frescal cheese surface previously inoc-
ulated with L. monocytogenes. Inhibition toward all the organisms tested was 
seen in skim milk agar, and during storage of cheese over 14 days, antimi-
crobial nanocomposite films with 2 g/100 g nisin significantly reduced the 
initial counts of the bacterium after four-day storage (Meira et al., 2016). For 
films with 6 g/100 g nisin, significant decrease in L. monocytogenes popula-
tion was observed after day 1, with no bacteria detected at the 4-, 7- and 
14-day sample points indicating a bactericidal effect from the applications of 
the active nanocomposites. While much of the research on HT application on 
meat systems demonstrates the ability of HT to permit controlled release of 
a bioactive into a meat product, as well as improve some mechanical prop-
erties such as tensile strength in starch films (Meira et al., 2016), more work 
needs to be done on a broader variety of meat products, as well as coupling 
studies with sensory evaluation of the product and nanotoxicity studies.

657
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
Studies have shown that composite packaging film loaded with MMT 
or HT and bioactives from botanicals may be promising in direct contact 
applications, such as for wrapping or skin packaging of fresh meats. Future 
studies on elucidating the mechanism of release of bioactives, stability of 
these compounds during storage, as well as more in-depth investigation of 
the nanocomposite films on meat systems under typical distribution condi-
tions will be useful to demonstrate the antimicrobial efficacy and commer-
cial viability. A summary of select works in antimicrobial active packaging 
appears in Table 21.1.
TABLE 21.1
Summary of Antimicrobial Active Packaging Systems Relevant to Meat Systems
Nanomaterials
Bioactive 
(If Added)
Packaging 
Material(s)
Meat 
Product 
Application
Effects
References
MMT nanoclay
n/a
PA6
Beef loins
Enhanced 
shelf life
Lowered 
thick-
ness of 
packaging 
material
Picouet et al. 
(2014)
MMT
n/a
PA6
Not tested
Reduced 
WVTR and 
O2 perme-
ability
Beatrice et al. 
(2010)
Silver (Ag) 
nanoparticles 
and zinc oxide 
(ZnO)
n/a
LDPE
Chicken 
breasts
Inhibited 
Escherichia 
coli, Pseudo-
monas 
aeruginosa, 
Listeria 
monocyto-
genes
Panea et al. 
(2014)
Ag nanopar-
ticles
n/a
PLA
Growth 
media
Inhibited 
E. coli, 
Salmonella, 
L. monocy-
togenes
Munteanu 
et al. (2014)
Ag nanopar-
ticles
n/a
Microcrys-
talline 
cellulose
Growth 
media
Inhibition of 
Bacillus 
stearother-
mophilus
Vivekanand-
han et al. 
(2012)
(Continued)

658
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
21.2.3.1 Antimicrobial Ions
One of the most investigated antimicrobial ions in recent literature is the sil-
ver nanoparticle (AgNP) with particle size ranging from 1 to 100 nm. While 
AgNPs are often described as “silver,” some are composed of silver oxide, in 
addition to the silver element. AgNPs of different shapes can be produced 
TABLE 21.1 (Continued)
Summary of Antimicrobial Active Packaging Systems Relevant to Meat Systems
Nanomaterials
Bioactive 
(If Added)
Packaging 
Material(s)
Meat 
Product 
Application
Effects
References
O2Block® 
(modified 
nanoclay)
Thymol 
essential 
oil
PCL
Growth 
media
Nanoclay 
increased 
solubility 
of thymol 
and 
enabled 
controlled 
release
Sanchez-
Garcia et al. 
(2008)
MMT nanoclay
Polyphe-
nol 
extract 
from beer 
retentate
EVA and 
LDPE 
films
Beef
Reduced 
Staphylo-
coccus 
aureus 
growth
Reduced 
oxidation 
and color 
changes
Barbosa-
Pereira 
et al. (2014)
Halloysite 
nanoclay
Thymol 
essential 
oil
LLDPE
Fermented 
sausage 
and fresh 
beef
Reduced 
lipid oxida-
tion in 
fermented 
sausage
Bacterio-
static 
against 
E.coli in 
fresh beef 
over 7-day 
shelf life
Tornuk et al. 
(2015)
Encapsulated bacteriophage
Alginate 
and pectin 
micro-
spheres; 
phospho-
lipids
None
Reduced 
sensitivity 
to low pH
Prolonged 
storage 
times
Dini et al. 
(2012) and 
Singla et al. 
(2016)
EVA, ethylene vinyl acetate; LDPE, low-density polyethylene; LLDPE, linear low-density 
polyethylene; MMT, montmorillonite; PA6, polyamide 6; PCL, polycaprolactone; PLA, 
poly(lactic acid); WVTR, water vapor transmission rate.

659
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
depending on the synthesis processes, but sphere, octagon, and thin sheet 
are common. AgNPs have been investigated in depth for their antimicrobial 
properties. Reasons why AgNPs are of notable interest as an antimicrobial 
are their high thermal stability, sustainable bactericidal activity, and broad 
spectrum efficacy against bacteria, viruses, and fungi (Dehnavi et al., 2012). 
Also, from a safety perspective, the toxicity of silver to human is fairly low. 
A study assessing the acute toxicity of AgNPs indicated the LD50 of colloi-
dal AgNPs is greater than 5000 mg/kg body weight (Maneewattanapinyo 
et al., 2011). Another study observed the cytotoxicity of ZnO nanoparticles 
and AgNPs in human epithelial colorectal adenocarcinoma (Caco-2) cells. It 
was determined that ZnO nanoparticles possessed higher cytotoxicity than 
AgNPs when applied in the concentration range, and that the LD50 of ZnO 
NPs in Caco-2 cells is 0.431 mg/L. In comparison, the amount of nano sil-
ver used in many packaging materials is approximately 0.05 mg/m3 (Travan 
et al., 2009; Vivekanandhan et al., 2012).
To facilitate end-use deployment, AgNP is often temporarily encapsulated 
in carrier matrices that allow for controlled release of the ions to achieve opti-
mal antimicrobial efficacy. For example, electrospun PLA nanofibers incor-
porating AgNP and vitamin E may be used in fruit and juice packaging due 
to large surface area of nanofibers, which allows for the diffusion of AgNP 
and antioxidant onto the surface of these products (Munteanu et al., 2014). 
Conceivably, a similar approach may be feasible for fresh meats, which have 
a high moisture content that facilitates the diffusion of these active agents 
to inhibit the proliferation of microorganisms. The mode of antimicrobial 
action exhibited by AgNP is depicted in Figure 21.5.
AgNP has been encapsulated in chitosan gels, PE, polyvinyl acetate, and cel-
lulose films by various researchers. Combining AgNP and chitosan films can 
result in packaging materials with synergistic antimicrobial effects. Travan 
Protein
oxidation
ROS generation
Damage of
cell DNA
Damage of
membrane/
cell wall
Interruption of
electron transport
AgNP
AgNP
e–
e–
FIGURE 21.5
Possible modes of antimicrobial activity for nanosilver.

660
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
et al. (2009) developed a novel method to coat AgNP particles in chitosan and 
encapsulate them in an alginate hydrogel (Travan et al., 2009). The results sug-
gested that the gels could prevent AgNP against aggregation, providing anti-
bacterial activity against E. coli, S. aureus, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa without 
exhibiting toxicity to mammalian cells (Travan et al., 2009). Potara et al. (2011) 
also showed that chitosan-coated AgNP exhibited antimicrobial activity 
against two strains of S. aureus when incorporated into Mueller Hinton agar. 
These findings may be of interest to meat processors, as these pathogens can 
often be a source of foodborne illness from meat products.
Recently, a study reported one interesting approach to encapsulate AgNP 
ions by impregnating them into microcrystalline cellulose, followed by the 
inclusion in PLA polymer to produce antimicrobial (AM) films (Vivekanand-
han et al., 2012). Here, the researchers used a curry leaf extract-mediated biore-
duction process to reduce silver nitrate. The silver ions formed were nucleated 
as AgNP on dispersed fragments of microcrystalline cellulose (MCC). The 
AgNP-impregnated MCC was washed with deionized water and dried in 
an oven at 55°C overnight. The powder was then dispersed in solvent-casted 
PLA films that demonstrated antimicrobial properties against Bacillus stea-
rothermophilus via Charm disk assay. Transmission electron microscopy and 
x-ray diffraction, respectively, confirmed the formation of spherical AgNP and 
a face-centered cubic lattice crystalline structure within the MCC network 
(Vivekanandhan et al., 2012). In another approach, researchers have exploited 
corona discharge as a pretreatment for PE and LDPE films to activate their 
surfaces prior to attaching AgNP (Sundaram et al., 2013; Dehnavi et al., 2012). 
Using surface activation methods, or mediated release methods from inside 
the film, effective active packaging films may be created for packaging meat in 
vacuum-sealed packages for either fresh or processed meats.
Besides AgNP, other inorganic nanoparticles such as zinc oxide and tita-
nium dioxide have also been exploited for the development of antimicrobial 
active packaging for meat products. In a study, both silver and zinc oxide 
nanoparticles were added to LDPE, at 5% or 10% (w/w) levels to packaging 
prepared using a JSW J85 ELII electrical injection molding machine, using a 
clamping force of 85 t and a screw diameter of 35 mm to prepare composite 
structures for the packaging of chicken meats (Panea et al., 2014). Freshly 
skinned and deboned chicken breasts were packaged in neat LDPE, 5 wt% 
ZnO + AgNP, or 10 wt% ZnO + AgNP, and flushed with a gas mixture of 70% 
O2, 20% CO2, and 10% N2. Samples were stored and evaluated up to 21 days. 
The researchers reported that adding ZnO + AgNPs to LDPE packaging has 
an antimicrobial effect against Enterobacteriaceae at 10 and 15 days of stor-
age, and that the amount of AgNP and ZnO migration from packaging was 
well within the level prescribed by the European Union (Panea et al., 2014). 
These results are encouraging for meat processors in extending the shelf life 
of highly perishable meat products, as well as packaging converters in devel-
oping commercially viable antimicrobial packaging films by direct incorpo-
ration of inorganic nanoparticles into polymers via melt processing.

661
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
21.2.3.2 Bacteriophage
Besides organic and inorganic antimicrobial species, bacteriophages have 
also been investigated by researchers for AM packaging of food. For exam-
ple, the ListexTM P100 bacteriophage, which is considered as Generally Rec-
ognized as Safe (GRAS) by the Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS) by the 
United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA), specifically targets 
and lyses cells of pathogenic L. monocytogenes (USFDA, 2007). The phage has 
been tested on RTE cooked turkey and roast beef products (Chibeu et al., 
2013). These researchers found topical application of a ListexP100 cocktail 
of 107 PFU/cm2 to be effective in reducing counts of L. monocytogenes by 2.1 
log10 CFU/cm2 for cooked turkey and 1.7 log10 CFU/cm2 for roast beef, com-
pared to untreated meat samples. Listex also exhibits listericidal effect on 
fresh sausages (Rossi et al., 2011), fresh salmon fillets (Soni et al., 2010), and 
fresh cut fruit and fruit juice (Oliveira et al., 2014). Other approved phage 
preparations that may be applied to meat products include Salmonellex™ 
(Micreos; Wageningen, the Netherlands) targeting Salmonella spp., as well as 
SalmoFresh™ and ListoShield™ (Intralytix; Baltimore, Maryland), targeting 
Salmonella spp. and Listeria spp. bacteria, respectively.
To extend the use of bacteriophage in packaging for food, several challenges 
must be addressed to maintain phage stability and activity (Figure 21.6). First, 
the phage must be oriented or incorporated in the packaging matrix such 
that it can diffuse to the contacting food and bind with the target pathogens. 
Second, the stability of the phage in elevated temperature and pressure con-
ditions typically encountered during food processing needs to be investi-
gated, especially for products that are subjected to thermal processes (e.g., 
retort, pasteurization) and high hydrostatic pressure processing for RTE pro-
cessed meat products. Thermal stability of the phage is genetic and strain 
type dependent. For instance, some mutants of the T7 phage cannot replicate 
at temperatures above 40°C (Kumar et al., 2001). Loss of phage DNA from 
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 21.6
Bacteriophages aligned (a) randomly and (b) aligned with tail facing away from the packaging 
surface.

662
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
capsids and phage head and tail disintegration can also occur in some phages 
during prolonged exposure near 80°C (Marvig et al., 2011). In a study by Black 
et al. (2010), coliphages—T4, MS2, Qβ, λ imm434, λ cI 857, and λ cI 857A—were 
used as surrogates for Hepatitis A and Aichi viruses for high-pressure treat-
ment of an oyster slurry. They reported that the MS2 phage could survive 
treatment at 60°C at 500 MPa for 5 min, while other surrogate phages dis-
played resistance up to 250 and 400 MPa (Black et al., 2010).
High pathogen specificity and the great antimicrobial efficiency of phages 
make bacteriophages a desirable means for controlling pathogen growth in 
meat products. While this area has received considerable growing research 
and commercial interests, several hurdles remain to be tackled. From an end-
use standpoint, long-term stability of the phage in the packaging material is 
important to ensure its AM efficacy. This is of concern considering that food 
packaging materials are usually being stored for a prolonged period in typi-
cal commercial settings. A few methods have been investigated as a means 
of prolonging phage stability. To increase storage stability, bacteriophages 
selective for S. aureus (strains 9563 and 8588, NCIMB, respectively) and P. 
aeruginosa (strain 217M) have been freeze-dried from SM buffer with or with-
out the addition of gelatin (Puapermpoonsiri et al., 2010). The lytic activity of 
freeze-dried phage was compared against control samples stored in a tris-
buffer (1 M tris–HCl, 0.1 M NaCl, 8 mM MgSO4, 0.1 g/L gelatin, pH 7.5) with 
and without gelatin and sucrose or poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) 6000. Phage 
samples were stored at 4°C and lytic activity was tested up to 30 days. The 
freeze-dried formulations proved more stable than for bacteriophage encap-
sulated in PEG matrix (Puapermpoonsiri et al., 2010). Besides freeze-drying, 
other encapsulation methods involving different biopolymer matrices and 
preparation technologies may also be useful in enhancing the stability of 
the bacteriophage. For example, alginate or pectin biopolymers have been 
utilized to encapsulate CA933P phage (lytic for Enterohemorrhagic E. coli 
[EHEC] serotypes of E. coli) in microspheres. Microspheres of emulsified 
pectin displayed good encapsulation efficiency and protection against acid-
ity, with phages remaining active after 30 min exposure at pH 1.6, and also 
protected the phage from pepsin activity (4.2 mg/mL). On the other hand, 
free phages were completely inactivated at pH 1.6 or with pepsin (0.5 mg/mL) 
after 10 min of exposure (Dini et al., 2012). Another study developed a bac-
teriophage encapsulation system utilizing liposomal phospholipid bilayers 
to ensure efficient phage delivery to the site of infection by multidrug-resis-
tant strains of bacteria (Singla et al., 2016). In this study, liposome prepared 
using soy phosphatidylcholine with Tween 80 and protamine sulfate was 
most stable at 4°C, having insignificant reduction (0.096 log PFU/mL) in the 
number of entrapped phages during the entire nine-week storage period. 
The phage liposomes were found to be less stable at room temperature and 
highly unstable at 37°C with 1.16 log PFU/mL reduction as compared to the 
initial number of entrapped phages after nine weeks for phages stored at 
room temperature (Singla et al., 2016).

663
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
Comparisons have also been made between storage of bacteriophage in 
dry versus wet/moist environments. It was observed that when wet micro-
spheres of 0.8% alginate–5% whey protein, containing Felix O1, were stored 
at 4°C, the phage remained viable for up to six weeks (Tang et al., 2013). 
This is comparable to results obtained for chitosan-coated alginate micro-
spheres used to encapsulate bacteriophage for oral delivery in another report 
(Ma et al., 2008). Tang et al. (2013) also tested the activity of Felix-O1 bacterio-
phages that were immersed in maltodextrin, drained, and then dried at 22°C 
for 30 h in a laminar flow hood. For air-dried phage, storage at 4°C showed 
better stability than those at room temperature. Moreover, 100% survival was 
observed for over two weeks (Tang et al., 2013). In another study, the antimi-
crobial efficacy and stability of a phage in edible films made from whey pro-
tein isolate was characterized using an E. coli growth inhibition assay and 
plaque-forming unit determination (Vonasek et al., 2014). The researchers 
reported that whey protein isolate films stabilized phages during storage on 
a light-exposed laboratory bench at 22°C, and in dark, 4°C conditions with-
out significant loss in phage infectivity for greater than one month.
These studies are relevant to meat processors and packaging designers to 
demonstrate the encapsulation technologies available to enhance the stabil-
ity of bacteriophages, in order to ensure that they survive the thermal and 
pressure treatment processes essential to achieve the required lethality on 
the target pathogens. This will give meat processors the flexibility to add 
an approved bacteriophage as an in-process treatment and as an additional 
microbial growth hurdle prior to packaging of finished product.
21.2.3.3 Antimicrobial Proteins and Peptides
Lysins, also known as endolysins or murein hydrolases, are enzymes pro-
duced by bacteriophages for the purpose of disrupting a host’s cell wall dur-
ing the final stage of the lytic cycle. Lysins are highly evolved enzymes that 
are able to target one of the five bonds in peptidoglycan (murein), the main 
component of bacterial cell walls. This allows the release of progeny virions 
from the lysed cell. These enzymes are being investigated for their use as 
biocontrol agents in the food industry due to their effectiveness and specific-
ity (Mahony et al., 2011; Garcia et al., 2010a). Lysins may prove a preferable 
biocontrol agent over antibiotics, the latter being susceptible to the evolution 
of bacterial resistance in target strains. Lysins have shown to have a syn-
ergetic effect with nisin on reducing S. aureus growth in pasteurized milk 
(Garcia et al., 2010b). Future studies should determine if synergistic effects 
can also be demonstrated in fresh or RTE meat products.
Nisin is a polycyclic antibacterial peptide produced by the bacterium Lacto-
coccus lactis that is used as a food preservative. In foods, nisin has primarily 
been applied to meats and cheeses to control growth of Gram-positive spoil-
age and pathogenic bacteria. It is common to use nisin in foods at levels rang-
ing from ~1 to 25 ppm, depending on the food type and regulation in the 

664
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
jurisdiction of production. The effect of nisin and ethylenediaminetetraacetic 
acid (EDTA) treatments on the shelf life of fresh chicken meat stored using 
MAP at 4°C has been evaluated (Economou et al., 2009). Chicken meat was 
subjected to nine different antimicrobial treatment combinations: N1 (AM-
free control sample), N2 (500 IU/g; no EDTA added), N3 (1500 IU/g; no EDTA 
added), N4 (500 IU/g; 10 mM EDTA), N5 (1500 IU/g; 10 mM EDTA), N6 (500 
IU/g 50 mM EDTA), N7 (1500 IU/g; 50 mM EDTA), N8 (10 mM EDTA; no 
nisin added), and N9 (50 mM EDTA; no nisin added). In each treatment, the 
chicken breast samples were dipped in one of the test solutions, packaged in 
MAP with a 65%:30%:5% CO2:N2:O2 gas mixture, and stored at 4°C for up to 
24 days. Plating stomached chicken samples during the study period showed 
that N3, N4, N5, N6, and N7 decreased populations of mesophilic bacteria, 
B. thermosphacta, lactic acid bacteria, and Enterobacteriaceae. Sensory analysis 
suggested chicken was best preserved under treatments N6 and N7, maintain-
ing acceptable odor attributes up to 24 and 20 days of storage, respectively 
(Economou et al., 2009). In another study, the effect of nisin combined with dif-
ferent packaging treatments on L. monocytogenes growth in RTE meat (turkey 
bologna) was evaluated (Naas et al., 2013). Here, bologna was inoculated with 
L. monocytogenes and exposed to 100% CO2, air, or vacuum MAP, each with and 
without nisin. L. monocytogenes counts were 1–2 log CFU/cm2 lower for each 
treatment with nisin. 100% CO2 packaging prevented outgrowth throughout 
42 days of storage whereas a 1–2-log increase in populations during storage 
was observed for air and vacuum packed. Reportedly, nisin (500 IU/mL) com-
bined with 100% CO2 was the most effective in preventing the growth of L. 
monocytogenes on bologna during 42 days of refrigerated storage (Naas et al., 
2013). More recently, another study has focused on assessing the bacterial com-
munities in beef burgers stored in nisin-coated LLDPE packaging, and high-
lighted the effectiveness of this strategy in prolonging beef burger shelf life 
(Ferrocino et al., 2016). In this study, the researchers evaluated beef from two 
different production lots. Control samples showed a significantly higher abun-
dance of bacteria taxa sensitive to nisin, such as Kocuria rhizophila, Staphylococ-
cus xylosus, Leuconostoc carnosum, and Carnobacterium divergens, as compared 
to control samples. However, the nisin-treated batch exhibited a significantly 
lower amount of nisin-sensitive bacteria found on treated samples (Ferrocino 
et al., 2016). These nisin studies demonstrate the effectiveness of this antimi-
crobial under different meat packaging configurations, which is promising for 
inhibiting the growth of both spoilage and pathogenic bacteria.
21.2.4 Intelligent Packaging
The U.S. Center for Disease Control (CDC) estimates that 9.4 million cases of 
foodborne illnesses are caused by 31 major pathogens in the United States 
each year (Scallan et al., 2011). Most cases in the United States have been attrib-
uted to produce (46%) while meat and poultry are the second most common 
sources at 26% (Painter et al., 2013). To help manufactures and consumers 

665
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
identify contaminated products, intelligent packaging with enhanced com-
municative functions that provide indication on food quality and safety of 
the food can be useful for reducing the spread of foodborne illness, pro-
tecting brand name, and avoiding financial strain of lawsuits. As fresh or 
processed meats approach their end of shelf life, they will deteriorate and 
develop off odors, discoloration, and other physical and sensory cues that 
result in product rejection by consumers. However, many packaged prod-
ucts are isolated from the environment and as a result, consumers must rely 
on “best before” or “sell-by” dates to accept or reject the products. Unfortu-
nately, these printed dates are often determined conservatively by meat pro-
cessors based on a “worst-case” scenario and typical conditions encountered 
by the product during storage and transportation. Thus, a deviation from 
these assumed conditions, such as unexpected thermal abuses during prod-
uct distribution and postprocessing contamination, will overestimate the 
shelf life, potentially resulting in product rejection, or worse still, foodborne 
illness. To overcome these hurdles, an intelligent packaging approach has 
been explored by researchers. By definition, intelligent packaging in food is 
equipped with internal or external indicators that provide information about 
the quality or history of the product, hence enhancing the communication 
aspect of the product (Lim, 2014). Selected intelligent examples relevant to 
the packaging of meats are presented below. Select intelligent and biosens-
ing packaging systems and their tested or potential application in meat prod-
ucts is summarized in Table 21.2.
(Continued)
TABLE 21.2
Summary of Intelligent and Biosensing Packaging Systems Cited with Tested or 
Potential Application in Meat Systems
Nanomaterials
Packaging 
Material(s)
Meat Products
Effects
Reference
Semiconductor 
nanocrystals
Polyethylene
Uncooked 
bacon
Detect O2 to 
assure 
package seal 
integrity
Mills (2005)
Carbon-coated 
copper 
nanoparticles
n/a
Not tested
RH detection 
due to optical 
shifting; 50 nm 
change for 1% 
change in RH
Luechinger et al. 
(2007)
Nanocubic 
ZnO/SnO2
Sputter-coated 
glass 
substrate
Not tested
RH detection 
via lumines-
cence change 
in the 
presence of 
different RH 
levels
Md Sin et al. 
(2013)

666
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
TABLE 21.2 (Continued)
Summary of Intelligence and Biosensing Packaging Systems Cited with Tested or 
Potential Application in Meat Systems
Nanomaterials
Packaging 
Material(s)
Meat Products
Effects
Reference
TiO2 nanopar-
ticles
PEO with 
glycerol, MB, 
and nano-
TiO2
Not tested
Electrospun 
indicator more 
sensitive to 
RH change 
than solvent 
cast nanocom-
posite
Mihindukula-
suriya and Lim 
(2013)
Nanofibrils of 
perylene-based 
fluorophores
Deposition on 
glass 
substrate
Not tested
Millisecond 
response time 
for vapor 
sensing
Color change 
from red to 
blue
Che et al. (2008)
SnO2 nanopar-
ticles + ZnO 
microrod 
composite
Sensor material 
coated on 
Al2O3 rods 
placed inside 
test jars 
containing 
fish
TMA detection 
in fish
Good sensitiv-
ity to TMA
Zhang and 
Zhang (2008)
Fe3O4 nanopar-
ticles biocon-
gugated to 
streptavin
(n/a—Biosen-
sor)
E.coli O157:H7 
in ground 
beef
Detected as low 
as 1.2 × 103 
cells of E. coli 
in ground beef
Varshney et al. 
(2007)
Anti-Salmonella 
antibody gold 
nanoparticles
(n/a—Biosen-
sor)
Salmonella on 
growth media
Bacteria bound 
to antibody-
coated 
nanoparticles 
exposed to 
near-infrared 
radiation, 
photothermal 
lysis observed
Wang et al. 
(2010)
Silver-coated 
PVA immobi-
lized on mica 
sheets
(n/a—Biosen-
sor)
Tested on 
chicken rinse 
water
Rapid 
identification 
of Salmonella 
Typhimurium, 
E. coli, and 
L. innocua via 
surface-
enhanced 
Raman 
scattering
Sundaram et al. 
(2013)
MB, methylene blue; PEO, poly(ethylene oxide); PVA, polyvinyl alcohol; RH, relative humid-
ity; TMA, trimethylamine.

667
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
21.2.4.1 Colorimetric Indicators
One of the potential applications of intelligent packaging is in meat products 
packaged in MAP systems, which will benefit from continuous monitoring 
of the headspace gas composition during distribution. Nanomaterial-based 
indicators that provide visibly interpretable information have been devel-
oped by Mills and coworkers for relative humidity (RH) and oxygen detec-
tions. Humidity detection is of importance in meat packaging because 
excess moisture in meat packaging can accelerate spoilage in dried meats 
such as jerky and for this reason, desiccants are often included in packaging 
to enhance quality and shelf life. The reversible RH indicator ink is based 
on methylene blue (MB) and urea (Mills et al., 2010). In the work done by 
Mills and coworkers, it was also found that when MB is encapsulated within 
a polymer, such as hydroxyethyl cellulose with an excess of urea, the dye 
appears white under ambient or dry conditions yet is rapidly and revers-
ibly rendered blue colored when exposed to RH values >85% (Mills et al., 
2010). The oxygen indicator involved a reaction between nanosized TiO2 or 
SiO2 with a redox MB dye (Lawrie et al., 2013; Mills, 2005). To create the indi-
cator, TiO2 particles, with diameter ~5 nm, were prepared via hydrother-
mal treatment of titanium isopropoxide in the presence of tartaric acid. The 
indicator ink was composed of a redox dye (MB), a colloidal semiconductor 
photocatalyst (TiO2), and a sacrificial electron donor (tartaric acid). The ink 
was inkjet-printed on a polyester film, resulting in a colorimetric oxygen-
indicating film with a thickness of ~63 nm. Upon exposure to three minutes 
UVA light (4 mW/cm2), the indicator was photobleached to a white/light blue 
color where MB was reduced to leucomethylene blue. The photobleached 
film recovers its blue color in approximately 12 h under ambient conditions 
(~21°C, ~60% RH, 21% O2), but remained bleached in the absence of oxygen. 
The rate of recovery increased linearly with increasing O2 concentration, and 
also RH and temperature dependent. The process of color loss and recovery 
of the O2 indicator as part of a meat package can be seen in Figure 21.7.
CO2 is one of the gases commonly deployed in MAP. Typically, CO2 concen-
tration in MAP of meat products ranges from 20% to 100% for the purpose of 
inhibiting the proliferation of microorganisms, especially the Gram-negative 
bacteria such as Pseudomonads and psychrotrophs, but is less effective against 
the lactic acid bacteria. To ensure the efficacy of the elevated CO2 MAP for 
meat, it is desirable to continuously monitor the in-package CO2 level. Zhang 
and Lim (2016) developed a printing methodology, based on bubble-jet print-
ing technology, for printing colorimetric CO2 indicators. In their studies, pH 
dyes (M-cresol purple and/or phenol red), along with a phase transfer agent 
(tetrabutylammonium hydroxide) were dissolved in ethylcellulose solution 
using a 1:2 ethanol:1-butanol solvent. Different formulations of inks were 
printed on paper or plastic substrates using a commercially available thermal 
inkjet printer, resuling in colorimetric indicators that were sensitive to CO2 
in the absence of moisture (Zhang and Lim, 2016). Mills and Skinner (2010) 

668
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
investigated similar solvent- and water-based indicator inks sensitive to 
CO2 that can be applied to ceramic, paper, and metal substrates using a felt-
tipped pen. These researchers applied the ink to a variety of different surfaces 
including ceramics, paper, and aluminum foil. Additionally, they found the 
solvent-based CO2 indicator to be more sensitive toward CO2 than its water-
based counterpart, but it had a short shelf life, while increasing the amount of 
plasticizer in both water and solvent formulations helped to improve indicator 
response and recovery time (Mills and Skinner, 2010).
Other works have shown RH can also be detected using carbon-coated cop-
per nanoparticles with silicon surfactant (Luechinger et al., 2007), or nanocubic 
ZnO/SnO2 film-based detectors (Md Sin et al., 2013). Luechinger et al. (2007) 
prepared porous metal films for humidity detection from copper nanopar-
ticles coated with 2–3 nm of carbon, followed by amphiphilic surfactant. The 
unique preparation of the copper coating resulted in sensitivity to water or 
its vapor with optical shifts in the visible light range of up to 50 nm for a 1% 
change in RH. In a study by Md Sin et al. (2013), a humidity sensor was pre-
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
FIGURE 21.7
Photographs of O2 indicators based on UV-activated TiO2 nanoparticles and methylene blue 
dye, showing that one indicator was placed inside of a food package flushed with CO2 and one 
placed outside. (a) Package freshly sealed and both indicators are blue. (b) Indicators immedi-
ately after photobleaching with UVA irradiation. (c) Indicator outside of the package returned 
to blue color, whereas the indicator inside the oxygen-free atmosphere package remained 
white. (d) Package was opened—influx of oxygen caused the indicator to change back to blue 
color. This oxygen indicator could be used to easily and noninvasively detect the presence of 
leaks in packaged products throughout distribution. (Reproduced from Mills (2005 with per-
mission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.)

669
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
pared using nano ZnO/SnO2 prepared via sol–gel and immersion method and 
deposited on sputtered ZnO-film-coated glass substrate. The emission bands 
were apparent in the thin ZnO-film sensor at ultraviolet (UV) emission with 
low intensity at 408 nm and in the broad visible region dominating the peak 
emission around 600 nm. They also found that the sensitivity of the sensor 
was dependent on the porosity of materials in the detector, which agreed with 
the findings of Zhang and Zhang (2008), who used SnO2 nanoparticles supple-
mented with 5–15 wt% ZnO microrods to detect trimethylamine.
A UV-activated oxygen indicator has been prepared by dispersing TiO2 
nanoparticles, glycerol, and MB in poly(ethylene oxide) solution using aque-
ous ethanol as a solvent (Mihindukulasuriya and Lim, 2013). The solution 
was either electrospun or solvent cast, producing oxygen-sensitive fibrous 
membrane and continuous cast film, respectively. SEM assessment of fibers 
showed the diameter of the electrospun fibers varied from about 350–1000 nm. 
The electrospun indicators were four to five times more sensitive to UV irra-
diation as compared to continuous film indicators prepared by casting. This 
was mainly due to morphological differences between the two preparation 
methods, and a much greater surface area on electrospun indicators for color-
changing reactions to take place. It was also discovered that increasing etha-
nol concentration of the electrospinning solvent enhanced the sensitivity of 
the indicator to UV irradiation (Mihindukulasuriya and Lim, 2013).
The production of gaseous amines, due to the growth of spoilage bacteria, 
is one of the hallmarks of meat deterioration. The growth of Pseudomonas on 
meat results in the degradation of proteins, forming ammonia and other foul-
smelling amines. The detection of these alkaline volatiles can be made at the 
parts per trillion level using fluorescence quenching of nanofibrils of perylene-
based fluorophores (Che et al., 2008). Upon deposition onto a substrate, via a 
technique such as electrospinning, the resulting porous nonwoven made up 
of entangled nanofibers allowed for maximal exposure to the gaseous analyte 
molecules. This substrate permits rapid diffusion of the molecules through 
the film coating and increased adsorption and accumulation of gas molecules 
within a porous matrix. Compared to the sensors prepared by Luechinger 
et al. (2007) and Md Sin et al. (2013), the sensor developed by Che et al. (2008) 
was relatively simpler for chemical detection. At the ppm level, another study 
detected volatile trimethylamine from fish during spoilage with composites 
consisting of SiO2 nanoparticles and TiO2 microrods (Zhang and Zhang, 2008). 
By doping SiO2 nanoparticles with 5–15 wt% ZnO microrods, the researchers 
observed enhanced gas-sensing properties, as measured by the change in the 
ratio of the resistance in air to that in a sample of the sensor.
In MAP packaged meats, the growth of facultative anaerobes such as 
B. thermosphacta, Enterobacteriaceae, Lactobacillus, and other lactic acid bacteria is 
undesirable, and their metabolic activity may alter the gas composition initially 
flushed into the product headspace during packaging. Indicators and sensors 
capable of detecting a change in headspace gas composition are worthy of inves-
tigation for real-time monitoring of freshness of meat. However, many of the 

670
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
indicator/sensor innovations mentioned above have yet to be applied in com-
mercial food systems. Further research is needed to elucidate if they are robust 
enough for the detection of spoilage volatiles in meat packaging during actual 
end-use conditions. Issues such as stability and accuracy of the indicator/sensor, 
as well as the effects of temperature and RH effects, will need to be addressed.
21.2.4.2 Biosensors
Besides detecting gaseous compounds indicative of product freshness, other 
strategies are based on detecting the presence of specific microorganisms 
by using biosensors. These sensors take advantage of antibodies that bind 
specifically to antigens present on the pathogens of interest. However, food 
is a complex system consisting of many components that can interfere with 
the antibody–antigen interaction. Therefore, the target microorganism’s anti-
gens will need to be somehow isolated from the food matrices and surround-
ing environment, in sufficient quantities, to ensure adequate signal-to-noise 
ratios for optimal detection. To this end, various techniques have been used. 
For example, immunomagnetic separation (IMS) has been used by research-
ers to increase the amount of the analyte. Here, nanomagnetic particles are 
functionalized with selected antibodies, onto which the antigens from the 
pathogens attached. A magnetic force is then applied to selectively sepa-
rate the target analyte from the food matrix before detection. On the basis 
of this principle, Varshney and coworkers extended the IMS concept and 
developed a method to detect E. coli O157:H7. They applied an interdigitated 
array microelectrode-based impedance biosensor in combination with anti-
body-conjugated nanoparticles to detect the presence of the microorganism 
(Varshney et al., 2005, 2007). Rather than measuring electrical signals, other 
indicators rely on color changes as a means for detection. Rapid colorimet-
ric identification of Salmonella bacteria by using bioconjugated oval-shaped 
gold nanoparticles has also been demonstrated (Wang et al., 2010). These 
researchers were able to detect Salmonella Typhimurium with an excellent 
detection limit (104 bacteria/mL). When bacteria bound to the conjugated gold 
nanoparticles and these were exposed to near-infrared radiation, a reduction 
in bacterial cell viability was observed due to photothermal lysis. Different 
concentrations of bound Salmonella resulted in a unique color change, 
ranging from black at 10 CFU/mL, to dark blue at 50 CFU/mL, light blue at 
103 CFU/mL, and pink at 104 CFU/mL (Wang et al., 2010). Other studies have 
demonstrated that silver-coated PVA immobilized on mica sheets can be used 
as a biosensor in the rapid identification of S. enterica ser. Typimurium, E. coli, 
Listeria innocua, and S. aureus, isolated from chicken rinse water (Sundaram 
et al., 2013). These researchers used silver ion-encapsulated PVA deposited on 
a mica sheet to use as substrate in surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) 
assessment. Cultures of S. Typhimurium, E. coli, S. aureus and L. innocua were 
isolated from chicken rinse water and suspended in 10 mL of sterile deion-
ized water. Approximately 5 μL of the bacterial suspensions was placed on 

671
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
the coated mica sheet detector and exposed to 785 nm HeNe laser excitation; 
spectral data was recorded between 400 and 1800 cm-1 for 15 different spots 
on the detector strip for each bacterial sample. While many of these direct 
microbial detection methods are intended for rapid detection of microorgan-
isms in meat prior to packaging, attempts have been made to integrate them 
into packaging technology with a few modifications. For instance, either of 
the biosensors in Wang et al. (2010) or Sundaram et al. (2013) could be included 
as a small strip underneath product packaged fresh in a Styrofoam tray or 
MAP. To permit pathogen detection, workers at meat plants would have to be 
equipped with the appropriate detection equipment to read packaging prior 
to shipping and/or upon receiving. The major constraint for such an indicator 
system is that the components used for the manufacturing of the indicator 
must be nontoxic and approved for food contact applications. Also, antigen-
binding to food-grade nanoparticles should couple with a reaction that results 
in color change to provide freshness indication that can be visually detected 
by the consumer/manufacturer. The choice of color may need to be consid-
ered when designing the indicator, as certain consumers may be affected by 
color blindness. Because the food industry, in general, is sensitive to the cost 
of packaging materials, the deployment of a freshness indicator will need to 
be justified on the basis of how the technology can help in enhancing product 
safety and increasing brand name protection.
21.3 Nanostructured Edible Films and Coatings
The formation of edible films for processed meat products can be achieved 
either by wet or dry processing. Wet processed films are produced from 
polymers with good film-forming ability, such as long-chain polysaccha-
rides or proteins. Here, the polymers must be dissolved and dispersed in 
a food-grade solvent (e.g., water, alcohol, or mixture of both) to form film-
forming solution. Other additives (e.g., plasticizers, antimicrobial agents, 
colors, flavors, and fillers) are often added to enhance the functionalities of 
the film. Adjustment of pH and/or heating the film-forming solutions may 
be done to facilitate dispersion of polymer in the solvent to increase chain–
chain interactions essential for the formation of coherent film structure. The 
film-forming solution is then casted or extruded to obtain free-standing 
films. Alternatively, the film-forming solutions can also be applied directly 
onto the surface of food to form coating via methods such as dipping, spray-
ing, and brushing followed by drying. On the other hand, dry processing of 
an edible film does not involve solvent dispersion, but rather relies on the 
thermoplastic characteristics of the polymer. Here, the polymer is compres-
sion molded or extruded above its glass transition or melting temperatures, 
along with the additive components, to form a continuous film (Pommet 
et al., 2005; Liu et al., 2006). Because of the elevated temperature involved, the 
dry process may not be suitable for active components that are heat labile.

672
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
To produce a coherent protein film, globular proteins must be denatured by 
disrupting the disulfide bonds, as well as hydrogen and hydrophobic bonding 
interactions inherently present in native protein molecules, often through heat-
ing, the addition of denaturant, and adjusting the pH of the protein solution 
away from the isoelectric point. The main purpose of the denaturation process 
is to unfold the protein, allowing the intermolecular chain interaction to occur, 
which is essential for forming a coherent and strong film. Edible protein films 
are generally good gas and oxygen barriers at low RH. This gas barrier prop-
erty may be used to prevent oxidative rancidity and enzymatic browning, and 
minimize flavor loss in processed meat products. Types of edible proteins that 
are well established for coating on meat products are collagen, corn zein, wheat 
gluten, and soy. Zein is a prolamine protein from corn that has been applied 
as a nanomaterial for active packaging purposes (Moomand and Lim, 2014; 
Fernandez et al., 2009). Enhancing the barrier of corn and whey protein films 
by incorporating TiO2 or SiO2 has also been demonstrated (Kadam et al., 2014).
The drawback of protein films, such as those derived from wheat gluten and 
soy, is that they are food allergens to some consumers. Polysaccharide-based 
edible films do not have this limitation. Polysaccharides that have been widely 
used for the formation of edible films include pullulan, xanthan, chitosan, starch, 
and cellulose. Pullulan and xanthan are both derived from microorganisms, 
while chitosan is a deacetylated derivative of chitin—an abundant polysaccha-
ride found in nature, second only to cellulose. Recent research has shown that 
chitosan is nontoxic, biodegradable, antimicrobial, and has the ability to chelate 
cations (Rinaudo, 2006; Srinivasa and Tharanathan, 2007; Aider, 2010). However, 
poor mechanical and gas barrier properties and weak water resistance limit its 
application, particularly in applications involving elevated moisture content or 
RH (Wang et al., 2005; Xu et al., 2006). Therefore, the creation of composite edible 
films of chitosan with a nanomaterial filler is desirable for preserving meat qual-
ity. The incorporation of nanoclay in the range of 1–5 wt% has led to improve-
ment of mechanical properties of chitosan (Lavorgna et al., 2010; Xu et al., 2006), 
thermal stability (Wang et al., 2005), functional properties (Rhim et al., 2006), 
and barrier properties (Casariego et al., 2009; Rhim et al., 2006). In another study, 
potato starch-based nanocomposite films were prepared using microfibrillated 
cellulose (Dufresne et al., 2000). The researchers reported that the addition of a 
filler significantly reinforced the starch matrix, increasing tensile modulus by 
adding up to 50 wt% fraction of potato starch nanocellulose in the finished film. 
At a high RH, the reinforcing effect diminished due to plasticization effects of 
the absorbed water. In addition, a higher modulus value was observed for a for-
mulation with less glycerol plasticizer (Dufresne et al., 2000). Similar findings 
were reported by Moran et al. on nanocellulose reinforced potato starch (Moran 
et al., 2013). Other modified cellulose polymers that have been used in the area of 
food packaging include hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose, methyl cellulose, and 
ethyl cellulose (Lua et al., 2007; Imran et al., 2010; Arnon et al., 2015).
Besides strengthening the physical properties of edible films, other combina-
tion of materials may be applied to provide antimicrobial effects for shelf life 

673
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
extension of meats. One study evaluated the effects of alginate films dispersed 
with MMT nanoclay and essential oil from marjoram herb on the shelf life of 
trout fillets inoculated with L. monocytogenes. The nanoclay was pretreated by 
dispersing 3 wt% in distilled water, followed by gradual addition of 1% w/v 
alginate solution for four hours to form the film-forming solution. Marjoram 
essential oil and Tween 80 (0.25 g/g of essential oil) were added, followed by 
homogenization, degassing under vacuum, casting, and finally drying to form 
composite films (Alboofetileh et al., 2016). Fish samples wrapped in the film 
with 1% marjoram essential oil significantly delayed the growth of L. mono-
cytogenes during the 15-day storage at 4°C, with final counts of approximately 
1.2 log CFU/g lower than those observed in the untreated control samples. 
Total viable and psychrotrophic counts, as well as volatile nitrogen levels in 
the trout slices during storage were lower as well (Alboofetileh et al., 2016). 
Chitosan–nanocellulose nanocomposite films have been developed for direct 
contact application on the surface of ground meat slabs (Dehnad et al., 2014). 
The researchers observed a lower lactic acid bacterial population on ground 
meat samples packaged with nanocomposite active packaging compared to 
control samples which received a nylon film covering. The active packaging 
treatments had lactic acid bacteria counts that were lower than control by 1.3 
and 3.1 log cycles at 3°C and 25°C, respectively, after six days of storage. Con-
sidering that cellulose is a renewable feedstock and abundantly available as a 
food processing byproduct, it is anticipated that composite films with nanocel-
lulose fillers would be a growing area of research potentially making signifi-
cant impact on food packaging in the future (Khan et al., 2012).
Food-grade coatings can be applied to packaging films that are in contact 
with meat for various purposes, such as for the delivery of antimicrobial or 
antioxidative agents, and therefore can be considered as an active packaging 
system component. This approach is often applied in the delivery of bioactive 
agent with relatively low volatility, where the mass transport of the compound 
takes place via diffusion across the packaging–food interface. For instance, 
a food contact approved active packaging with an inner coating of bioactive 
agent (rosemary or oregano extract) enhanced the oxidative stability and shelf 
life of lamb steaks compared to control samples stored under modified atmo-
sphere conditions (Camo et al., 2008). There are several natural antimicrobial 
compounds such as essential oils and spice extracts which can be effectively 
used in edible films or coatings against foodborne pathogens found in meat 
such as E. coli, Campylobacter jejuni, Salmonella enterica, and L. monocytogenes 
(Olasupo et al., 2003). Rosemary and oregano essential oils and silver and zinc 
oxide nanoparticles incorporated into pullulan films prepared with xanthan 
and locust bean gum were effective against pathogenic microorganisms, 
such as S. aureus, L. monocytogenes, E. coli O157:H7, and S. Typhimurium, all 
of which may be potential pathogens in various meat products (Morsy et al., 
2014). Future work should determine if nanoencapsulation of bioactive agents 
and the incorporated nanomaterial might benefit the delivery efficiency of the 
biocontrol agent. Optimization of the amount of edible material applied as a 

674
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
coating in food through sensory evaluation is essential considering the fact 
that the applied coating may impact the sensory attributes of the products. A 
summary of select edible film systems cited herein can be seen in Table 21.3.
(Continued)
TABLE 21.3
Summary of Edible Packaging Systems Cited with Tested or Potential Application 
in Meat Systems
Nanomaterials
Bioacitve(s) 
Added
Packaging 
Material(s)
Food 
Product(s) 
Applica-
tion or 
Other 
Testing
Effects
Reference
MMT nanoclay Marjoram 
essential 
oil
Alginate
Trout fillet
Enhanced shelf 
life
Reduced growth 
of L. monocyto-
genes in vitro 
and in food 
system
Alboofetileh 
et al. (2016)
Halloysite 
nanoclay
Nisin
Corn starch
Fresh 
cheese
Inhibition of 
L. monocyto-
genes on cheese 
and in vitro
Meira et al. 
(2016)
Halloysite 
nanoclay
Nisin
Liposomes in 
casein and 
gelatin films
Growth 
media
Reduced counts 
of B. cereus, 
C. perfringens, 
and L. 
monocytogenes
Liposomes 
increased 
surface 
roughness of 
films
Casein films were 
thinner, slightly 
yellow, and 
more elastic than 
gelatin films
Boelter and 
Brandelli 
(2016)
CNT
AIT
Cellulose
Cooked 
chicken 
breasts
Reduction in 
Salmonella 
chloeraesuis
Reduction in 
oxidation and 
color changes
Dias et al. 
(2013)
Zein prolamine 
nanofibers
Β-carotene 
and fish oil
Zein as encap-
sulating 
nanomaterial
Tested for 
stability 
outside of 
food 
systems
Stabilized 
against UV–Vis 
irradiation and 
heat-induced 
oxidation
Fernandez 
et al. (2009) 
and 
Moomand 
and Lim 
(2014)

675
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
21.4 Societal Implications
The success of nanotechnology-enabled packaging ultimately depends on 
consumer acceptance of the product, which is affected by its costs, perfor-
mance, and perceived benefits and risks as compared with existing products 
(Siegrist et al., 2008; Bieberstein et al., 2013). Considering many consumers 
are unfamiliar with and/or skeptical of nanotechnology, strategic knowledge 
TABLE 21.3 (Continued)
Summary of Edible Packaging Systems Cited with Tested or Potential Application 
in Meat Systems
Nanomaterials
Bioacitve(s) 
Added
Packaging 
Material(s)
Food 
Product(s) 
Applica-
tion or 
Other 
Testing
Effects
Reference
Nanocellulose
Not added
Potato–
nanostarch 
nanocom-
posite
Tested 
material 
properties
Increased tensile 
modulus
Reduced 
reinforcement at 
elevated RH
Dufresne 
et al. (2000) 
and 
Moranet al. 
(2013)
Nanocellulose
Chitosan
Chitosan–
nanocellu-
lose 
nanocom-
posite
Ground 
meat
Inhibited 
S. aureus, 
S. enteritidis, 
and E. coli
Reduced 
population of 
lactic acid 
bacteria in 
anaerobic 
packaging 
environment
Dehnad et al. 
(2014)
Silver and zinc 
oxide 
nanoparticles
Rosemary 
and 
oregano 
essential 
oils
Pullulan films 
blended with 
xanthan and 
locust bean 
gum
Growth 
media and 
vacuum-
packaged 
raw turkey 
breast, raw 
beef (top 
round), 
and RTE 
turkey 
breast
Reduced counts 
of E.coli 
O157:H7, L. 
monocytogenes, 
S. aureus, and S. 
Typhimurium. 
Reduction 
varied from 1–3 
log CFU/g 
depending on 
food/microor-
ganisms system
Morsy et al. 
(2014)
AIT, allyl isothiocyanate; CNT, carbon nanotube; MMT, montmorillonite; RH, relative humid-
ity; RTE, ready-to-eat.

676
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
transfer and translation will be beneficial to increase the level of understand-
ing on how nanomaterials can help in enhancing food safety and quality, 
as well as communicating risks involved under typical end-use conditions. 
Because nanomaterials tend to exhibit properties different from their bulk 
counterparts, the onus is on the food manufacturers to ensure that their 
products are safe. Enforcing safety regulations and guidelines established 
by governmental regulatory agencies will strengthen consumer confidence 
in nanotechnology-based packaging materials.
21.4.1 Potential Risks
The main concern with nanotechnology-based food packaging is unintended 
migration of nanoparticles from the packaging matrix into the food during 
storage, exposing consumers to these materials (Ramachandraiah et al., 2015; 
Bumbudsanpharoke and Ko, 2015; Dimitrijevic et al., 2015). Unfortunately, 
there is a lack of understanding regarding the safety of nanomaterials, as 
the toxicity of some materials is unpredictable when scaled down to nano 
dimension. Furthermore, differences in morphology, reactivity, hydropho-
bicity, and surface functionalization affect the toxicity of nanomaterials, 
further complicating the characterization and making it difficult to fully 
understand the mechanisms that make these materials hazardous. As such, 
extensive research and testing need to be done by governing and health 
agencies to fully understand these materials before they can be safely used. 
This is a challenging task considering the rapid development of many new 
nanomaterial-based products today.
Metal and metal oxide nanoparticles, which are used as antimicrobial 
agents, have been shown to be cytotoxic in vitro as well as in animal stud-
ies (Prabhu and Poulose, 2012; Kang et al., 2015). The synthesis method and 
surface functionalization also affect the toxicity of the nanoparticles (Kwok 
et al., 2012). It should be noted that these studies are typically acute exposure 
studies involving doses significantly higher than those observed in migra-
tion studies from packaging materials. When performing risk assessments 
for nanocomposite packaging materials, the following parameters have to 
be considered: realistic exposure doses from consumer products, the abil-
ity of these nanoparticles to be absorbed through the gastrointestinal track, 
and whether or not the body is able to clear these materials in a reasonable 
timeframe.
There have also been studies that examined the potential of nanoparticles 
to diffuse from nanocomposites into food simulants. Schmidt et al. (2011) 
examined the migration of synthesized Mg–Al layered double hydroxide 
nanoparticles from PLA films into a food simulant of 95% ethanol. They 
found that increased nanoparticle loading from 1.8% to 5.5% w/w resulted 
in an increase in the migration of packaging components into the simulant, 
but is still able to conform to the total migration limit of 10 mg/dm2 set 

677
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
by the European Commission (EC) (Schmidt et al., 2011). Lin et al. (2014) 
showed that the migration of these nanomaterials from the packaging to 
the food simulant depends on the compatibility of the nanoparticles with 
the packaging matrix. It was shown that TiO2 nanoparticles of around 
30 nm in PE films diffuse slower compared to nanoparticles of around 
100 nm due to the better incorporation of the smaller nanoparticles into the 
PE matrix. Studies have shown that the initial loading, time, and tempera-
ture are important factors that affect the amount and rate of nanomaterial 
migration from packaging films (Farhoodi et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2014; Ram-
achandraiah et al., 2015).
There are, however, limitations to migration studies. Many studies used 
homogeneous solutions (e.g., 95% or 50% aqueous ethanol and 3% aqueous 
acetic acid) to simulate food matrices, which are significantly more complex 
in composition with multiphase components (Schmidt et al., 2011; Lin et al., 
2014; Farhoodi et al., 2014). These studies neither consider the potential for 
these materials to be absorbed by the gastrointestinal track nor whether 
they simply pass through unchanged. Furthermore, since the amounts of 
nanoparticles that migrate are very low, sample preparation and analysis 
methods have to be chosen carefully to ensure the measurements performed 
are accurate (Bumbudsanpharoke and Ko, 2015).
The release of nanoparticles into the environment at the end of the life-
cycle of the nanocomposite packaging is another area of concern. AgNPs, 
in particular, have gained much attention as their use in consumer prod-
ucts has spread over the recent years. AgNPs possess nonspecific toxic-
ity and could negatively affect bacterial and aquatic populations when 
released into the environment (Oberdörster et al., 2005; Marambio-Jones 
and Hoek, 2010; Prabhu and Poulose, 2012). As such, lifecycle analyses for 
these nanocomposites are needed to ensure they do not have a negative 
impact on the environment when these packaging materials are ultimately 
disposed of.
A potential tool that permits evaluation of nanoclay toxicity is environ-
mental biomonitoring using bioassays or plant genetic models. For exam-
ple, the use of Allium cepa (onion) could be applied as a test organism for 
analysis of compost samples containing nanoclay biocomposites. Allium cepa 
has demonstrated a great potential for environmental monitoring of met-
als, pesticides, and other complex mixtures (Leme and Marin-Morales, 2009). 
One study observed the manifestation of disease in the organs of Wistar 
rats exposed for 90 days to an extract of PLA and MMT-derivative nano-
composite. Tissues were observed using optical microscopy and SEM, while 
inflammation and oxidative stress biomarkers were determined as well. The 
subchronic oral exposure over a 90-day period did not produce significant 
adverse effects in any of the markers studied; however, it is recommended 
more studies are performed in this area over a longer period to confirm toxi-
cological effects (Maisanaba et al., 2014). Yoshida et al. (2012) showed that 
nanosilica particles with an external diameter of 70 nm induced cytotoxicity, 

678
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
reactive oxygen species generation, and DNA damage in rat and human cell 
lines during acute exposure. Adverse effects were reduced by surface modi-
fication with carbonyl and amine groups, and it is speculated that surface 
modification changed cellular distribution of the nanomaterial, considering 
it was previously observed that the unmodified and carbonyl-coated nano-
silica were taken up equally into cells.
21.4.2 Regulation
Currently, there is no universally accepted definition as to what a nanomate-
rial is. Typically, agencies and organizations around the world define a nano-
material as a material having at least one dimension that is less than 100 nm 
(Amenta et al., 2015; Bumbudsanpharoke and Ko, 2015). However, this defi-
nition is inadequate as there may be materials with dimensions larger than 
100 nm which exhibit behavior that is different than that of its bulk counter-
part (USFDA, 2014).
There has also been difficulty in setting regulations on the use of nanoma-
terials in food packaging due to lack of data. The toxicity of nanomaterials is 
affected greatly by both intrinsic (e.g., size, morphology, charge, and function-
alization) and extrinsic (e.g., pH, temperature, agglomeration, and matrix in 
which they are dispersed in) factors, and so there are numerous parameters 
that need to be studied in order to fully understand the hazards associated 
with using these materials. The long-term effects of being exposed to these 
materials also need to be examined (Handy and Shaw, 2007). As a result, a 
large number of studies are needed to fully understand these hazards, mak-
ing risk assessment and regulation with reasonable assumptions difficult at 
this time. A balance that adequately protects consumers from harm without 
discouraging the industry from further investing in and developing these 
technologies is required when regulating these materials.
In the United States, jurisdiction on the use of nanocomposite food pack-
aging falls under the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (Amenta et al., 
2015). The FDA does not have a formal definition for nanomaterials, but 
rather only provides guidelines as to what may be considered as nanomate-
rials (USFDA, 2014). The FDA recommends preliminary safety assessments 
of products that may contain nanomaterials on a case-by-case basis, but 
does not have any specific regulations regarding the use of nanomaterials in 
products (Chau et al., 2007; Amenta et al., 2015). In the European Union, any 
chemical or material, including nanomaterials, have to be registered under 
Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006, called registration, evaluation, authorization, 
and restriction of chemicals (REACH), before it can be commercially used 
(Amenta et al., 2015). This approval process ensures that the material haz-
ards are identified and risk management strategies are employed. Moreover, 
the legislation tends to place the burden of proof of safety on the companies 
that use these materials (European Council and Parliament, 2006). Specific 

679
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
to food packaging, the EU also sets limits on amounts of migrants that are 
allowed to transfer from the packaging material into the food (European 
Commission, 2009).
21.4.3 Public Acceptance
The public perception of using nanomaterials in the food industry is compa-
rable to the consumer perception on genetically modified foods (Scheufele 
and Lewenstein 2005; Chau et al., 2007). In general, many consumers 
are reluctant to embrace these new technologies due to the potential for 
unknown hazards associated with using them. Consumer confidence can be 
improved by further research on the safety of these materials and informing 
consumers of the benefits and risks associated with these products. As more 
data regarding its safety become available and as consumers are more well 
informed on this topic, they will see nanotechnology as one of the tools for 
enhancing the quality and safety of food products, as well as for reducing 
food waste.
Studies have shown that nanotechnology in food packaging is considered 
to be more acceptable to consumers compared to incorporating nanotech-
nology into food products themselves (Siegrist et al., 2007, 2008; Bieberstein 
et al., 2013). This is likely due to the lower perceived risk of incorporating 
them into packaging, where they are not directly consumed by its users. As 
such, the use of nanotechnology-enabled food packaging is likely the first 
step in introducing this concept to the public for the public to gain consumer 
confidence for the use of nanotechnology in the food industry.
21.5 Conclusion
Technologies based on exploiting nanomaterials discussed in the chapter 
can be promising in advancing active and intelligent packaging for meat 
products, in order to enhance the protective and communication functions 
of a meat package. More research and development activities in these areas 
are expected especially to integrate low-cost sensors/indicators fabricated 
from printing sensors/indicators onto meat packaging structures. Edible 
films and coatings incorporated with nanomaterials (e.g., nanocellulose) 
and antimicrobials (e.g., chitosan, nisin, and essential oils) offer unique 
opportunities to improve physical and antimicrobial properties of meat 
packages. To achieve full potential in the marketplace, besides being cost-
effective, the new nanotechnology-based packaging materials must exhibit 
benefits that outweigh the perceived risks of these new materials. Govern-
ing bodies should institute rules and regulations on the basis of sound 
science.

680
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
References
Abdollahi, M., Rezaei, M. and Farzi, G. (2012). A novel active bionanocomposite film 
incorporating rosemary essential oil and nanoclay into Chitosan. Journal of Food 
Engineering, 111(2), 343–350.
Aider, M. (2010). Chitosan application for active bio-based films production and 
potential in the food industry: Review. LWT—Food Science and Technology, 43(6), 
837–842.
Alboofetileh, M., Rezaei, M., Hosseini, H. and Abdollahi, M. (2016). Efficacy of acti-
vated alginate-based nanocomposite films to control L. monocytogenes and spoil-
age flora in rainbow trout slice. Journal of Food Science and Technology, 53(1), 
521–530.
Amenta, V., Aschberger, K., Arena, M. et al. (2015). Regulatory aspects of nanotech-
nology in the agri/feed/food sector in EU and non-EU countries. Regulatory 
Toxicology and Pharmacology, 73(1), 463–476.
Arnon, H., Granit, R., Porat, R. and Poverenov, E. (2015). Development of polysac-
charides-based edible coatings for citrus fruits: A layer-by-layer approach. Food 
Chemistry, 166, 465–472.
Barbosa-Pereira, L., Angulo, I., Lagarón, J. M., Paseiro-Losada, P. and Cruz, J. M. 
(2014). Development of new active packaging films containing bioactive nano-
composites. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 26, 310–318.
Barbut, S. (2015). The Science of Meat and Poultry Processing. Creative Commons 
Open Source. Available at http://www.poultryandmeatprocessing.com/
Beatrice, C. A. G., Branciforti, M. C., Alves, R. M. V. and Bretas, R. E. S. (2010). Rheo-
logical, mechanical, optical, and transport properties of blown films of polyam-
ide 6/residual monomer/montmorillonite nanocomposites. Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science, 116, 3581–3592.
Bieberstein, A., Roosen, J., Marette, S., Blanchemanche, S. and Vandermoere, F. (2013). 
Consumer choices for nano-food and nano-packaging in France and Germany. 
European Review of Agricultural Economics, 40(1), 73–94.
Black, E. P., Cascarino, J., Guan, D. et al. (2010). Coliphage as pressure surrogates for 
enteric viruses in foods. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 11(2), 
239–244.
Boelter, J. F. and Brandelli, A. (2016). Innovative bionanocomposite films of edible 
proteins containing liposome-encapsulated nisin and halloysite nanoclay. Col-
loids and Surfaces: Biointerfaces, 145, 740–747.
Bumbudsanpharoke, N. and Ko, S. (2015). Nano-food packaging: An overview of 
market, migration research, and safety regulations. Journal of Food Science, 80(5), 
R910–R923.
Busolo, M. A. and Lagaron, J. M. (2012). Oxygen scavenging polyolefin nanocom-
posite films containing an iron modified kaolinite of interest in active food 
packaging applications. Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 16, 
211–217.
Camo, J., Beltrán, J. A. and Roncalés, P. (2008). Extension of the display life of lamb 
with an antioxidant active packaging. Meat Science, 80(4), 1086–1091.
Casariego, A., Souza, B. W. S., Cerqueira, M. A. et al. (2009). Chitosan/clay films’ 
properties as affected by biopolymer and clay micro/nanoparticles’ concentra-
tions. Food Hydrocolloids, 23(7), 1895–1902.

681
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
Chau, C. F., Wu, S. H. and Yen, G. C. (2007). The development of regulations for food 
nanotechnology. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 18(5), 269–280.
Che, Y., Yang, X., Loser, S. and Zang, L. (2008). Expedient vapor probing of organic 
amines using fluorescent nanofibers fabricated from an N-type organic semi-
conductor. Nano Letters, 8(8), 2219–2223.
Chibeu, A., Agius, L., Gao, A., Sabour, P. M., Kropinski, A. M. and Balamurugan, S. 
(2013). Efficacy of bacteriophage LISTEXTM P100 combined with chemical anti-
microbials in reducing L. Monocytogenes in cooked turkey and roast beef. Inter-
national Journal of Food Microbiology, 167(2), 208–214.
Dehnad, D., Mirzaei, H., Emam-Djomeh, Z., Jafari, S. M. and Dadashi, S. (2014). Ther-
mal and antimicrobial properties of chitosan-nanocellulose films for extending 
shelf life of ground meat. Carbohydrate Polymers, 109, 148–154.
Dehnavi, A. S., Aroujalian, A., Raisi, A. et al. (2012). Preparation and characterization 
of polyethylene/silver nanocomposite films with antibacterial activity. Journal 
of Applied Polymer Science, 127(2), 1180–1190.
Dias, M. V., De Fátima, N., Soares, F. et al. (2013). Use of allyl isothiocyanate and 
carbon nanotubes in an antimicrobial film to package shredded, cooked chicken 
meat. Food Chemistry, 141(3), 3160–3166.
Dimitrijevic, M., Karabasil, N., Boskovic, M. et al. (2015). Safety aspects of nanotech-
nology applications in food packaging. Procedia Food Science, 5, 57–60.
Dini, C., Islan, G. A., De Urraza, P. J. and Castro, G. R. (2012). Novel biopolymer 
matrices for microencapsulation of phages: Enhanced protection against acidity 
and protease activity. Macromolecular Bioscience, 12(9), 1200–1208.
Dufresne, A., Dupeyre, D. and Vignon, M. (2000). Cellulose microfibrils from potato 
tuber cells: Processing and characterization of starch–cellulose microfibril com-
posites. Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 76, 2080–2092.
Economou, T., Pournis, N., Ntzimani, A. and Savvaidis, I. N. (2009). Nisin-EDTA 
treatments and modified atmosphere packaging to increase fresh chicken meat 
shelf-life. Food Chemistry, 114(4), 1470–1476.
European Commission. (2009). Commission regulation (EC) No. 450/2009 of 29 May 
2009 on active and intelligent materials and articles intended to come into con-
tact with food. Official Journal of European Union, L135.
European Council and Parliament. (2006). Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the 
European Parliament and of the council of 18 December 2006 concerning the 
registration, evaluation, authorisation and restriction of chemicals (REACH), 
establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending directive 1999. Official 
Journal of the European Union, L 396, 1.
Farhoodi, M., Mousavi, S. M., Sotudeh-Gharebagh, R., Emam-Djomeh, Z. and 
Oromiehie, A. (2014). Migration of aluminum and silicon from PET/clay nano-
composite bottles into acidic food simulant. Packaging Technology and Science, 
27(2), 161–168.
Fernandez, A., Torres-Giner, S. and Lagaron, J. M. (2009). Novel route to stabilization 
of bioactive antioxidants by encapsulation in electrospun fibers of zein prola-
mine. Food Hydrocolloids, 23(5), 1427–1432.
Ferrocino, I., Greppi, A., Lastoria, A., Rantsiou, K. and Ercolini, D. (2016). Impact of 
nisin-activated packaging on microbiota of beef burgers during storage. Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology, 82(2), 1–13.
Flanagan, J. and Singh, H. (2006). Microemulsions: A potential delivery system for 
bioactives in food. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, 46(3), 221–237.

682
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Fratianni, F., De Martino, L., Melone, A., De Feo, V., Coppola, R. and Nazzaro, F. 
(2010). Preservation of chicken breast meat treated with thyme and balm essen-
tial oils. Journal of Food Science, 75(8), M528–M535.
Garcia, P., Martinez, B., Rodriguez, L. and Rodriguez, A. (2010b). Synergy between 
the phage endolysin LysH5 and nisin to kill Staphylococcus aureus in pasteurized 
milk. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 141(3), 151–155.
Garcia, P., Rodriguez, L., Rodriguez, A. and Martinez, B. (2010a). Food biopreserva-
tion: Promising strategies using bacteriocins, bacteriophages and endolysins. 
Trends in Food Science and Technology, 21(8), 373–382.
Gill, A. O. and Gill, C. O. (2010). Packaging and the shelf life of fresh red and poultry 
meats. In: Robertson, G. L. (ed.) Food Packaging and Shelf Life: A Practical Guide. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 259–272.
Gupta, S. R. N. (2014). Advances in molecular nanotechnology from premodern to 
modern era. International Journal of Materials Science and Engineering, 2(2), 99–106.
Handy, R. D. and Shaw, B. J. (2007). Toxic effects of nanoparticles and nanomateri-
als: Implications for public health, risk assessment and the public perception of 
nanotechnology. Health, Risk and Society, 9(2), 125–144.
Imran, M., El-Fahmy, S., Revol-Junelles, A. and Desobry, S. (2010). Cellulose deriva-
tive based active coatings: Effects of nisin and plasticizer on physico-chemical 
and antimicrobial properties of hydroxypropyl methylcellulose films. Carbohy-
drate Polymers, 81(2), 219–225.
Islam, M. S., Masoodi, R. and Rostami, H. (2013). The effect of nanoparticles percent-
age on mechanical behavior of silica-epoxy nanocomposites. Journal of Nanosci-
ence, 2013, 1–10.
Jayasena, D. D. and Jo, C. (2013). Essential oils as potential antimicrobial agents in 
meat and meat products: A review. Trends in Food Science and Technology, 34(2), 
96–108.
Kadam, D. M., Wang, C., Wang, S., Grewell, D., Lamsal, B. and Yu, C. (2014). Micro-
structure and antimicrobial functionality of nano-enhanced protein-based 
biopolymers. Transactions of the American Society of Agricultural and Biological 
Engineers, 57(4), 1141–1150.
Kang, T., Guan, R., Song, Y., Lyu, F., Ye, X. and Jiang, H. (2015). Cytotoxicity of zinc 
oxide nanoparticles and silver nanoparticles in human epithelial colorectal ade-
nocarcinoma cells. LWT—Food Science and Technology, 60(2), 1143–1148.
Khan, A., Huq, T., Khan, R. A., Riedl, B. and Lacroix, M. (2012). Nanocellulose based 
composites and bioactive agents for food packaging. Critical Reviews in Food sci-
ence and Nutrition, 54(2), 163–174
Kumar, J. K., Kremsdorf, R., Tabor, S. and Richardson, C. C. (2001). A mutation 
in the gene-encoding bacteriophage T7 DNA polymerase that renders the 
phage temperature-sensitive. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 276(49), 46151–
46159.
Kwok, K. W. H., Auffan, M., Badireddy, A. R. et al. (2012). Uptake of silver nanopar-
ticles and toxicity to early life stages of Japanese medaka (Oryzias latipes): Effect 
of coating materials. Aquatic Toxicology, 120–121, 59–66.
Lavorgna, M., Piscitelli, F., Mangiacapra, P. and Buonocore, G. G. (2010). Study of the 
combined effect of both clay and glycerol plasticizer on the properties of chito-
san films. Carbohydrate Polymers, 82(2), 291–298.
Lawrie, K., Mills, A. and Hazafy, D. (2013). Simple inkjet-printed, UV-activated 
oxygen indicator. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 176, 1154–1159.

683
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
Leme, D. M. and Marin-Morales, M. A. (2009). Allium cepa test in environmental 
monitoring: A review on its application. Mutation Research: Reviews in Mutation 
Research, 682(1), 71–81.
Liu L., Kerry J.P. and Kerry, J.F. (2006). Effect of food ingredients and selected lipids 
on the physical properties of extruded edible films/casings. International Jour-
nal of Food Science and Technology, 41, 295–302.
Lim, L.-T. (2014). Application of nano- and microencapsulated materials to food 
packaging. In: Kwak, H.-S. (ed.) Nano- and Microencapsulation for Foods. Oxford: 
Wiley, pp. 301–323.
Lin, Q.-B., Li, H., Zhong, H.-N., Zhao, Q., Xiao, D.-H. and Wang, Z.-W. (2014). Migra-
tion of Ti from nano-TiO2-polyethylene composite packaging into food simu-
lants. Food Additives and Contaminants: Part A, 0049(June 2015), 1–7.
Lua, Y. Y., Cao, X., Rohrs, B. R. and Aldrich, D. S. (2007). Surface characterizations of 
spin-coated films of ethylcellulose and hydroxypropyl methylcellulose blends. 
Langmuir, 23(8), 4286–4292.
Luechinger, N., Loher, S., Athanassiou, E. K., Grass, R. N. and Stark, W. J. (2007). 
Highly sensitive optical detection of humidity on polymer/metal nanoparticle 
hybrid films. Langmuir, 23(6), 3473–3477.
Lvov, Y. M., Shchukin, D. G. and Price, R. R. (2015). Halloysite clay nanotubes for 
controlled release of protective agents. ACS Nano, 2(5), 814–820.
Ma, Y., Pacan, J. C., Wang, Q., Xu, Y., Huang, X., Korenevsky, A. and Sabour, P. M. 
(2008). Microencapsulation of bacteriophage Felix O1 into chitosan- alginate 
microspheres for oral delivery. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 74(15), 
4799–4805.
Mahony, J., McAuliffe, O., Ross, R. P. and van Sinderen, D. (2011). Bacteriophages 
as biocontrol agents of food pathogens. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 22(2), 
157–163.
Maisanaba, S., Gutiérrez-Praena, D., Puerto, M. et al. (2014). In vivo toxicity evalu-
ation of the migration extract of an organomodified clay-poly(lactic) acid 
nanocomposite. Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health. Part A, 77(13), 
731–746.
Maneewattanapinyo, P., Banlunara, W., Thammacharoen, C., Ekgasit, S. and Kaewa-
matawong, T. (2011). An evaluation of acute toxicity of colloidal silver nanopar-
ticles. Journal of Veterinary Medical Science/Japanese Society of Veterinary Science, 
73(11), 1417–1423.
Marambio-Jones, C. and Hoek, E. M. V. (2010). A review of the antibacterial effects of 
silver nanomaterials and potential implications for human health and the envi-
ronment. Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 12(5), 1531–1551.
Marvig, C. L., Aideh, B., Neve, H., Heller, K. J., Knøchel, S. and Vogensen, F. K. (2011). 
Heat tolerance of dairy lactococcal c2 phages. International Dairy Journal, 21(8), 
556–560.
Md Sin, N. D., Mamat, M. H., Malek, M. F. and Rusop, M. (2013). Fabrication of 
nanocubic ZnO/SnO2 film-based humidity sensor with high sensitivity by 
ultrasonic-assisted solution growth method at different Zn:Sn precursor ratios. 
Applied Nanoscience, 4(7), 829–838.
Meira, S. M. M., Zehetmeyer, G., Scheibel, J. M., Werner, J. O. and Brandelli, A. (2016). 
Starch-halloysite nanocomposites containing nisin: Characterization and inhibi-
tion of Listeria monocytogenes in soft cheese. LWT—Food Science and Technology, 
68, 226–234.

684
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Mihindukulasuriya, S. D. F. and Lim, L.-T. (2013). Oxygen detection using UV-
activated electrospun poly(ethylene oxide) fibers encapsulated with TiO2 
nanoparticles. Journal of Materials Science, 48(16), 5489–5498.
Mills, A. (2005). Oxygen indicators in food packaging. Chemical Society Reviews, 32(12), 
1003–1011.
Mills, A., Grosshans, P. and Hazafy, D. (2010). A novel reversible relative-humidity 
indicator ink based on methylene blue and urea. Analyst, 135(1), 33–35.
Mills, A. and Skinner, G. a. (2010). Water-based colourimetric optical indicators for 
the detection of carbon dioxide. The Analyst, 135, 1912–1917.
Mohammad, F. and Abolghasemi, M. R. (2011). Oxygen barrier and mechanical prop-
erties of masterbatch-based PA6/nanoclay composite films. Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science, 125, E2–E8.
Moomand, K. and Lim, L.-T. (2014). Oxidative stability of encapsulated fish oil in 
electrospun zein fibres. Food Research International, 62, 523–532, Elsevier.
Moran, J. I., Vazquez, A. and Cyras, V. P. (2013). Bio-nanocomposites based on deriva-
tized potato starch and cellulose, preparation and characterization. Journal of 
Materials Science, 48(20), 7196–7203.
Morsy, M. K., Khalaf, H. H., Sharoba, A. M., El-Tanahi, H. H. and Cutter, C. N. (2014). 
Incorporation of essential oils and nanoparticles in pullulan films to control 
foodborne pathogens on meat and poultry products. Journal of Food Science, 
79(4), M675–M684.
Munteanu, B. S., Aytac, Z., Pricope, G. M., Uyar, T. and Vasile, C. (2014). Polylac-
tic acid (PLA)/Silver-NP/VitaminE bionanocomposite electrospun nanofibers 
with antibacterial and antioxidant activity. Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 
16(10), 1–12.
Naas, H., Martinez-Dawson, R., Han, I. and Dawson, P. (2013). Effect of combining 
nisin with modified atmosphere packaging on inhibition of L. monocytogenes in 
ready-to-eat turkey bologna. Poultry Science, 92(7), 1930–1935.
Oberdörster, G., Oberdörster, E. and Oberdörster, J. (2005). Nanotoxicology: An 
emerging discipline evolving from studies of ultrafine particles. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 113(7), 823–839.
Ojijo, V., Cele, H. and Sinha Ray, S. (2011). Morphology and properties of polymer 
composites based on biodegradable polylactide/poly[(butylene succinate)-
co-adipate] blend and nanoclay. Macromolecular Materials and Engineering, 
296(9), 865–877.
Ojijo, V. and Sinha Ray, S. (2013). Processing strategies in bionanocomposites. Progress 
in Polymer Science, 38(10–11), 1543–1589.
Olasupo, N. A., Fitzgerald, D. J., Gasson, M. J. and Narbad, A. (2003). Activity of 
natural antimicrobial compounds against Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica 
serovar Typhimurium. Letters in Applied Microbiology, 37(6), 448–451.
Oliveira, M., Vinas, I., Colas, P., Anguera, M., Usall, J. and Abadias, M. (2014). Effec-
tiveness of a bacteriophage in reducing Listeria monocytogenes on fresh-cut 
fruits and fruit juices. Food Microbiology, 38, 137–142.
Painter, J. A., Hoekstra, R. M., Ayers, T. et al. (2013). Attribution of foodborne ill-
nesses, hospitalizations, and deaths to food commodities by using outbreak 
data, United States, 1998–2008. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 19(3), 407–415.
Panea, B., Ripoll, G., González, J., Fernández-Cuello, Á. and Albertí, P. (2014). Effect of 
nanocomposite packaging containing different proportions of ZnO and Ag on 
chicken breast meat quality. Journal of Food Engineering, 123, 104–112.

685
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
Picouet, P., Fernandez, A., Realini, C. E. and Lloret, E. (2014). Influence of PA6 nano-
composite films on the stability of vacuum-aged beef loins during storage in 
modified atmospheres. Meat Science, 96(1), 574–580.
Pommet, M., Redl, A., Guilbert, S. and Morel, M. (2005) Intrinsic influence of various 
plasticizers on functional properties and reactivity of wheat gluten thermoplas-
tic materials. Journal of Cereal Science, 42, 81–91.
Potara, M., Jakab, E., Damert, A., Popescu, O., Canpean, V. and Astilean, S. (2011). 
Synergistic antibacterial activity of chitosan silver nanocomposites on S. aureus. 
Nanotechnology, 22(13), 135101–135110.
Prabhu, S. and Poulose, E. K. (2012). Silver nanoparticles: Mechanism of antimicrobial 
action, synthesis, medical applications, and toxicity effects. International Nano 
Letters, 2(1), 32.
Pradhan, N., Singh, S., Ojha, N. et al. (2015). Facets of nanotechnology as seen in food 
processing, packaging, and preservation industry. BioMed Research International, 
2015, 1–17.
Puapermpoonsiri, U., Ford, S. J. and van der Walle, C. F. (2010). Stabilization of bac-
teriophage during freeze drying. International Journal of Pharmaceutics, 389(1–2), 
168–175, Elsevier.
Pukanski, B. and Fekete, E. (1999). Adhesion and surface modification. Advances in 
Polymer Science, 139, 109–153.
Ramachandraiah, K., Gu Han, S. and Bok Chin, K. (2015). Nanotechnology in meat 
processing and packaging: Potential applications—A review. Asian-Australasian 
Journal of Animal Sciences, 28(2), 290–302.
Rhim, J. W., Hong, S. I., Park, H. M. and Ng, P. K. W. (2006). Preparation and char-
acterization of chitosan-based nanocomposite films with antimicrobial activity. 
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 54(16), 5814–5822.
Rinaudo, M. (2006). Chitin and chitosan: Properties and applications. Progress in Poly-
mer Science, 31, 603–632.
Robertson, G. L. (2013). Food Packaging: Principles and Practices (3rd Ed.). Boca Raton 
FL: CRC Press, Taylor and Francis, 703p.
Rossi, L., Aleida, R. C. C., Lopes, L. S., Figueiredo, A. C. L., Ramos, M. P. P. and 
Almeida, P. F. (2011). Occurrence of Listeria spp. in Brazilian fresh sausage and 
control of L. monocytogenes using bacteriophage P100. Food Control, 22(6), 954–
958.
Sanchez-Garcia, M. D., Ocio, M. J., Gimenez, E. and Lagaron, J. M. (2008). Novel 
polycaprolactone nanocomposites containing Thymol of interest in antimicro-
bial film and coating applications. Journal of Plastic Film and Sheeting, 24(3–4), 
239–251.
Scallan, E., Hoekstra, R. M., Angulo, F. J. et al. (2011). Foodborne illness acquired in 
the United States-major pathogens. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 17(1), 7–15.
Scheufele, D. A. and Lewenstein, B. V. (2005). The public and nanotechnology: How 
citizens make sense of emerging technologies. Journal of Nanoparticle Research, 
7(6), 659–667.
Schmidt, B., Katiyar, V., Plackett, D. et al. (2011). Migration of nanosized layered dou-
ble hydroxide platelets from polylactide nanocomposite films. Food Additives 
and Contaminants: Part A, 28(7), 956–966.
Sengwa, R. J. and Choudhary, S. (2012). Dielectric properties and structural dynamics 
of melt compounded hot-pressed poly(ethylene oxide)-organophilic montmo-
rillonite clay nanocomposite films. Bulletin of Materials Science, 35(1), 19–25.

686
Advanced Technologies for Meat Processing, Second Edition
Siegrist, M., Cousin, M. E., Kastenholz, H. and Wiek, A. (2007). Public acceptance of 
nanotechnology foods and food packaging: The influence of affect and trust. 
Appetite, 49(2), 459–466.
Siegrist, M., Stampfli, N., Kastenholz, H. and Keller, C. (2008). Perceived risks and 
perceived benefits of different nanotechnology foods and nanotechnology food 
packaging. Appetite, 51(2), 283–290.
Singala, K. J., Mungray, A. A. and Mungray, A. K. (2012). Degradation behavior of 
polypropylene—Organically modified clay nanocomposites. Industrial and 
Engineering Chemistry Research, 51, 10557–10564.
Singla, S., Harjai, K., Raza, K., Wadhwa, S., Katare, O.P. and Chhibber, S. (2016). Phos-
pholipid vesicles encapsulated bacteriophage: A novel approach to enhance 
phage biodistribution. Journal of Virological Methods, 236, 68–76.
Soni, K. A., and Nannapaneni, R. (2010). Bacteriophage significantly reduces Listeria 
monocytogenes on raw salmon fillet tissue. Journal of Food Protection, 73(1), 32–38.
Srinivasa, P. C. and Tharanathan, R. N. (2007). Chitin/chitosan—Safe, ecofriendly pack-
aging materials with multiple potential uses. Food Reviews International, 23(1), 53–72.
Sundaram, J., Park, B., Kwon, Y. and Lawrence, K. C. (2013). Surface enhanced 
Raman scattering (SERS) with biopolymer encapsulated silver nanosubstrates 
for rapid detection of foodborne pathogens. International Journal of Food Micro-
biology, 167(1), 67–73.
Tang, Z., Huang, X., Baxi, S., Chambers, J. R., Sabour, P. M. and Wang, Q. (2013). Whey 
protein improves survival and release characteristics of bacteriophage felix O1 
encapsulated in alginate microspheres. Food Research International, 52(2), 460–466.
Tornuk, F., Hancer, M., Sagdic, O. and Yetim, H. (2015). LLDPE based food packaging 
incorporated with nanoclays grafted with bioactive compounds to extend shelf 
life of some meat products. LWT—Food Science and Technology, 64(2), 540–546.
Travan, A., Pelillo, C., Donati, I. et al. (2009). Non-cytotoxic silver nanoparticle-
polysaccharide nanocomposites with antimicrobial activity. Biomacromolecules, 
10(6), 1429–1435. USFDA. 2007. Agency Response Letter GRAS Notice No. 
GRN 000198.
USFDA. (2014). Guidance for Industry—Considering whether an FDA-Regulated Product 
Involves the Application of Nanotechnology. Silver Springs, MD: US FDA.
Varshney, M., Yang, L., Su, X.-L. and Li, Y. (2005). Magnetic nanoparticle-antibody 
conjugates for the separation of Escherichia coli O157:H7 in ground beef. Jour-
nal of Food Protection, 68(9), 1804–1811.
Varshney, M., Li, Y., Srinivasan, B. and Tung, S. (2007). A label-free, microfluidics and 
interdigitated array microelectrode-based impedance biosensor in combination 
with nanoparticles immunoseparation for detection of Escherichia coli O157:H7 
in food samples. Sensors and Actuators, B: Chemical, 128(1), 99–107.
Vivekanandhan, S., Christensen, L., Misra, M. and Amar, K. M. (2012). Green pro-
cess for impregnation of silver nanoparticles into microcrystalline cellulose and 
their antimicrobial bionanocomposite films. Journal of Biomaterials and Nanobio-
technology, 3(3), 371–376.
Vonasek, E., Le, P. and Nitin, N. (2014). Encapsulation of bacteriophages in whey 
protein films for extended storage and release. Food Hydrocolloids, 37, 7–13.
Wang, S. F., Shen, L., Tong, Y. J. et al. (2005). Biopolymer chitosan/montmorillon-
ite nanocomposites: Preparation and characterization. Polymer Degradation and 
Stability, 90(1), 123–131.

687
Nanotechnology-Based Packaging Materials for Fresh and Processed Meats
Wang, S., Singh, A. K., Senapati, D., Neely, A., Yu, H. and Ray, P. C. (2010). Rapid colo-
rimetric identification and targeted photothermal lysis of Salmonella bacteria by 
using bioconjugated oval-shaped gold nanoparticles. Chemistry—A European 
Journal, 16(19), 5600–5606.
Xu, Y., Ren, X. and Hanna, M. A. (2006). Chitosan/clay nanocomposite film prepara-
tion and characterization. Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 99(4), 1684–1691.
Zhang, W. H. and De Zhang, W. (2008). Fabrication of SnO2-ZnO nanocomposite sen-
sor for selective sensing of trimethylamine and the freshness of fishes. Sensors 
and Actuators, B: Chemical, 134(2), 403–408.
Yoshida, T., Yoshioka, Y., Matsuyama, K., Nakazato, Y., Tochigi, S., Hirai, T., et al. 
(2012). Surface modification of amorphous nanosilica particles suppresses 
nanosilica-induced cytotoxicity, ROS generation, and DNA damage in various 
mammalian cells. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 427(4), 
748–752.
Zhang, Y. and Lim, L.-T. (2016). Inkjet-printed CO2 colorimetric indicators. Talanta, 
161, 105–113.


689
Index
A
ACE inhibitory peptides, see 
Angiotensin I-converting 
enzyme inhibitory peptides
Acetate, glucose vs., 364–366
Acetic acid, 364
Acousto-optic tunable filter (AOTF), 
29–30
Acrylamide, 387
Active packaging (AP) systems, 618, 654
antimicrobial, see Antimicrobial 
active packaging
bacteriocins in, 577–579
components, 638–640
Additives, 216, 238
Aging of meats, 373
AgNP, see Silver nanoparticle
β-Agonists, 174
Agricultural Research Service (ARS), 49
Agrobacterium tumefaciens, 4
Alanyl aminopeptidase, 449
Aliphatic hydrocarbons, 323
Allergens, 419–420
Allium cepa, 677
Amino acid(s), 422–423
catabolism, 604–605
Amortization cost, 289
Analysis of spectral differences (ASD), 44
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) test, 68
Angiotensin I-converting enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitory peptides, 373, 
375–378
Animal by-products, 383
Animal production strategies, see Raw 
meat, animal production 
strategies for
ANN, see Artificial neural networks
ANOVA test, see Analysis of variance 
test
Antihypertensive peptides, 375–378
Antimicrobial(s), 238
activity, 549
agents, addition of, 216
ions, 658–660
peptides, 382, 384
properties, 526–528
proteins, 663–664
Antimicrobial active packaging
antimicrobial ions, 658–660
antimicrobial proteins and peptides, 
663–664
bacteriophage, 661–663
halloysite, 655
liposomes, 656
polyphenols, 655
summary of, 657
thymol, 654
Antioxidants
addition of, 217
properties, 523–525
and vitamins, 413–414, 424–427
Antioxidative peptides, 378–379
Anti-Stokes Raman scattering, 84
Antithrombotic peptides, 381–382
AOTF, see Acousto-optic tunable filter
AP, see Active packaging
Aqueous smoke condensates, see Liquid 
smoke flavorings
Area scanning mode, 31
Area under the curve (AUC), 44
ARS, see Agricultural Research Service
Artificial neural networks (ANN), 42
Aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylases, 325
Ascorbic acid, 426
ASD, see Analysis of spectral differences
Asini Corii Collas, 388
Aspergillus, 377
AUC, see Area under the curve
Autoxidation, meat, 630
B
Bacillus cereus, 637
BacJ1, 565
“Background toughness,” 268

690
Index
Backward interval partial least squares 
(biPLS), 44
Bacteria foodborne infection, qPCR 
detection
Campylobacter, 127
Listeria monocytogenes, 122–124
Salmonella detection, 119–122
verotoxin-producing E. coli, 124–126
Yersinia, 127–129
Bacteria foodborne intoxications, qPCR 
detection
Clostridium botulinum, 131–132
Staphylococcus aureus, 129–131
Bacterial rapid detection using optical 
scattering technology 
(BARDOT), 166
Bacterial starter cultures, 598–599
color, 601–602
flavor formation, 602–606
probiotic, 606–608
with protective, 599–600
texture, 601
Bacteriocins, 238
appearance of resistant strains, 
582–585
application of, 563
industrial application and regulatory 
aspects, 584
interaction with meat components, 
579–581
microbial flora, 559
preservation technologies, 575, 576
Bacteriophage, 661–663
Band-interleaved-by-line (BIL) format, 24
Band-interleaved-by-pixel (BIP) format, 
24
Band sequential (BSQ) format, 25
BARDOT, see Bacterial rapid detection 
using optical scattering 
technology
Barrier film materials, 633–634
Batch-pilot equipment, 265
BAX® system real-time polymerase 
chain reaction assay, 1247
Bayesian classification, 36
“Bay region” dihydrodiol epoxides, 325
Beef, 98–100
high-oxygen packaging of, 628
peptide in, 373, 385
Benchtop Raman devices, 86
Benzo[a] pyrene (BaP) content
in charcoal-grilled frankfurters, 324
diffusion coefficients for, 347
methanolic solution, 340
Biacore® Q biosensor, 176
Bifidobacterium, 383
BIL format, see Band-interleaved-by-line 
format
Bioactive peptides, 372, 374, 389, 422
ACE inhibitory peptide, 375–378
antimicrobial peptides, 382
antioxidative peptides, 378–379
antithrombotic peptides, 381–382
from by-products, 383–384
hypocholesterolemic peptides, 381
immunomodulatory peptides, 
380–381
opioid peptides, 379–380
Bioinformatics, 390
Biological sensors, 154
BIOPEP database, 390
Biopreservation, 563
Biosensors, 670–671
optical fiber-based, 159
recognition elements in, 155
BIP format, see Band-interleaved-by-
pixel format
biPLS, see Backward interval partial 
least squares
“Black-smoked,” 322
Blending, 519
Blood, by-product of meat industry, 383
Bone detection, in chicken, 52–55
Bone marrow, in meat, 628
Botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT), 131
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy 
(BSE), 1
Bran, 477
Branched-chain amino acids, 605
Breaded meat products, 495
Breading system, 495
Brine curing, 517–518
Brine injection, 273
Brining, 302–303
Broadband illumination sources, 27
BSQ format, see Band sequential format
Butyric acid, 363

691
Index
C
Calcium-activated factor, 537
Calcium-activated neutral proteinases, 
537
Calcium-dependent proteases, 537
Callipyge lamb meat, 272
Calpains, 374, 537
Campylobacter, 127
C.jejuni, 140–141, 562, 636
CAP, see Controlled atmosphere 
packaging
Capillary electrophoresis (CE), 277
Carbohydrate
based extenders/proteins, 492
catabolism, 603
Carbon dioxide, 618, 621–623
Carbon monoxide, 620, 625–626
Carboxypeptidases, 538
Carcinogens, 419
L-Carnitine, 422
Carotenoids, 426
Carrageenan gum, 471
Casecidin, 382
Casein-derived peptides, 380
Casomorphins, 379
Catacondensed PAHs, 320
Cathepsin, 276
Cavitation, 282
CCD, see Charge-coupled device
CCMP, see Cooked cured meat pigment
CCR, see Correct classification rate
cDNA, see Complementary DNA
Cell-free culture supernatants (CFS), 565
Cellulose-peelable casing, 340
Charcoal grilling, 324
Charge-coupled device (CCD), 19, 85, 
166
Chemical contamination
electromechanical sensors, 177–182
optical sensors, 176–177
veterinary drug residues, 171–175
Chemical sensors, recognition elements 
in, 155
Chemometric principal component 
analysis (CPCA), 67
Chemometric techniques, 39
Chicken
brine injection, 273
HDP treatment of, 272
meat, 664
Cholesterol, 417–418
Chopping, 519
Cigarette smoking, 325
Ciprofloxacin, 173
CLAs, see Conjugated linoleic acids
Clavicle, 54
CLB, see Clenbuterol (CLB)
Clenbuterol (CLB), 175
Clostridium botulinum, 131–132, 561, 571, 
636
Clostridium perfringens, 562, 637
clpP, 139
CLSM, see Confocal laser scanning 
microscopy
Clupea harengus, 340
Clustered regularly interspaced short 
palindromic repeat (CRISPR) 
technology, 5
CMOS cameras, see Complementary 
metal oxide semiconductor 
cameras
Cold plasma technology (CPT), 304–308
Collagen, 384, 387, 388
Color
attributes, fat, 468
changes, in cooked meat, 212–213
of meat, 601–602, 649
Colorimetric indicators, 667–670
Complementary DNA (cDNA), 358
Complementary metal oxide 
semiconductor (CMOS) 
cameras, 26, 30
“Compton effect,” 202
“Compton electron,” 202
Computer vision, 19
Conducting organic polymers (CPs), 169
Confocal laser scanning microscopy 
(CLSM), 278, 279
Conjugated linoleic acids (CLAs), 361
Controlled atmosphere packaging 
(CAP), 618
Cooked cured meat pigment (CCMP), 519
Cooked meat
color changes in, 212–213
emulsions, fat in, 467
products, 567–571, 629–630

692
Index
vacuum vs. MAP packaging, 
631–632
Correct classification rate (CCR), 43
Cost analysis of HDP technology, 286
equipment, 287–289
packaging, 286
quantifying meat benefits, 289
CPCA, see Chemometric principal 
component analysis
CPs, see Conducting organic polymers
CPT, see Cold plasma technology
Cq, see Quantification cycle
Crossline-markers, 52
Cross-validation, 43
Ct, see Threshold cycle
Cured-and-cooked meat products, 
567–571, 629–630
vacuum vs. MAP packaging, 631–632
D
Decontamination of meat, 300–301
Denaturation process, 672
Designing meat products, 516
DHA, see Docosahexaenoic acid
Dibenzo[a,h]pyrene (DBa,hP), 325
Dietary fiber, 423, 424
Dietary salt intake, 444
Differential gene expression, 358
Digestible oligosaccharides (DOs), 478
Dipeptidylpeptidases (DPP), 536, 537
DNA bases detection strategies, 7, 10
polymerase chain reaction-based 
methods, 10–11
sequencing, 11–13
DNA isolation, 114
Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 464, 465
Dos, see Digestible oligosaccharides
DPP, see Dipeptidylpeptidases
Drip loss, 71
Dry-cured ham, 450, 451
data analysis, 550–552
peptidomics, applications of, 545–550
protein mass fingerprint approach, 
544
from traditional proteomics to 
peptidomics, 545
Dry-cured meats, proteolysis in, 542
Dry curing method, 516–517
Dry-fermented sausages, 451
Durethan®, 654
E
Edible coatings, 671–674
Edible films, nanostructured, 671–674
Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), 464, 465
EIS, see Electrochemical impedance 
spectroscopy
Electric nose, 57
Electrochemical biosensors, 167
Electrochemical impedance 
spectroscopy (EIS), 168
Electrochemical sensors, 167–168
Electromagnetic waves, 21
Electromechanical sensors, 167–168, 
177–182
Electron beam, 203
Electronic nose-based sensors, 169–170
Emerging technologies
cold plasma technology, 304–308
light-based technologies, 308–310
pulsed electric field, 303–304
ultrasound, see Ultrasound 
technology
EMSC, see Extended multiplicative 
signal correction
Emulsified lipid gel, 488
Emulsified meat products, 465, 466, 
492–493
heat treatment, 468
Emulsion gels, 491
Endolysins, see Lysins
Endopeptidases, 373, 537, 540–541
Enterobacteriaceae family, 572
Enterococci, use of, 574
Enterococcus strains, 574
Enterotoxigenic strains, 561
Enzymatic amplification, of DNA, 8
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA), 9
EPA, see Eicosapentaenoic acid
Ergosterol, 324
Escherichia coli, 561
E.coli O157:H7, 284, 285, 635–636, 656
Esters, 606
Ethylene vinyl acetate (EVA), 634, 655
Ethylene vinyl alcohol, 633–634

693
Index
European Food Safety Agency (EFSA), 3
European Union, 678
Exopeptidases, 537–538, 541–543
Explosives, in food industry, 263
Extended multiplicative signal 
correction (EMSC), 39
Exterior film materials, 633
F
“Farmhouse smoked,” 322
Fat, 417–418
content, 59
deposition model, 365
and fatty acid profile, 420–422
mimetics, 471
substitutes, 471
Fat consumption, health implications, 
462–463
mono and polyunsaturated fatty 
acids, 464–465
saturated fatty acids, 463–464
Fat reduction, in processed meats, 462
challenges of, 492–495
as fat source, 465–466
flavor and taste, 467
insoluble fibers, 474–478
lipid reformulation using vegetable 
oils, 483–491
mono and polyunsaturated fatty 
acids, 464–465
perception of satiety, 469
physicochemical properties, 467–468
saturated fatty acids, 463–464
soluble fibers, 478–483
strategies for, 469–491
texture, 466–467
use of structured lipids, 488–491
Fat replacers
effects on meat products, 479–481
gums, 471–472
nonprotein extenders, 471
protein-based, 473–474
starch derivatives, 472–473
Fatty acids
fat and, 420–422
ώ-3 fatty acids, 361
oxidation, 605–606
in pigs, 408–411
in ruminants, 412
synthesis
conjugated linoleic acids as 
regulators, 361–364
de novo, 365
primary precursor for, 364
Feed forward neural network, 42
Fermentation
of by-product, 384
of meats, 374
Fermented foods
production of, 597
purpose, 598
Fermented meat products, 465, 493–494
Fermented sausages, 468, 493
Fiber-optic approach, 157
Fibers, as functional ingredients, 
474–483
Fickian laws of diffusion, 335, 339
Fish
chemical compositions, 58–60
differentiation and classification, 62
freshness, 57–58
microbial spoilage, 61–62
parasites and defects, 60–61
Fisher’s linear discriminant (FLD), 67
Flat-field correction, 32–33
Flavor, 467
characteristics, 525–526
formation, 602
amino acid catabolism, 604–605
carbohydrate catabolism, 603
esters, 606
fatty acid oxidation, 605–606
lipid hydrolysis, 605
protein hydrolysis, 603–604
FLD, see Fisher’s linear discriminant
Flexible packaging film, 632–634
barrier materials, 633–634
exterior materials, 633
sealant materials, 634
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 
678
Foodborne botulism, 131
Foodborne diseases, 157
Food contamination, 159
Food-grade coatings, 673
Food irradiation, 199–204

694
Index
Food packaging applications, 
nanotechnology for, 648
Food safety, 281
Food Safety and Inspection Service 
(FSIS), 48
Foods for specified health use (FOSHU), 
404
Formulating, meat products, 515–516
FOSHU, see Foods for specified health use
FOSs, see Fructooligosaccharides
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) 
spectroscopy, 164–165
Free-radical oxidation, 210
Free solution conjugate electrophoresis 
(FSCE), 542
Fresh beef, color, 656
Fresh meat, 273
carbon monoxide, 619
case-ready packaging, 641
high hydrostatic pressure on, 247–257
MAP systems, 627–629
nitrite-containing film, 639
nitrogen, 623
vacuum packaging, 631
vacuum vs. MAP, 630–631
Fructooligosaccharides (FOSs), 478, 479
FSAs, see saturated fatty acids
FSCE, see Free solution conjugate 
electrophoresis
FSIS, see Food Safety and Inspection 
Service
FTIR spectroscopy, see Fourier 
transform infrared 
spectroscopy
Functionality modification, 274–276
Functional meat products
allergens, 419–420
antioxidants and vitamins, 424–427
definition of, 404
development of, 415, 416
fat and cholesterol, 417–418
fatty acid profile, 420–422
meat and, 405–429
minerals, 427
nitrite, 419
other compounds, 427–429
prebiotics and probiotics, 423–424
proteins, peptides, and amino acids, 
422–423
raw meat, see Raw meat, animal 
production strategies for
safety and scientific criteria, 428
sodium and phosphate, 418–419
Fungal contamination detection, 
sensors for, 160, 161
Furanones, 387
Furans, 387
G
Gadus morhua, 60
Galactomannans, 472
Gamma rays, 202
Gaseous amines production, 669
Gastrointestinal proteolysis, 373
Gaussian maximum likelihood (GML), 
61
Gel from emulsion, formation of, 490
GenBank, 358
Generally recognized as safe (GRAS), 
473, 570, 584
Genetic algorithms (GAs), 44
Genetically modified (GM) farm 
animals
authorization process, 3
clustered regularly interspaced short 
palindromic repeat system, 5
detection options, 7
DNA bases detection strategies, 10–13
DNA level modification, 5
field use of, 3–4
microinjection, 4
protein-based detection strategies, 
7–10
protein level modification, 6
quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction methods, 13–14
quantitative protein methods, 13
traceability process, 1
Genetically modified organisms 
(GMOs), 2
Genetics, for animal fats reduction, 
407–408
GLGCM method, see Gray-level gradient 
co-occurrence matrix method
Glucose, vs. acetate, 364–366
Glycine, 387
Glycosylated peptides, 383

695
Index
gmk gene, 139
GML, see Gaussian maximum 
likelihood
Goat placenta, 384
Gram-negative bacteria, 582
Gram-negative pathogens, 567
GRAS, see Generally recognized as safe
Grass-fed beef, 356
Gray-level gradient co-occurrence 
matrix (GLGCM) method, 58
Grilling, 324
Guar gum, 472
Gums, 471–472
H
Halloysite (HT), 655
Halogen lamps, 27
HDL, see Highdensity lipoprotein
HDP, see Hydrodynamic pressure 
processing
Heat-treated pork, 94–95
Hemoglobin, 384
Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS), 561
Hemorphins, 380
Hemorrhagic colitis, 561
HHP, see High hydrostatic pressure
HI, see Hyperspectral imaging
Highdensity lipoprotein (HDL), 464
High hydrostatic pressure (HHP)
and bacteriocins, 575–577
consumer acceptance of, 244
limitations of, 247–257
Listeria monocytogenes inactivation, 
230–232
microbial inactivation during, 230, 
232–241
multipulsed treatment, 238–239
quality attributes, effect on, 241
Highly unsaturated omega-3 fatty acids 
(HUFAs), 360, 361
High-performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC), 18, 
329
High-pressure processing (HPP)
hydrodynamic pressure processing 
vs., 260
for structural modification, 274
for tenderness improvement, 269
HILIC, see Hydrophilic interaction 
liquid chromatography
Housekeeping genes, 117
HPLC, see High-performance liquid 
chromatography
HPP, see High-pressure processing
HT, see Halloysite
HUFAs, see Highly unsaturated 
omega-3 fatty acids
Human foodborne viruses, 141
Humidity detection, in meat packaging, 
667
Hurdle concept, 239–240, 638
Hydrodynamic pressure processing 
(HDP), 260
bacterial inactivation, 283
cost analysis of, 286–291, 289–291
improving meat safety, 281–285
modification of functionality, 274–276
molecular and structural effects, 
276–280
shock wave technology, see Shock 
wave technology
tenderness, effect on, 269, 270, 271, 
272
vs. high-pressure processing, 260
Hydrodyne process, 263, 284
Hydrophilic interaction liquid 
chromatography (HILIC), 542
Hydrophilic peptides, 604
Hypercube, for salmon fillet, 23
Hyperspectral imaging (HI), 166
acquisition, 24–26
basic principles, 20–22
data structure, 22–23
fluorescence/reflectance imaging, 53
image sensing modes, 23–24
instruments
area detectors, 30
illumination unit, 27–28
system calibration, 30–33
wavelength dispersion devices, 
28–30
system calibration
flat-field correction, 32–33
spatial calibration, 31
spectral calibration, 31–32
Hypocholesterolemic peptides, 381

696
Index
I
IAC, see Internal amplification control
IARC, see Working Group of 
International Agency for 
Research on Cancer
IEC, see Ion exchange chromatography
Image segmentation, 33–34
spectral image segmentation, 36
thresholding and morphological 
processing, 34–36
Image sensing modes, 23–24
IMF, see Intramuscular fat
Immunological protein detection 
methods, 9
Immunomagnetic separation (IMS), 670
Immunomodulatory peptides, 380–381
Impedance biosensors, 168
Imperm®, 654
IMS, see Immunomagnetic separation
IN, see Inulin
Inelastic scattering, 84
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA), 359
Injected meat product, 274
Inoculation, of meat products, 563
Insoluble fibers, 474–478
Instrumentation, of hyperspectral 
imaging, 26
Intelligence packaging
biosensors, 670–671
colorimetric indicators, 667–670
Interactance mode, 24
Internal amplification control (IAC), 118
Interval partial least squares (iPLS), 44
Intramuscular fat (IMF), 356
adipocytes, 364, 365
deposition, 357
glucose vs. acetate, as precursors, 
364–366
Inulin (IN), 478, 479, 480
Ion exchange chromatography (IEC), 542
Iota carrageenan, 472
IPA, see Ingenuity Pathway Analysis
iPLS, see Interval partial least squares
Irradiated meat
color changes, mechanism of, 
213–215
consumer acceptance of, 215–216
Irradiated raw meat, color changes in, 
212–213
Irradiation dose, 205
Isracidin, 382
K
Kappa carrageenan, 472
L
β-Lactam antibiotics, 172
Lactic acid, 216
Lactic acid bacteria (LAB), 540, 563, 598, 
600
Lactobacillus acidophilus, 607
Lactobacillus casei, 607
Lactobacillus curvatus, 378, 598, 599, 603, 
604, 608
Lactobacillus curvatus CRL705, 566
Lactobacillus gasseri, 607
Lactobacillus paracasei, 607
Lactobacillus plantarum, 598, 599, 603, 604, 
608
Lactobacillus sakei, 378, 565, 573, 598, 599, 
603, 604
Lactococcus lactis, 663
α-Lactorphin, 379–380
Lamb, 95–98
Lasers, 27
Lauric acid, 463
LCTF, see Liquid crystal tunable filter
LDA, see Linear discrimination analysis
LDPE, see Low-density polyethylene
Lean animals, 356
Lean meats
fat content in, 465
fat reduction and selection, 470
Least squares-support vector machine 
(LS-SVM) model, 58
LEDs technology, see Light-emitting 
diodes technology
Leucine, 363
Ligand-forming compounds, 213
Light-based technologies, 308–310
applications, 310
efficacy of, factors affecting, 309
UV light, 310

697
Index
Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) 
technology, 27
Light-scattering sensors, 166
Linear discrimination analysis (LDA), 41
Linear low-density polyethylene 
(LLDPE), 656
Line scanning method, 24, 31
Lipid hydrolysis, 605
Lipidomics, 358
Lipid oxidation, 209–210, 628
of meat and meat products, 241–242
Lipid peroxidation, 425
Lipid reformulation, using vegetable 
oils, 483–491, 484
Lipogenesis, 361
Lipolysis, 493, 605
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 582
Liquid crystal tunable filter (LCTF), 
29–30
Liquid media, 335–339
Liquid smoke flavorings (LSFs), 324, 
326–328
Listeria innocua, 568
Listeria monocytogenes, 637, 673
in beef frankfurters, 284, 285
in foodborne illness, 122–124, 560
growth of, 382
inhibition of, 565, 570, 577
RT-qPCR evaluation, 139–140
LLDPE, see Linear low-density 
polyethylene
Locust gum, 472
Long-chain fatty acids, 360–364
Longissimus thoracis, 279, 280
Low-density polyethylene (LDPE), 329, 
331
liquid media and, 335–339
Low-energy electromagnetic radiations, 
202
Low-salt foods
dry-fermented sausages, 451
manufacturing strategies for, 
445–446
Low-temperature long-time treatment 
(LTLT), 273
LS-SVM model, see Least squares-
support vector machine model
LTLT, see Low-temperature long-time 
treatment
Lutein, 426
Lycopene, 426
Lysins, 663
M
Machine learning methods, 41
Maillard reaction
Amadori compound and, 385–386
of amino compounds and reducing 
sugars, 386
and meat, 386–387
Maillard reaction products (MRPs), 372
bioactivities, from peptides, 387–388
in cooked meat, 386
of enzymatic hydrolysates, 387
volatile, 388–389
MALDI-ToF MS, see Matrix-assisted 
laser desorption/ionization 
time-of-flight mass 
spectrometry
Maltodextrin, 473
MAP, see Modified atmospheric 
packaging
Marbling, 64
Marinated meat products, 494
Mass spectrometry (MS), 10
Master-pack approach, 620
Matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization time-of-flight mass 
spectrometry (MALDI-ToF 
MS), 544
Meat components/additives, 579–581
Meat composition, 205
Meat contamination monitoring
chemical contamination, 170–182
microbial contamination, 157–191
Meat decontamination, by irradiation
control of quality changes, 216–218
food irradiation, 199–204
microbial decontamination, 204–208
Meat emulsions, 492
Meat matrix, 465
Meat packaging systems, 
nanotechnology-based
antimicrobial active packaging, 
see Antimicrobial active 
packaging

698
Index
enhanced barrier using nanoclay, 
651–652
intelligence packaging, see 
Intelligence packaging
nanoclay composites in, 653–654
nanostructured edible films and 
coatings, 671–674
packaging format, 650
societal implications, 675–679
Meat products, as fat source, 465–466
Meat protein-derived peptides, 372–375, 
389
aging of meats, 373
bioactivities of, see Bioactive peptides
enzymatic treatment, 374–375
fermentation of meats, 374
gastrointestinal proteolysis, 373
Meat quality/safety assessment
fish, 56–62
poultry carcass, see Poultry carcass
red meats, 62–72
Meat tenderization, 64, 375
biological interventions for, 268
brine injection, 273
chemical interventions for, 269
effect of ultrasound, 301–302
hydrodynamic pressure processing, 
269–272
low-temperature long-time 
treatment, 273
Meat tissue, 580
Melanoidins, 386
Melt processing, 652
Metabolomics, 358
Metal oxide nanoparticles, 676
Metal–oxide–semiconductor fieldeffect 
transistors (MOSFETs), 169
Metal-oxide-semiconductors (MOSs), 
169, 170
Metal–oxide–semiconductors (MOSs), 169
MFD, see Milk fat depression
Microbial contamination
electrochemical and 
electromechanical sensors, 
167–168
electronic nose-based sensors, 
169–170
fourier transform infrared 
spectroscopy, 164–165
light-scattering sensors, 166
optical fibers and microarrays, 
159–163
sensors for, 160, 161
Microbial inactivation, 232–241, 306
Microbial metabolism, 627
Microbial proteolytical system
endopeptidases, 540–541
exopeptidases, 541–543
Micrococcus luteus, 384
Microcrystalline cellulose (MCC), 660
Microencapsulation, 607
Microinjection, 4
microRNA, 359
Milk caseins, hydrolysates of, 380
Milk clotting, 381
Milk fat depression (MFD), 362
Minerals, 414–416, 427
MLR, see Multiple linear regression
Modified atmosphere packaging (MAP), 
306, 616
active packaging components, 
638–640
applications of, 620
barrier film materials, 633–634
carbon monoxide, 629
component in hurdle concept, 638
cured-and-cooked meat products, 
629–630
definitions, 617–618
dynamic headspace changes, 626–627
exterior film materials, 633
fresh chicken meat, 664
gases used in, 620–627
high-oxygen, 627–628
intelligent packaging, 667
leakers and package integrity, 640
packaged meats, 669
on pathogens effects, 635–637
purpose of, 619–620
regulatory issues, 640–641
rigid materials, 634
sealant materials, 634
vacuum packaging vs., 630–631
Modified atmospheric packaging 
(MAP), 306, 651
Monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), 
464–465
Montmorillonite (MMT), 651, 652, 654

699
Index
Mosaic principal component analysis 
(MPCA), 67
MOSs, see Metal-oxide-semiconductors
MPCA, see Mosaic principal component 
analysis
MpHHP, see Multipulsed high 
hydrostatic pressure
MRPs, see Maillard reaction products
MSC, see Multiplicative scatter 
correction
MUFAs, see Monounsaturated fatty 
acids
Multiple linear regression (MLR), 42
Multiple-needle pumping, 518
Multiplicative scatter correction (MSC), 
37
Multipulsed high hydrostatic pressure 
(MpHHP), 238–239
Multivariate analysis
classification, 39–41
model evaluation, 43–44
regression, 41–42
Multivariate regression, 41–42
Murein hydrolases, see Lysins
Muscle proteolytic system
endopeptidases, 537
exopeptidases, 537–538
Musculus longissimus dorsi, 63
Musculus semimembranosus, 281
Myofibrillar proteins, 492
Myristic acid, 463
N
NAFLD, see Nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease
Nanoclay, 651
composites, in meat packaging, 
653–654
enhanced barrier using, 651–652
toxicity, 677
Nanocomposite films, 673
Nanoencapsulation, 648
Nanomaterial implementation, 
for enhanced sensing 
performance, 156–157
Nanomaterials
incorporation of, 649
public perception of, 679
regulation, 678–679
toxicity of, 678
Nanoparticles, toxicity of, 676
Nanotechnology
in food industry, 647–650
in packaging food, 679
NASH, see Nonalcoholic steato 
hepatitis
Native granular, 482
NDOs, see Nondigestible 
oligosaccharides
Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS), 19
Negative polymerase chain reaction 
control, 118
NIRS, see Near-infrared spectroscopy
Nisin, 238, 564, 663
Nitrite, 419, 519
Nitrite curing, 519–528
Nitrite/nitrate, 601
Nitrogen, 618, 623–624
Nitrogen gas, 620
Nitrogen oxide (NO), 601
N-nitrosamines, 515
nlpD, 139
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD), 360
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), 
360
Nondigestible oligosaccharides (NDOs), 
478
Nonglycosylated peptides, 383
Nonprotein extenders, 471
Nontemplate polymerase chain reaction 
control, 118
Nontoxic nonhemagglutinin (NTNH) 
gene, 131
Novel sensors, 156
NTNH gene, see Nontoxic 
nonhemagglutinin gene
Nutrigenomics, 355, 389
animal agriculture and, 356
conjugated linoleic acids, 361
differential gene expression, 358
experimental approaches, 360
glucose vs. acetate, 364–366
long-chain fatty acids as, 360–364
reductionism, 357–359
Nutrition Facts Label, 453
Nylon, 633

700
Index
O
Ochratoxin A (OTA), 132, 170
Ochratoxin A-producing penicillia, 142
Octapeptide, 385
Off-odor production, in irradiated meat, 
210
Oleic acid, 464
Oligopeptides, 373
Oligosaccharides, 382, 424
OMFs, see Oscillating magnetic fields
Omics technologies, 390
Opioid peptides, 379–380
Optical fibers, 159–163
Optical microarrays, 159–163, 163
Optical sensors, 176–177
latest trends in, 166–167
Optical waveguides, 157
Organic selenium, 415
ORP, see Oxidation-reduction potential
Oscillating magnetic fields (OMFs), 297, 
304
OTA, see Ochratoxin A
Oxidation of lipids, 306
Oxidation-reduction potential (ORP), 214
Oxygen, 624–625
Oxygen scavengers, 635, 639
P
Package integrity, 640
Packaging films, 632–634, 639
PAH4 content, 329, 347
Palmitic acid, 463
Partial least squares analysis (PLSA), 67
Partial least squares-discriminant 
analysis (PLS-DA), 41
Partial least squares regression (PLSR), 
41, 164, 168
Pathogen detection techniques., 158
Pathogens associated with meat, 650
Pattern recognition, 39, 41
PCA, see Principal component analysis
PCCMP, see Powdered cooked cured 
meat pigment
PCR, see Principle component regression
PD, see Polydextrose
Pediocin, 570, 572
Pediococcus, 603
PEF, see Pulsed electric field
Pentocin 31-1, 565
Peptidase, 276
Peptides, 371, 422–423, 604
bioactive, see Bioactive peptides
generation, from meat proteins, 
372–375
Maillard reaction and, 385–389
with sensory properties, 385
Peptidomic approach, 552
Pericondensed PAHs, 320
Peroxidation, 605
PGP principle, see Prism-grating-prism 
principle
Phosphate, 418–419
Phospholipon liposomes, 656
Photodecomposition, 340–342
Photons, 202
Photooxidation, meat, 630
Physical sensors, 154
Physicochemical processes, 335–339
Physicochemical properties, of fat, 
467–468
Plant stanol, 427
Plant sterols, 427
PLSA, see Partial least squares analysis
PLS-DA, see Partial least squares-
discriminant analysis
PLSR, see Partial least squares 
regression
PLS regression, see Partial least squares 
regression
PMF, see Protein mass fingerprint
Point scanning method, 24
Polyamides, 633
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
(PAHs), 344
characterization of, 320–321
content in processed meats, 339–348
cooking of smoked sausages, 342–344
diffusion coefficients of, 332
formation of, 321–324
international normalization, 326–328
in liquid media and low-density 
polyethylene, 335–339
in liquid smoke flavorings, 329
on living organisms, 325–326
in roasted duck, 344
in smoked meats, 328–329

701
Index
and smoked sausages, 344–348
Polydextrose (PD), 478, 480, 481, 482
Polyelectrolyte films, electrogeneration 
of, 182
Polyester, 633
Polyethylenes, 634
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 10
Polymer–clay nanocomposites, 651
Polyphenols, 655
Polypropylene, 633
Polysaccharides, 672
Polystyrene, 634
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), 
360, 361, 408, 409, 464–465
Polyvinyl chloride, 634
Polyvinylidene chloride, 634
Polyvinylpolypyrrolidone resin (PVPP), 
655
Pork
back fat, 492
decontamination of, 306
heat-treated pork, 94–95
meat, hydrodynamic pressure 
processing of, 272
oxygen packaging, 628
peptide in, 373
postrigor pork, 93
prerigor pork, 88–92
Positive polymerase chain reaction 
control, 118
Postharvest interventions, 198
Postrigor pork, 93
Poultry carcass, 48
contamination detection, 49–52
microbiological spoilage detection, 
55–56
tumor and bone detection, 52–55
Poultry meat, 411
Powdered cooked cured meat pigment 
(PCCMP), 521
PrB, see Proteinase B
Prebiotic peptides, 382–383
Prebiotics, 423–424
Premature browning, beef, 628
Prerigor pork, 88–92
Preservation technologies, bacteriocins 
and
active packaging systems, 577–579
high hydrostatic pressure, 575–577
Principal component analysis (PCA), 36, 
37, 39–40, 94, 103
score plot, 551
Principle component regression (PCR), 
42
Prism-grating-prism (PGP) principle, 28
Probiotics, 423–424
Propionic acid, 364
Proteases, 374
Proteasome complex, 537
Protein, 422–423
denaturation, 282
as emulsifiers, 490
film, 672
modification of, 274–276
Proteinase B (PrB), 541
Protein-based detection strategies, 7–10
enzyme linked immunosorbent 
assay, 9
flow strip, 8–9
mass spectrometry, 10
Protein-based fat replacers, 473–474
Protein mass fingerprint (PMF), 544
Proteolytic enzymes for meat 
tenderization, 375
Proteomics, 390, 545
Pseudomonas, 650
PUFAs, see Polyunsaturated fatty acids
Pulsed electric field (PEF), 303–304
Purge, vacuum packaging, 631
Purified bacteriocins, 563
Pushbroom method, 24
hyperspectral imaging system, 26
Pyrazines, 387
Q
QCMs, see Quartz crystal microbalances
Qflex® kit, 176
QIAamp DNA Mini kit (QIAGEN), 115
QIM, see Quality index method
QIS, see Quality index scores
qPCR, see Quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction
QTH lamps, see Quartz–tungsten–
halogen lamps
Quality index method (QIM), 56
Quality index scores (QIS), 58
Quantification cycle (Cq), 116

702
Index
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
(qPCR)
bacteria foodborne infection, see 
Bacteria foodborne infection, 
qPCR detection
bacteria foodborne intoxications, 
129–132
considerations for, 116–117
controls of, 118
Quantitative regression, 43
Quartz crystal microbalances (QCMs), 
168
Quartz–tungsten–halogen (QTH) 
lamps, 27
Quasi-nutrigenomic, 363
Quinolones, 173
R
Radial basis function (RBF) kernel, 42
“Radiation absorbed dose,” 204
Radiation destruction, of 
microorganisms, 205–207
Radionuclides, 202, 203
Raman spectra of pork chops, 101
Raman spectroscopic devices, 84, 86–87
Random forests (RF), 41
Raw hyperspectral image, 22
Raw meat, animal production strategies 
for
fatty acids in pigs, 408–411
fatty acids in ruminants, 412
genetics for reduction, 407–408
minerals, 414–416
products, 564–567
vitamins and antioxidants, 413–414
RBF kernel, see Radial basis function 
kernel
Reactive gas species (ROS), 304
Real-time polymerase chain reaction
principles and characteristics of, 114
quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction for, 119
reverse transcription quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction, 134
Receiver operator characteristics (ROC) 
curves, 44
Red meats
chemical compositions, 67–69
microbiological properties, 69–70
sensory attributes, 64–67
technological attributes, 70–72
Reductionism to global gene expression, 
357–359
Reflectance calibration, 32
Reflectance spectra, 49
Reformulated meat products, 467
Relative humidity (RH), 667
Residual predictive deviation (RPD), 43
Resistant starch (RS), 478, 481, 482–483
Resistant strains, appearance of, 582–585
Restructured injected meat products, 
494
Restructured meat products, 466, 482
Retrovirus-mediated gene transfer, 4
Reuterin, 245, 571
Reversed-phase high-performance 
liquid chromatography 
(RP-HPLC), 278, 542
Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR), 359
Reverse transcription quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-qPCR) tool
Campylobacter jejuni, 140–141
Listeria monocytogenes, 139–140
ochratoxin A-producing penicillia, 
142
Salmonella, 135–139
shiga toxin-producing E. coli, 140
Staphylococcus aureus, 141
viruses, 141–142
RF, see Random forests
Ribosomal RNA (rRNA), 117
Rice bran, 477
Rice starch, 473
RMSEC, see Root mean square error of 
calibration
RMSECV, see Root mean square error of 
cross-validation
RMSEP, see Root mean square error of 
prediction
ROC curves, see Receiver operator 
characteristics (ROC) curves
Root mean square error of calibration 
(RMSEC), 43
Root mean square error of cross-
validation (RMSECV), 43

703
Index
Root mean square error of prediction 
(RMSEP), 43
ROS, see Reactive gas species
Rotatable disk, 29
RPD, see Residual predictive deviation
RP-HPLC, see Reversed-phase 
high-performance liquid 
chromatography
rpoS, 139
rRNA, see Ribosomal RNA
RS, see Resistant starch
RT-PCR, see Reverse transcriptase-
polymerase chain reaction
RT-qPCR, see Reverse transcription 
quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction
Ruminants, fatty acids in, 412
Rupture effect, 261
S
SA, see Simulated annealing
Safety assurance, 260
Salmonella spp., 119–122, 135–139, 560, 635
S.typhimurium, 284, 285, 565, 670
Salmon fillet, hypercube for, 23
Salt reduction in processed meats
crystal size and shape of, 446
enzyme inhibition, 448–449
and labeling, regulations, 453
masking agents, 446
physical properties, 447–448
preservation properties, 452
raised blood pressure, 444
sensory effects, 449–452
sodium reduction, 445
Sample principal component analysis 
(SPCA), 67
Satiety, 469
Saturated fatty acids (SFAs), 463–464
Sausages, 342–344
Savory peptides, 385
Savory taste-enhancing peptide, 385
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), 
278, 280
SCFA, see Short-chain fatty acid
SDS-PAGE, see Sodium dodecyl 
sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis
Sealant materials, 634
SEC, see Size-exclusion chromatography
Selenium, 415
SEM, see Scanning electron microscopy
Semipurified bacteriocins, 563
Sensor electrode coating, 182
Sensory inspection, 57
Sensory properties, peptides with, 385
Sensory tenderness score, 273
SEP, see Standard error of prediction
SFAs, see Saturated fatty acids
Shiga toxin-producing E. coli, 140
Shock wave technology
cost analysis of, 287, 289–291
damages in packaging material, 288
development of equipment, 263–267
generation of shock waves, 261
historical perspective of, 263
principle of, 262
Short-chain fatty acid (SCFA), 363, 364, 
605
Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), 29
Silicon-based optical thinfilm biosensor, 
163
Silver nanoparticle (AgNP), 658, 659, 677
Simulated annealing (SA), 44
Single-pulsed high hydrostatic pressure 
(spHHP), 238
Single-ring aromatic hydrocarbons, 323
Size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), 
542
Slice shear force (SSF), 65
Smoked meat
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in, 
326–328
occurrence of, 328–329
reduction of, 339–340
products, 321–324
Smoothing, 37
SNR, see Signal-to-noise ratio
SNV, see Standard normal variate
Sodium, 418–419
reduction, 445
replacement, 445–446
selenite, 415
Sodium chloride, 448
Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide 
gel electrophoresis (SDS-
PAGE), 276, 277, 542

704
Index
Sodium hypophosphite, 527
Soluble fibers, 478–483
Sourness-suppressing peptides, 385
Soy proteins, 423
Spatial calibration, 31
Spatial scanning methods, 25
SPCA, see Sample principal component 
analysis
Spectral calibration, 31–32
Spectral classifier, 53
Spectral image segmentation, 36
Spectral preprocessing, 37–39
Spectral variables, 44
Spectrum derivatives, 44
spHHP, see Single-pulsed high 
hydrostatic pressure
Spoilage reactions, in meat, 649–650
SPR transduction, see Surface plasmon 
resonance transduction
SSF, see Slice shear force
Standard error of calibration (SEC), 43
Standard error of prediction (SEP), 43
Standard normal variate (SNV), 37
Staphylococcal foodborne poisoning, 129
Staphylococcus aureus, 129–131, 141, 561, 
636
Staphylococcus carnosus, 599, 601, 603, 606
Staphylococcus equorum, 599, 605, 606
Staphylococcus xylosus, 599, 601, 603, 606
Starch derivatives, 472–473
Stepwise regression, 44
Stokes Raman scattering, 84
Strip test, 8
Structured lipids, use of, 488–491
Sulfonamides, 173
Support vector machines (SVMs), 36, 41
Support vector regression (SVR), 42
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) 
transduction, 176
SVMs, see Support vector machines
SVR, see Support vector regression
SYBR Green chemistry, 116
Synthetic peptide, 385
T
Tailor designing nitrite-free meat 
products, 528–529
TaqMan® hydrolysis probes, 116
Taste, 467
TBARS, see Thiobarbituric acid reactive 
substances
Tender Class System (TCS), 264
Tenderness, see Meat tenderization
Texture, 601
change of meat, 215
fat, 466–467
of muscle foods, 241
TFs, see Transcription factors
Thermo-labile nature of protein meat 
systems, 246
Thiobarbituric acid reactive substances 
(TBARS), 209, 306, 384
Three-dimensional (3D) hyperspectral 
cube, 22
Threshold cycle (Ct), 116
Thresholding, 34–36
Thymol, 654
Time of curing, in dry-cured ham, 550
TnT degradation, see Troponin T 
degradation
Torturous diffusion path, of 
nanocomposite, 653
Total viable count (TVC), 18
Toxic equivalency factors, 326
Toxigenic molds, quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction for, 
132–142
TPP, see Tripeptidylpeptidases
Transcription factors (TFs), 355, 360, 
362
Trans-fatty acids intake, 463
Transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM), 278, 286
Transmission grating, 28
Transmittance mode, 24
Trichinella spiralis, 284
Tripeptidylpeptidases (TPP), 537
Troponin T (TnT) degradation, 277
Tumbling/massaging, of pickle-injected 
meat cuts, 518
Tumor detection, in chicken, 52–55
Tunable light sources, 27
Turkey breast, hydrodynamic pressure 
processing of, 272
TVC, see Total viable count
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis 
(2-DGE), 542

705
Index
U
Ultralow-oxygen system, 629
Ultrasound technology, 298
decontamination of meat, 300–301
meat brining, 302–303
meat tenderization, 301–302
Umami taste-enhancing peptides, 385
Underwater electrical discharge, 264
United Nations Population Fund, 647
Up-to-date meat processing procedures, 
320
UV irradiation, 669
V
Vacuum packaging (VP), 217, 618
modified atmosphere packaging vs., 
630–632
Valorphin, 380
Venous thromboembolism, 381
Verotoxin-producing E. coli (VTEC), 124
Veterinary drug residues, 171
antibiotics, 172–174
hormones acting as growth 
promoters, 174–175
Visual identification, of genetically 
modified animals, 7
Vitamin E, 413, 425
Vitamins, 413–414, 424–427
Volatile organic compound (VOC), 169
VP, see Vacuum packaging
VTEC, see Verotoxin-producing E. coli
W
Warner–Bratzler shear force (WBSF), 
272
Water emulsion, formation of oil and, 
490
Water holding capacity (WHC), 447, 448
Wavelength calibration, 31
Wavelength dispersion devices
filter wheels, 29
imaging spectrographs, 28–29
tunable filters, 29–30
Wavelengths, selection of important, 
44–45
WBSF, see Warner–Bratzler shear force
Whiskbroom method, 24
Wild/direct smoking, 322
Wishbone, 54
Working Group of International Agency 
for Research on Cancer (IARC), 
326
World Health Organization (WHO), 463, 
474
X
X-prolyl-dipeptidylpeptidase, 541
X-rays, 202, 204
Y
Yersinia, 127–129
Y.enterocolitica, 115, 172, 562, 635
Yersiniosis, 635
Z
Zein, 672
Zero-current devices, 167
Zero-order first-class Bessel function, 331

